Barotrauma of descent is caused by a lack of pressure equalization in closed spaces in contact with the diver, typically the ear, teeth, sinuses, and face mask. The resulting pressure difference between the tissues and the gas space causes injury. The actual rupture of the tympanic membrane  (TM) is a consequence of ear ‘squeeze’ and usually occurs in divers with Eustachian tube dysfunction. On the descent, as pressure builds up between the ear canal, TM, and the nasopharynx, the Eustachian tube should function to equalize this. However, if the pressure gradient exceeds 30mm, pain will ensue. At 100mmHg gradient, the Eustachian tube cannot open, and TM hemorrhage and rupture may occur. Curiously this is heralded by a sudden decrease in pain. However, hearing loss, whirling vertigo, tinnitus, and bloody drainage may ensue. Occasionally the pressure gradients across the left and right TMs differ asymmetrically, usually due to eustachian tube mismatch. When this gradient differential exceeds 45mgHg, alternobaric vertigo may occur. This may present with disorientation, nausea, vomiting, vertigo, and tinnitus. Drownings have occurred due to disorientation or vomiting. Occasionally inner ear barotrauma may occur. This is usually in the setting of severe (locked) Eustachian tube, allowing a large pressure gradient. The round and oval windows of the inner ear may rupture, with a concomitant perilymphatic leak. Tinnitus, sensorineural hearing loss and vertigo are common. Dental pain is caused by similar pressure effects at the site of fillings, apical abscesses, or carious teeth. Root abscesses can expand, causing pain. Fillings may distort. And carious teeth may implode on the descent. Sinuses are truly closed spaces, except for the functioning of their ostia. Sinus squeeze usually occurs in divers with some degree of chronic sinusitis, allergies, URI, mucoperiosteal thickening, nasal polyps, and ostial occlusion. Pain may be severe. Bloody nasal discharge is seen.