The hind limb bud develops as bulging on the ventrolateral surface in the 4th week of the embryo by the proliferation of the somatopleuric layer of lateral plate mesoderm opposite to L3 to L5 somites covered by ectoderm. The limb bud grows from the proximal to the distal, and a primitive footplate is formed at 4.5 weeks.

Following interactions between epithelium and mesenchyme, an apical ectodermal ridge (AER) is formed from ectoderm. Mesenchyme will condense to form ligaments and the skeleton of the hindlimb, While ectoderm forms the skin and its appendages. AER has a role in the development of skeletal elements by releasing various signals. Limb development may be hampered if AER is affected or removed.

Around the 6th week cartilaginous skeleton forms by chondrification. Ossification of cartilaginous models begins at the 10th week, which may continue after birth till puberty to complete the secondary ossification process. In some tarsal bones, endochondral ossification starts after birth.

The Human pentadactylous hind limb has been differentiated into three segments.

- **Stylopodium,**or proximal segment, gives rise to the femur.

- **Zeugopodium**or intermediate segment gives rise to two skeletal elements - tibia and fibula.

- **Autopodium**gives rise to skeletal elements of the foot (metatarsals and phalanges).**Mesopodium**considers a segment between autopodium and zeugopodium, giving rise to tarsals.

During 6th week, the paddle-shaped foot lies inverted and equinus in position. During the 8th week, the forefoot is adducted, and notches between the toes are visible. During the 9th week, all digits are formed, heads of the first and fifth metatarsals drop downward, and the transverse arch of the foot form.

Around the 12th week, the foot rotates and comes to lie in the supine position. Between the 13 to 16th week, the size of the limb increases, the equinus level of the foot decreases, and the foot lie right angle to the lower part of the leg.

At the time of birth, due to the presence of a fatty pad in the sole, arch of the foot is not visible. This fatty pad protects the arch and prevents compressions of the nerves and blood vessels of the sole. At around 5 to 6 years, normal arches become apparent in children. During weight-bearing, arches disappear as flexible pes planus.