Improvement of hygiene in swimming pools and bathing areas and frequent washing and cleaning of changing room floors and walkways may help in controlling the infection. Topical treatment is usually adequate for the management in most of the patients. Magenta paint (Castellani’s paint) is still used in some cases of inflammatory tinea pedis, particularly with a coexisting bacterial infection. Topical imidazoles such as clotrimazole, econazole, ketoconazole, miconazole, isoconazole, tioconazole, and sulconazole are effective remedies in tinea pedis with the very low incidence of adverse reactions. Terbinafine and amorolfine applied topically have been shown to produce faster responses as compared to clotrimazole in tinea pedis. The use of tolnaftate powder at swimming baths prophylactically has been shown to reduce levels of toe cleft tinea pedis caused by T. interdigitale. The period of therapy depends on the response of the lesions. Repeated KOH scrapings and cultures should be negative. Much shorter courses are possible with newer antifungal agents.

Systemic treatment is needed, only if there is involvement of the dorsum of foot, heel, sole of the foot or if the infection is recurrent or has blisters

Gastrointestinal side effects may occur with fluconazole but are uncommon. Itraconazole may cause gastrointestinal upsets, diarrhea, and peripheral edema, especially when used in conjunction with calcium channel blockers. Hepatotoxicity occurs at a much lower rate with fluconazole and itraconazole as compared to ketoconazole. Terbinafine also produces gastrointestinal upsets, and rarely, hepatitis.