Employ the "landmark technique" to isolate the location of the femoral vein for puncture. There are several methods to do this, and some examples are:

- Use your index finger to locate the arterial pulsation along the inguinal ligament at the midpoint between the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic symphysis. Then move 1 cm to 2 cm inferior to this position as the needle puncture must be performed below the inguinal ligament. Next, move 1 cm to 2 cm as the vein lies medial to the artery.

- Use your index and middle fingers to locate the distal and proximal pulsations of the femoral artery. Just medial to your fingertips should be the general course of the femoral vein. Hence, it would be best if you punctured the medial to your index finger in a medial direction to your middle finger.

At the desired location and using the slip-tip syringe-introducer needle complex, puncture the skin at a 30 to 45-degree angle to the skin.

- Using ultrasound guidance, information is provided on the relationship of vessels to each other and other surrounding structures. Additionally, vessel depth, caliber, and patency can also be assessed.   These findings should be integrated with landmark findings to assist in choosing an ideal puncture site, entry angle, and needle direction.

- Pull back on the plunger of the syringe while advancing the syringe-needle complex. Aspiration of blood into the syringe indicates entry into a vessel. The color of blood aspirated does not help distinguish between arterial and venous blood. If resistance is met, retract the syringe-needle complex slowly, as the needle may have gone through the vessel. If blood is still not aspirated, pull back the syringe-needle complex just short of coming out of the skin, and reconsider needle direction and angle.

- When blood is easily aspirated, stabilize the needle's hub and remove the syringe. A steady dripping of blood is to be expected. The presence of pulsatile blood flow should concern the practitioner for arterial puncture. Insert the guidewire into the needle hub and advance slowly. The guidewire should move quickly and only be inserted at a length that is 2 cm to 3 cm longer than the introducer needle. The proceduralist should never let go of the guidewire to avoid mishaps.

- While maintaining the guidewire position, slowly remove the needle.

- Using the scalpel, incise the skin at the puncture site while avoiding the guidewire.

- Insert the dilator over the guidewire and advance slowly through the incised puncture site. In general, the entire length of the dilator does not need to be inserted. The dilator only needs to be advanced to a depth that allows it to pass through the skin and enter the vessel slightly.

- Remove the dilator while maintaining the guidewire position, and then advance the central venous catheter over the guidewire.

- Attempt to aspirate blood from each access port of the catheter to ensure patency and then place hubs on each access port.

- Using the needle holder and silk sutures, suture the catheter in place.

- Place the antimicrobial disc over the catheter insertion site and apply the dressing.

- Confirm catheter placement via blood gas, x-ray, and pressure transduction.

- Perform documentation of the procedure in the medical record.