**Ectopic Parathyroid Glands**- These result from abnormal embryologic development and migration of the parathyroid glands. They occur in approximately 15% of patients and are the most common etiology of persistent/recurrent disease following surgical parathyroidectomy.

**Parathyroid Surgery**

- Overview - Surgery is performed to remove abnormal parathyroid tissue while leaving sufficient normal tissue behind to maintain normal calcium homeostasis. Parathyroid adenomas treatment is by resection of the abnormal gland(s). Parathyroid hyperplasia is manageable with total resection with parathyroid autotransplantation or a subtotal (3.5 glands) resection in parathyroid hyperplasia.

- Guidelines for Performing Surgery  - The National Institute of Health (NIH) recommends parathyroidectomy in all patients with symptomatic hyperparathyroidism and select patients with asymptomatic disease. These criteria include patients under 50-years-old, those with serum Ca greater than 1 mg/dL above the upper-limit-of-normal, urinary calcium excretion greater than 400 mg/24 hours, a 30% reduction in creatinine clearance and those with a DEXA-scan below 2.5. Studies have shown that compliance with the NIH guidelines is low, but age, serum calcium, and hypercalciuria were the most common indications for surgical intervention. Patients with only one criterion received surgery, approximately 33% of the time, while patients meeting 3+ criteria underwent surgery 82% of the time.

- Open Neck Exploration - The old gold standard for parathyroid surgery, this procedure involved bilateral exploration and visualization of all four parathyroid glands. As radiographic localization has improved, and most cases of hyperparathyroidism result from a single adenoma (about 85%), open exploration is becoming less common.

- Minimally Invasive Parathyroidectomy

- Intraoperative PTH Monitoring (ioPTH) - Rapid PTH is used to confirm the complete removal of hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue. Serum PTH is drawn preoperatively, and at 0, 5, and 10 minutes post-tissue resection. Per the Miami criteria, a decrease of PTH over 50% from preoperative levels at 10 minutes is considered adequate resection. ioPTH increases the detection of multiglandular disease, minimizing the need for recurrent operations.

- Complications - Complications of parathyroid surgery are infrequent, and even more so in minimally-invasive surgery (3.1% for open, 1.2% for minimally invasive). 

- Transient Hypoparathyroidism (50%) - Seen commonly, this occurs because the resected/abnormal parathyroid tissue has suppressed the remaining/normal parathyroid tissue. Eventually, the normal glands achieve calcium homeostasis, and hypoparathyroidism/hypocalcemia resolves. 
- Recurrent Laryngeal Nerve Injury (10 to 15%) - Unilateral injury can lead to voice hoarseness, while bilateral injury can lead to airway occlusion. Damage can be transient in cases of nerve compression or stretching, or permanent if the nerve is transected or suffers sufficient thermal injury. In a 2017 study, 10.6% of thyroid/parathyroid surgeries led to transient recurrent laryngeal nerve injuries, while 1.1% of surgical patients suffered permanent injury.
- Persistent Hypercalcemia (1 to 5%) - Generally, this is due to a failure to identify all adenomas or resect all of the hyperplastic tissue. This complication has become less common with increasing usage of localization studies and ioPTH.
- Permanent Hypoparathyroidism (less than 1%) - Most commonly seen in parathyroid hyperplasia, where all the parathyroid tissue has been removed.