HBSE also utilizes theories of development through the lifespan and other psychological theories, including psychoanalytic theory, as well as Erikson, Piaget, and Kohlberg's theories of development. Here we will focus primarily on Erikson, Piaget, and Kohlberg theories. These theories can be particularly useful in understanding an individual's overall development and any aspects of their presentation associated with an incomplete transition through stages of development.

The Erikson theory of development describes stages of development that range from infancy to old age, with a total of 8 stages.

- Stage 1 - "Trust vs. Mistrust"

- Infancy - first 18 months
- Development of stable, nurturing, and consistent relationships with caregivers
- Disruptions in the stability or consistency of the relationship can lead to impairments in trust.

- Stage 2 - "Autonomy vs. Shame and Doubt"

- Early childhood - 18 months to ~3 years
- Development of independence, sense of control over abilities (including bodily functions), and assertiveness
- Over-control or excess criticism during this period leads to shame, self-doubt, and increased dependence on others.

- Stage 3 - "Initiative vs. Guilt"

- Preschool age - ~3 to 5 years
- Development of interpersonal skills, assertiveness, and social interactions
- Restriction from exploring these environments can lead to a sense of guilt as the child may view its way of interacting as a nuisance.

- Stage 4 - "Industry vs. Inferiority"

- School-age - 5 to ~12 years
- Development of self-esteem through social interactions and peer groups, and feelings of pride and accomplishment during a time of increasing demands from academic and social situations
- Disruptions in this time can lead to feelings of failure and inferiority especially compared to peers.

- Stage 5 - "Identity vs Confusion"

- Adolescence - 12 to 18 years
- Development of a sense of identity and sense of self through in-depth self-exploration, including beliefs and values, and an increasing sense of independence
- Erickson described this stage as the bridge between the morality learned as a child and the ethics developed by the adult.
- Disruption in this stage leads to a sense of confusion and a lack of sense of self.

- Stage 6 - "Intimacy vs. Isolation"

- Young adulthood - 18 to 40 years
- Development of secure and enduring intimate relationships with others that are meaningful and lasting
- Disruptions in this result in a sense of isolation and loneliness

- Stage 7 - "Generativity vs. Stagnation"

- Adulthood - 40 to 65 years
- Development of feeling of accomplishment, contributions to society, to children, and the world
- Disruptions lead to feelings of disillusionment, distance, and stagnation.

- Stage 8 - "Integrity vs. Despair"

- Old age - 65 years onward
- Development of an understanding of one's life and a review of one's accomplishments, to feel integrity and coherence about one's self, which leads to wisdom
- Disruption in this stage can lead to feelings of despair and regret

The Piaget model describes the development in 4 stages of childhood cognitive development.

- The sensorimotor period from birth to 18 to 24 months

- As the name implies, sensations, bodily functions, and movements ("sensorimotor") are developed in this stage
- The concept of "object permanence" is also developed during this stage, in which the child recognizes the existence of an object (parent, toy, etc.) despite not being able to sense it immediately

- The pre-operational period between two and seven years

- A semiotic function is developed during this stage, which is the development of the symbolic representation of thoughts, memories, and events, as well as imaginative thought
- This represents the beginning of the assimilation of ideas and thoughts in addition to describing and identifying these ideas

- The concrete operational period from ages seven through 11 or 12 years

- In this stage, the child can apply logic and rules to concrete objects in their environment to predict and understand the world in greater detail
- The concept of conservation is developed in this stage, wherein the child understands that the amount of liquid does not change after being poured into a wider or thinner container (which affects the height or level of water)

- The formal operational period from 12 until adulthood

- Application of rules and logic to more abstract concepts is developed during this stage
- The types of thought developed during this stage include hypothetical-deductive thought, propositional thought, and isolating variables, and examining combinations

Piaget also commented on "moral development," in which he describes two stages: heteronomy and autonomy.

The concept of heteronomy or "heteronomous morality" is the child's understanding that there are rules and duties and authority figures who must be obeyed. This is related to the idea of "Moral Realism," in which the rule itself is more important than the purpose of the rule. In this regard, the intention of the person doing the act is less important than the outcomes of the actions to the child. The child expects that violations of these rules will be punished, referred to as "Immanent Justice." In this regard, heteronomous morality considers that power is handed down from above (heteronomously).

During play, children develop an understanding of "moral relativism," where morality can be considered more with regard to intentions rather than consequences. This results in the development of "autonomous morality" or autonomy. The concept of punishment also changes where the purpose of punishment is to correct wrongs rather than punish the guilty.

The Kohlberg theory expounded on the concept of morality development and described three stages (with six "substages") of the development of morals and considers that the development of morality takes longer.

- Preconventional morality - up to age 9

- Obedience and Punishment Orientation

- The child is punished for doing something wrong
- Punishment is avoided by doing good


- Individualism Orientation

- "What's in it for me?"
- Individual needs are prioritized.

- Conventional - through adolescence and adulthood

- Good Intentions and Social Norms Orientation

- The child wishes to win the approval of others
- Emphasis is placed on people being "nice" to others


- Authority and Social-Order Orientation

- The child accepts rules without question as a means of maintaining social order.
- This goes beyond wishing to win the approval of others

- Postconventional - through adulthood

- Social Contract and Individual Rights

- Multiple world views are acknowledged, accepted, and respected
- Laws are considered social contracts instead of a rigid set of rules


- Universal Principles

- Abstract reasoning around morals is applied
- Rather than laws being followed, individuals choose the moral principles by which they live.

Each of these above theories describes the development of the child as it progresses through changing social environments. When assessing each patient, they will have varying degrees of development or disruption in development in each stage, which can affect their behavior and approaches to prescribed treatments, as well as interpersonally and in other settings.

The disease and medical models also provide useful ways to approach patient care and contribute significantly to the understanding of patients. This is the more traditional biomedical view, in which syndromes are identified, and through the process of identifying syndromes, diseases are thus identified. Pathophysiology, etiology, epidemiology, pathology, and other such concepts are applied to develop an understanding of each disease. Through this developed understanding, the ability to diagnose and then treat accurately is garnered. The success of this model is evident in the modern-day practice of healthcare, in which most healthcare workers are familiar with and apply this model. However, significant limitations of this model include that it tends to neglect psychosocial components, or as HBSE describes, many of the other factors that contribute to a person's development and situation. Many of these factors contribute to the precipitation and perpetuation of disease in an individual patient.

Clinicians' understanding of mental health and disorders is evolving towards a more dimensional approach.