Patients with severe errors in carbohydrate metabolism present early (typically in the neonatal period) and catastrophically. Clinically, they can be indistinguishable from septic neonates, with hypoglycemia, brady/and tachydysrhythmias, hypothermia or hyperpyrexia, seizures, and poor tone. These children cannot metabolize food to fuel, and the prognosis with severe early involvement is poor. Patients with severe errors in excretion pathways will present typically with intoxication, with lethargy and altered mental status, seizures, vomiting, and vital sign abnormalities. They often have elevations in ammonia and other metabolites. Patients with errors in pathways involved in accessing stored energy may appear well for prolonged periods of time and can be asymptomatic as long as they have an ongoing intake of carbohydrates. However, should the child develop a gastrointestinal illness, have a change in diet, or begin to forgo night feeds, he or she will be unable to access stored energy adequately and will present with hypoglycemia or seizures. These children may present with an illness that seems minor and short-lived, but appear quite ill.

Although all these presentations exist on a spectrum depending upon degree and type of enzyme involvement, inborn errors of metabolism have some common features. The most common presentation of these diseases taken as a whole is neurologic abnormalities, which occurs in about 80% of individuals. These abnormalities include developmental delay, loss of milestones, poor tone, poor suck, and seizure. The second most common presentation is related to gastrointestinal symptoms, including vomiting, hepatomegaly, food intolerance, diarrhea, food aversion, exercise intolerance, and dehydration. More than half of children have both neurologic and gastrointestinal abnormalities. Therefore, inborn errors of metabolism should be considered in the differential of any child with neurologic and/or gastrointestinal findings. Inborn errors should also be considered in children with failure to thrive, recurrent feeding issues and formula changes, "reflux" or "gastroparesis," autonomic instability, or behavioral or learning issues.