Agammaglobulinemia is a rare disorder, and its diagnosis is often overlooked. Regardless of age, all males with hypogammaglobulinemia and low circulating B cells must be assessed for XLA by investigating the BTK gene. Certain varieties of XLA mimic other disorders, like CVID. The disease, which is characterized by a low count of B cells and reduced antibody production, is less severe in childhood and increases in intensity during adulthood.

These patients should not receive live vaccines such as oral polio or MMR. Because of the deficient immunoglobulins, they are not capable of mounting the appropriate immunological response to these vaccines. There are reported cases of patients with XLA that developed vaccine-related poliomyelitis after vaccination with live attenuated poliovirus. The condition carries a high rate of mortality, and those who survived had severe neurological complications, such as permanent paralysis. Hence, special emphasis is given to avoiding the oral live attenuated SABIN-type polio vaccine. Furthermore, it is not proven that active vaccines, in general, have any beneficial effect on patients with XLA, as they lack the normal ability to maintain immune memory.

Inactive or conjugate vaccines like inactive polio vaccine can be administered safely. Additionally, these patients should not be given any medicines that suppress the immune system, such as immunosuppressive drugs or corticosteroids.

Previous guidelines advised to aim for an IgG level of at least 5 g/L, but recent studies recommend a higher IgG level of 8 g/L, in an effort to effectively prevent infections and promote respiratory health. Additionally, some studies also recommend that treatments should be individualized, and the target trough IgG levels should be adequate to prevent infection for an individual.