As with all steroid hormones, aldosterone passes through cell membranes to bind to cytoplasmic receptors which translocate to the nucleus to influence mRNA transcription and subsequently protein synthesis. The mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) may have higher or lower affinity for for aldosterone depending on whether or not it is phosphorylated. In the phosphorylated state, MR has lower affinity for aldosterone therefore phosphorylation of MR in a given cell inhibits aldosterone activity.

Within the principal cells of the late distal tubule and collecting ducts, MR is largely in a non-phosphorylated state. In principal cells, aldosterone increases the expression of sodium channels and sodium-potassium ATPase in the cell membrane. The sodium channels are on the luminal side of the principal cells and allow sodium to passively diffuse into the principal cells due to the transepithelial potential difference of -50 mV. This gradient is maintained by the sodium-potassium ATPase on the basolateral side, which uses ATP to actively transport sodium into the blood and potassium into the cell. Meanwhile, potassium channels on the luminal side of the cell that allow passive diffusion out of the cell into the lumen of the kidney whenever a sodium ion enters the cell. The net effect of this process is sodium absorption from the lumen, which allows for water absorption, assuming ADH is present to make the cells permeable to water. This directly results in an increase in osmolality within the blood, causing water to flow down its concentration gradient.

Within intercalated cells, MR is often in a phosphorylated state therefore the dephosphorylation of MR in the presence of angiotensin II enables intercalated cells to be responsive to aldosterone. This conditional response of intercalated cells results in seemingly paradoxical effects of aldosterone dependent upon whether or not angiotensin II is present.

In alpha-intercalated cells (A-intercalated, acid-secretory), aldosterone increases the expression of apical hydrogen ATPases to stimulate hydrogen ion (proton) excretion into the lumen. Additionally, the sodium resorption from adjacent principal cells creates a more negatively charged lumen space which further encourages acid secretion from the intercalated cells to compensate.

Within the non-A intercalated cells (beta-intercalated, and non-A non-B intercalated cells), aldosterone increases the activity of apical bicarbonate-chloride exchangers, which reabsorb chloride from the lumen into the cell and excrete bicarbonate from the cell into the lumen.