Lower extremity radiculopathy, often ambiguously ill-defined even by healthcare providers and physicians as "sciatica," is frequently attributable to nerve root(s) compression and impingement at one or multiple nerve roots in the lumbosacral plexus. These nerve roots ultimately contribute innervation (motor/sensory) peripherally as the sciatic nerve, manifests as shooting, stabbing, and/or burning pain radiating from the back to the ipsilateral or contralateral lower extremity.  Accurate clinical diagnosis is critical to ensure the utilization of the ideal management modalities for each patient.

Diabetes Mellitus

Clinical differentiation and accurate delineation of underlying sources of pain in adult patients presenting with chronic low back pain and radicular symptoms are further fraught with ambiguity in the setting of diabetes.  Diabetic lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy (DLSRPN) is easily confused with lower extremity radiculopathy.  Etiologically, long-standing, poorly controlled, diabetes can lead to widespread stenosis affecting the microvasculature, including the vaso nevorum, that supplies peripheral nerves in many regions of the body.

The patient often complains of pain, tingling, numbness, and hypersensitivity. The treatment of diabetic neuropathy is multimodal and may include the use of tricyclic antidepressants.  The actual benefit of these agents remains debated in the literature.  The primary concern of diabetic neuropathy is the development of ulcers which often go undetected because patients lack the appropriate sensory feedback that is physiologically present in non-diabetics.

Other pertinent clinical conditions

Sacral tumors can also cause lumbosacral plexopathy.

Trendelenburg gait occurs secondary to weakness and dysfunction of the gluteus medius and minimus.  The former normally functions as a critical stabilizing force for the pelvis during the stance phase of the gait cycle.  Hip abductor compromise results in a characteristic "lurching" gait pattern as the patient compensates to shift their center of gravity toward the side of the stance limb; Trendelenburg gait pathology can be summarized as follows:

- Right-sided hip abductor dysfunction results in:

- Compromise to the hip abductor pelvic stabilizing function during the gait
- When the right limb is the stance limb during gait, the left side of the pelvis will "droop"
- The patient compensates for the left-sided "droop" by leaning toward the side of the lesion (in this case, the right side)

- Leaning toward the right side thereby shifts the center of gravity during ambulation


- A cane improves gait biomechanics and is helpful when used on the contralateral (i.e., unaffected) side

Hip abductor dysfunction leading to Trendelenburg gait can occur in the setting of lesions in the superior gluteal nerve, often by a needle hitting the nerve during a gluteal injection, or via L5 radiculopathy etiologies.