The breast is composed of fat and fibroglandular tissue, with the breast parenchyma being composed of a vibrant network of exocrine glands, ducts, stromal connective tissues, vasculature, and nerves. This tissue extends from the second through sixth ribs and is bordered by the sternum and the midaxillary line. The breast tissue is commonly divided into quadrants for ease of localization. This is performed by segmenting the breast into medial/lateral and upper/lower components using the nipple as a reference point. It should be noted that the upper outer quadrants of the breasts often contain breast tissue that extends into the axilla. This is relevant for mammographic technique, as this region of breast tissue may be difficult to image fully without adequate patient positioning. Furthermore, one of the primary lymphatic drainage networks of the breast passes through the axilla, and abnormal lymph nodes may be incidentally discovered by imaging this region.

Mammography can be used to evaluate the breast based on the differential attenuation characteristics of the tissues. Specifically, fat attenuates fewer x-rays than fibroglandular tissue and stromal elements and appears gray on mammography. Dense mineral deposits can be easily identified and appear bright white, such as skin calcifications or calcifications within a neoplastic lesion. Superimposition poses a challenge in mammography, as tissue structures that overlie or overlap one another may obscure a small mass. To try and combat this, screening mammograms are performed in at least two standard views, which include the craniocaudal view (CC) and the mediolateral oblique (MLO). By comparing these two different viewpoints, structures that are superimposed upon one another in one view may be separated in the other. In cases of uncertainty, additional diagnostic views with spot compression paddles or variant angles, such as a mediolateral (ML) view, may be obtained. Additionally, newer technologies such as tomosynthesis imaging allow the radiologist to scroll through the breast in slices, decreasing the superimposition effect of tissues. A typical mammogram can depict the skin surface, the nipple, the main breast ducts, fibroglandular tissue, veins, adipose tissue, muscle, and occasionally lymph nodes.

The relative abundance of fibroglandular tissue versus fat that a patient has in their breast can vary considerably from person to person, and even within the same patient depending on hormonal factors and weight changes. For example, the hormonal effects of pregnancy and lactation can increase the abundance of glandular tissue, and similarly, cessation of lactation causes fibroglandular tissue to regress. Dense breast tissue attenuates a higher proportion of x-rays and appears whiter on a mammogram and may pose a diagnostic challenge when trying to detect breast cancer due to the masking effect. This is further complicated by the fact that patients with dense breast tissue are at increased risk of developing breast cancer.

Every screening mammogram is evaluated to ensure the technical quality, including adequate positioning as breast cancers may be missed if not enough tissue is imaged. The breast tissue overlies the pectoralis major muscles, and these muscles can be partially seen on mammographic images. The pectoralis demonstrates a striated appearance on the MLO view that is denser than the overlying fat and fibroglandular tissue. As a rule of thumb, the MLO view is not adequate if the pectoralis is not intersected by a line drawn orthogonally from the nipple posteriorly, also known as the posterior-nipple line (PNL). The CC view is not adequate if the PNL is not within 1 cm of the MLO posterior-nipple line.