Neonatal lupus erythematosus presents with reversible manifestations including cutaneous lesions in 40% of the cases, 35% hepatic dysfunction and 35% hematological abnormalities; a 25% of neonates present with irreversible cardiac arrhythmias, the most distinctive and dangerous feature.

**Cutaneous Manifestations**

Lesions resemble those seen in children and adolescents with systemic lupus erythematosus. Eruptions are often misdiagnosed as birth trauma, skin infection or eczema, especially if the mother is asymptomatic. 80% of the lesions are not clear at birth developing during the first month of life in only 20% of the affected newborns. Neonates present with photosensitivity usually within the first 2 days of sun exposure in 90% of the cases. Cutaneous lesions characterized by a superficial inflammatory coalescent rash with raised active margins, described as macular annular or elliptic erythema that involves the head (with or without the scalp or neck) in 95%, scalp in 60%, trunk (with or without groin) in 25%, extremities in 25% and can involve the whole body in 10% of the cases. Sometimes it can manifest as papular or plaque-like lesions, and 30% can present with a central clearing lesion or a fine scale. The classic rash remits within 4 months of life in 50% of the cases, 80% within 7 months and 100% within a year. Twenty percent of neonates can present with persisting skin rash characterized by telangiectasia, hyperpigmented skin areas, and atrophy. On histological examination, granular depositions of immunoglobulin G at the dermo-epidermal junction and vacuolar alteration at the interface and adnexal structures can be observed.

**Hematological and Hepatobiliary Involvement**

These manifestations are transient and rarely present as an isolated sign. Regarding the hematological aspect, newborns with neonatal lupus syndrome can present with anemia, neutropenia or thrombocytopenia. In 20% of the cases, aplastic anemia has been reported. There is an asymptomatic elevation of aminotransferases, cholestasis, or hepatomegaly/splenomegaly in 15% to 25% of the cases.

**Neurological Involvement**

This is a self-remitting phenomenon that can manifest as macrocephaly with or without associated hydrocephalus.

**Cardiac Manifestations**

Newborns with neonatal lupus erythematosus usually have a structurally normal heart. The classic and distinctive cardiac manifestation is a congenital atrioventricular block that can present as first, second, and especially third-degree AV block. Commonly presents between 18 to 24 weeks of gestation. Other cardiac manifestations include sinus bradycardia, QT-interval prolongation, cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, myocarditis and structural or valvular abnormalities (ventricular septal defects, ostium secundum type atrial septal defects, patent foramen ovale, patent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary valve dysplasia, fusion of the chordae tendineae of the tricuspid valve). Second- and third-degree AV block present in utero with fetal bradycardia, with a ventricular rate between 40 and 80 per minute. Postnatally the heart rate is found to be less than 100 per minute, rarely associated with signs of congestive heart failure (diaphoresis, pallor, peripheral edema, prominent jugular veins and crackles on auscultation of the lungs). On cardiac auscultation, there can be an appreciation of nonspecific signs such as intermittent gallops, variability with the intensity of the first heart sound, intermittent cannon waves, and murmurs. Five percent to 10% of infants present with a severe AV block that precipitates myocardial dysfunction due to endocardial fibroelastosis and myocardial fibrosis, associated with right ventricular pacing and subsequent ventricular asynchrony and dysfunction.