**Medical treatments**

Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) has traditionally been recommended as potential monotherapy; however, it is to be avoided if there is coinfection with Loa loa or onychomycosis as it can worsen the progression of eye disease and can cause encephalopathy.Loa loa.Loa loa and has also shown the ability to slow the inflammation and fibrosis that leads to worsening lymphedema. Doxycycline also treats Wolbachia, a genus of symbiotic bacteria that inhabit nematodes.

There is currently no vaccine for filariasis, but efforts are ongoing to develop one.

**Surgical treatments**

Surgical treatments exist for the debulking of skin and creating lymphovenous anastomosis to improve drainage. Topical coumarin and flavonoids were shown to be effective in reducing lymphedema. It is thought that increased macrophage activity leads to the reuptake of proteinaceous material.

A case report documented the success of ablative carbon dioxide laser treatment of skin lesions and lymphocutaneous fistulas, which resulted in significant improvement of skin lesions. It works via causing thermal damage to dermis resulting in remodeling of superficial tissue and dermal tightening. This was done in a patient with non-filarial elephantiasis but could have an application in filarial disease.

**Chronic Management**

Lymphedema can progress due to repeated attacks of adenolymphangitis even in the absence of LF. Strategies targeting lymphedema progression include working with patients on skin hygiene, wearing comfortable shoes, using compressive bandages, pneumatic compression, regular washing with soap and water, limb elevation, cold/heat therapy, and antibiotic and antifungal creams to prevent flares of lymphangitis.