The complications include

- Intracranial and tract hemorrhage (10%) However, this hemorrhage is usually insignificant and rarely needs surgical intervention.

- Ventriculitis (20%)Infection is the most common complication of external ventricular drainage (EVD), with rates ranging from 0 to 45%.

- Technical failure (failure to tap ventricle or misplacement) (5%) One study revealed that 22.4% of catheter tips were in extraventricular spaces during a freehand placement,  showing ample room for improvement.

- The cost for placing an external ventricular drain (EVD) amounts to around $200, with transducers costing an extra $400 to 600.

- Over-drainage can lead to aneurysmal rebleed and, in cases of hydrocephalus, complicate the upward transtentorial herniation.

- Kinks and blockage by air, blood, and debris are also frequent, leading to the poor and false recording of the ICP.

- Inadvertent vascular injury.

- Pneumocephalus and pneumoventriculi.

- CSF leak.

- Accidental fracture

- Accidental pull

- Obstruction by choroid plexus, blood clot, or proteinous plug. The anterior entry site lowered the risk of shunt failure compared with the posterior entry site by approximately one-third due to the chandelier effect.

Various clinical parameters shown to harbinger the risk of infection include:

- CSF leak

- Frequent CSF sampling (each sampling increasing the risk by 8.3%)

- Increased duration of catheter insertion (9.3% with time duration of ≥8 days)

- Frequent changing of the catheter (each increasing the risk by 4-fold)

- The dictum of catheter irrigation.

There have been no significant differences observed in terms of the risk of infection or complications while comparing the EVDs placed either in the operating room or at the bedside. The experience of the surgeons also did not influence the outcome.

Strict adherence to EVD care bundles is of paramount importance in reducing the risk of infection. The most rational strategy is to avoid its insertion whenever possible and implement it only when deemed necessary.

The misplacement rate of the EVD has been reported from 12.3 to 60%.

Using navigation and augmented reality aids in the appropriate EVD placement and impacts the learning curve.