The pathophysiology of the echogenic bowel is speculative and has not yet been fully established. The fetus begins to swallow amniotic fluid by the end of the first trimester, which transits through the intestines. When this passage is slow or obstructed, contents in the bowel can become progressively thick and lead to a bright appearance in the ultrasound. The pathophysiology can vary depending on the underlying etiology. The primary mechanism may involve meconium stasis, or hypercellular meconium can occur for several reasons.

**Meconium Stasis**

- Hypoperistalsis

- Distal obstruction of the bowel

- Meconium ileus

- Fetal Intestinal ischemia

- Fetal Intestinal perforation

**Hypercellular Meconium**

- Abnormal enzyme secretion

- Proximal obstruction of the bowel

- Feto-placental bleeding into the amniotic fluid

- Intrauterine transfusions

**Meconium Stasis**

Infants with abnormal karyotypes can have decreased levels of microvillar enzymes leading to hypoperistalsis and further impeding the passage of meconium in utero. This meconium can be inspissated, especially in the second trimester when the bowel lumens are small. As the pregnancy progresses, the amount of fetal swallowing of amniotic fluid increases, as does the small bowel volume resulting in the resolution of meconium stasis and, in turn, leads to the resolution of the hyperechogenic appearance of the bowel.

The pathophysiology of the association between the echogenic bowel and TORCH infection is also thought to be a result of the direct viral-induced cytotoxic effect and ischemia of the endothelial cells in the fetal bowel leading to hypoperistalsis, ileus, or fetal intestinal perforation.

Proximal bowel obstruction can interfere with normal amniotic fluid swallowing and lead to decreased fluid content in meconium which subsequently leads to the formation of meconium plugs which can be identified as increased echogenicity.

**Hypercellular Meconium**

Conditions such as cystic fibrosis can lead to abnormality in the enzyme secretion leading to abnormal consistency of the meconium, which is usually detected as diffusely increased echogenicity of the bowel along with bowel dilatation and calcification.

Swallowed blood products due to maternal-fetal hemorrhage or intrauterine transfusions can also lead to hypercellular meconium and the finding of echogenic bowel.

Other possibilities, such as compromised placental and fetal perfusion leading to the redistribution of blood flow and, subsequently, gut ischemia, have been postulated.