Acute rejection has been associated with increased expression of HLA class I and class II antigens in inflamed grafts and with early infiltration of CD8+ T cells. Fine-needle aspiration can help recognize rejection from cyclosporin toxicity. CD4+ T cells orchestrate rejection by recruiting a range of effector cells responsible for the damage of rejection including CD8+ T cells, macrophages, natural killer cells, and B cells. Foreign antigens can recognize these in the graft or the lymphoid tissue of the recipient. Another histopathologic mechanism is the participation of dendritic cells which are antigen-presenting cells of the donor tissue or organ that migrate to the recipient's lymphoid follicles and present peptides to the recipient's adaptive immune system causing acute rejection.

Acute rejection relates well with class I and class II HLA gene disparity between donor and receptor. ABO matching protects against hyperacute transplantation rejection, which cannot be prevented with the use of immunosuppressive drugs. However, children below 24 months of age can accept an incompatible organ without rejecting it, known as an ABO-incompatible (ABOi) transplantation.

Memory cells against the graft alloantigens differentiate into Th1 and Th2 lymphocytes. Th1 cells produce IL-2 and gamma interferon that mediates cellular immune responses including activation of macrophages against the allograft and xenograft. Th2 cells produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-13 that stimulate humoral responses (mediated by antibodies) against the graft. However, Th1 cells orchestrate the acute graft rejection. Other T cell subsets that may be involved in rejection are Th9, Th17, and Th22 through participation in the inflammatory response.