As the adrenal glands produce various systemically-important hormones, they require significant blood supply and are extremely well vascularized. The blood supply is tightly controlled by neuroendocrine and paracrine mechanisms, which is one method of regulating the systemic levels of adrenal hormones.

The three chief sources of blood supply to the adrenal glands include:

- The superior adrenal arteries, which are small branches coming off the inferior phrenic artery

- The middle adrenal artery comes directly off the abdominal aorta.

- The inferior adrenal artery originates from the renal artery bilaterally

Variations in adrenal artery origin are very common. The superior adrenal artery can come off the abdominal aorta, celiac axis, or, more rarely, an intercostal artery. The superior adrenal artery is also commonly found as multiple arteries. The middle adrenal artery can come off the inferior phrenic, renal, or superior mesenteric arteries, or the celiac axis. The inferior adrenal arteries can also originate from the abdominal aorta or the inferior phrenic artery.

The venous drainage from the adrenal glands is dependent on the side of the gland. The left adrenal gland is anatomically further away from the inferior vena cava, and therefore the left adrenal vein drains into the left renal vein. The right adrenal vein is much closer to the inferior vena cava and drains directly into this large vessel. Variations in adrenal venous drainage are common, particularly on the left side. There are reports of venous connections between the left adrenal vein and the left genital vein, and the inferior phrenic vein. Double left adrenal veins are also common.