As pneumonia can be considered somewhat a final common pathway of infection, especially for those who are immune-compromised, a great number of viruses can cause pneumonia. In general, these viruses can be divided into those containing DNA or RNA as their nucleic acid. As this is a bit of an artificial division, a more meaningful approach to etiology is to define by clinical syndromes produced and demographics affected.

**Etiologies of Viral Influenza**

**Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)**

- RNA virus

- RSV is the most common cause of viral pneumonia in small children and infants.

**Rhinovirus**

- RNA

- Rhinovirus is the most common cause of upper respiratory tract infection across all age groups, although it is not as commonly represented as a cause of viral pneumonia.

**Influenza A, B and C viruses**

- RNA

- Influenza A is the greatest cause of mortality and morbidity among the viral types of pneumonia.

- There are multiple subtypes of Influenza A.  Two particularly concerning subtypes to be aware of are the avian flu (H5N1)and swine flu (H1N1).

**Human metapneumovirus**

- RNA

- Human Metapneumovirus is a novel viral pathogen that is increasingly recognized as a cause of viral pneumonia and is implicated as the cause of the SARS outbreak.

**Parainfluenza viruses type 1, 2, 3, and 4**

- RNA

- Parainfluenza virus has multiple serotypes and is most commonly associated with pneumonia-like illness in young children seasonally. Spring and fall predominate.

**Human bocavirus**

**Coronavirus**

- RNA

- Coronal viruses are already viruses that cause pneumonia, typically in immune incompetent people.

- However, one subtype of coronavirus is the virus causing Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome, and another has been implicated in severe acute respiratory syndrome.

**Adenovirus**

- DNA

- Adenovirus most commonly causes pneumonia in people with solid organ transplantation or hematological transplantation

**Enteroviruses**

- RNA

- Enteroviruses, although common causes of polio, gastrointestinal, and upper respiratory tract syndromes, are less common causes of viral pneumonia.

**Varicella-zoster virus**

- DNA

- Varicella-zoster virus is associated with both chickenpox and shingles and may cause severe types of pneumonia, particularly in non-immune pregnant women, non-gravid-adults with chickenpox. It is a fairly common cause of pneumonia in people with HIV post-shingles outbreak

**Hantavirus**

- RNA

- Hantavirus is a zoonotic viral pathogen that emerged in the American Southwest and is associated with rodent feces exposure.

- Hantavirus pneumonia is associated with frequent rapid respiratory failure and cardiovascular collapse.

**Parechoviruses**
**Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV)**

- DNA

- Epstein-Barr virus, although commonly implicated in mono-like syndromes, can be rarely associated with viral pneumonia. The majority of which occur in people with hematological dyscrasias.

**Human herpesvirus 6 and 7**

- DNA

**Herpes simplex virus**

- DNA

- HSV I and II are both associated with viral pneumonia in immune-compromised patients, including those with HIV, solid organ transplantation, and hematopoietic transplantation.

**Minimi virus**

**Cytomegalovirus (CMV)**

- DNA

- CMV is a significant cause of pneumonia in HIV-infected patients with a CD4 count less than 100 cells per millimeter squared.

- CMV is also frequently implicated in pneumonia in recipients of solid organ transplant and hematopoietic transplant.

**Measles**

- RNA

- A childhood exanthemata’s illness that, although less common in the industrialized world secondary to vaccination, remains a major contributor to worldwide childhood mortality secondary to viral pneumonia as a sequela.

**Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (Coronavirus)
**

- RNA

- A subset of the coronavirus associated with severe pneumonia. This was first observed in the Middle East and had an initial mortality rate of 30%.

**Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (Metapneumovirus)**

- RNA

- A subset of Coronavirus causing life-threatening pneumonia