Every patient with a complaint of syncope should have a complete history and physical exam, with attention to the presence or absence of pallor, cardiac abnormalities (murmurs, tachy/bradydysrhythmias, and irregular heartbeat), pulmonary abnormalities, and signs of trauma. Patients may require radiographic studies of trauma sustained during the vasovagal event.

Every person undergoing evaluation for syncope including presumed vasovagal syncope should have an ECG to look for evidence of underlying arrhythmogenic cardiac abnormalities, such as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, prolonged QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, or heart blocks. It is also wise to check for pregnancy in women of childbearing potential. Strong consideration should be given to fecal blood testing in patients in whom blood loss anemia is suspected, as hemoglobin may be normal in patients with acute hemorrhage.

Further emergency evaluation for syncope is tailored based on the presentation of the patient and existing comorbid conditions. In healthy patients with a classic history of vasovagal syncope, a normal exam, and a normal ECG, no further testing is indicated, and laboratory testing is low yield. When a diagnosis is not certain, or when patients have multiple potential causes of syncope, serum electrolyte testing, complete blood count, and cardiac enzymes may be indicated.

In patients with recurrent syncope or when a diagnosis remains elusive, Holter monitoring, event monitoring, and tilt table testing may be used in an outpatient setting to define the etiology of syncope better.