Over 1 million nerve fibers travel via the optic nerve, which transmits the visual signals from the photoreceptors within the outer retina to the visual processing areas of the occipital lobe. The various types of glaucoma all cause damage to the retinal nerve fiber layer. This fluid within the anterior chamber of the eye is called aqueous humor. Aqueous is produced by the non-pigmented epithelial cells of the ciliary body processes, with an individual circadian pattern of production.

Currently, screening pressure readings greater than 21 mm Hg are considered above normal physiologic eye pressure are concerning for future glaucomatous nerve damage. However, it is hard to know if patients are transiently spiking pressures throughout the day, causing damage but going undetected on screening. This is part of why elevated screening pressure can only be a risk factor for developing glaucoma, and is not required for the diagnosis of glaucoma. Diurnal pressure monitoring of IOP may help to catch this patient population.

Patients with normal-tension glaucoma also tend to have systemic vascular conditions such as Raynauds phenomenon, migraines, sleep apnea, carotid artery disease, and larger than normal changes in blood pressure overnight.

In acute angle-closure glaucoma, this trabecular meshwork drainage pathway is closed off either from the iris being pushed forward from pressure, i.e., anteriorly displaced lens, or the iris is pulled forward by fibrous tissue. Most commonly, it is due to a pupillary block in which the iris dilates to mid-position and bows anteriorly due to contact with the lens and closes off the trabecular meshwork blocking the aqueous outflow.

As previously mentioned above, secondary glaucoma can be caused by a variety of mechanisms, i.e., surgery or neovascularization, precipitating a blockage of the outflow tracts resulting in increased intraocular pressure, and if prolonged, related glaucomatous optic nerve injury.