The cornerstone of the management of cardioembolic strokes involves the use of anticoagulants for secondary prevention.

However, the exact timing of the initiation of anticoagulation remains a matter of controversy. The intention is to strike a delicate balance between the risk of recurrence on the one hand and the risk of a hemorrhagic transformation of the infarct on the other.

Current guidelines propose an arbitrary deferral of anticoagulation for two weeks after the event, based on the extrapolation of trials based on heparin use.

Conventionally, vitamin K antagonists like warfarin are used for oral anticoagulation. Therapeutic response is monitored by serial assessment of prothrombin time and the international normalized ratio (PT/INR). The target INR is between 2.0 to -3.0. However, this target is scaled up to 2.5 to 3.5 for cases with metallic mitral valves. Although universally available and inexpensive, a poorly predictable dose-response curve, a penchant for drug interactions, and a heavy dependence on patient dietary compliance are key drawbacks of these agents.

Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) represent the new generation of oral anticoagulants that overcome the shortcomings of vitamin K antagonists. Available agents include apixaban, rivaroxaban, dabigatran, and edoxaban. These newer agents are believed to have a more predictable dose-response curve, and their use obviates the need for repeated monitoring. A key drawback of these DOACs was the lack of availability of a reversal agent; however, this is no longer always the case. Reversal agents for dabigatran (idarucizumab) and rivaroxaban and apixaban (recombinant factor Xa - andexanet alfa) have received FDA approval and are available for clinical use.

Various devices have also received approval for stroke prevention, such as the "WATCHMAN" device for left atrial appendage closure. Such devices are useful in patients with atrial fibrillation unable to tolerate anticoagulation. By sealing off the left atrial appendage, these devices reduce the risk of atrial thrombi, that develop due to atrial fibrillation, embolizing into the systemic circulation.

Closure of the patent foramen ovale is also gaining recognition as a vital tool to prevent stroke recurrence. It has shown a clear superiority to antiplatelet therapy, and non-inferiority to anticoagulation.

For patients with left ventricular thrombus and myocardial infarction, we usually recommend anticoagulation at least for three months due to embolization risk.