**Interpreting the Snellen chart**

An important component of the cranial nerve 2 (optic nerve) exam is testing the visual acuity. Visual acuity assessment has been used clinically for hundreds of years as a useful tool to gauge the clarity of a patient's vision. When interpreting visual acuity using the Snellen chart, it is important to note that 20/20 vision is not synonymous with perfect vision, but rather, indicates a measure of a patient's clarity of eyesight from a distance. Overall visual ability encompasses a variety of other vision skills, including peripheral vision, eye coordination, depth perception, ability to focus on objects, and color vision. Furthermore, visual acuity assessment using the Snellen chart does not give a patient's prescription. The prescription is a separate measurement that must be evaluated by an eye professional in an office setting.

Hyperopia (farsightedness) describes the condition where patients have clear eyesight from a distance but cannot focus well on objects that are near. Another type of farsightedness is presbyopia, which typically develops after age 40 due to a loss of the elasticity in the eye's natural lens. On the other hand, myopia (nearsightedness) describes the condition where patients can see objects that are near well but have trouble seeing objects at a distance. A comprehensive eye examination by a licensed eye professional is needed in order to diagnose the condition compromising a patient's vision and determine whether refractive therapy is needed or more extensive workup is required for vision-threatening diseases, such as coloboma or carotid-cavernous fistula.

**Understanding Abbreviations in Clinical Practice**

The following abbreviations are commonly used in the reporting of visual acuity measurements.

- OD: Right eye

- OS: Left eye

- OU: Both eyes

- VA: Visual acuity

- DVA: Distance visual acuity

- NVA: Near visual acuity

- CC: With correction

- SC: Without correction

- PH: Pinhole

- CF: Counting fingers

- HM: Hand motion

- LP: Light perception

- NLP: No light perception

- +/-: Letters are seen on the next line (+) or letters missed (-), i.e., 20/50+1 means the patient read all letters on the 20/50 line and discerned 1 letter on the 20/40 line.

**Future Directions**

Mobile smartphone apps, such as the SightBook mobile app, have been developed to allow patients to remotely monitor their visual acuity.