The following are alterations in mouth structure leading to changes in lip approximation and increased salivary pooling and maceration at the labial commissures:

- The normal loss of skin turgor due to aging, smoking, or rapid weight loss

- Loss of vertical dimension of the face due to severe tooth wear, edentulous states, and mal-fitted dentures increasing overhang of the upper lip onto the lower one (overclosure)

- Retrognathic malocclusion

- Deepened furrowing of the skin dependent on the commissures (marionette lines)

- Conditions associated with enlarged lips such as oro-facial granulomatosis (OFG). Up to 20% of OFG patients suffer from AC, but Candida is usually not isolated from lesions

- Down syndrome: 25% of patients have AC due to macroglossia leading to tongue protrusion and drooling

**Atopic Dermatitis**

Allergic or irritant contact dermatitis causes up to 22% of cases of AC and 25% to 34% of generalized cheilitis. Common causes include nickel (in individuals with orthodontic braces)

Immune deficiency causes AC, often via the development of oral candidiasis (thrush) with extension to the labial commissures. Chronic steroid use (inhaled or oral), HIV/AIDS, thymic aplasia, a severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome (SCID), DiGeorge syndrome, hereditary myeloperoxidase deficiency, and Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Blood dyscrasias and malignancies probably also imbue some immune suppression as seen in acute leukemia and agranulocytosis.

Nutritional deficiencies are less common in developed countries but exist in susceptible populations such as the elderly, celiac disease patients, the impoverished, the mentally ill, vegans, and their solely breastfed infants not receiving vitamin supplementation. Patients who undergo bariatric surgery and ileal resection also have nutritional deficiencies and that is why they are more prone. Chronic gastritis, chronic pancreatitis, Crohn disease, and pernicious anemia are also important risk factors. Up to 25% of AC has iron or vitamin B deficiency. The following are associated with angular cheilitis:

- Vitamin B deficiencies (especially cyanocobalamin, folate, riboflavin)

- Trace mineral deficiencies (zinc or iron)

- General protein malnutrition

**Manifestations of Systemic Diseases - Sjogren Syndrome, Inflammatory Bowel Disease**

- Sjogren syndrome (SS): AC is the most common oral lesion found in SS, followed by atrophic glossitis and oral candidiasis. This is according to a systematic review by Serrano, et al. which incorporated the data of 2426 patients with SS. The prevalence of AC ranged from 2% to 81%, with the largest population reporting frequency of 20-40%. SS is a rheumatologic disease characterized by xerostomia ("dry mouth") and hyposialia ("decreased salivation"). This results from lymphocytic infiltration and destruction of salivary glands. Surprisingly, in this patient population, there is an inverse relationship between salivary flow and the presence of candidiasis, which is the opposite of what is the case for non-Sjogren’s AC. This may be explained by proper levels of saliva allowing for mucosal lubrication, tissue healing, and local immunity. Salivary IgA inhibits the binding of candida species to mucosal surfaces and flushes Candida from the oral cavity. Dentures still predispose SS patients to AC, since dental orthotics act as a reservoir for Candida and is a risk factor for oral candidiasis.

- Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn disease more than ulcerative colitis) can contribute to AC in several ways, one of which is general malnutrition impeding wound healing.

**Infection**

Infection is the most common cause of AC and the organisms listed below have been isolated in over 50-80% of lesions.

- Risk Factors

- Increased exposure to infecting microbes or factors that increase the microbial burden of skin flora such as poor hygiene, oral thrush, gingival disease/poor dentition
- Diabetes causing overgrowth of Candida due to increased salivary glucose levels and increased adherence to mucous membranes
- Decreased local immunity due to an immunocompromised state from chronic steroid use, chemotherapy, or HIV/AIDS
- Depletion of normal oral flora from prolonged antibiotic use enabling the proliferation of Candida species

- Specific Organisms

- Candida (especially C. Albicans) is the most common cause of AC and it is a normal commensal flora of the mouth in the yeast form, with 40% to 60% of healthy individuals acting as a reservoir. This explains why Candida is found in 93% of cases of AC but is described as the sole pathogen in only about 20% to 50% of the cases. Poor oral hygiene plays a role by increasing colony burden, especially when dentures are present. Since the hyphal form of this dimorphic yeast is the pathogenic variant, potassium iodide staining can help distinguish whether Candida is an innocent bystander yeast or a culprit pathogen. Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus is a major risk factor because of relative immunodeficiency and the increased availability of glucose as a substrate for fungi. Candida is typically the primary pathogen invading macerated labial commissures, setting the stage for subsequent bacterial infection. Infantile AC is almost always associated with concomitant oral candidiasis (thrush) and needs treatment to prevent a recurrence.
- Staphylococcus aureus is the sole pathogen in approximately 20% of cases. The anterior nares harbor Staphylococcus and decolonization therapy with anti-staphylococcal ointments should be applied to the nares if Staphylococcus aureus is identified as a causative agent.
- Beta-hemolytic streptococci, isolated in 8% to 15% of cases, is less commonly a sole pathogen. The anterior nares can harbor Streptococcus and Staphylococcus.
- Polymicrobial infections cause most AC and a combination of Candida albicans and S. aureus comprises 60% to 75%.

**Recurrent Mechanical, Chemical, or Thermal Injury**

Repeated mechanical, chemical, and thermal insults to labial commissures or conditions make the angles of the mouth more susceptible to injury.

- Xerostomia contributes to 5% of cases of AC and the causes include:

- Radiation treatment
- Sjogren syndrome
- Medications causing xerostomia and xeroderma such as isotretinoin, acitretin, indinavir, sorafenib, anticholinergic medications, and anticancer drugs
- Hypervitaminosis A
- Environmental exposures (dry heat, cold)

- Repetitive behaviors leading to salivary overexposure and commissural maceration. Habit-induced cheilitis is sometimes considered a distinct entity from AC and termed either “factitious cheilitis” or “perleche”

- Nervous tics such as over-licking of lips
- Thumb-sucking, lollipops
- Sialorrhea, drooling, or hypersialia
- Aggressive dental flossing
- Smoking

- Acute mechanical stress at the labial commissures such as post-tonsillectomy

**Idiopathic AC with no Identifiable Cause**

Since infection is the most common cause and maceration from saliva exposure the most common risk factor, empiric treatment with antifungal and/or antibiotic creams are reasonable but, long-term emollient therapy may be necessary in unresponsive or recurrent cases. Any case of idiopathic AC, after it has undergone adequate investigation, should raise a red flag for nutritional deficiencies or malignancy (the latter, especially in unilateral cases that fail to respond to any therapy.) A rare cause of AC is glucagonoma – a pancreatic endocrine tumor that causes a syndrome of dermatitis, diabetes, weight loss, anemia, and AC.