As mentioned, there are two mechanisms causing hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. First, the fetomaternal pair can have inherent ABO incompatibility, which occurs in 15 to 25% of pregnancies.

The second mechanism most commonly causing HDFN is through fetomaternal hemorrhage (FMH), where maternal antibodies develop after exposure to fetal blood. When fetal RBCs enter the maternal blood circulation, maternal antibodies can develop to an antigen presented on the fetal RBC surface. The most common antigen involved in this mechanism is the Rhesus D antigen.

Antigens in fetal blood that are foreign to maternal blood are inherited from paternal genes. For example, an Rh-negative woman can have an Rh-positive fetus due to her partner being Rh-positive. Antibodies that develop due to FMH put subsequent pregnancies at risk for HDFN as the first antibodies to develop are of IgM type, which cannot cross the placenta. In subsequent encounters with the Rh-D antigen, maternal antibodies rapidly develop IgG antibodies, which do cross the placenta.

As infant RBCs are attacked and broken down, infants develop hemolytic anemia. The breakdown of heme leads to bilirubin, which is removed by the placenta in utero. At birth, the liver begins processing the bilirubin. Indirect bilirubin, or unconjugated bilirubin, is conjugated to direct bilirubin using the enzyme uridine diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase (UDP-glucuronosyltransferase). This conjugated bilirubin is excreted in bile, where it ultimately will be excreted in feces and urine.

In infants, especially preterm infants, liver processing is less efficient, which often leads to natural physiologic jaundice.