Patients with multiple chronic illnesses are more likely to be hospitalized, and coordinating their care after discharge can be challenging.

Specific patient populations may require robust and meticulous discharge planning. For example, elderly patients, patients admitted for psychiatric treatment, and those who experienced major life events like myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accidents, or major surgical procedures will require a more robust discharge plan. Such patient populations will often require additional coordination of care with rehabilitation facilities, long-term care, or home health care, as these services may increase the patient’s quality of life and reduce the rate of re-admission.

The implementation of electronic health records (EHR) has streamlined the process of discharge planning. An EHR is shown to facilitate communication between providers, and many have the ability to coordinate patient care between clinicians and facilities.

To discharge patients to their homes where they can heal and recover, it is imperative to perform an assessment of their home situation, caregiver support, and access to necessary follow-up care. By assessing their home situation, you must factor in their mobility, ease of food preparation, toileting, and other activities of daily living. In the event that the patient requires ongoing medical care that may not be available at the current facility or at home, the patient may need to be discharged from the inpatient service to a facility where this care can be provided.