Bartter syndrome is a renal tubular salt-wasting disorder in which the kidneys cannot reabsorb sodium and chloride in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. This leads to increased distal delivery of salt and excessive salt and water loss from the body. The resultant volume depletion causes activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and subsequent secondary hyperaldosteronism. Long-term stimulation causes hyperplasia of the juxtaglomerular apparatus and hence increased renin levels.

Excessive distal delivery of sodium results in enhanced distal convoluted tubule sodium reabsorption and exchange with the positively charged potassium or hydrogen ion and leads to increased loss of potassium in urine and increased hydrogen H secretion. There is increased bicarbonate secondary to decreased hydrogen ion secretion due to hyperaldosteronism.

Urinary concentrating and diluting abilities are compromised in Bartter syndrome. Impaired urinary concentrating ability is secondary to defective sodium absorption in the loop of Henle.

Nephrocalcinosis commonly is seen in patients with Bartter syndrome. The likely explanation is secondary to excess calcium wasting in urine. Chloride transporters malfunction in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle (TAL), resulting in malabsorption of calcium in TAL. Under normal conditions, calcium and magnesium are absorbed paracellularly under the influence of positive charge in lumen due to reabsorption of negatively charged chloride ions.