**Nonoperative Management**

Fractures that are non-displaced and within the distal third of the bone can be managed non-operatively with immobilization in a cast.

The cast is usually needed for six weeks with repeat radiographs taken at this time to assess for union. The time to union varies depending on the location of the fracture. The distal third would be expected to heal within 6-8 weeks, the middle third within 8-12 weeks, and the proximal third within 12-24 weeks.  The relative increase in time to healing while moving from distal to proximal is secondary to the tenuous blood supply and retrograde arterial flow.

**Surgical Fixation**

The indications for operative management include:

- Displacement greater than 1mm

- An intrascaphoid angle greater than 35 degrees (humpback deformity)

- A radiolunate angle of more than 15 degrees

- Transcaphoid perilunate dislocation

- Proximal pole fractures

- Comminuted fractures

- Undisplaced waist fractures in individuals that need to return quickly to work/sport

- Nonunion or avascular necrosis

The surgical fixation involves inserting screws or K-wires and can be done percutaneously or via an open procedure. The latter is preferable for non-unions and those fractures that exhibit gross displacement.

**Technique**

Positioning of the screw is crucial and should be in the middle third of the central axis of the scaphoid; this provides the most stability, reduces time to union, and improves alignment.

Access to the scaphoid can be via a dorsal or volar approach. The decision is made based on the surgeon's preference and the location of the fracture. The volar approach uses the interval between the flexor carpi radialis and the radial artery and is the optimal approach for waist and distal pole fractures. It has the benefits of allowing exposure of the entire scaphoid and radioscapholunate ligament and is least damaging to the vascular supply. The dorsal approach is preferred for proximal pole fractures but places the vascular supply at greater risk of injury.

**Nonunion**

Treatment of scaphoid non-union is approachable in a variety of ways.

Alternative treatments include excision of the proximal fragment, total or partial arthrodesis (fusion), radial styloidectomy, or proximal row carpectomy. These are salvage procedures and are usually considered when there is evidence of arthritis of the radio-carpal joint.