The ultimate goal of fracture management is to obtain acceptable reduction, stable fixation and bony healing, early return to activities of daily living, preservation of function, and minimizing complications.

**Conservative Management**

There are only limited indications for conservative management in forearm fractures like unicortical fracture and undisplaced or minimally displaced fracture (<50% displacement, <10 degrees of angulation). Isolated ulna fractures have shown high success rates in non-operative management, including long-arm cast, functional brace, and close follow-up by serial x-rays.

**Operative Management**

The forearm fractures are usually managed by surgical fixation, including closed or open reduction and internal fixation. Open reduction helps achieve anatomic reduction, stable fixation, and an early range of motion, thereby enabling patients to return to their pre-injured state as early as possible. Closed reduction and internal fixation can be performed using an intramedullary nail as a minimally invasive procedure which has a good favorable outcome in the pediatric population. At the same time, it is less preferable in adult forearm fractures since adequate reduction is difficult to achieve in a closed fashion.

**Open Reduction with Plate and Screw Fixation**

In both-bone forearm fractures, the order of fixation for the radius and ulna is based on fracture pattern and comminution. Initial fixation of the fracture with less comminution will restore the length and facilitates reduction of the other bone. When both the fractures are simple, preferably radius should be fixed first as it makes the forearm more stable and makes it easy to address the ulna. Placement of the plate is usually preferred on the volar surface. It provides proper seating of the plate and adequate soft tissue coverage; however, placement of the plate on the dorsal (tension) surface is biomechanically better.

The management of open fractures depends on the grade of the fracture according to Gustilo and Anderson's classification. Grade 1 and 2 fractures with minimum contamination can be managed with definitive fixation after adequate debridement in a single setting. On the other hand, grade 3 and highly contaminated wounds should be managed by debridement and external fixation followed by staged internal fixation.

**Surgical Approaches**

The majority of the forearm fractures are surgically approached, with the patient lying in the supine position. For volar approaches in the supine position, the limb can be abducted onto the hand table, whereas for dorsal and subcutaneous approaches limb can be adducted and internally rotated at the shoulder joint. The prone position allows access to the dorsal forearm. Using an individualized approach for both ulna and radius is preferable as a single incision approach will lead to cross union and restriction of supination and pronation.

A surgical approach to the radius is considered more difficult than approaching the ulna as the radius is surrounded by a muscular envelope and closely associated with neurovascular structures, particularly in the proximal third. The most commonly used approaches for radius include the volar Henry approach and the dorsolateral Thompson approach.

The Thompson approach is considered the best approach for the proximal and middle third of the radius; it uses the interval between the extensor carpi radialis brevis and the extensor digitorum communis. The most common complication associated with this approach is the injury to the posterior interosseous nerve; this can be prevented or reduced by supinating the radius, allowing safe elevation of the supinator from its insertion. The distal third of the Thompson approach is relatively subcutaneous and is considered to be safe.

The volar Henry approach is an extensile approach to the radius. In this approach, the line of skin incision is from the lateral aspect of the biceps tendon to the radial styloid. The inter nervous plane depends on the area of the fracture. The benefit of this approach is that it allows better visualization of the proximal, middle, and distal parts of the radius.

The ulna is located subcutaneously in the forearm throughout its length; therefore, a subcutaneous approach is used for the ulna exposure and reduction. The only known complication in this approach is the injury to the dorsal branches of the ulnar nerve, especially in the distal third.

**Methods of Fixation**

Dynamic compression and limited contact dynamic compression are the most commonly used techniques for fixation of the forearm fractures. These are mostly used for simple fracture patterns, especially the transverse and short oblique types. They provide absolute stability at the fracture site and promote primary healing. A lag screw with a neutralization plate is used for oblique fractures. If the fracture is severely comminuted, it should be fixed by bridge plating mode. The intramedullary nail is a load-sharing device that can also be used for the fixation of forearm fractures. The advantages of nailing are preserving the fracture hematoma (closed reduction) and periosteal blood supply in the forearm.

**Dynamic Compression Plate**

Dynamic compression plating (DCP) has been considered the gold standard treatment in forearm fractures.

**Limited Contact Dynamic Compression Plate**

Perren et al. reported the use of limited contact dynamic compression plate (LCDCP) in 1990. The fixation principle of LCDCP is very similar to the DCP. The advantages over the DCP are 1) decreased periosteal compression and damage, 2) preserves blood supply to the bone, 3) wavy surface provides an increased area for bone graft application, 4) altering the load of the plate delivers pure tension on the plate, and 5) avoids implant-related stress riser and thereby re-fracture after implant removal.

**Bridging Plate**

A bridging plate is mainly used for comminuted fractures of the forearm. Minimally comminuted fractures with large fragments can be fixed with multiple lag screws. However, highly comminuted fractures are fixed by bridging proximal and distal fragments after proper reduction.

**Intramedullary Nailing**

Intramedullary nailing of the forearm shaft fractures has been changed for over a century. Newer trends of fracture treatment have evolved towards the biological fixation of the fracture by minimal handling of the soft tissues and periosteal blood supply. This method is more widely used in children than adults.

Intramedullary nailing can be done by open and closed methods. The advantages of intramedullary nailing over the plating are: 1) preserving soft tissues and primary hematoma,  2) less incidence of neurovascular injury, 3) less risk of infection, 4) minimally invasive and cosmetic, and 5) lowers the incidence of re-fracture.

Previously, solid small diameter nails were used, including Kirschner wires, Steinmann pins, rush pins, and larger V/U rods. The currently used non-locking nails for forearm fractures include square nails, rush pins, and TENS nails. The plating is preferred over the conventional non-locking nailing due to insufficient rotational and linear stability. However, recently a locking intramedullary nail has been introduced for forearm bones which overcomes the stability problem seen with the non-locking nails.

Intramedullary nailing is indicated in pediatric forearm fractures, segmental fractures, polytrauma, osteopenic bones, and those with poor soft tissue envelope. The contraindications for nailing include active infection, narrow intramedullary canal, concomitant metaphyseal or epiphyseal fracture, radial head and neck fractures, ulna, and radial metaphyseal fractures, which do not permit proper locking.

**Hybrid Fixation**

Hybrid fixation involves the fixation of one bone with an intramedullary nail and the other bone with plating. It also provides good biomechanical stability, preservation of soft tissues, fewer complication, and a good functional outcome. Intramedullary nailing fixation of ulna and plate fixation of radius shows better biomechanical stability than the reversed fixation. In this combination, the plate fixation of radius controls the rotation and provides rigid fixation, whereas nailing is easier in the ulna as it is a relatively straight bone.

**Management of Galeazzi and Monteggia Fractures**

Principles of management in Galeazzi fractures are the same as that for simple forearm fracture fixation. The adult Galeazzi fractures are highly unstable, so open reduction and stable fixation are required to restore normal anatomy and function. The volar Henry approach is commonly used for these fracture fixations, and plate-fixation is the preferred method of fixation.

Monteggia fracture can be managed by either closed reduction or open reduction, depending on the type of fracture and stability of the radial head. If it is a simple fracture with a stable radial head, it can be managed by the closed reduction in an operative room under fluoroscopic guidance. If the radial head remains unstable even after reduction, the ulna fracture should be managed by internal fixation either by intramedullary nailing or plating, while in comminuted fractures, it should be managed by plate and screw fixation.