**Normal Appearance Concern**

Body image falls on a continuum from healthy body perceptions to unhealthy body perceptions. Accordingly, body dysmorphic disorder concerns may be on a spectrum with normal appearance concerns, contrasting only quantitatively. Appearance concerns are increasingly common. Ongoing studies in the United States indicate that the number of people who experience dissatisfaction with some aspect of their physical appearance is progressively increasing. At the same time, an increasing interest exists for cosmetic specialists and procedures to enhance physical appearance.

**Dysmorphic Concern**

Dysmorphic concern is attributable to an excessive concern and preoccupation with a perceived or slight defect in the body, also includes concerns about body odor or function and non-appearance related somatic concerns. Dysmorphic concerns also lie on a continuum of severity from no or minimal concerns to severe concerns. Dysmorphic concern is not a DSM diagnosis.

**Disordered Eating**

The definition of disordered eating attitudes is any abnormal thoughts, beliefs, affects, and behaviors towards food, and are associated with body image misperception, body dissatisfaction, and unhealthy weight control beliefs and practice. It is important to note that eating problems exist on a spectrum from disordered eating that does not meet the DSM criteria to anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Disordered eating is a risk factor for the development of full-syndrome eating disorders, and thus, early detection to provide appropriate intervention is particularly important.

**Anorexia Nervosa (AN)**

Eating disorders (ED) are among the most severe manifestations of body image dysfunction. Traditionally, treatment of eating disorders involves the treatment of body image disturbances. Body image distortion is a core characteristic of anorexia nervosa (AN), and this distortion exists in both attitudinal and perceptual level. Anorexia nervosa is the restriction of energy intake, body image distortion and misperception of body weight, fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, and significantly low BMI. In the DSM-5, the amenorrhea criterion no longer applies for anorexia nervosa. AN has a prevalence of 0.4% and is considered to be one of the most challenging psychiatric disorders to treat with the highest mortality rates in mental disorders.

**Bulimia Nervosa (BN)**

Bulimia nervosa (BN) is a potentially life-threatening and debilitating eating disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of overeating (bingeing) followed by inappropriate compensatory behaviors (purging) such as self-induced vomiting, misusing of laxatives or diuretics, and excessive exercise, to compensate for the excessive caloric intake. Body image distortion often accompanies bulimia nervosa and excessive concern about body weight and shape. Indeed, Self-evaluation and self-worth in these individuals suffer undue influence from body shape and weight. BN has a chronic or intermittent course and often persists for several years after onset.

**Body Dysmorphic Disorder (BDD)**

The fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental disorders-5 (DSM-5) characterizes body dysmorphic disorder as a distressing preoccupation or a markedly excessive concern with one or more perceived or slight defects in physical appearance, associated with significant distress and functional impairment. The criteria also specify that at some point during the illness, individuals perform repetitive and compulsive behaviors in response to their appearance concerns. These irresistible and distressful compulsions can be behavioral (e.g., mirror checking, excessive grooming, camouflaging, skin picking, reassurance seeking) or mental acts (e.g., comparing the disliked appearance features to those of other people). A majority of patients exhibit excessive self-consciousness, often with ideas or delusions of reference, which are irrational beliefs that random incidents in the world relate directly to them. For instance, thinking that others are taking special notice of, talking about, judging, or mocking them because of the perceived defect or flaw.

BDD is associated with significant psychosocial impairment and high rates of depression, suicidality, and hospitalization. Estimates of the prevalence of BDD in the general population are between 0.7% and 3.2%. BDD is frequently found in clinical settings, with prevalence of 13% to 16% in psychiatric inpatients, 4.8% in adolescent inpatients, 9% to 12% in dermatology settings, 8% to 37% in individuals with OCD, 3% to 53% in cosmetic surgery settings, 11% to 13% in social phobia, and 14% to 42% in atypical major depressive disorder.

**Muscle Dysmorphia (MD)**

Muscle dysmorphia is a rare form of body dysmorphic disorder that is focused on muscularity and mostly found in men. It refers to an extreme desire to gain lean muscle mass and preoccupation with a perceived lack of muscularity. Although muscle dysmorphia is included in DSM-5 as a variant of body dysmorphic disorder, similarities with eating disorders, particularly anorexia nervosa, have been postulated. Researchers have proposed that MD is a reverse form of anorexia nervosa and even the word “bigorexia” has been coined to explain it. Individuals with MD may experience impairment in social and occupational functioning because of embarrassment over their perceived appearance flaws and consequently, their tendency for social withdrawal; also because of their need to follow a careful diet and time-consuming workout schedule. They may also damage their health by risky body change behaviors, excessively working out, and use of anabolic-androgenic steroids.

**Binge Eating Disorder (BED)**

DSM-5 characterizes binge eating disorder as recurrent episodes of consuming large amounts of food (i.e., binge eating), quickly and until feeling uncomfortably full. Additional criteria include eating alone, eating without being hungry, feeling guilty, disgusted, or depressed after overeating, marked distress regarding binge eating, and absence of regular compensatory behaviors such as purging. Although the criteria for BED do not include a body image related criterion, new evidence show that body image disturbance might play roles in BED and could be a target for treatment.

**Obsessive-compulsive Disorder (OCD)**

Obsessive-compulsive disorder is a disabling condition characterized by obsessions and compulsions. Recent studies have shown that OCD may be associated with different aspects of body image. In addition to OCD, several other disorders have key obsessive and compulsive characteristics. In BDD, the obsessive thoughts direct on their perceived defect and how they can resolve the physical problem. Further, the compulsive behaviors include checking their appearance, temporary solutions such as camouflaging, or the search for permanent solutions.

**Social Anxiety Disorder (SAD)**

Recent studies have suggested that social anxiety disorder may be associated with body image-related dysfunction. Social anxiety disorder and BDD are two different but conceptually overlapping disorders. Individuals who do not necessarily have BDD but perceive themselves being unattractive tend to have more social anxiety.

**Major Depressive Disorder**

Patients with major depressive disorder experience alteration in posture and dissatisfaction with body image during episodes of depression.

**Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)**

**Deliberate Self-harm (DSH)**

**Trichotillomania**