The proper management of sleep disorders requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), specialists, pharmacists, nursing staff, psychological professionals (social workers, counselors, etc.), and in some cases a sleep clinic, and a dietician. Surgical consultations are required for some of the underlying causes of insomnia, such as in cases of OSA, which may require palate surgery. Interprofessional collaboration is essential for good patient outcomes in sleep disorders.

Nurses can coordinate activities between the managing clinicians and other health professionals on the case, as well as counsel the patient and answer any questions. The pharmacist will verify the medication dosing, check for interactions, and counsel patients on proper administration. Sleep clinics will look deeper into the case, including potential sleep studies, when indicated. Psychological professionals will work with any issues that may contribute to sleep problems and report to the rest of the interprofessional team. Clinicians will do well to consider input from all team members in deciding their course of therapy; the patient and possibly family (e.g., spouses, parents) are also members of the care team.

All interprofessional team members are responsible for maintaining accurate and updated records regarding the patient's case with every interaction or intervention taken. They must also be free to openly communicate with all other team members when there are any concerns about the patient's condition or progress. This interprofessional model will help drive optimal outcomes for those patients who experience issues with sleep disorders of any type. [Level 5]