**Prenatal Techniques**

**Non-Sonographic Methods for Determining Gestational Age
**

- Naegele’s Rule: This rule assumes a standardized 28-day menstrual cycle with fertilization occurring on day 14. However, many women have irregular cycles with variability in the length of the follicular phase affecting ovulation. History of last menstrual period may be confounded by early pregnancy bleeding, hormonal contraceptive use, or incorrect recall of last menstrual period date.

- Uterine Size: This finding primarily relies on the provider’s physical examination. This may be confounded by maternal factors including but not limited to obesity, multiple gestation, leiomyoma, and fibroids. The mother may also have a retroverted uterus which will alter normal progressive landmarks. Individual practitioner skill and experience make findings less reliable and reproducible.

**Sonographic Methods for Determining Gestational Age
**

- Crown-rump length (CRL): This parameter becomes less accurate for predicting gestational age and delivery date with the advancement of gestation due to normal embryonic development and variability in anatomic positioning. Once the CRL exceeds 84 mm, the BDP serves as a better indicator for gestational age.

- Biparietal Diameter (BPD): This parameter becomes limited after 22 weeks gestation due to normal biologic development with variations in fetal size and shape. If there is a physiologic or pathologic cause for the skull size and shape to be altered, the BPD may produce false measurements.

- Head Circumference (HC): This parameter is useful for obtaining gestation age, but multiple landmarks need to be identified before taking measurements. After 22 weeks, there is significant variation due to normal development affecting size and shape.

- Femur Length (FC): Multiple errors may occur when obtaining this parameter including but not limited to, non-ossified portions of the femur and not visualizing the full femur. This can lead to incorrect gestational age calculations. Average femur lengths may differ among certain ethnic groups or can be indicative of pathology. Again, this parameter does have variability after 22 weeks due to normal biologic development.

- Abdominal Circumference (AC): This parameter has a wide margin of error for determining gestational age due to multiple factors including asymmetry of the abdomen, changes with respiration and movement, and user skills. Like the other parameters, significant variability is seen after 22 weeks.

- Ossification Centers: These parameters do not directly correlate with exact gestational age. Presence of these ossified centers are rather markers of fetal maturity which is seen later in pregnancy.

**Postnatal Techniques**

- Dubowitz Method: Due to a large number of criteria needed to perform the exam, this method may be more difficult to perform on sick and preterm infants. Also, it can take up to 20 minutes to perform this exam. Studies have shown that this method tends to overestimate the gestational age.

- New Ballard Score: Although this exam is quicker to perform, studies have shown that this system can overestimate gestational age in preterm infants.