The key to Lyme disease is prevention, and this requires an interprofessional team approach. All healthcare workers, including the nurse practitioner, pharmacist, and primary care provider, should provide patient education on measures to prevent tick bites while hiking or working outdoors. In areas where ticks are common, cleaning up of the environment by removing the underbrush and spraying an insecticide may reduce the tick burden in the area. The outdoors person should be told to wear appropriate garments and be familiar with the skin features of the tick bite. The nurse should educate the patient on how to remove the tick from the skin and when to seek medical assistance. The pharmacist should educate the patient on medication compliance for those who have been confirmed to have acquired Lyme disease.

Nurses should educate parents on how to inspect their children for ticks at the end of an outdoor event in an endemic area. While there are many repellants on the market, it is best to avoid them as the risk of harm is greater than any benefit. If one is going to use a repellant, DEET is the one product that is safe; however, it is not 100% effective. finally, the pharmacist should educate the patient about the harms of taking prophylactic doxycycline; a better strategy is to remove the tick as soon as it is visualized.

Finally, pets can also develop Lyme disease and carry the tick. Hence, pet owners should examine their pets on a regular basis and remove the tick. There is no risk of acquiring Lyme disease by removing the tick.

Patients need to be told that there are many unvalidated tests for Lyme disease which offer false-positive results. Even though there is a Lyme vaccine, the public should be educated that the effects of the vaccine are not consistent or long-lasting; hence one should not rely on the vaccine to prevent Lyme disease.

**Outcomes**

The prognosis for patients who are treated for Lyme disease is excellent, with no residual deficits. However, a few individuals may develop a recurrent infection if an infected tick bites them. Individuals who receive late treatment may develop neurological and musculoskeletal symptoms. Lyme arthritis is not uncommon. Some patients may develop Lyme carditis which results in a heart block and requires temporary pacing of the heart. Despite the large number of people affected, Lyme disease is not fatal. There continues to be a debate about the existence of post-treatment Lyme disease, but so far, this diagnosis has been promoted by the lay public and media, as there is no good evidence that such a condition exists.