**Congenital Generalized Lipodystrophy**

The extent of fat loss results in a striking clinical appearance. Patients not only have a widespread fat loss but also have skeletal muscle hypertrophy due to excess adipose deposition within the musculature. As is common to many lipodystrophies, metabolic anomalies including hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance, and hypertriglyceridemia often occur. Due to the early onset of this condition, these findings occur before adulthood. The life expectancy of patients with congenital generalized lipodystrophy is reduced due to complications of diabetes or from liver or heart disease.

**Familial Partial Lipodystrophy**

The patient demonstrates fat loss primarily involving the extremities, more commonly lower than upper. Patients appear normal at birth and throughout childhood regarding fat distribution but develop clinically apparent changes near puberty. In contrast to the fat loss involving the extremities, patients demonstrate a fat gain in the face, neck, and abdomen.

These patients show clinical findings consistent with that described above and additionally may have hypertriglyceridemia severe enough to induce pancreatitis. Insulin resistance, adverse cardiac events, and hepatic steatosis may also be present and sometimes severe.

**Acquired Generalized Lipodystrophy**

At birth fat distribution is normal but as time progresses fat loss develops. The face, arms, and legs are most commonly affected. The absence of mature adipocytes inhibits the ability to synthesize adipocytokines that are important for normal metabolism. This loss leads to leptin deficiency and severe metabolic derangements. Fat deposition in the liver may lead to cirrhosis. Diabetes mellitus and hypertriglyceridemia are often also present. One-quarter of patients will develop inflammatory panniculitis at the time the fat loss begins, though this is not specific to acquired generalized lipodystrophy.

**Acquired Partial Lipodystrophy**

Acquired partial lipodystrophy is characterized by gradual loss of fat from the upper body and truncal region during childhood. This condition is progressive, and patients may demonstrate compensatory fat deposition in the hips and legs. The metabolic complications seen in the other lipodystrophies do not seem to be as common in patients with acquired partial lipodystrophy. However, these patients may be more susceptible to kidney disease. Most patients with acquired partial lipodystrophy have circulating levels of the nephritic factor.

Highly active antiretroviral therapy-induced lipodystrophy has become the most common form of acquired partial lipodystrophy. The resultant lipodystrophy is well-documented and has a typical clinical presentation. Patients demonstrate subcutaneous fat loss of the extremities and the face and an increase in adiposity of the trunk. Due to this classic clinical picture, the appearance became stigmatized as an association with HIV.

**Lipodystrophy Associated With Insulin Treatment**

Patients taking insulin should receive a detailed physical examination. An inspection alone is not sufficient and concerned areas should be palpated to evaluate for lipohypertrophy.