Bilomas are most commonly secondary to disruption of the biliary tree by either an iatrogenic or traumatic cause. Iatrogenic causes of biloma formation include laparoscopic cholecystectomy, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), radiofrequency ablation (RFA), transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE), liver transplant, resection, and biopsy.

The increased utilization of laparoscopic cholecystectomy over the past 3 decades has been linked with increased rates of disruption to the biliary tree. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is associated with bile duct injuries in 0.6 to 1.5% of cases compared with 0.2 to 0.3% of open operations.

In 1991, Kang et al. showed that 53% of patients who had a US scan 24 hours following laparoscopic cholecystectomy showed small volume fluid collections. However, they determined that a routine postoperative US scan did not change management and was unwarranted.

Biloma has been demonstrated following perforation of the common bile duct during ERCP.

Biloma formation was identified in 3.3% of 3284 patients undergoing RFA of hepatocellular carcinoma. However, biloma formation in the context of RFA is a minor complication. Chang et al. examined 109 bilomas following RFA for hepatocellular carcinoma, with only one patient requiring percutaneous drainage of the biloma for infection.

Liver transplantation is known to be associated with biloma formation. Biloma forms part of a spectrum of post-transplant cholangiopathies. Post-transplant cholangiopathy is one of the most challenging complications following a liver transplant. The pathophysiology of post-transplant cholangiopathy is likely to involve ischemia-reperfusion injury, bile salt toxicity, or immune-mediated injury. Biloma formation after liver transplant can be associated with both anastomotic leakage and non-anastomotic strictures with associated bile duct necrosis and resulting intraparenchymal bile leakage.

Abdominal trauma has been associated with biloma formation. In most cases, this involves blunt trauma to the upper abdomen. Post-traumatic biloma can take 1 to 2 days to appear.