Differential diagnosis of anaplasmosis includes human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis (HME), Rocky Mountain spotted fever, relapsing fever, tularemia, Lyme disease, Colorado tick fever, and babesiosis.

Similar to anaplasmosis, HME presents with nonspecific symptoms such as fever, headache, myalgias, and headaches. Also, Ixodes ticks are the responsible vector for disease transmission. Clinical cases of HME present with thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and elevated liver enzymes. Peripheral smear examination (looking for the presence of morulae in monocytes), PCR, serology, culture, or identification in tissue samples confirms the diagnosis.

In those patients with a history of tick bite or outdoor exposure, other diagnoses to consider are Rocky Mountain spotted fever, relapsing fever, tularemia, Lyme disease, Colorado tick fever, and babesiosis.

Lyme disease has a characteristic rash (bulls-eye rash) and can be differentiated with specific ELISA and Western Blot testing.

Colorado tick fever is transmitted by a different tick (Dermacentor), whereas, relapsing fever is transmitted by lice and soft-bodied ticks (Ornithodoros). Tick-borne relapsing fever is characterized by recurrent febrile episodes lasting 1 to 3 days flanked by afebrile periods that could last up to 14 days. Relapsing fever is diagnosed by identifying spirochetes from peripheral blood smears or by PCR.

Babesiosis can be diagnosed by identifying intraerythrocytic ring forms of the parasite which occasionally looks like a "maltese cross" on a peripheral blood smear exam. Tularemia has a different clinical presentation than anaplasmosis including skin ulceration, lymphadenopathy, and severe respiratory symptoms.