The mechanism through which TZDs exert their anti-diabetic effect is augmenting insulin sensitivity by acting on muscle, adipose, and liver tissue. TZDs increase peripheral tissue glucose utilization and, to some extent, decrease glucose production in the liver. This action involves activating a nuclear receptor, the gamma isoform of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR-gamma). The activation of this nuclear receptor, in turn, alters the gene transcription of several genes involved in glucose and lipid metabolism, along with energy balance. Some genes are stimulated, and some genes are inhibited. This includes the genes for fatty acid transporter protein, lipoprotein lipase, glucokinase, and the GLUT4 glucose transporter. TZDs help to reduce insulin resistance in muscle, adipose tissue, and liver. Since PPAR-gamma concentrates heavily in adipose tissue, the effect on muscle and liver seems to be via endocrine signaling from adipocytes by adipokines. The exact mechanism of action of TZDs is still not entirely clear, but they have been proven to potentially improve the insulin resistance syndrome and improve the complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus with better glycemic control.

While rosiglitazone is a PPAR-gamma agonist, pioglitazone is both PPAR-gamma and PPAR-alpha agonist. PPAR-gamma is mainly localized in adipose tissue, pancreatic beta cells, macrophages, vascular endothelium, and the central nervous system. PPAR-alpha is mainly localized in the liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and vascular wall.  These differences may be responsible for different results of rosiglitazone and pioglitazone on lipid levels and cardiovascular outcomes.

Pioglitazone is readily absorbed, and it reaches peak plasma time in 2 to 4 hours. It is more than 99 percent protein bound. Volume of distribution: 0.63 L/kg. Its elimination half-life is between 3 to 7 hours. It is given once a day, and it is considered to exert its pharmacokinetic effects or, in plain terms, to be effective for 24 hours.

Pioglitazone is metabolized in the liver by CYP2C8 and CYP3A4. It has active metabolites, called metabolite II (hydroxy derivative), metabolite III (keto derivative), metabolite IV (active hydroxy derivative). CYP2C8 inducers may decrease the serum concentration of pioglitazone, whereas CYP2C8 inhibitors may increase the serum concentration of pioglitazone. Hyperglycemia-associated or causing- agents like steroids may diminish the therapeutic effect of pioglitazone. When pioglitazone is combined with other oral anti-diabetics, it increases the risk of hypoglycemia, especially with insulin and insulin secretagogues. Consider decreasing the dose of other oral anti-diabetics when starting pioglitazone. If pioglitazone is given together with insulin, the risk of fluid retention, heart failure, and hypoglycemia increases. Consider decreasing insulin dose. If any side effects occur in combination with insulin, the first option is to discontinue pioglitazone or to decrease pioglitazone dose, and the second option to discontinue or decrease insulin.

Other factors that may affect pioglitazone use:

- Concomitant use of pioglitazone and pregabalin may enhance edema.

- The use of aspirin with pioglitazone may increase the hypoglycemic effect of pioglitazone.

- Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may enhance the glucose-lowering effect of pioglitazone.

- Use of pioglitazone with a thiazide or thiazide-like diuretics may decrease the glucose-lowering effect of pioglitazone.

- Use of pioglitazone with Topiramate may result in decreased serum concentration of pioglitazone.

- By decreasing insulin resistance, pioglitazone may cause ovulation in premenopausal women with anovulation, especially in polycystic ovarian syndrome. These anovulatory female patients may get pregnant with the resumption of ovulation.

Pioglitazone stimulates PPAR-gamma receptors located in collecting tubules of the kidney. PPAR-gamma pioglitazone interaction induces sodium channel messenger RNA production.  Pioglitazone increases sodium reabsorption from the epithelial sodium channel at the luminal surface of the collecting tubules and causes fluid retention and possibly edema.