**Motor Nerve Conduction Studies**

Since the myelin is not affected in an NMJ disorder, motor nerve conduction velocities are normal. However, amplitudes may be affected, and they can assist differentiating myasthenia gravis from Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. In the patient with Lambert-Eaton, compound muscle action potential (CMAP) decreases. Meanwhile, in myasthenia gravis, compound muscle action potential (CMAP) is within normal limits.

**Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies**

The neuromuscular junction is not present in sensory nerves, and therefore the sensory nerve conduction study is normal.

**Repetitive Nerve Stimulation/Exercise Testing**

There is no amplitude decrement between the first and the succeeding CMAP in normal subjects. However, in patients with neuromuscular junction disorder, a decrement of more than 10% between the first and the fourth stimulation can be appreciated.

In Myasthenia Gravis (MG), the baseline CMAP amplitude decrement is observed more than 70% of the time with RNS in generalized MG. Not uncommonly, no decrement is appreciated on RNS of distal muscles. However, a significant decrement is observable after a 1-minute exercise. Post-exercise repair or facilitation is also observable following a brief 10-second maximum isometric contraction, followed by a decrement in two to five minutes post-exercise due to post-exercise exhaustion.

On the other hand, with Lambert-Eaton myasthenia syndrome, baseline CMAP amplitude decrement is usually noted. After a brief 10-second maximum isometric muscle contraction, post-exercise facilitation of up to 200% increase in CMAP amplitude is typical. In two to five minutes, the clinician should note post-exercise exhaustion.

Other neurologic disorders that can also show CMAP decrement on RNS include motor neuron disease, conditions where on-going denervation and reinnervation result in immature nerve endings/neuromuscular junction, and myopathies.

**Single Fiber EMG**

Single-fiber EMG reveals increased jitter and blocking in neuromuscular junction disorder. There is marked prolongation in jitter value, with MCD of more than 100 microseconds.

**Late Responses**

H-reflexes and F-reflex are not routinely part of the process in a neuromuscular junction study as it does not provide additional useful information.

**Needle EMG**

For a neuromuscular junction study, all muscles that are weak in the patient should be examined in the needle EMG portion of the test. During the exam, the diagnostician may notice unstable MUAPs with normal recruitment. Most Neuromuscular junction disorders will not show abnormal spontaneous activity except for in botulism.