Nonoperative management is the foundation for the treatment of medial epicondylitis. Ciccotti et al. divided the nonoperative treatment of medial epicondylitis into three phases. Phase 1 consists of the cessation of offending activities or exercises in combination with pain-relieving modalities. Phase 2 consists of guided physiotherapy and rehabilitation. Phase 3 focuses on modifications to previously offending activities.

Initial pain relief is achieved with icing, especially after activities, and non-opiate analgesic medications, such as acetaminophen (first line) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs).

Some patients benefit from bracing, which is done with a counterforce elbow strap or night splint. The counterforce strap should be placed about 2 cm distal to the medial epicondyle to provide compression and unload the tendon.

Patients with medial epicondylitis should be actively involved in physical therapy. The first goal of physical therapy is establishing full, painless range of motion. This is followed by stretching and progressive isometric exercises. As the patient continues to improve, resistive exercises are added to the program. The overall goal is to increase muscle strength beyond that of pre-injury strength. Once the patient can perform repetitive exercises without discomfort, they are progressed back into sports or occupation-specific activities. At the end of the guided therapy, patients should transition to a maintenance exercise program to continue overall flexibility and strength and decrease the chance of recurrence.

Corticosteroid injections have been shown to be helpful for symptom relief in the short term (up to 6 weeks post-injection), but there was no difference when compared to controls in the long term (3 and 12 months post-injection).

Topical nitroglycerin or glyceryl trinitrate has shown short-term benefits in lateral epicondylitis, but overall results for treatment for tendinopathy have been mixed depending on the site of application.

Surgery is typically not required. However, if no benefit is seen with the above conservative treatments for 6 to 12 months, then surgical management may be considered. Given the proximity to the ulnar nerve and UCL, an open surgical technique is preferred. The operative treatment involves debridement of the degenerated tendon, the release of the common flexor tendon at the medial epicondyle, and cortical drilling of the epicondyle to increase vascularity. If there is concomitant ulnar neuropathy, a transposition is also performed at the time of surgery.

Prevention includes adjustments to sporting or occupational equipment and modifications to technique. For example, in a tennis player, a larger grip size on the racquet, stringing the racquet less tight, and improving the serve and forehand techniques may help reduce the stress on the flexor-pronator mass.