Agents including alcohol, phenol, and botulinum toxin are all choices for chemical neurolysis. Alcohol produces nonselective destruction of the cholesterol, phospholipids, and lipoproteins. At least a 35 to 60 % concentration is needed. It also spreads rapidly from the injection site so that large volumes are often necessary. Phenol 5% to 7% is a common agent, and it dissolves the axons and Schwann cells inside the basal lamina tubes.

Usually, the practitioner advances a 24-gauge pencil point needle into subarachnoid space. In intrathecal neurolysis, needle tip placement is at the vertebral level where the target dorsal root leaves the spinal cord and not where it passes the intervertebral foramen. It is crucial to prevent a leak of the alcohol or phenol to unintended nerve roots.

Phenol is hyperbaric relative to CSF, and this principle is harnessable by positioning patients with the painful side dependent. Alcohol is hypobaric relative to CSF and hence to facilitate the spread of alcohol to the target area, the patient should be positioned lateral decubitus with the painful side up. Typically, alcohol causes a burning sensation on injection while phenol has local anesthetic properties and often causes a warm sensation on injection. The concentration of phenol and alcohol in CSF diminishes rapidly after administration. The patient should be maintained in this position for at least 30 minutes after the injection.

Epidural neurolysis is a less common procedure for neuraxial neurolysis. In epidural neurolysis, the needle or catheter tip lies closer to the vertebral level that corresponds to the dermatomal level of pain. This procedure involves the insertion of an epidural catheter, and repeated injections performed over a few days.