Hearing loss is relatively common in newborns and children, with an estimated prevalence of 1.1-3.5 per 1,000 newborns screened.

In 1993, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) published recommendations that all newborns obtain routine hearing screening by three months of age. The Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (JCIH) published its first position statement in 1994, with updates made in 2000, 2007, and most recently in 2019. The 2007 guidelines called for newborn hearing screen to be performed in all newborns by one month of age, with definitive diagnostic audiometric testing completed by three months for those who did not pass, and finally with the initiation of an appropriate intervention by six months of age.

These recommendations have been adopted widely in the United States, with recent data indicating 98% of all newborns completed initial screening for hearing loss within one month of birth. This led to the updated recommendation in 2019 that screening, diagnostic testing, and intervention be completed by one month, two months, and three months, respectively, wherever possible.

Hearing loss may be unilateral or bilateral. Unilateral hearing loss is frequently considered less problematic than bilateral hearing loss, although more recent data has demonstrated its clinical significance. Early in life, balanced input to both ears is essential for developing binaural hearing pathways.

Without binaural hearing, sound localization is more difficult and can significantly affect patients, especially when trying to hear in the presence of background noise through decrements in binaural squelch.

Unilateral hearing loss has also been reported to progress into bilateral hearing loss in 7.5 to 11% of cases, demonstrating the importance of active diagnosis and treatment of unilateral and bilateral hearing loss. Cochlear malformations such as Mondini dysplasia or enlarged vestibular aqueduct have been reported to be responsible for greater than 50% of unilateral hearing loss in children.