Quadriceps tendon rupture can be a result of direct or indirect trauma. There have been reports of spontaneous ruptures, even sometimes bilaterally, when certain medical conditions preexist, as mentioned in the etiology.

Quadriceps tendon ruptures are due to violent eccentric loading of the knee extensor mechanism as a direct result of a sudden and strong contraction of the quadriceps muscle from a jump and land mechanism or a sudden change in direction while running, or attempting to regain balance to avoid a fall.

End-stage renal disease patients on dialysis have the highest association with tendon degeneration resulting in ruptures. The pathophysiologic mechanism involved in chronic kidney disease is theorized to involve uremic toxins, renal osteodystrophy, and hyperparathyroidism.

Beta-2 microglobulin accumulation results in functional impairment in tissue elasticity and, therefore, a higher potential for tendon rupture with minimal trauma. The proposed mechanism in diabetes mellitus involves accumulating advanced glycation end products. Advanced glycation end products form covalent bonds with collagen fibers. This results in the release of inflammatory cytokines, which cause progressive tendon damage. As person ages, there are also decreased arterial capillaries per unit of surface area. This results in a decreased healing potential after repeated microtrauma.

The quadriceps tendon has been subdivided into three zones based on the distance from the superior pole of the patella.

- Zone 1 : 0 to 1 cm.

- Zone 2 : 1 to 2 cm.

- Zone 3: is located >2 cm from the superior pole of the patella

Zone 2 has been reported to be a hypovascular zone and correlates with the spontaneous ruptures of the quadriceps tendon reported in the literature.