Gout has been described as a chronic disease characterized by four distinct stages.

- Asymptomatic hyperuricemia

- Acute gout attacks

- Inter-critical period

- Chronic tophaceous gout.

**Asymptomatic Hyperuricemia**

majority of patients with asymptomatic hyperuricemia never develop gout. The risk of acute gout attack increases with the level of serum urate. This stage ends with the first gout attack.

**Acute Gout Attack**

This is the initial manifestation of gout. It is characterized by abrupt onset of severe pain and swelling. The maximum inflammation occurs within 12 to 24 hours. Gout flare is typically monoarticular, often occurring in the lower extremities.

Polyarticular gout flares are more likely to occur in patients with longstanding disease. Initial presentation of polyarticular gout is more frequent in patients in whom gout and hyperuricemia arise secondary to lymphoproliferative or myeloproliferative disorder or in organ transplant recipients receiving tacrolimus or cyclosporine.

Gout flares are more common at night and in the early morning when cortisol levels are low.

Around 60% of the patients experience a second attack within one year and 80 % within three years. Local trauma, alcohol binges, overeating or fasting, weight changes, use of diuretics, and initiation of urate-lowering drugs may precipitate an acute attack. in a hospital setting, post-operative status or acute severe medical illnesses may precipitate attacks. The spring season has been reportedly associated with an increase in gout attacks.

The physical exam findings align with the patient's history. The affected joint is typically red, swollen, warm, and tender.

**Intercritical Gout**

After resolution of the acute attack, the patient is in the inter-critical stage. in some patients, a stage of incomplete remissions is present with the persistence of pain. Although the disease seems to be inactive, hyperuricemia persists, and subclinical inflammation may be present in the joints.

**Chronic Tophaceous Gout**

Gouty tophi are foreign body granulomas around deposits of MSU crystal. They appear as chalk-like subcutaneous nodules under transparent skin with increased vascularity, which may or may not drain. Although patients may present with tophi as their initial symptom, chronic tophaceous gout usually develops ten or more years after an acute attack. However, microtophi are documented early in the disease in patients with hyperuricemia. MSU crystal deposition is seen in joints affected by osteoarthritis. It usually occurs in the connective tissue and articular cartilage. Tophi may be intraarticular, periarticular, or extra-articular, the most common sites being the digits of hands and feet, knees, and the olecranon bursa. They lead to destructive deforming arthritis with extensive bone destruction and grotesque deformities. Women develop tophaceous deposits on the Heberden nodes and Bouchard nodes. 30% of the patients with chronic tophaceous gout had finger pad deposits. In postmenopausal women with CKD finger pad, tophi were seen before the onset of an acute attack.

Tophaceous deposits have been reported in the cornea in the eye and the heart valves.