The tissue is then injected with local anesthetic. For best aesthetic results, the long axis of the defect is usually oriented parallel to relaxed skin tension lines. While stretching and stabilizing the skin with both hands, the surgeon begins the incision at one end, being sure to start at the desired tissue depth and maintain that depth throughout the incision, including at the other end. Often the tip of the scalpel blade is used to puncture the skin at the tip of the planned incision, and then the curved belly of the blade is used to proceed with the remainder of the incision. The scalpel cutting surface should be maintained perpendicular to the skin surface plane as well, to avoid slanted sides to the defect that would result in an inverted scar after suturing. The undersurface of the specimen is then sharply dissected with the scalpel or with scissors, again maintaining the same plane throughout.

Once the specimen has been removed, the wound is prepared for closure. After obtaining hemostasis with electrocoagulation, most wounds will be closed in a layered fashion, starting with one or more layers of an absorbable suture in the subcutaneous fat and dermis. If necessary, the surrounding skin may be undermined to allow placement of buried vertical mattress sutures and to provide a degree of tissue mobility. In many instances, little or no undermining is required to obtain optimal closure. Excessive undermining only provides more potential space for hematoma or seroma formation. Deep sutures provide the strength of the closure, and then superficial sutures keep the skin edges flush during initial healing.

A sterile pressure dressing is placed over the incision for 1-2 days to minimize the risk of bleeding. Sterile petrolatum is applied to the incision site, and is preferable to antibiotic ointments containing neomycin or bacitracin. Those antibiotic ointments have not been shown to decrease the incidence of post-operative infection, but they do pose a significant risk of causing an allergic contact dermatitis. Fluffed gauze, cotton balls or similar material form the bulk of the dressing that will apply pressure under the adhesive tape. Strips of stretchable bandage material are ideal for placement of these dressings, and the strips should run perpendicular to the incision line so that they help pull skin edges together and take tension off the sutures.

With the adequate placement of buried sutures, superficial sutures on the face can be removed in one week, and often sooner. On the trunk and extremities, it is generally safer to allow 10-14 days, depending on the tension on the wound and the patient's level of activity. If using absorbable sutures for the superficial closure, one should choose suture material that will remain in place for an adequate period of time.