Depending on the acuity of presentation (acute versus subacute IE), as well as the location of the cardiac abscess and the overall state of a patient with bacteremia, the following are possible history and physical exam findings.

**History**

Highly variable, vague symptoms are common. An acute presentation is more toxic; whereas, a subacute patient presents with a more indolent complaint. Depending on conduction abnormality, symptoms related to heart block of any degree may be present.

- Fever, subjective or objective

- Anorexia

- Myalgias

- Headache

- Dyspnea

- Joint pain

- Rashes

- Cough

- Chest pain

**Physical Exam**

The possible complications of the most common causative etiology of IE, as well as complications of a cardiac abscess alone. One must keep in mind that the absence of these findings does not rule out IE as the findings are not sufficiently sensitive or specific for this disease process.

- Fever

- Signs and symptoms of heart failure: S3, JVD, crackles

- Signs and symptoms of valvular insufficiency: usually systolic murmurs related to the tricuspid valve, mitral valve, or aortic valve. Diastolic murmurs are possible, and more common if dealing with a patient with prosthetic valve endocarditis and perivalvular leak or disease.

- Focal neurologic complaints due to emboli

- Back pain associated with osteomyelitis

- Petechia, nonspecific

- Subungal or splinter hemorrhages, linear lesions of nailbeds

- Osler nodes, painful subcutaneous nodules most commonly on hands

- Janeway lesions, non-tender lesions of palms or soles

- Roth spots, retinal hemorrhages on fundoscopic exam

- Splenomegaly