**Common Murmurs and the Cardiac Disease States**

Murmurs have been closely linked to a multitude of diseases throughout the centuries. There are several common murmurs and cardiac disease states from which each specific murmur develops.

Aortic stenosis

Aortic stenosis is caused by narrowing the aortic valve and is the most common valvular pathology in the developed world. Typically, the stenosis arises from senile calcification or a congenital anomaly, such as a bicuspid aortic valve. Less commonly, rheumatic heart disease can affect the aortic valve. The characteristic crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur is auscultated at the right upper sternal border and may radiate to the carotid arteries.

**Aortic Regurgitation**

Aortic regurgitation, also known as aortic insufficiency, is a decrescendo blowing diastolic murmur heard best at the left lower sternal border, heard when blood flows retrograde into the left ventricle. This is most commonly seen in aortic root dilation and as sequelae of aortic stenosis.

**Innocent or Flow Murmur**

This type of murmur is usually mid-systolic, caused by increased cardiac output. It is associated with no symptoms, typically seen in childhood and pregnancy, and resolves spontaneously.

Pulmonary stenosis

Pulmonary stenosis is a systolic murmur best heard at the upper left sternal border and commonly associated with tetralogy of Fallot, carcinoid syndrome, congenital rubella syndrome, and Noonan syndrome.

Tricuspid stenosis

This diastolic murmur best heard at the lower left sternal border. Typical causes include infective endocarditis, seen in intravenous drug users, and carcinoid syndrome. Prolonged tricuspid stenosis may lead to right atrial enlargement and arrhythmias.

Tricuspid regurgitation

This type of murmur is systolic, auscultated at the lower left sternal border. It is also associated with intravenous drug users and carcinoid syndrome.

Mitral stenosis

Mitral stenosis is a diastolic murmur, best heard at the left 5th midclavicular line. It is associated with infective endocarditis and chronic rheumatic heart disease

Mitral regurgitation

Mitral regurgitation is a systolic murmur, best heard at the left 5th midclavicular line with possible radiation to the left axilla. It is commonly associated with infective endocarditis, rheumatic heart disease, congenital anomalies, and inferior wall myocardial infarctions.

Mitral valve prolapse

This murmur is auscultated as an early systolic click, with a potential last systolic murmur. Prolapse is associated with chronic diseases of the valves and congenital anomalies.

Pulmonic stenosis

Pulmonic stenosis is the main murmur auscultated in infants with Tetralogy of Fallot. It is described as a crescendo-decrescendo systolic ejection murmur heard loudest at the upper left sternal border. Onset is typically from congenital causes but may be seen in chronic rheumatic heart disease.

Austin Flint murmur

This type of murmur is a mid-diastolic rumbling murmur heard best over the apex. It is speculated to occur due to an aortic regurgitant jet causing the anterior mitral valve leaflet to close prematurely. Austin Flint murmurs may be mistaken for mitral stenosis.

Atrial septal defect

This congenital defect is located between the left and right atria, which allows blood to flow freely. Typical auscultation reveals a loud and wide fixed split S2 at the upper left sternal border. More substantial atrial septal defects are quieter, while small ones are louder and have a harsh quality, due to less turbulence through a larger, unrestricted conduit.

Ventricular septal defect

This murmur is holosystolic, best heard at the apex. Like atrial septum defects, smaller holes typically present with louder and harder murmurs.

Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy

Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy is an inherited myocardial disease in which the myocardium undergoes hypertrophic changes. These changes cause a systolic ejection murmur due to the mitral valve hitting the thickened septal wall during systole. The murmur is heard best between the apex and the left sternal border. It becomes louder with any maneuver that decreases preload or afterload, such as Valsalva or abrupt standing. This effect occurs because the lower ventricular blood volume from reduced preload or afterload allows for a closer approximation of the mitral valve to the hypertrophied septal wall, causing more turbulent blood flow.

Patent ductus arteriosus

This distinct machine-like murmur is heard continuously at the left upper sternal border. Avoidance of NSAIDs is standard, due to potentially closing the life-sustaining conduit until assurance of proper cardiac function is established.

Turners syndrome

This inherited disease often presents with a murmur in young women, most commonly due to the presence of a bicuspid aortic valve or coarctation of the aorta. A bicuspid aortic valve will present as a systolic murmur best heard at the right second intercostal space. Coarctation of the aorta will present in both systole and diastole and is heard over the thoracic spine. The continuous harsh systolic component of the aorta's coarctation is due to turbulent blood flowing through the aorta's small diameter section. Its diastolic component is due to aortic regurgitation. Other causes of murmurs in these patients include hypoplastic left heart or aortic dissection.

Tetralogy of Fallot

The murmur in Tetralogy of Fallot will present in an infant and is usually due to pulmonic valve stenosis. Another possible source of murmur in these patients is from the ventricular septal defect. However, this is less likely because the ventricular septal defect is often large in Tetralogy of Fallot patients. Pulmonic valve stenosis is characterized as an early systolic click with a harsh systolic crescendo-decrescendo ejection murmur, best heard at the left upper sternal border. Unlike aortic stenosis, this murmur will not radiate to the carotids.

Carcinoid syndrome

Carcinoid syndrome causes thickening of the tricuspid and pulmonary valves, which leads to either stenosis or regurgitation murmurs from the valves. This thickening arises from high amounts of serotonin released from the carcinoid tumor after the tumor has metastasized to the liver.

Chronic rheumatic heart disease

Chronic rheumatic heart disease is a sequela of untreated streptococcal pharyngitis and acute rheumatic fever. Autoimmune driven destruction occurs as a result of molecular mimicry between streptococcal M protein and the cardiac tissue.

Infective endocarditis

Infective endocarditis is associated with bacterial vegetative growths, most commonly seen on the tricuspid valve. This can lead to tricuspid stenosis and tricuspid regurgitation.

**Prosthetic Valve Leaks
**

Murmurs may develop from a leak in any of the prostheses available for the four cardiac valves.