Myoclonic epilepsy of Infancy occurs in previously healthy and developmentally normal children. Usually, there will be no significant past medical history, except for a history of febrile seizures in one-third of cases. A positive family history with seizures in first and second-degree relatives is noted in 30% of cases.

Myoclonic seizures are the only type of seizures occurring in Myoclonic epilepsy in Infancy. MEI is characterized by a brief (1 to 2 secs) single or cluster of 2 to 8 myoclonic jerks involving predominantly the head and upper extremity. Myoclonic jerks are rapid, isolated but simultaneous jerks of various muscle groups in synchrony. Myoclonic seizures are often spontaneous, frequently occurring in wakefulness, less often during drowsiness or slow-wave sleep. The following features are noted in MEI.

- Myoclonic jerks involving upper extremities.

- Head nodding, upward rolling of eyes, blinking.

- Falls if standing with lower extremities involved.

- Yelling/cough-like vocalization due to sudden diaphragmatic contraction may sometimes accompany the myoclonic jerks.

- Consciousness is usually intact. However, mild alteration of consciousness can accompany a cluster of myoclonic seizures.

The following variants of Myoclonic epilepsy of Infancy have been reported.

- **Reflex myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (RMEI)**is a peculiar subtype (10% of MEI) precipitated exclusively by sudden unexpected tactile or auditory stimuli. RMEI is characterized by earlier onset, brief duration, a better prognosis with fast remission, and better cognitive outcome.

- **Photosensitive myoclonic epilepsy in infancy**is a subtype of RMEI characterized by photic-induced myoclonic seizures, which are usually difficult to manage.

- **The nocturnal variant of benign myoclonic epilepsy in infancy**has been reported in the literature characterized by excessive myoclonic jerks only during sleep.

- **Familial infantile myoclonic epilepsy**with autosomal recessive inheritance (chromosome 16p13) has infantile-onset prolonged myoclonic status followed by generalized tonic-clonic seizure persisting into adulthood in all patients.