After the introduction of the Hib conjugate vaccine in the United States (US) in 1987 for children, and three years later in 1990 for infants, the annual incidence of invasive Hib disease in the pediatric population of age less than 5 years old has markedly decreased. The majority of invasive H. influenzae disease is now caused by non-typeable H. influenzae (NTHi) in all age groups in the US. Interestingly, the incidence and prevalence of H.influenzae are higher among Alaska native children (incidence rate: 5.4 per 100,000) as compared to other races despite Hib immunization. Due to the inclusion of the Hib conjugate vaccine in routine immunization schedule, it primarily occurs in nonimmunized children and in newborns who have not yet completed their vaccination series.

In 2017, the incidence rate was 0.18 for Hib, 1.7 for non-b H. influenzae, and 1.7 for non-typeable H. influenzae per 100,000 population of children younger than 5 years of age. Among adults 65 years of age and older, the incidence of invasive non-typeable H. influenzae was 6.2 per 100,000. The infectious agent in acute otitis media and sinusitis in children is NTHi in around 40% of cases, and it is also the causative factor in the recurrence of otitis media in that age group. Healthy children colonize H.influenzae in the nasopharynx and throat in developing countries where vaccination is not readily available. The carriage rate is approximately 20% in one-year-olds and increases to more than 50% in children 5 years of age.