Monitoring is recommended in patients with suggestive deep vein thrombosis (DVT) symptoms, including redness, tenderness, and inflammation of calves and lower limbs. In such instances, patients should proceed immediately to the emergency department. A Doppler ultrasound of lower limbs is needed to rule out deep vein thrombosis in the emergency department. If such testing proves positive, admission to the hospital will be essential. In addition, it is vital to rule out pulmonary embolism in patients exhibiting chest pain, shortness of breath, or hemoptysis.

Reports recommend suspending raloxifene 72 hours before and during an expected immobilization of a patient. When raloxifene is given concomitantly with warfarin or other warfarin derivatives, monitor prothrombin time more closely when starting or stopping the medicine. Supplementation of vitamin D and calcium is also a recommendation in conjunction with raloxifene therapy. In addition, monitor hepatic profile and triglycerides levels, given the agonistic effect of estrogen over triglycerides.

Monitor for any unexpected abnormal uterine bleeding. For patients with abnormal uterine bleeding in using raloxifene, it is recommended to establish a consultation with OB/GYN and initiate further workup to establish the source of the bleeding. An endometrial biopsy is suggested to rule out endometrial cancer.

Investigations and research have been done to establish the effect of raloxifene on the heart, given its estrogen-agonistic effect in the heart estrogen receptors. Reports indicate that raloxifene does not produce myocardial hypertrophy in postmenopausal women after being treated for six months.