Sarcoidosis has no obvious cause, and hence prevention is not possible. The disorder also resolves spontaneously, and hence treatment is not always required. However, severe cases do need follow-up. The management of patients with sarcoidosis is best done in an interprofessional fashion with a team of healthcare workers that includes a cardiologist, neurologist, radiologist, pulmonologist, cardiac nurse, respiratory therapist, and pharmacist. The patient needs regular chest x-rays since it is a marker for disease progression. Some patients may benefit from pulmonary rehabilitation and the use of bronchodilators. If the disease is advanced, a regular eye exam is important.

Symptomatic patients need drug therapy, and the pharmacist needs to emphasize the importance of compliance and the need to follow up since most drugs have adverse side effects. Patients who fail to respond to steroids may need potent biological agents. In addition, patients with end-stage lung disease may need to be seen by a transplant nurse to determine their eligibility. Further, patients with eye symptoms should be referred to an ophthalmologist.

At each clinic visit, the nurse should ensure that the patient gets a regular 12-lead ECG because the heart block is not uncommon. The pharmacist and nurse should educate the patient on the importance of discontinuing smoking and abstaining from alcohol. Finally, patients who are managed with steroids should be educated by all members of the team about the side effects of the drugs used. Only through such an interprofessional team approach can the outcomes of sarcoidosis be improved.

**Outcomes**

In many patients with sarcoidosis, bo treatment is required, and the disorder spontaneously resolves. However, in a certain number of people, the disease may take a fulminant course with severe symptoms. Factors that indicate a poor prognosis include significant chest imaging findings, extrapulmonary involvement, and the presence of pulmonary hypertension. Many studies indicate that a chest x-ray is an excellent marker for disease prognosis. In severe cases, patients may require oxygen, experience heart block and respiratory failure. Data regarding mortality are not available because, in many cases, long-term follow-up is missing. Overall, it appears that about one-fifth of patients develop functional impairment, and there is a mortality rate of 3 to 5% in patients who are not treated. The highest mortality rates are in African American females past the fifth decade of life.