The preoperative evaluation should be a multidisciplinary approach that contains a team containing dieticians, psychologists, endocrinologists, anesthesiologists, nurses, physician extenders, cardiologists, and the surgeon.

**Psychological Evaluation**

Patients must be psychologically fit to undergo bariatric surgery. This will help avoid major postoperative complications.

**Nutritional Evaluation and Planning**

The nutritional evaluation includes assessment and education that will direct the patient towards dietary changes needed after surgery. Patients are typically placed on a Low carbohydrate diet before surgery to shrink the liver as much a possible before surgery. Studies have shown that preoperative weight loss may lead to some improvements in postoperative outcomes and possibly decrease complications. Patients who can lose weight before surgery have been shown to have total weight loss following the surgery.

**Medical Clearance**

As with all surgeries, medical evaluation and clearance are extremely important in the preoperative period. Patients must have a detailed history and physical, a thorough review of their prior surgeries and past medical history. Recent laboratory studies should be performed. Patients' functional status must be determined, and if there is a concern, further workup may be warranted by a cardiologist. Patients who have obstructive sleep apnea need to be evaluated with a sleep study and pulmonologist before surgery. Untreated obstructive sleep apnea can put the patient at increased perioperative risks for complications.

**Preoperative Imaging**

Currently, there is no consensus regarding the imaging modalities to be obtained before a bariatric procedure. Several studies have evaluated the use of abdominal ultrasounds to evaluate liver pathology, size, and cholelithiasis. Imaging was shown to no change patient outcomes and only increase healthcare costs.

**Oher Preoperative Evaluation**

EGD before bariatric surgery remains a controversial topic. Some recommend a preoperative evaluation with EGD before restrictive procedures such as sleeve gastrectomy or an adjustable gastric banding. These restrictive procedures may place these patients at a greater risk of worsening gastroesophageal reflux and Barrett's esophagus. Bypass procedures such as Roux en-Y gastric bypass will result in an inaccessible foregut, which will make a further evaluation of the upper gastrointestinal tract difficult.