Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be caused by dysregulation in bilirubin metabolism that includes bilirubin production, uptake in hepatocytes, and conjugation. The clinician should distinguish unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia from other conditions with similar clinical manifestations. Hemolytic anemias and resorption of hematoma significantly increase the levels of unconjugated bilirubin. Hemolytic anemias may lead to a mild increase in bilirubin levels with or without clinical symptoms. Hemolytic disorders such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, sickle cell anemia, thalassemia, iso-immune mediated hemolysis, and autoimmune disorders should be a consideration during diagnosis.

Inherited disorders of the enzyme glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1) such as Gilbert syndrome and Crigler-Najjar syndromes (CNS1 and CNS2), may impede the complete conjugation of bilirubin and thereby cause varying degrees of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, depending on inhibition of enzyme with each disease. In addition to inherited disorders, other conditions such as portosystemic shunts, congestive heart failure, liver damage, dyserythropoiesis, and hyperthyroidism can also contribute to impaired bilirubin conjugation and should merit consideration during diagnosis. Additional considerations in the diagnosis of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia include drugs interfering with bilirubin uptake or conjugation (rifampicin, probenecid, or other rifamycin antibiotics, ketoconazole, amitryptiline, and protease inhibitors), chronic liver diseases, thyrotoxicosis, infections, and physiologic neonatal jaundice resulting from the immature conjugating ability of the UGT1A1 enzyme.