Depending on the severity of illness, immediate interventions, including blood transfusions, plasmapheresis, or diuresis, may need to be performed depending on the cause of hemolytic anemia.

Blood transfusions are always the mainstay of treatment when there is severe anemia, especially when there is active bleeding. Once hemolysis is the known cause of anemia, or if no emergent intervention is required, more specific treatment modalities may be followed. However, the treatment will always vary depending on the cause.

If the cause is initially unclear, performing a direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test can be used to differentiate between an immune or non-immune cause of hemolysis.

For patients with SCD, blood transfusions, hydroxyurea, erythropoiesis-stimulating agents, and bone marrow transplants are possible options with demonstrated effect.

A blood smear should be performed, especially when G6PD deficiency is being ruled out as it can be performed more rapidly than an assay. Additionally, there is the possibility of a false negative assay, while the smear is still suggestive of G6PD deficiency.

As the most feared complication of PNH is a thromboembolic event, some recommend starting prophylactic anticoagulation; however, further studies must be performed to create a proper treatment regimen as well as define who would benefit most from this anticoagulation.

Splenectomy, steroids, monoclonal antibodies, or immunosuppressants have been used as late treatment options for certain diseases such as autoimmune hemolytic anemias, HS, and SCD.