**Minimally Invasive Fetal Surgery**

They are usually carried out around 20 to 24 weeks of gestation, either under local or regional anesthesia. If the placenta is posterior, straight scopes can be passed from the anterior abdominal wall. They are often well tolerated with skin and peritoneal infiltration of local anesthetics by the surgeons. When the placenta is anterior, access is usually from the lateral abdominal wall with curved scopes, which necessitates almost a lateral position of the parturient. They often need regional anesthesia. Usually, a lumbar epidural or combined spinal-epidural is offered. Intravenous sedation is helpful to decrease maternal discomfort and can be given according to patient preference. Propofol, dexmedetomidine, and remifentanil are commonly used for sedation either alone or in combination. General anesthesia may be needed as a backup if the operating conditions are suboptimal from maternal discomfort due to positioning or a failed regional technique.

Because of the minimally invasive nature of the surgery, Standard ASA monitoring together with uterine tone assessment is usually sufficient. They usually do not require an arterial line. Uterine relaxation is usually provided using a bolus dose of magnesium sulfate during incision, and then an infusion is continued through the intraoperative and postoperative period. Other uterine relaxants may be supplemented as needed. Fetoscope is placed using ultrasound guidance, and trocars are inserted into the amniotic sac through the mother’s abdominal wall. Very rarely, hysterotomy is needed. Large amounts of irrigating fluid may be absorbed from the amniotic membrane, so IV fluids are often restricted to 500 to 750 ml for the entire procedure to minimize the risk of pulmonary edema. Fentanyl 20 mcg/kg may be given to the fetus with a spinal needle by the surgeon in the event of a rise in heart rate response from the operative stimuli. Very rarely they need the fetal cocktail. Apart from the usual anesthesia complications, other complications specific to minimally invasive surgeries include preterm labor, chorio-amniotic separation, infection, hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, etc.

**Midgestational Open Surgeries**

In midgestational open fetal surgeries, part of the fetus is exposed through a hysterotomy, operated on placental circulation, and replaced in the uterus for the remainder of the pregnancy. Technically, it can be done either under regional or general anesthesia. With a posterior placenta, hysterotomy can be done on the anterior uterine wall, and the fetus could be easily exposed. It can be done under regional anesthesia. But when the placenta is anterior, hysterotomy is usually done on the lateral or posterior uterine wall, which needs exteriorization of the uterus. Exteriorization is usually not tolerated well by the mother, so they are usually carried out under general anesthesia. General anesthesia with volatile anesthetics gives excellent uterine relaxation and provides analgesia and anesthesia to the fetus, which is desirable. So general anesthesia is usually preferred over regional anesthesia for midgestational open procedures.

Because of the invasiveness of the surgery, they often require invasive blood pressure monitoring apart from ASA standards of monitoring to ensure adequate placental circulation. They also require extensive fetal monitoring and additional preparation for fetal anesthesia and possible fetal resuscitation.

**Fetal Monitoring and Anesthesia**

To ensure fetal wellbeing, maternal blood pressure is closely monitored. The uterus is continuously monitored for any contraction, retroplacental bleed/hematoma, and placental abruption using an ultrasonogram. Continuous echocardiography monitoring of the fetus is started even before the uterine incision by the fetal cardiologist. They monitor the fetal heart rate, cardiac filling, cardiac contractility, and patency of the ductus arteriosus. After delivery of the fetal hand, a pulse oximeter is connected to monitor fetal oxygenation status, which is usually between 55 to 70% on placental circulation. Usually, 15 to 20 ml/kg of O negative blood is reserved for the fetus. A tray of sterile fetal anesthesia medications and resuscitation equipment is prepared, which contains:

Medications:

Fetal cocktail medication: fentanyl 10 to 20 mcg/kg, vecuronium 10 to 20 mcg/kg and atropine 10 to 20 mcg/kg

Resuscitation medication: syringes containing unit dose of: atropine 0.1 mg, epinephrine 1 mcg/kg, calcium gluconate 30 mg/kg

Resuscitation equipment: Self-inflating bag connecting to the oxygen source, end-tidal monitor

Others: pulse oximetry, intravenous cannula, and IV fluids

Profound uterine atony is achieved by volatile anesthetics at 1 to 1.5 MAC with a bolus of 4 to 6 g of magnesium sulfate just during skin incision followed by 2-4 gm/hr continuous infusion. Nitroglycerine may be supplemented if more relaxation is required. When the fetus is exposed, fetal anesthesia and analgesia are achieved using a combination of fentanyl 10 to 20 mcg/kg, vecuronium 10- 20 mcg/kg, and atropine 10- 20 mcg/kg as an intramuscular injection, often referred to as the ‘fetal cocktail.’ A fetal pulse oximeter is attached, and continuous fetal echocardiography is performed. The uterus is filled with warm saline to avoid any uterine contraction, which is constantly monitored by the obstetrician.

At the end of the procedure, the fetus is returned to the uterine cavity, and amniotic fluid is replaced. Tocolytic therapy is continued to prevent premature labor, which is a major concern during these procedures. The total fluid intake for the mother should be minimized to 1 to 1.5 L as volume overload and pulmonary edema may develop especially when magnesium sulfate is used as a tocolytic.

**EXIT Procedures**

Because of their complexity and need for reversible profound tocolysis, general anesthesia is often considered for EXIT procedures, although regional anesthesia is also an option. Depending on the procedure, the adjacent operating room is usually reserved with a separate team if the fetus needs any further intervention after delivery from EXIT.

EXIT procedures are like midgestational procedures except that the umbilical cord is clamped, and the fetus is delivered at the end of the procedure. So, they need profound uterine relaxation during the procedure but needs adequate uterine tone immediately after clamping the umbilical cord to minimize postpartum hemorrhage. Lengthy hysterotomy and profound uterine relaxation may put the mother at significant risk of bleeding. These procedures are associated with a higher incidence of transfusion compared to a conventional cesarean section (6% vs. 2% to 4%).