- The most common etiologies of frontal bone fracture are MVAs, falls, assaults, falling objects, and penetrating trauma. These injuries most commonly occur in young males (92%) with a mean age of 20 to 31 years old.

- Trauma patients, especially those who have sustained cranial and facial injuries, must be critically evaluated based on ATLS protocols.  It is important to avoid distraction by obvious or deforming injuries and focus on establishing or maintaining a definitive airway, preserving respiratory status, and supporting circulatory volume. After the initial stabilization, a thorough history and physical needs to be performed. The most important test to determine structural involvement and to plan management is a non-contrast CT scan of the head and facial bones. If a frontal sinus fracture is observed on CT, this indicates significant trauma, and it is imperative to search for corresponding injuries.

- Multiple classification systems have been proposed since 1999, but there is currently no universally agreed-upon system to follow. These protocols can guide treatment based on classification.

- Based on concurrent injuries, surgical intervention can vary immensely. Options can include frontal sinus ablation/obliteration, cranialization, ORIF, minimally invasive techniques, and conservative management with observation.

- Complications vary according to the extent of the injury but can include frontal sinusitis, meningitis, CSF leak, mucocele, poor aesthetic outcome, brain abscess, frontal headaches, ophthalmoplegia, and/or local paresthesia.

- A multidisciplinary team may be necessary for the diagnosis and treatment of frontal sinus fractures, depending on the structures affected.