**Adverse Effects**

- Paroxysmal cough (1% to 10%)

- Proteinuria (1 of 100 patients), which subsides or clears within six months even when captopril therapy is continued

- Renal insufficiency, renal failure, nephrotic syndrome, polyuria, oliguria, and urinary frequency (1 to 2 of 1000 patients)

- Neutropenia (less than 1000/mm3) or agranulocytosis with myeloid hypoplasia

- Rash with pruritus and occasionally with fever, arthralgia, and eosinophilia (4 to 7 of 100 patients)

- Angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, Raynaud syndrome, and congestive heart failure (2 to 3 of 1000 patients)

- Dysgeusia (diminution or loss of taste perception) reversible and usually self-limited (2 to 4 of 100 patients).

- Anaphylactoid and other related reactions due to the inhibition of the metabolism of eicosanoids and polypeptides, including bradykinin

- In terms of angioedema, it can occur in any region such as the intestine but angioedema of the tongue, glottis, or larynx cause obstruction of the airway. The prevalence of angioedema is higher in the African-American population. Treatment for angioedema involving the airways involves immediate stabilization with an endotracheal tube until the swelling resolves. Many pharmacological agents like diphenhydramine, methylprednisolone, epinephrine, or bradykinin blocking agents have been tried as treatment without a definitive answer

- Intestinal angioedema- abdominal pain with or without nausea vomiting

- Flushing or pallor

- Tachycardia, chest pain, and palpitations

- Hypotension

- ACE inhibitors may cause hyperkalemia. Individuals who are more prone to developing hyperkalemia have a history of renal impairment and/or diabetes, concurrent use of potassium-sparing diuretics, and/or potassium supplements. Treatment planning should also consider factors such as potassium levels, EKG changes, and the patient’s renal function and urine production.

**Precautions**

- Hypertension: Increases in BUN and serum creatinine have been observed in some patients with renal disease.

- Heart failure: Elevations of BUN and serum creatinine greater than 20% above normal or baseline with long-term treatment

- Hyperkalemia: Elevations in serum potassium

- Surgery/Anesthesia: In patients undergoing major surgery with anesthesia with agents that produce hypotension, captopril will block angiotensin II formation, and hypotension may result.

- Captopril should not be coadministered with aliskiren in patients with diabetes mellitus.