A basic comprehension of the layers composing skin is crucial to understanding the different types of chemical peeling and its depth of action.

- Epidermis represents an avascular layer that consists of 4 layers (superficial to deep): stratum corneum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale. The only exceptions to that are the palms of the hands and soles of the feet where a fifth layer called the stratum lucidum lies below the stratum corneum. Keratinocytes (squamous cells) are the predominant cells in all those layers, except the stratum basale layer where cuboidal stem precursor cells exist in a single layer. Keratinocytes produce keratin, which is a protein present in skin, hair, and nails.

- Stratum corneum is a protective layer consisting of 15 to 30 layers of highly keratinized dead cells that shed and are replaced by layers below.
- Stratum granulosum has squamous cells with a "grainy" appearance due to the increased amount of keratin protein.
- Stratum spinosum layer consists of cells of which have prominent processes that interlock the cells together via desmosomes. These desmosomes ensure the integrity of the bond between the squamous skin cells. Langerhans macrophage cells are found interspersed in this layer.
- Stratum basale is at the base of the epidermal layer connecting it to the dermis. In this layer are melanocytes and Merkel cells which are responsible for producing melanin pigment and for sensory stimulation of touch respectively.

- The dermis consists of connective tissue that contains structures including hair follicles, sebaceous glands, nerves, and blood vessels.

- The papillary layer consists of finger-like projections (also known as dermal papillae) intertwining with the stratum basale and connecting the epidermal and dermal layers.
- The reticular layer lies just beneath the papillary layer and has elastin and collagen fibers, which give skin its elasticity and tensile strength. This layer is divided based on depth into the upper, mid, and lower reticular dermis.

- The subcutaneous tissue (i.e., hypodermis layer) is the deepest layer of skin and consists of loose connective tissue and fat.

Chemical peels are commonly classified based on their depth of skin penetration into superficial, medium, and deep peels. Superficial peels penetrate the stratum corneum of the epidermis and are further sub-classified by some authors into very light (to stratum spinosum) and light (to stratum basale). Medium peels penetrate the papillary dermis to the upper reticular dermis, while the deep peels' effect reaches the mid-reticular dermis.