# Continuing Education Activity

Plants within the Anacardiaceae family cause Toxicodendron toxicity. It includes plants such as poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and is the most common cause of allergic dermatitis in North America. This activity outlines the evaluation and treatment of Toxicodendron toxicity and highlights the interprofessional team's role in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Toxicodendron toxicity.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of Toxicodendron toxicity.
- Outline the management options available for Toxicodendron toxicity.
- Describe the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance Toxicodendron toxicity and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Toxicodendron is a genus of plants, shrubs, vines, and trees within the Anacardiaceae family. Common names of plants within the family include poison oak, poison ivy, poison sumac, and the Chinese lacquer tree. Many of these names come from similar appearances to other leaves that are non-toxic. The genus as a whole is widespread throughout North America except for Hawaii and Alaska and can have regional variations in appearance. Many of these plants prefer lower elevations and are typically found below 1500 meters. An often-repeated adage regarding their identification is “leaves of three, leave it be,” but it should not be the sole method used. Poison ivy is pervasive throughout North America and has been known to hybridize where its geographic distribution overlaps. Eastern poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans) is commonly found in the eastern half of North America and typically appears as a vine with almond-shaped leaves in groups of three. Leaves change from green to red in the fall. Western or Rydberg’s poison ivy (Toxicodendron rydbergii) is commonly found as a shrub with small yellow berries. It is distributed throughout much of North America, with the general exception of the Southeastern United States.

All parts of both plants contain urushiol, which causes characteristic dermatitis associated with exposure. While the genus and its many subspecies have a strong predilection for North America, they can both be found in China, Mexico, Africa, Australia, and New Zealand, to name a few other places. Poison oak has two common variations. Western poison oak (Toxicodendron diversilobum) is a deciduous shrub with scalloped or lobed leaves, generally appearing in groups of three that resemble true oak leaves. It is found primarily west of the Rocky Mountains, as the name suggests. While Eastern or Atlantic poison oak (Toxicodendron pubescens or quercifolium) is frequently confused with Eastern poison ivy as it has three grouped leaves that are structurally similar in appearance. A unique feature useful in identification is the presence of clustered small green fuzzy berries on the plant. Distribution is more common in the Southeastern United States but can extend as far north as New Jersey. The leaves of both western and Atlantic poison oak change colors in the fall time and drop off in the Western species. Poison sumac (Toxicodendron vernix) is a deciduous tree or tall shrub found in moist, swampy areas of the eastern United States. It has red stems with a pinnate or feather-like leaf arrangement comprised of 7 to 13 oblong or oval-shaped leaves. The plant also produces green clustering flowers and small globular fruit. The leaves and fruit of the plant are the primary sources of urushiol.

The Chinese lacquer tree (Toxicodendron vernicifluum) is a common deciduous tree in many Asian countries and gets its name for the use of its urushiol-containing sap in lacquer production. Leaves are large and grouped in leaflets of 7 to 19 with flowers that bloom in the summer. All parts of Toxicodendron plants contain urushiol, which is found in sap channeled within the plant. When exposed to air, urushiol turns black and hardens to prevent moisture loss and can be useful in identifying plants in the fall. Urushiol is the primary allergenic cause of contact dermatitis and is typically encountered by brushing up against damaged stems or leaves. Skin exposure results in rapid absorption of the urushiol due to its lipophilic nature. Names for the toxicity are variable and include names such as Rhus dermatitis, urushiol-induced contact dermatitis, and Toxicodendron dermatitis.

# Etiology

Toxicodendron dermatitis is the most common cause of allergic contact dermatitis in North America and is caused by skin exposure to urushiol, producing a type IV hypersensitivity reaction.

# Epidemiology

A large portion of the population is sensitized to urushiol. Acute allergic dermatitis affects virtually all ages, ethnicities, and skin types, with an estimated 25 to 40 million cases requiring treatment yearly.

# Pathophysiology

Acute allergic dermatitis is caused by contact with bruised or broken parts of plants within the Toxicodendron species. Urushiol is the primary inciting compound causing the release of local cytokines and inflammatory mediators that initiate the process of sensitization. The compound is rapidly absorbed due to its lipophilic nature and picked up by Langerhans cells in the epidermis, making additional efforts to wash or remove the compound ineffective after absorption.

# Histopathology

Sensitization and reexposure are mediated by a type IV cell-mediated hypersensitivity reaction.

# History and Physical

A thorough history should include any potential occupational and environmental exposure within the past 2 to 3 weeks as initial sensitization may be unknown. Clinicians should be aware of local geographic distributions of the Toxicodendron species. Patients often initially present with complaints of intense pruritis and the beginning stages of a papular or vesicular rash in a linear pattern. Distribution may be scattered as patients often do not recognize exposure until they have contacted other body areas. Black spots may be noted on affected skin or clothing and should be avoided, and it is the result of oxidized urushiol exposed to air.

# Evaluation

A thorough history and physical primarily determine the diagnosis, and no additional testing is required. Allergy patch testing is widely available and may help identify patients with severe urushiol sensitivity, but it is not necessary. It can also increase the risk of sensitization in unsensitized subjects. Dermoscopy, if available, is another alternative for evaluation of black spot dermatitis caused by Toxicodendron species and would show jagged red-rimmed dark brown lesions.

# Treatment / Management

Toxicodendron dermatitis is typically self-limited and resolves within a couple of weeks.

Topical and oral antihistamines are commonly taken medications to decrease pruritus and are typically ineffective outside of their sedative effects as the biochemical process is not due to histamine release. Management should be centered on moderate to high dose topical or systemic corticosteroids that are beneficial early in the disease course, particularly before the appearance of papules or vesicles.

Initial studies assessing the use of topical immunosuppressants for atopic dermatitis were mixed.Staphylococcus aureus. Evidence also supports the possibility of polymicrobial infections.

# Differential Diagnosis

Several other conditions may be confused with Toxicodendron toxicity, and a careful history and physical examination are necessary to differentiate between them. Herpes zoster often presents as a vesiculopapular rash but follows a dermatomal pattern that doesn’t cross the midline of the body. It is also often preceded by pain in the affected area and would not have a history of environmental exposure. Phytophotodermatitis is another potential mimicker, as it follows a similar timeline. Differentiating factors include plant exposure to sun-exposed areas of the body and the absence of pruritus. Irritant dermatitis is usually sudden in onset and associated with exposure to metals or other irritating compounds with distinct dermal patterns. Other arthropod bites such as bed bugs (Cimex lectularius) or scabies (Sarcoptes scabiei) may present similarly and be pruritic but lack the appropriate timing and are typically non-vesicular. Scabies has a characteristic burrowing pattern, while bed bug bites tend to have a rapid onset in skin findings.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Ongoing clinical trials are being performed by the University of Mississippi in conjunction with a biochemical company. Several patents have been issued with regards to vaccine development and initial phase 1 safety studies were completed in 2017.

# Staging

Presenting symptoms vary in their onset depending upon initial or repeat exposure and consist of a linear appearing papulovesicular eruption of the dermis with erythema and pruritus.

Toxicodendron dermatitis can be mild, moderate, or severe. Mild cases present mainly with localized or linear erythema and/or edema with minimal symptoms. Moderate to severe cases will have more diffuse involvement associated with severe pain, burning, and/or pruritus.

# Prognosis

Prognosis is largely dependent upon the extent and duration of exposure. Outcomes are typically excellent as management is directed primarily at decreasing innate and adaptive responses. In rare cases of complications or severe exposure, management may be prolonged and require hospital admission.

# Complications

Uncommon complications include secondary bacterial infection and skin hyperpigmentation. Secondary infections are most commonly due to Staphylococcus aureus or streptococci and should be treated appropriately with additional consideration of concurrent polymicrobial infection.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be counseled regarding the identification of local Toxicodendron species and avoidance. If occupational exposure is encountered, proper protective equipment should be outlined with specific instructions to use vinyl gloves as urushiol can penetrate rubber or latex gloves.

# Pearls and Other Issues

The best prevention of Toxicodendron dermatitis is avoidance, followed by appropriate barriers and decontamination. Regional variations in plant structure often make identification challenging, making misidentification the most common pitfall. Poison ivy comprises a large percentage of exposures throughout North America and is the most commonly misidentified species.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Communication between physicians and other professionals, acting as an interprofessional team, is essential in managing these patients as they may present in a variety of clinical settings. This healthcare team will consist of clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, working collaboratively to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Management should be followed primarily by a primary care provider or dermatologist as the mainstay of treatment is corticosteroids, which have many potential side effects. Evidence supporting the use of corticosteroids or other topical immunosuppressives is well documented and supported by a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCT). [Level 1] Knowledge and understanding of management by nurses and pharmacists is also critical as they tend to be more readily accessible to patients and should be knowledgeable regarding potential complications and management. Outcomes are typically excellent with or without treatment, and patients should be given specific instructions regarding prevention, decontamination, and when to return if symptoms spread or worsen. [Level 4]

If there is a concern for systemic or respiratory exposure, patients should be admitted to the hospital for further observation and management.