A venous gas embolism is usually caused by medical interventions which expose the venous circulation to outside air/gas. Examples of procedures and situations which have caused venous gas embolism include central venous catheter insertion/removal, CT injector, hemodialysis, penetrating chest injuries, lung biopsy, cardiovascular surgery, neurosurgery, angioplasty, arthroscopy, laparoscopic procedures, hysteroscopy, among many others.

Anytime the patient is with the head elevated or fowler position, air embolism is a risk during surgery. Air embolism has been reported after ENT procedures and neurosurgery. The reason is in many cases, the patients are in the Fowler position or placed prone. Both gynecologic and obstetric procedures have the potential to cause venous air embolism. The risk of air embolism is highest when the uterus is exteriorized during a cesarean section. A common cause of venous air embolism is central venous access. This may be due to failure to occlude the needle hub, detachment of the catheter connections, deep inspiration during removal or insertion of the line, the upright position of the patient during insertion, and hypovolemia.

Another common cause of venous air embolism is mechanical insufflation during hysteroscopy, laparoscopy, or during a urethral procedure. Finally, positive pressure ventilation also places the patient at risk of venous gas embolism. Overdistension and rupture of the alveoli with high PEEP can lead to free air.

The common factor in these procedures is the possibility of the introduction of air/gas into the venous circulation. Additionally, deep-sea diving can result in nitrogen gas coalescing in the venous system as the diver ascends. When ascending, the pressure decreases, and the nitrogen which was dissolved in the blood at a much higher temperature begins to form bubbles and is no longer kept in solution with the blood. The nitrogen boils out of the venous system in particular as this is a lower pressure system. The nitrogen gas will then form bubbles and coalesce into emboli. This is prevented by slowly ascending and ensuring the diver has adequate breathes as they ascend to wash out excess nitrogen via exhalation.