History and physical examination will be of the utmost importance in making the diagnosis. It is important to first rule out life or vision-threatening injuries.

Upper facial trauma should increase the physician's suspicion of the possibility of canalicular laceration. The source of the injury will play an important role in management. Vaccination status should be clarified, specifically regarding tetanus. High-risk populations are predisposed to developing complications (e.g., severe infection), making it important to recognize the presence of an immunocompromised state, smoking status, and other risk factors.

Canalicular lacerations may not be obvious on initial physical examination, probing, or other modalities that may be beneficial to help make the diagnosis. You may try using loupes, slit lamp, or a surgical microscope. One study has suggested the injection of viscoelastic material to help in the identification of canalicular injury.

The extraocular movements and visual acuity should be assessed. A good pupillary examination is important, looking specifically at the shape, as a teardrop pupil could indicate a ruptured globe. Fluorescein staining may be beneficial to assess for corneal abrasions and Seidel's sign. The palpation of the facial bones is important in assessing for the presence of facial bone fractures. This is important because these fractures may require surgical repair and should be performed prior to addressing the canalicular injury. One study found that up to 1.4% of patients sustaining canalicular laceration due to dog bite also had associated facial bone fractures.