When triaged accurately, patients receive care in an appropriate and timely manner by emergency care providers. This limits their injuries and their complications. However, incorrectly triaged patients could sustain further injury and complications.

The effectiveness and validity of the MTS have shown mixed results when being reviewed in journals. A study by Zachariasses et al. in 2017 examined the validity of the MTS by performing a prospective observational study in three European emergency departments during a one-year period. They examined the validity by looking at the proportion of correctly triaged patients to over and under triaged patients. Their results showed that in more vulnerable populations, the pediatric and the elderly population, these groups showed poorer performance. This conclusion is further supported in a 2019 cohort study by Brouns et al. that showed that the MTS has worse performance in patients over the age of 65 as compared to patients between 18-64 years. This was accurate also for predicting the in-hospital mortality of patients over 65 years as compared to 18 to 64-year-old patients. However, when predicting hospitalization and in-hospital mortality for surgical patients over 65 years, it showed better predictive ability compared to medical patients over 65 years of age. This study also showed accuracy in the prediction of in-hospital mortality with increasing MTS urgency between the age groups of 18 to 64 years. The inconsistencies between the age groups are possibly due to the increasing complexity of medical issues in patients over 65 years.

Modern emergency departments are crowded places with many different people with different complaints, all with different levels of severity. Nurses must be able to scan crowded emergency departments for critically ill patients and move them to the front. If this occurs, nurses must be able to anticipate the prioritization and status of available treatment areas. An optimal arrival to proper triage of the patient should occur in 10-15 minutes. As patients wait in busy emergency rooms, they should advise the nursing staff if there have been any changes in their condition. To facilitate this, a major international study would be useful to compare the expression of the CTAS, MTS, and ATS in terms of the patterns of population descriptions, the outcomes, and the consistency of the results of different triage systems.