It remains imperative to identify the risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient before performing an open rhinoplasty. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of this procedure. Prior to surgery, the patient should have the following done:

- Evaluation by a surgeon experienced in selecting the appropriate patient for the open rhinoplasty surgery.

- Evaluation by a family physician and/or anesthesiologist/nurse anesthetist to ensure that the patient is fit for anesthesia.

- Perioperative nurse to coordinate care, monitor the patient, and assist the clinicians with pre- and post-operative patient and family education.

an interprofessional team of an experienced surgeon, anesthesiologist, and surgical assistants and operative nurses should be involved during the open rhinoplasty to maximize outcomes. Close follow-up during the initial post-operative period, either by a wound care nurse and/or clinician experienced in the post-operative care of the open rhinoplasty, should monitor the patient for possible complications including a septal hematoma. It is also crucial to provide patient education on proper care for the surgical wounds, and avoiding nose-blowing, strenuous activity, heavy lifting, or bending over during the first several days post-operatively to mitigate complications.

Nursing will play a significant role in both perioperative and intraoperative settings; their duties are outlined below. They must inform the surgeon of any concerns they may have, including postoperative issues, adverse medication effects, or lack of patient compliance. Pharmacists do not have a significant role in rhinoplasty cases, but their expertise for postoperative pain control is helpful, and as with any patient, they should perform medication reconciliation to head off any potential drug-drug interactions, reporting to the surgeon if they see anything noteworthy. Only through collaborative interprofessional teamwork can rhinoplasty cases achieve their optimal result with minimal adverse events. [Level V]