Since most of the cholesterol in serum is transported via LDL, measuring serum LDL levels could be useful to predict the risk for ASCVD. As per the NIH-sponsored National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Adult Treatment Panel III (ATPIII) guidelines, serum levels of both total cholesterol (TC) and LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) are useful to predict the risk for ASCVD. The therapy is also targeted to lower LDL cholesterol below a target value ( less than 100 mg/L).

Ultracentrifugation can be used for the separation of lipoproteins based on equilibrium and rate methods. When plasma or serum is ultracentrifuged in native non-protein solute density (1.006 g/ml), TG-rich VLDL and chylomicrons can be floated, which can be recovered by aspiration. The density of the bottom fraction can be adjusted to 1.063 g/ml with potassium bromide, and ultracentrifugation leads to the floating of LDL, or more commonly, the total cholesterol and HDL- cholesterol obtained in the infranatant is assayed to calculate the LDL-cholesterol. This method is tedious and time-consuming for high-throughput assays required in routine clinical practice. Alternately, agarose gel electrophoresis with subsequent enzymatic staining using cholesterol esterase and cholesterol oxidase could give a precise detection of lipoproteins. Although this method is quantitative, it is semi-automated and requires experience.

A commonly used and most cost-effective method is the Friedewald calculation, where LDL-C can be estimated from the measurements of TC, triglycerides, and HDL-C in a fasting sample. The Friedewald equation: LDL-cholesterol = TC – HDL-C – triglycerides (VLDL)/5 since the triglyceride to cholesterol ratio in VLDL in normal fasting persons is 5/1. Although widely used, this method has several limitations, including the requirement of a fasting sample and unreliability as TGs exceed 400 mg/dl. Hence, several direct homogenous methods have evolved to measure cholesterol, and the advantage is the non-requirement of a fasting sample. They are reliable to TG up to 1000 mg/dl. Homogeneous assays were developed in the third-generation methods, where the LDL-C can be determined directly with improved precision and accuracy and are available on automated platforms.

An additional measure of LDL is assaying its protein, apoB. This, unlike cholesterol, provides a measure of the number of particles, does not require a fasting sample, and is available on most automated platforms. However, it is more expensive than the measurement of LDL-cholesterol and reports apoB in VLDL and IDL.