Recognize that a pelvic ring injury may represent a life-threatening emergency and work as a team to resuscitate critically injured patients rapidly

- **ATLS first**
- If a patient has a pelvic ring injury, do not assume they do not have another source of hemorrhage.
- A pelvic ring injury should remind all practitioners of high energy trauma and perform a thorough assessment of all body systems.
- Exclude thoracic and abdominal bleeding before assuming a patient's hemorrhage is from a pelvic ring injury.

**Hemorrhage Associated with High Energy Trauma and Pelvic Ring Disruption**

Pelvic ring injuries can have significant blood loss from sources, including:

- Pelvic venous plexus (a common source of hemorrhage in 80% of cases): can lead to a retroperitoneal hematoma, which can hold up to 4 Liters of blood.

- Osseous blood supply, including nutrient arteries and bleeding cancellous bone.

- Arterial injury (uncommon source of hemorrhage in 10-20% of cases), the following arteries can be involved; superior gluteal artery most common in  APC injuries, internal pudendal and obturator arteries in LC injuries.

**Initial Management and Resuscitation**

**Resuscitation**

Ideally, a transfusion of PRBC:FFP: Platelets at a ratio 1:1:1 has been reported to improve mortality in cases where massive transfusion is necessary.

**Pelvic Binder/Circumferential Sheet Placement**

- Temporary intervention to partially reduce the displacement of a pelvic ring injury and should be placed at the level of the greater trochanters. Adding stability will help with clot formation within the pelvis and limit hemorrhage. It is controversial whether this actually changes the pelvic volume.

- Indications

- Hemodynamically unstable pelvic ring injuries including APC and VS injuries
- LC injuries treated with binder may be over-compressed and may cause harm to other structures in the pelvis.            


- Contraindications

- Acetabular fractures

- May mask an injury from being identified.

- If the patient is hemodynamically stable on arrival without radiographic evidence of a pelvic ring injury, remove the binder and obtain repeat imaging.

**Angiography/Embolization**

- Pelvic ring injuries that remain hemodynamically unstable despite transfusion and binder placement should undergo further intervention. At most centers, the next step is angiography and embolization. External fixation and open pelvic packing are the next steps at some centers; however, this is controversial.

- CT angiography confirms the presence or absence of ongoing arterial hemorrhage with 98 to 100% negative predictive value.

- Ongoing bleeding after selective embolization indicates bilateral temporary internal iliac embolization, which can be effective. But, on the other side can be complicated by gluteal necrosis and impotence.

**External Fixation**

- Pelvic clamp or traditional frames.

- Indicated as a temporary or definitive fixation for unstable injuries with hemodynamic instability, injuries with external rotation component, and symphyseal widening with fecal or urinary contamination.

- It allows nursing in an upright position with the advantage of improving ventilation, especially in patients with chest trauma.

- **Pin positions for frames:**Gluteal pillar, Anterosuperior (into the iliac crest), or anteroinferior ( supraacetabular). Supraacetabular pin placement, under fluoroscopic guidance, has the advantage of a significant increase in the stability of the sacroiliac joint

- Contraindicated in the ilium and acetabular fractures.

**Anterior Subcutaneous Pelvic Fixator (INFIX)**

- New technique to avoid complications associated with pelvic external fixation including pin site infection

**Diverting Colostomy**

- It may be necessary for open pelvic ring injury with perineal trauma.

**Definitive Management**

**Non-operative:**indicated for stable fractures such as type I APC and LC injuries. Pubic rami fractures are managed conservatively as surgical dissection necessary for fixation outweigh the benefits.

**Operative**: indicated in unstable fractures such as APC and LC types II and III and VS Injuries. Operative intervention is relatively indicated in type I APC and LC injuries if there is significant displacement as indicated by lower limb rotational deformity resulting in complete loss of rotation or leg length discrepancy of 1.5 cm or more. Other relative indications include associated trauma necessitating laparotomy, tilt fracture protruding into the perineum, and refractory pain.

**Open Reduction Internal Fixation**

- ORIF results in improved quality of reduction and better biomechanical stability when compared to external fixation.

- Plates and screws across the symphysis can support the anterior ring.

- Parasymphyseal pubic ramus fracture is treatable with open plating or percutaneous screw fixation.

- SI dislocation or sacral fracture can be treated with sacroiliac, transiliac transacral, or transiliac screws percutaneously. A thorough understanding of pelvic ring osseous fixation pathways is necessary to perform these techniques safely. Sacral dysmorphism is common and can complicate safe percutaneous fixation of the posterior pelvic ring.

- Open plating of SI joints or sacral fractures may be necessary if a closed reduction is unobtainable or the fracture pattern is not amenable to percutaneous fixation.

- Approaches: Pfannenstiel, Stoppa, or ilioinguinal approaches can be used to gain access to anterior structures. Posterior approaches are indicated in cases of inadequate reduction of the sacroiliac joint or associated sacral fractures.

**Percutaneous Fixation**

- Iliosacral screw fixation for instability of the posterior ring is a popular technique. especially with traumatized posterior skin that would breakdown with ORIF.

- The most common complications are nerve root injury, errantly placed screws, and loss of reduction.

**Triangular Osteosynthesis**

- Lumbosacral pedicle screw fixation combined with a sacroiliac fixation for management of lumbopelvic discontinuity.

- Absolute indications are still unclear.

The timing for definitive fixation is controversial. Early definitive fixation is advantageous for pain relief, easier nursing care, better reduction quality, bleeding control, and early mobility. but that at the expense of increased bleeding risk and possible second hit in trauma patients who are not fully resuscitated.