An incentive spirometer is a device that measures the volume of the air inhaled into the lungs during inspiration. When breathing in through an incentive spirometer, a piston rises inside the device and measures the volume of the inspired air. The incentive spirometry device is widely used in physical, speech, and respiratory therapy as it encourages the patient to perform a slow and deep inspiration through visual feedback.

The incentive spirometer uses visual feedback to assess a patient's inspiratory effort by measuring the inhalation volume. The incentive spirometer can be used in rehabilitation as a favorable tool, as it is inexpensive and easy to manage with no known side effects. It is simple to train and does not require assistance once a patient has learned how to use it properly. Furthermore, the visual feedback encourages patient compliance.

The use of the incentive spirometer in inspiratory muscle training has been shown to maintain or increase inhaled lung volume, prevent lung infection after surgery, and improve sputum expectoration. Although research on the effectiveness of incentive spirometry for chronic conditions is mixed, inspiratory muscle training is a vital factor in reducing or preventing postoperative pulmonary complications. Using an incentive spirometer following surgery can help preserve the lungs' integrity and keep the lungs clear. Deep breathing supports the movement of secretions and assists in opening lung spaces that may have become collapsed. Inspiratory muscle training stretches and exercises the lungs, keeping them engaged, especially while recovering from surgery.