The liver plays a vital role in the body's metabolic functions and is composed of a relatively complex vascular architecture.

- The portal vein constitutes 75% of the hepatic blood supply. The blood from the portal vein is deoxygenated, carrying mainly nutrients. It is formed by the confluence of superior mesenteric and splenic veins. The portal vein drains all the upper and middle parts of the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, gallbladder, and spleen.

- Hepatic veins: The hepatic veins are three branches (right, left, and middle hepatic veins) draining blood to the IVC.

- The hepatic artery supplies 25% of the hepatic blood flow and constitutes the main bulk of oxygenated blood to the liver.

- The inferior vena cava (IVC) represents the confluence of the right and left common iliac veins and is the retroperitoneal draining vessel to the hepatic veins. The inferior vena cava subsequently empties deoxygenated blood to the right heart.

**Hepatopetal and Hepatofugal Flow**

**Hepatopetal flow**refers to blood flow towards the liver (from the portal hepatis to the liver periphery). It typically is used in describing the normal blood flow direction in the portal vein.

**Hepatofugal flow**refers to blood flow away from the liver in the portal vein and is sometimes referred to as "retrograde" flow. In other words, the portal venous blood flow pattern is from the periphery of the liver towards the porta hepatis.

While **HVPG (hepatic venous pressure gradient)**is the gold standard for measuring the portal and hepatic venous pressure, it is an invasive procedure with the insertion of a catheter into the hepatic vessels.