ACE inhibitors are most commonly administered as oral agents, but intravenous forms are available. These medications most commonly end with the suffix '-pril.' Examples include lisinopril, ramipril, and captopril.

**ACE Inhibitors are Classified into Three Groups According to Chemical Structure**

- Sulfhydryl-containing ACE inhibitor. Captopril –  Hypertension therapy is 25 mg, either BID or TID, with a maximum of 450 mg. Heart failure therapy is 6.25 mg TID, with a maximum of 450 mg.

- Phosphorus-containing ACE inhibitor. Fosinopril – Hypertension therapy dosing is 10 mg, increasing to a maximum dose of 80 mg. May split into two equal doses during the day to control blood pressure. Heart failure therapy is 5 to 10 mg daily to a maximum dose of 40 mg.

- Dicarboxylic-containing ACE inhibitors: see table

**General Dosing Information**

All ACE inhibitors are prescribed orally, except for enalapril, which can be given intravenously. Enalapril's IV dosage is initially 0.625 to 1.25 mg every 6 hours. Dosage titration up can be to 5 mg IV every 6 hours. Geriatric dosing should be initiated at the lower end of the adult dosing regimen.

There should be a dosage decrease in patients with heart failure, salt-depleted patients, and/or renal impairment.

Lisinopril and captopril are the only ACE inhibitors that do not have to be activated in the body to be effective. All the other ACE inhibitors are prodrugs and require activation. Most reach peak serum levels within 1 hour after ingestion. Since most of the activation occurs in the liver, a non-prodrug form is preferable in patients with underlying liver issues.