Brainstem aura symptoms include vertigo, dysarthria, diplopia, tinnitus, impaired hearing, lack of coordination, confusion, and sometimes loss of consciousness. The most common symptom is vertigo. Most patients also have typical aura symptoms like photopsia, loss of vision, paresthesia, speech, and language problems like word-finding difficulty, language comprehension, and difficulty reading. Some patients may have associated anxiety and hyperventilation which can lead to misdiagnosis. All aura symptoms are completely reversible. Aura symptoms can last a few minutes to an hour followed by an occipital headache that may last hours to days. Rarely, migraine with brainstem aura occurs without a headache. Prodromal symptoms of migraine-like mood swings, irritability, tiredness, nausea, and neck pain should not be confused with aura symptoms. There are no motor or retinal symptoms in migraine with brainstem aura and symptoms like weakness, paralysis, loss of vision in one eye should prompt evaluation for an alternate diagnosis.

Symptoms can be very frightening especially when they occur the first time or until a definite diagnosis is made. Symptoms of brainstem aura can mimic some serious diseases like stroke, tumors, and infections, so it is important to seek medical attention the first time or if there is any change in symptom severity and frequency. Symptoms of migraines with brainstem aura are usually more frightening than harmful, as they are completely reversible.

**Diagnosis**

The International Classification of headache disorders outlined the following criteria for the diagnosis of basilar migraine.

- (A) Symptoms not attributed to another disorder

- (B) At least 2 attacks that fulfill criteria C, D, or E

- (C) Aura with more than one of the following symptoms: dysarthria, vertigo, tinnitus, hearing impairment, diplopia, ataxia, decreased level of consciousness, bilateral paresthesia, with no motor or retinal symptoms, and completely reversible symptoms

- (D) At least one of the following: At least 1 aura symptom occurring gradually over 5 minutes or more and/or 2 or more symptoms occurring in succession over 5 minutes or more, each aura symptom lasts more than 5 minutes, but less than 60 minutes, at least 1 aura symptom is unilateral

- (E) Migraine without aura begins during the aura or within 1 hour.