There is no universal definition for refractory symptoms; thus, it is up to the clinician and the hospital staff's discretion to determine if certain intractable symptoms would warrant the initiation of palliative sedation. However, in general, the following is considered to fit the criteria for palliative sedation:

- The patient considered a candidate for palliative sedation must have a terminal illness where death is almost certain.

- The patient's clinical presentation must be such that traditional or conventional therapies are incapable of providing relief despite maximal doses, e.g., terminally ill patients with shortness of breath who are already on high flow oxygen via nasal cannula might benefit from the addition of morphine to relieve respiratory distress.

- Alternatively, a scenario can exist when conventional therapies are associated with potential adverse outcomes in patients at high doses or frequent administration of agents and thus warranting the use of palliative sedation, e.g., use of frequent and high doses of Ondansetron to relieve nausea and vomiting can be associated with QTc prolongation and cardiac arrhythmias. Using sedating agents such as benzodiazepine (Midazolam) might be a suitable alternative that can relieve nausea and avoid the risk of cardiac arrhythmias.

- Additionally, palliative sedation can be considered if traditional therapies cannot provide relief of symptoms in a timely manner, e.g., using intravenous or intramuscular antipsychotics in acutely delirious patients with a terminal illness offers quicker results compared to standard re-orientation techniques in patients.

- Well-documented goals of care discussion with the patient or surrogates must be present to outline the plan of care and potential risks of using palliative sedation.

**Ethical and Legal Issues**

Although there has been a well-demonstrated benefit of better symptom control in patients with a terminal illness, the topic of providing palliative sedation continues to garner some controversy. Most clinicians and organizations' chief concern from administering palliative sedation in patients is that it may inadvertently hasten or quicken someone's demise. Due to this concern, the practice of palliative sedation is still compared with physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia. Below, we will briefly describe the fundamental concept and differences between these therapies in terminally ill patients.

**Euthanasia**

Euthanasia constitutes the process by which a health care worker taking care of the patient intentionally uses medications to terminate a patient's life to end their pain and suffering. It can either be done with the patient's consent (voluntary euthanasia) or done independently by the health care providers (involuntary euthanasia). The practice of involuntary euthanasia is illegal in all countries. Netherlands and Belgium are currently the only two that allow health care workers to participate in voluntary euthanasia.

**Physician-Assisted Suicide**

Physician-assisted suicide (PAS) is the process by which a physician acts as a facilitator for a patient to hasten death by providing lethal doses of prescription medication. It differs from euthanasia in that the health care worker assumes a passive role of supervision, and the actual administration of medication that leads to death has to be done by the patients on their own.

In the United States, PAS is legal in California, Colorado, the District of Columbia, Hawaii, Montana, Maine, New Jersey, Oregon, Vermont, and Washington. In these states, "death with dignity" statutes ensure that mentally competent adult state residents who have a terminal illness with a confirmed prognosis of having 6 or fewer can voluntarily request a prescription for medication that hasten death. Other countries where physician-assisted suicide is legal are Canada, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Switzerland.

**Differentiating Palliative Sedation from Euthanasia and Physician-assisted Suicide**

Palliative sedation as a practice differs from euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide on two fronts: intention and the desired outcome. Palliative sedation intends to relieve refractory symptoms in dying patients, whereas the intention of physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia is the termination of a patient's life. Similarly, the desired outcome in palliative sedation is to achieve a level of sedation in patients that control their symptoms. Whereas, in physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia, the desired outcome is always the death of the patient. Although some health care workers still raise ethical concerns regarding its use, palliative sedation is legal in all countries, including the United States.