The testes start as an undifferentiated gonad in the retroperitoneum area. The testis-determining factors (SRY gene) present on the Y chromosome causes the gonad to differentiate into the testes. In females, the SRY gene is absent, and hence the gonad turns into an ovary. As the fetus starts to mature, the testes begin to produce the male sex hormone, testosterone. This sex hormone permits the development of the male genitalia.

The tunica albuginea forms a connective tissue latery between the seminiferous tubules and the rest of the testis through invagination.  The Sertoli celss start to make make Mullerian-inhibiting Substance (MIS) which causes regressioin of the Mullerian ducts at 8 to 10 weeks.  The only remaining remnants of the Mullerian ducts in an adult male are the appendix testis and the prostatic utricle.

During the third trimester of pregnancy, the testes, which are located in the abdomen, starts their descent into the inguinal canal and then to its final destination in the scrotum. During this journey, they pass through the peritoneum, the abdominal wall, and the inguinal canal. During development the inguinal canal contains the processus vaginalis, which is a structure that develops from the peritoneum. It allows the testes to descend and then eventally undergoes apoptosis and becomes the tunica vaginalis which surrounds part of the testis. Failure of the closure of the processus vaginalis may lead to complications such as communicating hydrocele and inguinal hernia.