The intervention of an interprofessional team is key to achieve the best outcomes. The team should include primary care doctors, orthopedic nurses, radiologists, pain specialists, orthopedic surgeons, and physiotherapists. Rehabilitation must be started immediately after surgery allowing for early continuous passive motion. Continuous passive motion machines are beneficial during the first eight weeks. Early motion helps promote healing and graft vascularization. Quadriceps exercises and leg raises should be performed four times daily. Wearing a knee brace is recommended during this time.

A pain specialist can help manage postoperative pain, focusing on minimizing opioid use. Weight-bearing is delayed for six weeks until graft incorporation is visualized through X-rays. Daily life activities and normalized gait are started at 6 to 12 weeks. Athletes may start an advanced rehabilitation program after 3-4 months with the help of sports physical therapists; however, they must be cautioned against excessive loading on the allograft. During the first 12 months, high impact activities should be avoided as much as possible. Most patients return to sports in a period of 9 months to 1 year after surgery.

Good communication between professionals is crucial to ensure the best outcomes. Physical therapists and nurses play an important role in ensuring therapy adherence. Adherence to postoperative rehabilitation is associated with better outcomes, lower failure, and revision surgery rates.