Cyclosporine works to suppress cell-mediated immune reactions. Research has detected no effects on phagocytic function in animals, and it does not cause bone marrow suppression in animal or human models.

The mechanism of action of cyclosporine is as a calcineurin inhibitor, a cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitor, and a P-glycoprotein inhibitor. Cyclosporin A (CsA) inhibits the synthesis of interleukins (IL), including IL-2, which is essential for the self-activation of T lymphocytes (LT) and their differentiation. Cyclosporine is effective due to specific and reversible inhibition of immunocompetent lymphocytes in the G0 and G1-phase of the cell cycle. The T-helper cell is the primary target, although it may also suppress T-suppressor cells. The LT-B-lymphocyte (LB) co-operation is essential for activation of LB; the latter also gets inhibited. In addition, research has demonstrated that CsA had an inhibiting effect on CD4+ CD25+ Tregs, which might block the host immune tolerance potentiality.

**Metabolism:**Via hepatic CYP3A4 and is metabolized into a pair of hydroxylated derivatives (AM1 and AM9) and one N-methylated derivative (AM4N).

**Enzymes inhibited:**CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein.

**Half-Life:**8.4 to 27 hours: The time to peak blood cyclosporine concentrations (Tmax) ranges from 1.5 to 2 hours following oral administration of cyclosporine oral solution USP modified.

**Clearance:**5 to 7 mL/min/kg in patients who are recipients of renal or liver allografts while appearing to be somewhat slower in cardiac transplant patients.

**Excretion:**Mainly bile and feces.

**Factors known to influence absorption:**Time post-transplant, bile flow, dietary composition, gastrointestinal state, liver function, small bowel length, and vehicle.