An acceptable normal range of ABG values of ABG components are the following,

- pH (7.35-7.45)

- PaO2 (75-100 mmHg)

- PaCO2 (35-45 mmHg)

- HCO3 (22-26 meq/L)

- Base excess/deficit (-4 to +2)

- SaO2 (95-100%)

Arterial blood gas interpretation is best approached systematically.  Interpretation leads to an understanding of the degree or severity of abnormalities, whether the abnormalities are acute or chronic, and if the primary disorder is metabolic or respiratory in origin. Several articles have described simplistic ways to interpret ABG results. However, the Romanski method of analysis is most simplistic for all levels of providers.

The first step is to look at the pH and assess for the presence of acidemia (pH < 7.35) or alkalemia (pH > 7.45). If the pH is in the normal range (7.35-7.45), use a pH of 7.40 as a cutoff point.  In other words, a pH of 7.37 would be categorized as acidosis, and a pH of 7.42 would be categorized as alkalemia. Next, evaluate the respiratory and metabolic components of the ABG results, the PaCO2 and HCO3, respectively. The PaCO2 indicates whether the acidosis or alkalemia is primarily from a respiratory or metabolic acidosis/alkalosis. PaCO2 > 40 with a pH < 7.4 indicates a respiratory acidosis, while PaCO2 < 40 and pH > 7.4 indicates a respiratory alkalosis (but is often from hyperventilation from anxiety or compensation for a metabolic acidosis). Next, assess for evidence of compensation for the primary acidosis or alkalosis by looking for the value (PaCO2 or HCO3) that is not consistent with the pH.  Lastly, assess the PaO2 for any abnormalities in oxygenation.

Example 1

- pH is in the normal range, so use 7.40 as a cutoff point, in which case it is <7.40, acidosis is present.

- The PaCO2 is elevated, indicating respiratory acidosis, and the HCO3 is elevated, indicating a metabolic alkalosis.

- The value consistent with the pH is the PaCO2. Therefore, this is a primary respiratory acidosis.  The acid-base that is inconsistent with the pH is the HCO3, as it is elevated, indicating a metabolic alkalosis, so there is compensation signifying a non-acute primary disorder because it takes days for metabolic compensation to be effective.

- Last, the PaO2 is decreased, indicating an abnormality with oxygenation. However, a history and physical will help delineate the severity and urgency of required interventions, if any.

Example 2

- pH is in the normal range. Using 7.40 as a cutoff point, it is >7.40, so alkalemia is present.

- The PaCO2 is decreased, indicating a respiratory alkalosis, and the HCO3 is normal but on the low end of normal.

- The value consistent with the pH is the PaCO2. Therefore, this is a primary respiratory alkalosis.  The HCO3 is in the range of normal and, thus, not inconsistent with the pH, so there is a lack of compensation.

- Last, the PaO2 is within the normal range, so there is no abnormality in oxygenation.

When evaluating a patient's acid-base status, it is important to include an electrolyte imbalance or anion gap in your synthesis of the information.   For example: In a patient who presents with Diabetic Ketoacidosis, they will eliminate ketones, close the anion gap but have persistent metabolic acidosis due to hyperchloremia. This is due to the strong ionic effect, which is beyond the scope of this article.