The aortic arch gives rise to the brachiocephalic artery, from which subsequently stems the right common carotid artery; the left common carotid artery branches off the aortic arch just downstream the brachiocephalic trunk. The left and right common carotid arteries run along parallel to each other and divide near the angle of the mandible to the external and internal carotid arteries. The external carotid supplies the face and neck branching off immediately, while the internal carotid arteries do not branch until the origin of the ophthalmic artery bilaterally. Subsequently, the internal carotid arteries bifurcate onto the anterior and middle cerebral arteries, on each internal carotid artery. The largest terminal branch of the internal carotid artery, the MCA divides into four main surgical segments, denominated M1 to M4. The M1 segment extends from the ending of the internal carotid artery, perforating the brain up to its division. The M2 segment bifurcates or occasionally trifurcates. It travels laterally to the Sylvian fissure, and its branches end in the cerebral cortex. The M3 segment travels externally through the insula into the cortex. Finally, the M4 segments are thin and extend from the Sylvian fissure to the cortex.

The primary function of the MCA is to supply specific regions of brain parenchyma with oxygenated blood. The cortical branches of the MCA irrigate the brain parenchyma of the primary motor and somatosensory cortical areas of the face, trunk and upper limbs, apart from the insular and auditory cortex. The small central branches give rise to the lenticulostriate vessels, which irrigate the basal ganglia and internal capsule. The superior division irrigates the lateral inferior frontal lobe, which involves the Broca area responsible for speech production, language comprehension, and writing. The inferior division of the MCA irrigates the superior temporal gyrus, which involves Wernicke’s area responsible for speech comprehension and language development.