The diagnosis of reflux esophagitis is usually made based on a combination of presenting symptoms, objective testing with endoscopy, ambulatory reflux monitoring, and response to a PPI therapy.

Patients with atypical symptoms should undergo a diagnostic evaluation with endoscopy and pH monitoring before a PPI trial.

Performing endoscopy may be indicated in high-risk groups, particularly overweight, over the age of 50, and with chronic esophageal reflux for more than five years. Also, it is indicated in patients at high risk of complications, including Barrett esophagus, dysphagia, anemia, bleeding, and weight loss. Esophageal biopsies should be an adjunct to endoscopic examination, particularly in patients with non-erosive changes and those suspected to have eosinophilic esophagitis.

Esophageal manometry is of limited value in the primary diagnosis of reflux esophagitis disease.

Neither a decrease in lower esophageal sphincter pressure nor the presence of a motility abnormality is specific for the diagnosis of reflux esophagitis disease. However, manometry is recommended before considering anti-reflux surgery (to rule out achalasia or severe hypomotility as in scleroderma-like esophagus where Nissen fundoplication is contraindicated).

Ambulatory reflux monitoring is the only test that allows the determination of abnormal esophageal acid reflux and reflux frequency. In patients with PPI-resistant symptoms, ambulatory 24-h pH-impedance monitoring can be used to assess whether there is a relationship between symptoms and reflux episodes. This test can help exclude reflux esophagitis, but the test should be carried out after the cessation of PPI therapy.

Patients with atypical symptoms should undergo a diagnostic evaluation with endoscopy and pH monitoring before a PPI trial. Barium studies to diagnose reflux esophagitis are of limited value. The presence or absence of reflux during barium esophagography does not correlate with the incidence or extent of reflux observed during 24-hour pH impedance monitoring and is of no value in the diagnosis of reflux esophagitis.

Los Angeles classification of severity of reflux esophagitis-four grades:

- Grade A: One or more esophageal mucosal breaks less than 5 mm in length.

- Grade B: One or more mucosal breaks greater than 5 mm but with continuity across mucosal folds.

- Grade C: Continuous mucosal breaks between the tops of two or more mucosal folds but involving less than 75% of the esophageal circumference.

- Grade D: Mucosal breaks involving more than 75% of the esophageal sphincter.

Response to therapy with PPI (twice daily) in patients suspected of reflux esophagitis confirms the diagnosis. However, the PPI test is sensitive but has less specificity.