The use of prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) for erectile dysfunction and its side effects requires thorough discussion with patients. There are relatively common pre-existing conditions such as cardiovascular disease that are contraindicated or cautioned with PGE1. The healthcare team should be aware of all up-to-date information about PGE1 to prescribe the medication to the appropriate patient population. While some brands of PGE1 used for erectile dysfunction can be self-administered, the first dose should be administered by a healthcare professional. In particular, patient education about intracavernosal injection requires an interprofessional team of healthcare providers, including physicians, nurses, and pharmacists. Clinicians and pharmacists need to discuss their patient's sexual health before prescribing sexual performance-enhancing medications. Finally, because dosing may require titration, the healthcare team may need to adjust the dose repeatedly to obtain the most effective dose. Though the efficacy appears to be dose-dependent, the recommended maximum dosages should not be surpassed. Nursing can play a vital role in monitoring patient compliance, administration technique, and watching for adverse events. The pharmacist should also perform complete medication reconciliation and report back to the rest of the healthcare team.

For pediatric patients, the use of PGE1 for congenital heart defects comes with a U.S. Boxed Warning. An interprofessional healthcare team should monitor neonates receiving this medication, as symptoms are not always immediately apparent. Neonatal nursing is crucial in administering medication and monitoring these patients and will alert the treating physician promptly regarding any concerns.

In summary, PGE-1 therapy requires an interprofessional healthcare team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]