The procedures for the preparation and their complications account for 25% of chronic uremia hospital admissions. The gold standard is the distal AV fistula.****Preparation of appropriate infrastructure for home hemodialysis must be undertaken only after checking out any legal restrictions (central/local government) on the use of a dwelling for the purpose. Ensure that the prerequisites are met and that the home has a sound structure unaffected by dampness, mold, or high environmental pollution, along with stable electricity and ample water supply. Provisions must be made for RO purification and wastewater, dialysate, and biomedical waste disposal.

Community house hemodialysis provides a homelike non-institutional setting with flexible scheduling similar to home HD. Each patient has a separate space with a machine bay, dialysis equipment, and other consumables and is responsible for their dialysis. For those who dialyze more frequently (five or more times a week), a dedicated machine and space in the community HD location are the best, while those on a thrice-a-week or alternate-day regimen can share a machine. The home HD program is responsible for infrastructure, equipment, and community house maintenance.

Patients seeking nocturnal dialysis are limited to their bedrooms, while those fearing unintentional needle dislodgement may prefer daytime dialysis. Those with larger, more static HD machines have limited options for machine placement. At the same time, mobile batch dialysis equipment permits a change of location as long as the appropriate peripheral equipment and outlets are in place. The provision and undertaking of dialysis at home involves sharing and division of responsibilities between the home HD program and the patient. Both parties, as well as care providers, must understand their responsibilities. An agreement should be documented as patient contracts or in-unit policies and procedures. The liability towards installation and maintenance should be made clear at the beginning.