Nursing care of the child with pneumonia in the hospital is mostly supportive and will involve routine monitoring and assessment of the child for respiratory status and oxygenation, fluid status, and sepsis risk. The child may require supplemental oxygen and SpO2 monitoring, depending on the severity of the illness.

**Respiratory status and oxygenation:**The nurse should assess oxygenation and for the adequacy of air movement in lung fields, the presence of accessory muscle usage, nasal flaring, grunting, and diminished breath sounds at each routine assessment, and more frequently if indicated. In addition, assessment of the child's disposition and level of activity can help the nurse determine the child's status. The hospitalized child with pneumonia may require a chest tube in the case of a pleural effusion or pneumothorax.

**Fluid status**: The child may be at risk for a fluid deficit if eating and drinking poorly.  The risk for dehydration increases if the child is febrile.  Careful monitoring of intake and output can help the nurse determine the risk for a fluid deficit. Supplemental intravenous fluids may be required. Nasogastric tube placement may be indicated to provide nutrition.

**Sepsis risk:**Routine monitoring for fever and risk of sepsis is required.  Prompt initiation of antibiotic or antifungal therapy is required if the etiology is bacterial or fungal. The nurse should routinely assess vital signs with more frequent follow-up if out of range.  Fever may be treated with antipyretics. If the child is determined to be experiencing sepsis, prompt initiation of a sepsis protocol should be initiated.