**Clinical Toxicity Due to Overdosage**

As in any drug overdosage case, general supportive therapy should be provided. Since the policies for the management of drug overdose are continually advancing, it is advisable to consult a poison control center to decide the latest recommendations for the management of cases with galantamine overdose. The clinical picture of significant galantamine overdose is predicted to be like those of overdosing on other cholinergic medications. These effects involve the neuromuscular junction, the parasympathetic nervous system, and the central nervous system.

An overdose of galantamine produces a syndrome of cholinergic crisis. In addition to muscle weakness or fasciculations, the patient may manifest some or all the following symptoms and signs: salivation, severe nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, sweating, lacrimation, urination, defecation, bradycardia, hypotension, depression of respiration, collapse, and convulsions. Death may occur if worsening muscle weakness involves respiratory muscles.

Atropine, a tertiary anticholinergic, may be used as an antidote for galantamine IR and galantamine ER overdosage. Atropine sulfate is administered intravenously (IV) and is recommended at starting dose of 0.5 mg to 1.0 mg, with subsequent doses given based on clinical response. When other cholinergic agents and tertiary anticholinergics are concurrently administered, atypical responses in blood pressure and heart rate have been observed. It is unknown if dialysis (hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, hemofiltration) can remove galantamine and/or its metabolites.

**Non-clinical Toxicology**

Carcinogenesis: In a 2-year oral carcinogenicity study in rats, a surge in endometrial adenocarcinomas was seen at 10 mg/kg/day (6-times on a plasma exposure (AUC) basis or four times the MRHD of 24 mg/day on an mg/m basis) and 30mg/kg/day (19 times on an AUC basis or 12 times MRHD on an mg/m basis).

Mutagenesis: Galantamine was negative in a battery of in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity assays conducted in bacteria, mice, and mammalian cells

Impairment of Fertility: No impairment of fertility occurred in rats when galantine was given up to 16 mg/kg/day (7 times the MRHD on an mg/m basis) for 14 days and 60 days before mating in females and males, respectively.