# Introduction

Evidence-based practice is “integrating the best available evidence with the healthcare educator’s expertise and the client’s needs while considering the practice environment.

There is often confusion between quality improvement, evidence-based practice, and research. A seminal article by Shirey and colleagues.

The EBP process, as defined by Melnyk and Fineout-Overholt, includes seven steps:

- Encouraging and supporting a spirit of inquiry

- Asking questions

- Searching for evidence

- Appraising the evidence

- Integrating evidence into practice

- Evaluating outcomes

- Sharing results

Implementing EBP in practice has been shown to lead to a higher quality of care and better patient outcomes, but nurses encounter many barriers when implementing EBP. NPD practitioners can facilitate the implementation of EBP by ensuring a supportive environment for EBP, providing educational sessions to nurses about the EBP process, being role models, and mentoring nurses.

# Issues of Concern

**PICOT Question**

The foundation of EBP is developing a PICOT question, which identifies the terms to be used to search for the best evidence to answer a burning clinical question.

The intervention examines the management strategy, diagnostic test, or exposure of interest. There may not always be a comparison in the PICOT analysis. If there is, this would be a control or alternative management strategy compared to the intervention. Outcomes should be measurable, as the best evidence comes from rigorous studies with statistically significant findings. The time factor looks at what period should be considered. There are a variety of clinical domains that PICOT questions can evaluate, such as intervention, diagnosis, etiology, prevention, prognosis/prediction, quality of life, or therapy. Writing a good PICOT question for an effective search and making robust, evidence-based recommendations to improve care and outcomes is critical.

**The Evidence**

While there are multiple ways to evaluate and rank evidence in the literature, one of the most widely used in nursing in the United States uses seven levels. These seven accepted levels of evidence are assigned to studies based on the methodological quality of the design, validity, and application to patient care. In addition, these levels provide the “grade” or strength of the recommendation.

- **Level I –**Evidence from a systematic review or meta-analysis of all relevant randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or evidence-based clinical practice guidelines based on a systematic review of RCTs or three or more RCTs of decent quality with comparable results.

- **Level II -**Evidence obtained from at least one well-designed RCT

- **Level III –**Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization

- **Level IV -**Evidence from well-designed case-control or cohort studies****

- **Level V -**Evidence from a systematic review of descriptive and qualitative studies (meta-syntheses)

- **Level VI**– Evidence from a single or descriptive or qualitative study

- **Level VII -**Evidence from the opinion of authorities and/or reports of expert committees.

Roe-Prior discussed the strength of evidence by comparing it to a murder trial. A suspect’s conviction should require more than the testimony of one witness. If a crowd of people all agree that the suspect was the perpetrator or there was DNA evidence, that evidence is much stronger. Studies without a comparative group, methodologically weak studies, or poorly controlled studies could be likened to one witness. Roe Prior encouraged individuals to also look at non-nursing research findings since research centered on other disciplines, like psychology or education, could be appropriate.

Other frameworks for identifying levels of evidence include The Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine Levels of Evidence and Burns framework.

- 1a           Systematic review of RCTs

- 1b           Individual RCT

- 2a           Systematic review of cohort studies

- 2b           Individual cohort study

- 2c           Outcomes research

- 3a           Systematic review of case-control studies

- 3b           Individual case-control study

- 4             Case series

- 5             Expert opinion

Burns uses three levels to differentiate the strength of the evidence presented:

- I             At least 1 RCT with proper randomization

- II.1         Well-designed cohort or case-control study

- II.2         Time series comparisons or dramatic results from uncontrolled studies

- III           Expert opinions

Roe Prior outlined guidelines for the literature review.

The Cochran Library is comprised of multiple databases where systematic reviews on healthcare topics can be found. Using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systemic Review and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) Guidelines to evaluate a systemic review or meta-analysis can help the individual ensure the findings are valid and reliable. Findings from the literature review are put into an evidence-based table. There are various formats for these tables, but they all include information about the source, design, sample, summary of findings, and level of evidence for each of the articles included.

**EBP Models**

The most frequently used EBP models are the Iowa Model, the Advancing Research and Clinical Practice through Close Collaboration (ARCC) Model, the Star Model of Knowledge Transformation, and the John Hopkins Nursing Evidence-based Practice (JHNEBP) Model. The IOWA Model focuses on implementing evidence-based practice changes, and the ARCC model on advancing EBP in systems by using EBP mentors and control and cognitive behavioral therapies. The Star Model provides a framework for approaching EBP, and the John Hopkins Model is a problem-based approach to clinical decision-making accompanied by tools to guide its use.

The Iowa model was revised and updated in 2017 by the Iowa Model Collaborative.

Support for the ARCC Model was outlined in an article by Melnyk and colleagues in a study exploring how an evidence-based culture and mentorship predicted EBP implementation, nurse job satisfaction, and intent to stay.

A concept analysis of feelings of entrapment during the COVID-19 pandemic, using the ACE Star Model, was completed by Lee and Park. The ACE Star model is used to understand the cycle, nature, and characteristics of knowledge used in various aspects of EBP. The model consists of five steps: discovery research, evidence summary, translation to guidelines, practice integration, and process and outcome evaluation.

The JHNEBP Model is a problem-solving approach to clinical decision-making with user-friendly tools to guide individual or group use. It is explicitly designed to meet the needs of the practicing nurse and uses a three-step process called PET: practice question, evidence, and translation. In a study conducted by Speroni and colleagues on using EBP models across the United States, this was the second most frequently used model by the 127 nurse leaders who responded to the questionnaire.

**EBP Competence and Implementation**

NPD practitioners are instrumental in implementing EBP. Harper and colleagues conducted a national study to examine NPD practitioners’ beliefs and competencies, frequency of implementing EBP, and perceptions of organizational culture and readiness for EBP.

The Helene Fuld Health Trust National Institute for Evidence-based Practice in Nursing and Healthcare of the Ohio State University developed an Evidence-Based Practice Certificate, which was approved by the Accreditation Board for Specialty Nursing Certification in 2018. There are 24 EBP competencies; 13 for practicing registered nurses and an additional 11 competencies for practicing advanced practice nurses and EBP experts. These competencies are outlined in an article by Melnyk et al.

Although these competencies were initially written for nurses, they apply to other interprofessional team members who have received advanced EBP education. In addition to demonstrating completion of the EBP coursework, applicants must demonstrate current EBP knowledge through content review and successful testing and submit a portfolio to review that shows an EBP practice change project before receiving a certificate.

In 2020, ANPD worked with the Helene Fuld Health Trust National Institute for Evidence-Based Practice in Nursing and Healthcare to develop a curriculum for the Nursing Professional Development EBP Academy.

There are numerous resources available for NPD practitioners on evidence-based practice. There is a peer-reviewed journal published by Sigma Theta Tau International, Worldviews on Evidence-based Nursing, which includes original research with recommendations applicable to use as best practices to improve patient care. ANPD has a year-long evidence-based fellowship consisting of theory and completion of an evidence-based project. The Nursing Professional Development Evidence-Based Practice (EBP) Academy is a 12-month mentored program designed to guide the NPD practitioner through creating PICOT questions, gathering and critically appraising literature, and EBP implementation, evaluation, dissemination, and sustainment. Participation in the EBP Academy enhances the evidence-based competencies of nursing professional development practitioners to enable them to fulfill their role as champions of scientific inquiry and mentor other healthcare professionals in implementing EBP practices.

**EBP in Action**

One organization evaluated the use of evidence-based practice in clinical practice after nurses attended a formal evidence-based practice course.

Another large academic medical center evaluated the implementation of an EBP program.

There are numerous examples in the literature of individuals/organizations using evidence-based principles to develop programs in a variety of settings. McGarity and colleagues examined frontline nurse leaders oriented with only on-the-job training questioning whether their level of competence is improved with a professional development program.

Ydrogo and colleagues discussed a multifaceted approach to strengthening nurses’ EBP capabilities in a comprehensive cancer center.

Integrating EBP into an emergency department nurse residency program was the subject of an article by Asselta.

Pediatric nurses were the focus of a project described by Cline et al.

Many nurses work in long-term care. Higuchi and colleagues described a study that examined the impact of EBP practice change in ten long-term care (LTC) settings in Canada.

Clinical nurse educators were the focus of a study conducted by Dagg and colleagues.

Phan and Hampton described an evidence-based project focused on promoting civility in the workplace by addressing bullying in new graduate nurses using simulation and cognitive rehearsal.

The NPD Scope and Standards were used to assess, plan, implement, and evaluate the project. In addition to the demographic data collected at baseline, participants completed the Clark Workplace Civility Index (CWCI) at baseline and three times after the intervention (immediately, 2.5 months, and five months). The sample included 36 new graduate nurses (NGNs). The intervention consisted of 2.75 hours of didactic, polling, reflection, simulation role-play, and debriefing. The training was developed virtually on the Zoom platform, and breakout rooms facilitated small group discussions and role-playing. Although there was no statistically significant increase in civility scores, the qualitative data indicated the participants could apply knowledge and skills from the intervention to improve communication, peer relationships, teamwork, patient safety, and care.

# Clinical Significance

Evidence-based practice falls under the champion for scientific inquiry role of the NPD practitioner. According to the NPD scope and standards of practice, the NPD practitioner promotes a spirit of inquiry and assists with generating and disseminating new knowledge. The NPD practitioner also uses evidence to advance the specialty of NPD and guide practice.

The ultimate goal is to promote the quality of care for the healthcare consumer. Competencies for scholarly inquiry include acting as a champion for inquiry, generating new knowledge, and integrating the best available evidence into practice. In addition, the standards include disseminating inquiry findings, including evidence-based practice and quality improvement activities, through educational and professional development activities.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The healthcare consumer is the ultimate recipient of NPD practice. Therefore, NPD practitioners collaborate with the interprofessional team to ensure quality care, leading to optimal care outcomes and population health. Interprofessional partnerships are critical factors in achieving safe, effective, high-quality care.