**Cardiovascular System**

To understand the changes occurring in the cardiovascular physiology of the newborn, one must first understand intrauterine fetal circulation and the shunts involved, which include the ductus venosus, foramen ovale, and ductus arteriosus.

First, the blood from the mother becomes oxygenated in the placenta and enters the fetus through the umbilical vein. The oxygenated blood in the umbilical vein bypasses the hepatic circulation and is delivered to the inferior vena cava (IVC) via the ductus venosus. From the IVC, the blood flows into the right atrium. Oxygenated blood is then shunted from the right atrium to the left atrium through the foramen ovale. Blood travels to the left ventricle and into the coronary arteries and aorta from the left atrium. A small amount of blood from the right atrium does not travel through the foramen ovale and instead flows to the right ventricle and into the pulmonary artery, then the lungs. However, the majority of blood is shunted from the pulmonary artery directly to the aorta, bypassing the lungs via the ductus arteriosus. From the aorta, oxygenated blood is then delivered to the systemic circulation.

- 
**Changes in Fetal Circulation at Birth**

- 
              
- Decreased Pulmonary Vascular Resistance and Increased Systemic Vascular Resistance

- With the cutting of the umbilical cord comes the removal of the low-resistance circuit, allowing for an increase in systemic circulation. Upon taking its first breath, the fluid in the newborn lungs is replaced with air, and oxygen diffuses into the blood vessels surrounding the alveoli. Relaxation of the pulmonary arteries occurs, which allows the pulmonary resistance to fall and blood to flow into the lungs.


              
              
- Closure of the Ductus Arteriosus

- In utero, patency of the ductus arteriosus is maintained by high levels of prostaglandins, carbon monoxide, nitric oxide, and low oxygen tension. Once the newborn begins breathing, functional closure of ductus arteriosus begins and can last several days. Due to the decrease in pulmonary arterial resistance and increase in oxygen, there is a decrease in prostaglandins which aids in the closure of the ductus arteriosus. With the placenta now separated, there is also a decrease in prostaglandin synthesis, further contributing to the closure of the ductus arteriosus.


              
              
- Closure of the Foramen Ovale

- Decreased pulmonary vasculature resistance upon the newborn's first breath causes the left atrial pressure to increase. With the left atrial pressure now higher than the right atrial pressure, the foramen ovale begins to close.


              
              
- Closure of the Ductus Venosus (DV)

- 
              
- 
                  
- Permanent closure of the DV takes approximately one to three months, with the remnant consisting of connective tissue forming the ligamentum venosum of the liver.
                  
                

              
              
- Maternal-fetal circulation is no longer needed after birth, so the umbilical vein's remnant forms the liver's round ligament.

**Pulmonary System**

Adapting the lungs to the external environment requires careful coordination between clearance of fetal lung fluid, surfactant secretion, and the onset of consistent breathing. During intrauterine life, the lungs are filled with fetal lung fluid secreted by the airway epithelium, which is essential for normal lung growth. The most important process in the fetal transition to extrauterine air breathing is the adequate and timely clearance of lung fluid. The bulk of the fluid clearance occurs via osmotic gradients created by active solute transport by alveolar epithelial cells. This process is regulated by hormonal changes associated with labor, as well as developmental changes in the expression of sodium channels.

At birth, clamping of the umbilical cord (which removes prostaglandin secretion that suppresses breathing), diffuse tactile and cold stimuli, as well as changes in the carbon monoxide and oxygen levels in the blood, results in the rapid onset of vigorous breathing of a newborn. In the absence of severe hypoxia, most term infants will effectively initiate breathing. Specific endocrine adaptations begin before delivery and play a critical role in the clearance of fetal lung fluid at birth. Active chloride-mediated secretion of fetal lung fluid is shut down by an increase in cortisol, thyroid hormones, and catecholamines. Basal Na-K-ATPase of type II cells of the airway epithelium are activated by these hormones, allowing sodium in the fetal lung fluid to be pumped into the interstitium with water and other electrolytes, thus removing fluid from the airways. Physiologically normal newborns inflate their lungs at birth by generating large, negative pressure breaths, pulling the lung fluid from the airways into the distal airspace. The infant continues to clear lung fluid with subsequent inflation.

In the newborn, the work of breathing is usually labored (i.e., accessory muscle use, intercostal retractions, grunting) to overcome the high surface tension, which is one reason why newborns have an increased respiratory rate (30 to 60 breaths per minute). Other reasons include compensation for high metabolic rate and perfusion-ventilation differences. More importantly, the presence of circulatory shunts forces the infant to increase the work of breathing. As the fluid leaves the alveoli in the lungs, the effort of breathing is reduced. Due to immature central drive responses, newborns may have periods of apnea lasting less than 5 seconds. While this is considered abnormal in adults, it is normal for newborns to have apneic episodes.

**Hematological System**

Blood is comprised of two major components; plasma and cells (red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets). In utero, blood is produced by the liver and picked up by the bone marrow after birth. Red blood cells carry hemoglobin (Hb) which transports oxygen and iron from the lungs to tissues and organs of the body. There are multiple types of hemoglobin, with those pertinent to this discussion being HbF and HbA. HbF is the primary hemoglobin the fetus produces, and its role is to adequately transport oxygen in low-oxygen environments. HbF has a high affinity for oxygen, making it suitable for oxygen extraction from maternal hemoglobin across the placenta. Not only is HbF important for intrauterine development, but it is also important in the newborn period due to impaired oxygen delivery to the tissues. Around six months of age, HbF is replaced with HbA, also known as adult hemoglobin.

Infants lack vitamin K due to immature hepatocyte function, and lack of enteric bacteria that produce vitamin K. Vitamin K is used in the synthesis of clotting factors II, VII, IX, X, and proteins C and S. Therefore, those who lack vitamin K have an increased risk of any form of hemorrhage, from any cause. As a result, due to the deficiency of vitamin K, a prophylactic shot of vitamin K is given to every newborn to protect against hemorrhagic disease.

**Metabolism and Thermoregulation**

Soon after birth, the newborn's temperature rapidly drops in response to the cold extrauterine environment. To counteract this temperature change, the neonate accelerates heat production via nonshivering thermogenesis (NST), which involves lipolysis of brown adipose tissue, which is present around the kidneys and muscles of the back. Heat is produced by uncoupling ATP synthesis via the oxidation of fatty acids in the mitochondria, utilizing uncoupled protein. Adequate oxygenation is required for thermogenesis; thus, a hypoxic neonate cannot adequately produce enough heat to increase its temperature.