An arthrogram procedure involves the injection of contrast into the glenohumeral joint space to maintain a sterile field; aseptic technique materials are necessary, including skin cleansers, sterile drapes, and sterile swabs.

A 25 gauge needle for injection of local anesthetic and a 20 to 22 gauge spinal needle for the arthrogram itself are utilized. Image guidance using fluoroscopy, ultrasound, or computer tomography is utilized. 1% lidocaine can be used to anesthetize the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and projected tract that the needle will traverse. For CT arthrography, a non-ionic iodinated contrast is required. The injected solution is diluted to a one-to-one ratio with normal saline or lidocaine. For MR arthrography, a gadolinium contrast is utilized.

A variety of contrast mixture protocols exist. A common protocol is included here. In a 20 mL syringe, a mixture of 5 mL of iodinated contrast with 15 mL normal saline and gadolinium contrast at approximately two millimoles per liter should be made. The usage of epinephrine can be considered 0.2 mL, 1 in 1000 solution if there is a delay expected before the MR arthrogram. An option could include using a long-acting anesthetic for a diagnostic exam or a corticosteroid. A therapeutic test can aid in determining if the pain the patient is experiencing is caused by an intra-articular source where a long-acting anesthetic such as ropivacaine 0.2% or bupivacaine 0.5% can be utilized. Some reports have determined a lower in vitro toxicity with ropivacaine instead of bupivacaine or lidocaine.

There are reports of cartilage toxicity from these long-acting anesthetics. The corticosteroid can be injected after the injection of contrast, so it does not compromise the diagnostic exam. A corticosteroid should not be injected if an infection is suspected. CT or MRI follows the arthrogram to capture further imaging post-injection.