Foot drop resulting from vaginal delivery is a catastrophic event regarding the patient's feelings. It converts what should be the happiest moment of the patient's life into a shocking event that takes away from the joy of the mother holding her newborn baby and may cast doubt in her mind that she will be able to care for her precious infant. An interprofessional team approach is the best result in treating obstetric foot drop.

The differential diagnosis and treatment of the patient's condition begins with her obstetrician, who will then want a consultation with a neurologist who can provide an accurate diagnosis. This process may involve a radiologist if an MRI is needed. The services of an electrophysiologist will be required to help provide a diagnosis based on accurate data concerning the location of the lesion that has caused the patient's foot drop.

Once a diagnosis has been obtained, the services of a physiotherapist will become essential. Nurses are a critical component of the team, as they monitor the patient's vital signs and help educate the patient and her family concerning the patient's condition and, indeed, her future. Nurses are in a position to offer support and encouragement as they interact with the patient from day to day.

The services of a prosthetist may be needed to provide the proper orthotic to help her walk and correct the foot drop. Thus the management of obstetrical neural injuries requires a carefully chosen interprofessional team. Careful coordination between the team members will ensure a successful outcome for the patient. Adding a psychiatrist to the interprofessional team may be appropriate for the occasional patient whose symptoms are inconsistent with the anatomical findings.