In past decades most patients were diagnosed when they had complaints of nephrolithiasis, bone pain, fractures, muscle weakness, or bone deformities. Of these, the most common clinical symptoms are nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, and muscle weakness. Most patients with primary hyperparathyroidism are asymptomatic, diagnosed when hypercalcemia is incidentally discovered on a chemistry profile.

A familial syndrome should be considered when primary hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed at an early age or there is a family history of hypercalcemia, pituitary adenomas, pancreatic islet cell tumors, pheochromocytomas, or medullary thyroid cancer.

When the serum calcium level exceeds 12 mg/dL, patients are likely to start noticing symptoms associated with hypercalcemia such as anorexia, cardiac arrhythmias, altered mental states, constipation, dehydration, polyuria, and polydipsia.

While most primary hyperparathyroidism patients are asymptomatic, up to 55% will actually have previously undiagnosed nephrocalcinosis or non-obstructing renal calculi, and up to 75% of the symptomatic patients will present with acute renal colic and/or nephrolithiasis.

Patients with hypercalcemia should be tested for hyperparathyroidism. For those hyperparathyroid patients who undergo surgery, their increased risk of nephrolithiasis persists for ten years after their parathyroidectomy.

Besides kidney stones, other potential symptoms of hypercalcemia and hyperparathyroidism include:

- Weak bones that break easily (osteoporosis)

- Bone pain

- Nephrocalcinosis

- Excessive urination

- Stomach (abdominal) pain

- Tiring easily, chronic fatigue

- Muscle weakness

- Depression, memory loss, or forgetfulness

- Trouble concentrating

- Difficulty sleeping

- Joint pain

- Loss of appetite

- Body aches

- Headaches

- Hypertension

- Cardiac arrhythmias

- Left ventricular hypertrophy

- Decreased coronary artery flow reserve

- Aortic valve calcification

- Increased overall cardiovascular disease

- Renal Failure

- Frequent complaints of illness with no apparent cause

The physical examination of a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism is usually normal. However, the physical examination can help find abnormalities that could suggest other etiologies of hypercalcemia.

Parathyroid adenomas are rarely palpable on physical examination, but the presence of a large, firm mass in the neck of a patient with hypercalcemia should raise suspicion of a possible parathyroid carcinoma.