Ischemic stroke risk increases with age, and hence a typical presentation of a pontine infarction would be an elderly individual with a history of chronic conditions like hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, or history of heart disease. However, pontine infarction can also occur in younger individuals with vascular disorders like CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy), hypercoagulable states, vertebral artery dissections et cetera.

- Ventro-caudal pontine infarction is caused due to decreased blood flow in the paramedian perforating arteries arising from the basilar artery. Affected individuals have contralateral motor hemiparesis or hemiplegia due to the large infarcts of the unilateral corticospinal tract. Ipsilateral abducens and/or facial nerve palsy can occur secondary to the involvement of the nerve fibers and nucleus, respectively. Lateral spinothalamic tract infarction leads to decreased pain and temperature sensation on the opposite side of the body. Clinically, the presenting symptoms can be grouped into Millard-Gubler syndrome (contralateral hemiparesis, ipsilateral abducens, and facial nerve palsy), Foville syndrome (conjugate gaze palsy in addition to the features of Millard-Gubler syndrome), and Raymond syndrome (contralateral body hemiparesis, ipsilateral abducens palsy without facial nerve palsy).

- Mid-pontine base infarction is also due to decreased blood flow in the paramedian arteries or the short circumferential arteries arising from the basilar artery. Presenting symptoms depend on the extent of involvement of various structures within the pons. For instance, ipsilateral ataxia is due to the infarction of pontine nuclei; sensorimotor weakness of the ipsilateral face is due to the trigeminal nerve fibers' involvement and contralateral hemiparesis due to the corticospinal tract. Various combination of these symptoms results in distinct syndromes like pure motor hemiparesis (lacunar infarcts of the corticospinal tract), ataxic hemiparesis (lacunar infarcts of the pontine nuclei), dysarthria-clumsy hand syndrome (dysarthria, dysphagia, impaired dexterity and weakness of hand), and rare presentations like dysarthria-dysmetria and dysarthria-facial paresis.

- Tegmental pontine syndrome can affect various structures, including cranial nerve (trigeminal, abducens, facial, and vestibulocochlear) nuclei, medial lemniscus, medial longitudinal fasciculus, respiratory centers, and the pontine reticular formation. Obstruction of blood flow in the anterior inferior or superior cerebellar arteries causes the rostral pontine syndrome. Symptoms of this syndrome include ipsilateral facial sensory disturbance and masticator paralysis (trigeminal nuclei), impaired blinking (tectospinal tract); contralateral hemisensory loss (lateral spinothalamic tract and medial lemniscus); and ipsilateral hemiataxia (superior cerebellar peduncle). The caudal pontine syndrome is caused due to decreased blood flow in the short circumferential or the anterior inferior cerebellar artery. Clinically, they can present with ipsilateral conjugate gaze palsy and nystagmus (medial longitudinal fasciculus), ipsilateral impaired eye abduction (abducens nucleus), ipsilateral hemiataxia (middle cerebellar peduncle), and contralateral hemisensory loss (lateral spinothalamic tract and medial lemniscus).

- Multiple pontine infarcts primarily affecting the perforating arteries' territories result in pseudobulbar palsy due to the involvement of the corticobulbar fibers. A pseudobulbar palsy presentation includes severe dysphagia and dysarthria. Some individuals may present with pathological crying or laughing.

- Bilateral pontine infarcts happen secondary to impeded blood flow in the larger basilar artery. Being bilateral, both left and right, upper, and lower limbs can be involved (tetraplegia) and also impair the consciousness. Large infarcts affecting the corticospinal, corticobulbar, and corticopontine tracts result in the locked-in syndrome. Locked-in syndrome presents with tetraplegia, bilateral facial paralysis, pharyngeal, and horizontal gaze palsy with retained consciousness and cognitive abilities. Recurrent stereotypical episodes of dysarthria, ophthalmoplegia, motor, or sensory disturbances are more recently referred to as the "pontine warning syndrome." It is hypothesized that this syndrome can progress into a bilateral pontine infarct.

Few distinguishing features that can be used to identify the anatomical location of the pontine infarction include:

- Contralateral hemiparesis, internuclear ophthalmoplegia, and conjugate horizontal gaze paresis for medial infarction.

- Contralateral hemisensory loss and ataxia for lateral infarction.

- Ipsilateral lower motor neuron palsy of the facial nerve, abducens palsy, sensorineural hearing loss, and vertigo for caudal infarction.