Migraine is now considered a brain disease. In the past, it was thought of as a vascular disease. This new theory requires the brain to be genetically sensitive to migraine-inducing neurochemical changes that result in premonitory symptoms.

Migraine consists of trigeminal vascular system activation wherein nociceptive neurons that innervate the dura release various vasoactive peptides, including the most active calcitonin gene-related peptide.

The possible reason why children have more severe and cyclic vomiting compared to adults is related to their reduced cholinergic function. Centrally, the area postrema is considered the trigger zone and responds to circulating neuronal and chemical emetic stimuli. Peripherally, vagal pathways are involved in emetic stimulation. The act of emesis is coordinated via abdominal vagal nerve afferents that terminate in the tractus solitaries nucleus. Signals are mediated by multiple cholinergic and adrenergic neurotransmitters, mainly 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine, which binds to the 5-HT3 receptor, and substance P (SP), which binds to the neurokinin-1 receptor.

Copeptin is a hypothalamic stress hormone synthesized in the hypothalamus with arginine-vasopressin and circulated from the neurohypophysis in equimolar amounts and can indicate the individual stress level. Studies revealed that copeptin levels were significantly higher in patients with childhood migraine. The specificity and sensitivity of copeptin for 249.5 pg/dL cut-off value predicting the diagnosis of migraine were 67% and 64%, respectively. Plasma copeptin levels tend to increase in childhood migraine due to increased oxidative stress.

In line with an imbalance in cortical excitability, GABA-edited Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) studies revealed children (7 to 13 years) with migraine and aura had significantly lower glutamate levels in the visual cortex. Also, higher GABA levels were correlated to a higher migraine burden and higher glutamate in the thalamus. Higher GABA/Glx ratios in the sensorimotor cortex were related to longer migraine attacks. Lower GABA levels in the sensorimotor cortex were connected with being closer to their next migraine attack. Overall, this implied that GABA and glutamate disturbances occur early in migraine pathophysiology and emphasizes that adult migraine cannot be immediately correlated with pediatric patients.

The most common comorbidity with migraine in childhood is sleep disorders. There is a greater prevalence of parasomnias, obstructive sleep apnea, and sleep-related movement disorders in children migraineurs. This can be attributed to the bidirectional relationship between migraine and sleep disorders based on their shared pathophysiology. The structures and networks of the cerebral and neurochemical systems involved in migraine are closely related to those structures responsible for sleep regulation, particularly adenosine, melatonin, orexin, and calcitonin gene-related peptides.

The function of the insula, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, the serotonergic system, and the unstable hyperactivated neural networks may trigger the pathophysiology of both migraine and its psychiatric comorbidities. It is unclear whether the symptoms of anxiety and depression are comorbid with migraine in children due to the overlap between migraine symptomatology and that assessed by many screening tools. However, functional neurologic disorders such as psychogenic non-epileptic seizures (PNES) and other functional movement disorders are not common but can be comorbid with migraine in children and tend to improve with migraine treatment. A study revealed that a child's exposure to adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) appears to be near-linearly associated with the risk of migraine but not with tension-type headaches (TTH). The findings stressed the importance of choosing the appropriate screening methodologies for identifying psychiatric disorders in children with migraine.

An evaluation of hypertension in children with migraine by performing ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) showed that although the frequency of hypertension was not higher, abnormal ABPM patterns were significantly more frequent in the migraine group (migraine, 45.9%; control, 16.7%; p, 0.018). At the same time, nighttime means arterial blood pressure, nighttime diastolic blood pressure, and the non-dipping pattern was greater in children with migraine than those in the control group (p < 0.05).

Some studies evaluated the clinical interdependency of myofascial trigger points and migraine in children, which would support an interaction of spinal and trigeminal afferents in the trigeminal-cervical complex as a contributing factor in migraine. Trapezius muscle trigger points were determined by palpation, and the threshold of pressure pain at the trigger points was obtained. Findings revealed an association between trapezius muscle myofascial trigger points and migraine but in children, it can be induced by pressure to myofascial trigger points, but not by pressure to non-trigger points in the trapezius muscle. Therefore, this supports the involvement of the trigeminal-cervical-complex in the pathophysiology of migraine, which might have implications for innovative treatment.