The amygdala is an almond-shaped structure that lies in the temporal lobe, lying just beneath the uncus. The amygdala is diverse and complex in structure and comprises approximately 13 nuclei. They further subdivide into extensive internuclear and intranuclear connections. These nuclei functionally sort into five major groups: basolateral nuclei, cortical-like nuclei, central nuclei, other amygdaloid nuclei, and extended amygdala. Amygdala is one of the components of the limbic system, which is responsible for the control of emotions and behavior besides memory formation. Anatomically, the amygdala lies at the anterior border of the hippocampal formation and the anterior aspect of the lateral ventricle's inferior horn where it merges with the peri-amygdaloid cortex, which forms part of the surface of the uncus.

Amygdala manages the processing of information between prefrontal-temporal association cortices and the hypothalamus. Amygdala has neural circuits to carry out its different functions with two major output pathways; the Dorsal route via stria terminalis that projects to the septal area and hypothalamus, and the ventral route via the ventral amygdalofugal pathway which terminates in the septal area, hypothalamus, and the medial dorsal thalamic nucleus.

The amygdala also functions in regulating anxiety, aggression, fear conditioning, emotional memory, and social cognition.

Some parts of the amygdala have even more specific functions. The basolateral nucleus (BLA) is a cortical-like structure in the dorsal amygdala, and it regulates behavioral and physiological responses to stress.