Patients usually present with symptoms associated with localized disease depending on the tissue of origin or site of involvement. As mentioned previously, the stomach is the most frequent site of involvement, but it can involve other parts of the gut, ocular adnexa, lung, lacrimal and salivary glands, skin, soft tissue, thyroid, breast, and synovium, etc.

Patients present with some of the following clinical presentations, depending on the site of involvement. The typical B symptoms noted with lymphoma are rare, seen in <5 percent of patients.

- Gastric: Gastroesophageal reflux disease, stomach pain or discomfort, weight loss, anorexia, gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea, vomiting.H. pylori infection is noted in >90 percent of gastric MALT.

- Ocular adnexa: Irritation of the eye, slow-growing mass, redness of the eye, excessive eye-watering.

- Skin: Papules, plaques, nodules, itching usually on the upper extremities and trunk.

- Lung: Asymptomatic with lung nodules or consolidative changes.

- Salivary gland: A slow-growing mass, sometimes bilateral involvement.

EMZL usually remains localized in the tissue of origin for a prolonged period of time, but sometimes the involvement of regional lymph nodes and other mucosal surfaces is noted at diagnosis. Particularly in the non-gastric EMZLs, concomitant involvement of multiple mucosal sites is not uncommon, with 25 to 50 percent of cases having disseminated disease. Bone marrow involvement is noted in up to 5 to 25 percent of patients and more common in non-gastric EMZLs.