Although preeclampsia typically presents with a hallmark history and physical signs and symptoms, several atypical presentations exist. This section will review the most common presentations of preeclampsia and those that should prompt further investigation and diagnostic testing when present.

The most common history findings in patients with preeclampsia are patient complaints of a new-onset headache not accountable by any other alternative diagnosis (i.e., history of headaches or migraines) that is unresponsive to medication. This complaint may or may not be accompanied by additional complaints of visual disturbance. Patients may also endorse right upper quadrant or epigastric pain with associated nausea or vomiting. Shortness of breath and a perceived increase in swelling, both worsening from baseline pregnancy-related symptoms, may also be reported.

Patients who present with any single feature or combination of these history findings should undergo a thorough physical exam. This begins with an evaluation of vital signs, more specifically, blood pressure. Patients with a systolic blood pressure of 140 mmHg or greater or a diastolic pressure of 90 mmHg or greater should increase suspicion for preeclampsia. In patients at greater than 20 weeks gestation, blood pressure readings on two measurements at least 4 hours apart should be evaluated with further diagnostic workup.

Recent reevaluation of diagnostic blood pressure readings had expanded to include sustained severe hypertensive readings within minutes of repeat readings to allow for timely intervention with antihypertensive therapy. These blood pressure readings include systolic pressure of 160 mmHg or greater or diastolic of 110 mmHg or more. As per the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG), patients previously diagnosed with gestational hypertension presenting with these severe range blood pressures should be diagnosed with preeclampsia with severe features, regardless of the presence of other diagnostic criteria. Suppose patients present with shortness of breath, auscultation, and percussion of the lungs should be undertaken to examine for pulmonary disturbances. Palpation of the right upper quadrant and epigastric areas should also be done to evaluate for tenderness. Overall evaluation for edema should also be completed, specifically evaluating areas of dependent (gravity-related) edema, like the lower extremities, or independent edema, such as in the face or hands.