The symptoms of PMDD can overlap with other psychiatric disorders, most importantly major depression, and it is imperative to rule out another existing disorder before making the diagnosis of PMS/PMDD. The key factor in making the diagnosis is the temporal association of symptoms with the menstrual cycle. Some common differentials include:

- Major depressive disorder: Depression symptoms include low mood, low energy, anhedonia, appetite change, sleep disturbance, difficulty concentrating, and thoughts of suicide. Roughly half the cases of PMS/PMDD can have a coexisting diagnosis of depression.

- Thyroid disease (hyperthyroid or hypothyroid):

- Hypothyroid symptoms and signs include weight gain, constipation, cold intolerance, depression, dry skin, and delayed deep tendon reflexes.
- Hyperthyroid signs and symptoms include weight loss, poor sleep, heat intolerance, heart rhythm disturbance such as atrial fibrillation, and hyperreflexia.

- Generalized anxiety disorder Symptoms of anxiety include palpitations and feelings of fear. Triggers may be identified for anxiety attacks, and the patient shows avoidance of these triggers. Chronic or situational anxiety does not vary with the menstrual cycle. Generalized anxiety disorder and PMDD may coexist. Criteria are different but not exclusive.

- Mastalgia: Symptoms of mastalgia may be limited to just breast tenderness and swelling, and mastalgia may be present at times other than during the luteal phase but worsen during the luteal phase.