Blood specimens should be attained as early as possible, even if the child has a mild illness with no significant physical findings. Three to 5 separate blood cultures should be collected after cautious preparation of the phlebotomy site. Contamination represents an issue when results come back positive for skin bacteria. Since bacteremia remains constant, the timing for collection is irrelevant. In approximately 90% of cases of endocarditis, the causative agent is identified from the first 2 blood cultures.

Is well known that antimicrobial pretreatment can reduce the yield of blood culture to 50% to 60%. Hence, the microbiology laboratory needs to be informed that the patient recently used an antimicrobial pretreatment, so other methods can be used to identify the etiologic cause.

When a patient has a contributing factor, the index of suspicion should be high. Echocardiography can be used to increase the probability of diagnosing endocarditis. Echocardiography can be useful in predicting embolic complications if lesions are found to be greater than 1 cm or fungal lesions are noted. Important to mention, the absence of vegetation des does not exclude endocarditis. Visible vegetations portend a poor prognosis. Echocardiogram predictors of embolism include:

- Multiple vegetations

- Vegetations more than 1 cm in diameter

- Mobile pedunculated vegetations

- Noncalcified vegetations

- Vegetations that are prolapsing

The Duke criteria aid in the diagnosis of endocarditis. The major criteria consist of positive blood cultures and evidence of endocarditis on echocardiography. The minor criteria include predisposition factors, fever, embolic-vascular signs, complex immune phenomena (glomerulonephritis, arthritis, rheumatoid factor, Osler nodes, Roth spots), single positive blood culture or serologic confirmation of infection, and echocardiographic signs not meeting the major criteria. Diagnosis of infective endocarditis is defined as 2 major criteria, 1 major and 3 minor, or 5 minor criteria.

Culture negative endocarditis occurs in 5-12% of cases. This may be due to fastidious organisms and prior antibiotic therapy.

ECG may reveal conduction delay or heart block, signaling involvement of the aortic root.