Vascular and organ rupture are the two most feared and mortal complications of EDS. They are most common in the vascular and kyphoscoliotic subtypes but have been reported in the more common subtypes as well.

Mitral valve prolapse may exist with or without regurgitation.

Due to underlying connective tissue abnormalities, patients have an increased risk of cervical incompetence, and labor can progress prematurely and/or precipitously. Vaginal births correlate with a higher risk of significant vaginal and perineal lacerations, which can increase both morbidity and mortality. Additional complications in the pregnant patient may include premature rupture of membranes, breech presentation, uterine and bladder prolapse, uterine rupture, and great vessel rupture.

The risk of bleeding is much greater, given the previously discussed vascular fragility.

It is essential to note that any surgical procedures, including those necessary for the prevention of life-threatening complications of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, pose a significant risk of complications due to blood vessel and organ fragility, as well as prolonged healing time, among others. However, it is important to note that surgery, in general, poses an increased risk of complications in EDS patients due to prolonged healing time and increased bleeding risk.

Orthostatic intolerance should prompt evaluation for vascular injury as it may be a sign of hypovolemia. However, a detailed history of the symptoms is especially important as orthostatic intolerance can be common in EDS patients, specifically hypermobile type, and may have a more benign etiology, such as low blood pressure or postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), a known association with EDS.

Sudden onset of dyspnea in an Ehlers-Danlos syndrome patient should prompt emergent evaluation for pneumothorax.

Repeated joint injuries can lead to early-onset osteoarthritis and potentially a multitude of orthopedic procedures, especially in hypermobile and classical subtypes. While these procedures may be warranted based on the insult, the understanding is that the laxity of the affected connective tissue increases over time, which may predispose to additional insult.

Sleep disturbance and sleep-disordered breathing, termed genetic obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), has a known association with EDS.