Atherosclerosis leads to lipid-rich plaque accumulation in the coronary artery's intima.

Myocardial ischemia follows a temporal sequence of events called an ischemic cascade, a function of the duration of ischemia. It begins with a reduction in perfusion, leading to flow disparity and, thus, impairment of the Na/K ATPase pump, followed by diastolic dysfunction, systolic dysfunction, electrocardiographic changes, and angina. The extent of myocardial ischemia is the function of the duration of obstruction and the area of myocardium subtended by the diseased vessel.

Partial occlusion for more than 5 hours causes patchy infarction, whereas complete occlusion for more than 20 minutes causes irreversible myocyte death, termed transmural infarction. The cascade of irreversible myocardial injury begins from the endocardium and then progresses to the myocardium. If reperfusion is established before the onset of irreversible damage after myocardial infarction, stunning develops, and the time required for recovery depends on the duration of ischemia.

In chronic stunning, oxygen-free radicals released when interrupted blood flow damages the myocytes and cause myocardial stunning. The sequential evolution of the extent of myocardial injury from ischemia depends on the duration of ischemia, residual blood flow from collateral circulation, location of the occlusion, and myocardial oxygen consumption.

Ischemic pre- and post-conditioning are the adaptive responses believed to reduce infarct size. Brief reversible ischemic episodes followed by reperfusion preceding the major ischemic event are cardioprotective as it is believed to reduce the extent of myocardial necrosis. This is called ischemic preconditioning; preconditioned myocytes can tolerate ischemia better than naive myocytes.

Myocardial post-conditioning is when intermittent episodes of ischemia and reperfusion during reperfusion therapy are believed to be cardioprotective by reducing reperfusion injury and infarct size. Complex endogenous second messenger systems like Protein Kinase C, inducible Nitric oxide (iNOS), COX-2, and mitochondrial K channels are believed to be active.

Studies suggest hibernation and stress-induced ischemia without angina are common in patients with HFrEF, and revascularization may improve resting blood flow and left ventricular contractility.

The resting myocardium uses beta-oxidation of fatty acids as a metabolic fuel to produce high-energy phosphates like ATP to power myocardial contraction. However, the ischemic myocardium switches its energy metabolism from fatty acids to anaerobic glycolysis. Hence, glucose uptake is upregulated in ischemic and viable myocardium, and this phenomenon is utilized to assess myocardial viability in 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (F-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET).