Intestinal illness caused by E. coli results from the ingestion of bacteria and the innate ability of E. coli to overcome host defenses. Gram-negative bacteria are characterized by their cell envelope, which comprises an inner cytoplasmic cell membrane, peptidoglycan cell wall, and outer membrane. The outer membrane is made of a lipid bilayer, associated proteins, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), resulting in a toxic reaction if lysed. Pathogenic E. coli strains each has distinctive virulence factors encoded on plasmids, transposons, and bacteriophages.

- ETEC: Colonizing fimbriae expressed by ETEC enable the bacteria to attach to the intestinal wall. Once connected, ETEC expresses a heat-labile toxin (LT) and/or heat-stable toxin (ST), which are secretory toxins encoded on plasmids.

- EPEC: A bundle-forming pilus (BFP) is encoded by the plasmid (pEAF), enabling EPEC to form a localized attachment to enterocytes in the small intestine. Once bound, the outer membrane protein colonization factor, intimin, facilitates enhanced adherence. Intimin is an outer membrane protein colonization factor encoded on the eae gene within the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) chromosomal island. The LEE chromosomal island elaborates approximately 20 secretory toxins that are injected in the enterocyte by a type III injectisome.

- EAEC: EAEC exhibits a stacked brick pattern of adherence to epithelial cells. The virulence plasmid encodes the transcriptional activator AggR which activates several virulence factors, although scientific understanding of this process is not complete.

- EHEC/STEC: EHEC/STEC produces bloody diarrhea due to its ability to express Shiga toxin 1 (Stx1) and or Shiga toxin 2 (Stx2).Shigella dysenteriae. EHEC/STEC, which expresses Stx2, results in bloody diarrhea and may also express Stx1, while bacteria that do not express Stx2 do not induce bloody diarrhea. The Stxs are a group of bacterial AB protein toxins composed of one A subunit and five identical B subunits capable of inhibiting protein synthesis through their ability to target eukaryotic ribosomes. The A subunit is responsible for inhibiting protein synthesis while the B pentamer binds glycosphingolipid Gb3, a cellular receptor on endothelial cells. The inhibition of protein synthesis results in enterocyte cell death and subsequent inflammatory colitis. The EHEC/STEC genome also encodes intimin, which is its primary adhesin, and EHEC/STEC possesses a plasmid (pO157) that expresses a pore-forming toxin termed EHEC-hemolysin.

- EIEC: Like EHEC, enterotoxins induce secretory diarrhea. Subsequent colonization and invasion of colonic mucosa, replication, cell-to-cell spread result in inflammatory colitis.

Extraintestinal infections caused by E. coli are generally the result of the translocation of commensal E. coli outside of the intestine. The urinary tract is the most common extraintestinal site of infection caused by E. coli. UTIs are a significant reason for ambulatory care visits in the US and is the second most common cause of hospitalization after pneumonia.E. coli result from bacteria ascending the urethra and are more common in women than men, given the proximity of the urethra. Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) caused by E. coli is common, but ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) is more common.E. coli bacteremia is often the result of a primary E. coli infection at another site. Community-acquired E. coli bacteremia is most frequently the result of urinary tract infections in older adults, while hospitalized patients likely develop bacteremia as a result of lower respiratory tract infection.