Investigations into the diagnosis of NVG can be broadly categorized as Ophthalmic investigations and systemic investigations.

**Ophthalmic Investigations**

Slit-lamp biomicroscopy: Slit-lamp biomicroscopy is indispensable for detecting NVI and NVA during the workup of a patient with NVG. The fine new vessels can be found over the iris surface, mainly near the pupillary margin. Sometimes, peripheral anterior synechia can be found in the eyes with NVI. [Figure-2]  Red blood cells can sometimes be seen in the anterior chamber.

Gonioscopy: This is a dynamic investigation, preferably done in an undilated pupil. New blood vessels can be found in the angle of the anterior chamber, over the trabecular meshwork crossing the scleral spur.

Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA) of the retina and iris: Fundus fluorescein angiography is an invasive test to detect the neovascularization of the optic disc (NVD) neovascularization elsewhere (NVE), and areas of capillary nonperfusion (CNP). The former two are hyperfluorescent lesions, and the latter is a hyperfluorescent area. Recent advancements of ultra-wide-field FFA can capture the retinal image up to a 200-degree area of the retina, thus identifying the peripheral lesions like NVE and CNP areas better than conventional FFA.

Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) of the retina: OCTA of the retina is a rapid, non-invasive modality for diagnosing NVD, NVE, and CNP areas.  Wide-field OCTA can capture 12 × 12-mm fovea-centered images.

OCTA of iris: Neovascularization of the iris can also be detected using OCTA.

B-scan ultrasound for posterior segment examination: Ultrasonography B scan is helpful in the detection of lesions of the posterior segment of the eyes in certain conditions. B scan can detect the presence of vitreous hemorrhage and additional fibrous proliferation, tractional or rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. Mass lesions like choroidal melanoma, ciliary body melanoma, and retinoblastoma can be detected. B Scan can detect retinal detachment in the advanced stages of ROP with NVG.

**Systemic Investigations**

Various systemic diseases can be associated with a case of NVG, and these depend upon the specific etiology causing NVG. The investigations for various systemic diseases are as follows:

- Hypertension (associated with retinal venous and arterial occlusion): Blood pressure

- Diabetes (can cause retinal veinous and arterial occlusion, PDR): Blood sugar levels, HbA1c

- Hyperlipidemia (can cause retinal veinous and arterial occlusion): Lipid profile

- OIS: carotid doppler, magnetic resonance angiography

- Uveitis: HLA B-27 assay, treponema serology, Tuberculosis testing (QuantiFERON-TB Gold, Mantoux), Sarcoidosis (ACE, chest X-ray)

- Blood dyscrasia: Complete blood counts, ESR, CRP, Plasma electrophoresis, specific testing for hyperviscosity syndromes.