**Bridle Suture**

In superior tunnel MSICS, the 4-0 prolene suture is passed through the superior rectus and lateral rectus in case of a temporal tunnel. Bridle sutures help to stabilize the globe during sclerocorneal tunneling and provide counter traction for nucleus and epinucleus delivery. A bridle suture is placed by holding the muscle and tilting the globe downwards to expose the globe. Care should be taken to prevent perforation of the globe.

**Conjunctival Peritomy**

The conjunctiva is opened by grasping with a forceps and putting a small buttonhole incision with a sharp scissor at the limbus. The conjunctiva with the tenons is opened up from 10 to 2 o clock position, and a small relaxing inward incision is given at two o clock. Then gentle cautery is done to cauterize the vessels.

**Sclerocorneal Tunnel Construction**

The concept of a sclerocorneal tunnel is based on three planar tunnel. The first is a perpendicular scleral incision, the second is a horizontal incision through the sclera and cornea, and the third is a beveled incision in the anterior chamber. The inner corneal has the self-sealing property.

Paul Ernest first proposed the concept of the inner corneal lip. The inner corneal lip has the advantage that it saves the eye in case of expulsive choroidal hemorrhage and patients with respiratory and cardiac comorbidities. The benefits of the self-sealing sclerocorneal tunnel are low incidence of hyphema, iris prolapse, hypotony, no sutures needed, and early resumption of day-to-day activities.

The tunnel has a trapezoid configuration with the peripheral triangular tunnel. The incision configuration can be straight, frown incision, chevron, or inverted V-shaped and Blumenthal side cuts.

**Temporal Sclerocorneal Tunnel**

This is indicated in cases with against-the-rule astigmatism, superior bleb, glaucoma patients, the superior graft was taken for pterygium surgery, deep socket, scarred conjunctiva, etc. The tunnel technique is the same as described for the superior scleral tunnel. The advantages can be good working space, less astigmatism, the globe is parallel to the axis of the microscope, good preparation for temporal phacoemulsification, and help in deep sockets. The disadvantages of the temporal tunnel being it takes time to get adjusted to the temporal view and a high incidence of endophthalmitis.

**Paracentesis (Side Port Incision)**

The paracentesis incision is placed at 9 or 8 o clock with a 15-degree blade. Paracentesis is used to put adrenaline for pupillary dilatation, trypan blue for capsular staining, viscoelastic for anterior chamber formation, and while performing capsulorhexis. Paracentesis also helps in cortex aspiration, an anterior chamber after the surgery, and nucleus prolapse, dialing, IOL dialing, and Implantation with the help of a sinskey hook.

**Anterior Chamber Entry**

This approach is made with the help of a 3.2 mm angled keratome. While entering the scleral lip, the heel of the keratome should be parallel to the tunnel, and then the heel is rotated 90 degrees to make it perpendicular to the tunnel. Then the heel of the keratome is raised parallel to the iris until a dimple is seen on the corneal surface. The keratome is advanced till the anterior chamber entry is done. Then the entry is extended on either side till the limbus so that the nucleus can be delivered after prolapse into the anterior chamber.

**Capsulotomy**

A large capsulotomy of 7 to 8 mm is desired for MSICS in contrast to 5 to 6 mm for curvilinear capsulorhexis in cases with phacoemulsification.

**Can Opener Capsulotomy**

Can opener capsulotomy is ideal in extracapsular cataract extraction and beneficial under challenging cases of MSICS such as mature cataract, small pupil, fibrosed and calcified ALC, brown cataract, as a savior in cases of rhexis extension, and for beginners doing MSICS.

The tears are made circumferentially to avoid damage to the zonular insertions. The significant advantage of CCC is that it is easier to learn and helpful in small pupil cases, mature, hyper mature, brown cataract, and traumatic cataract cases. The limitations are a high risk of radial tear extending to the posterior capsule, zonular stress during prolapse, chances of PCR and ZD during cortex aspiration, and chances of IOL decentration.

**Continuous Curvilinear Capsulorhexis**

CCC is the ideal type of capsulotomy. The CCC offers various advantages.

- A good hydro dissection can be performed with full confidence

- Nucleus prolapse and delivery will be safe and easier

- In the bag, IOL implantation with good centration- Effective Lens Position (ELP)

- Cortex removal is safe and easy with minimal risk of ZD or PCR

- In the case of PCR, sulcus support is present for IOL implantation

Disadvantages

- Difficult learning curve

- Small rhexis may pose difficulty in nucleus prolapse

- Difficult in small pupil cases

- Small rhexis may cause capsular bag distension syndrome or capsular contraction syndrome

- Difficult to remove the sub incisional cortex

Prerequisites for Performing Safe Capsulorhexis

- Good ocular anesthesia

- Clear and transparent cornea

- Good pupillary dilatation

- Good anterior chamber depth

- Elastic capsule

- Intact zonular fibers

- Nuclear sclerosis of moderate to good hardness

- No positive vitreous pressure

Instruments Required

- 26G cystitome

- Converging forceps- Utrata forceps

- Forceps with coaxial arms- Caporessi and Possi

Capsulorhexis with forceps is performed using either a shearing force or a ripping force. The capsulorhexis is facilitated with the help of staining the anterior lens capsule with trypan blue dye. The capsule is stained with 0.1% trypan blue, and this is very helpful in white cataracts. The advantages of dye being non-toxic to endothelium and doesn't leak into vitreous. 0.5% indocyanine green can also be used, but the cost is very high.

The other dye available is 0.2% sodium fluorescein, but this is toxic to endothelium and leaks into the vitreous. A blue filter can be used to enhance visualization. The capsular staining technique can be suprascapular and subcapsular, of which suprascapular is more commonly employed.

**Staining Technique**

After injecting the air bubble, the dye is injected with a tuberculin syringe from the paracentesis or main port. The air bubble prevents the dye from getting diluted and prevents endothelial staining. The air bubble is then replaced with the help of viscoelastic.

A good capsulorhexis is performed in a formed anterior chamber with viscoelastic. The capsulorhexis is initiated slowly, and the vector force is directed towards the center to prevent extension. In pediatric cataracts, the capsule is very elastic; hence the rhexis is completed with the help of forceps. Posterior capsulorhexis is also done in cases with pediatric cataracts, thick posterior capsular plaque, and posterior capsular rupture.

**Envelope Capsulotomy**

This is done in cases with hypermature cataracts or with weak capsular support. The capsule is punctured with the help of keratome, and milky fluid is egressed. Then the capsule is cut on either side with the help of a vannas scissor and extended till six o clock.

**Hydroprocedures**

This is the technique of nucleus prolapse from the capsular bag with the help of a balanced salt solution without excess stress on the zonules, which can be hydrodissection and hydrodelineation**.**

**Hydrodissection**

This is the separation of the cortex from the anterior lens capsule. After performing the rhexis, the viscoelastic should be washed from the anterior chamber. If hydrodissection is performed in the chamber pressurized with viscoelastic, it can result in posterior capsular rupture. The hydrodissection is performed with the help of a 27 gauge bent tip hydrodissection cannula in a syringe filled with BSS.

Cortical cleavage hydrodissection is achieved by passing the cannula under the anterior lens capsule and advancing to the equator, and a jet of fluid is passed under the nucleus. This separates the cortex with epi and endonucleus from the anterior lens capsule. The advantage is no cortex is left in the capsular bag, and it produces no stress on the zonule and the capsular bag during cortex aspiration.

The phenomenon to look for while hydrodissection is fluid wave passage from one end of the equator to the other, anterior movement of the nucleus, shallowing of the anterior chamber, and stretching of the anterior lens capsule.

The capsular bag distension syndrome can be observed while hydrodissection in the small pupil. This is prevented by performing double rhexis or multiple mini-hydro dissections. A pupil snap sign is seen when sudden hydrodissection is performed in the small pupil, indicating a posterior capsular rupture.

**Hydrodilineation or Hydrodelamination**

This is the separation of the endonucleus from the epinucleus. Aziz Anis first described this. In hydrodilneation, the cannula is embedded 45 degrees in the substance of the nucleus at the paracentral zone, and a fluid wave is passed. The fluid movement separates the nucleus from the endonucleus, and a golden ring sign is seen. Hydrodilineation is helpful in the posterior polar cataract.

**Nucleus Prolapse in Anterior Chamber**

The nucleus prolapse in the anterior chamber is performed with the help of a Sinskey hook or cystitome or with the use of a hydrodissection cannula. The surgeon should learn to prolapse the nucleus through a can opener, and continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis as in can opener capsulotomy hydrodissection is contraindicated; hence the surgeon should know how to prolapse with a Sinskey hook.

After hydrodissection, when one of the poles of the nucleus has prolapsed out of the bag, the nucleus is dialed or wheeled in the anterior chamber under viscoelastic cover. The viscoelastic should coat under the nucleus's surface to protect the posterior capsule and the above surface to protect the endothelium.

Nucleus prolapse is difficult in the case of soft cataracts, small rhexis, brown cataracts, dense cortical adhesions, inadequate hydrodissection, and small pupil cases. The nucleus can be mechanically hooked with a Sinskey hook or cystitome or can be prolapsed with hydro jet during hydrodissection.

Nucleus prolapse can also be done by a bimanual technique using a Sinskey hook and a spatula. This technique is helpful in small pupil cases and cases where repeated attempts have failed to prolapse the nucleus. Another technique is the tumbling technique which is useful in soft cataracts where the nucleus is flipped in the posterior chamber and prolapses up with the help of the hydro cannula. The prerequisites are adequately sized rhexis and a deep anterior chamber.

**Nucleus Extraction**

**Irrigating Wire Vectis**

Steinert described this technique using irrigation wire Vectis using mechanical and hydrostatic forces. The wire Vectis is 4 mm in width and 8 mm in length. It has three irrigating ports on its anterior surface, each having a 0.3 mm opening in size. The posterior end is the main body of the Vectis, which is connected to the syringe containing ringer lactate or BSS.

Once the nucleus is prolapsed in the anterior chamber, the Vectis is introduced below the nucleus under viscoelastic cover. The nucleus prolapses by synchronous movements of the bridle suture, the mechanical movement of Vectis, and the hydrostatic jet from the fluid through the syringe. In this way, the nucleus is prolapsed out of the tunnel.

If the technique is not followed correctly, various complications can be encountered like corneal endothelial damage, nucleus trap in the tunnel, iridodialysis, zonular dialysis, posterior capsular rupture, and vitreous loss.

**Phacosandwich**

This was described by Luther. L. Fry in 1985. Initially, he tried to bisect the nucleus in the anterior chamber by using a lens loop and iris spatula. He noticed that the lens could be squeezed through the tunnel by sandwiching it between two instruments. The two most commonly used instruments are Sinskey hook and wire Vectis.

**Phacofracture**

- Nucleus Bisection

- Nucleus Trisection

- Phacosalute and fracture

- Wire-loop technique

- Phacofracture at exit

**Modified Blumenthal Technique**

This technique is not used frequently; however, some surgeons still perform this technique using an anterior chamber maintainer. This is a hollow tube of 0.9 mm outer diameter and 0.65 mm inner diameter. The tube is attached to the BSS bottle and suspended 50 to 60 cm above the patient's eye. The surgery steps are the same, except for an anterior chamber maintainer attached through the side port. Another side port is made for instrument manipulation. This technique is also called the Mininuc technique.

**Fish Hook Technique**

In this technique, a 30 G needle is bent and used as a fish hook for nucleus extraction. The needle is maneuvered behind the nucleus to hook it under the surface, and under viscoelastic cover, the nucleus is gently hooked out of the bag.

**Cortex Aspiration**

Once the nucleus is delivered, the capsular bag is cleaned of the cortex for IOL implantation. This is done with the help of two-way irrigation and aspiration Simcoe cannula. The cortical fibers are engaged with the use of Simcoe under a vacuum created by aspiration. Once the fibers are caught in Simcoe, they are slowly aspirated and mechanically pulled towards the center. In this way, the cortex is removed clockwise till the 360-degree capsular bag is free of the cortex. The epinucleus can be removed using Simcoe cannula, hydro cannula, or viscodissection.

**Management of Subincisional Cortex**

- Through side port using Simcoe cannula

- Using bimanual irrigation and aspiration

- J shaped Simcoe cannula

- Dialing the IOL in the bag

**IOL Implantation**

The optic of PMMA IOL is around 6 mm, which can be passed through the 6 to 7 mm SICS tunnel and dialed in the capsular bag. Small diameter IOL like 5 to 5.5 mm can also be placed in the capsular bag in soft and traumatic cataract cases.

**The Technique of IOL Implantation**

The IOL implantation is done with the help of lens holding forceps, conjunctival forceps, and a Sinskey hook. The IOL is first passed through the tunnel parallel to the iris plane until it reaches the anterior chamber's central part. After that, the IOL haptic is tilted towards the capsular bag, so the haptic is placed below the rhexis margin.

Then the IOL is dialed through the hole till the optic haptic junction reaches around four o clock. The IOL is depressed and dragged towards the capsular bag, and the lagging haptic is placed below the rhexis margin. In case of a can opener capsulotomy or a posterior capsular rent, the IOL is implanted in the sulcus. All the steps are performed under adequate viscoelastic cover. After surgery, the capsular bag is thoroughly washed with viscoelastic to prevent secondary glaucoma.

**Wound Closure**

After the surgery, the anterior chamber is reformed through a side port with the help of BSS, and the conjunctiva is cauterized with a bipolar cautery to close the incision and prevent the risk of endophthalmitis. At the completion, 0.1 ml intracameral moxifloxacin is injected through the side port to minimize the risk of endophthalmitis.