The anatomy of the iliopsoas is critical in understanding its role in psoas syndrome and the proper technique of MET and CS treatment of iliopsoas dysfunction. The iliopsoas divides into two parts: 1) the psoas (major and minor) muscle and 2) the iliacus muscle. The psoas major originates at the T12 through L5 vertebrae and inserts on the lesser trochanter of the femur. The psoas minor originates at the T12 to L1 vertebrae and inserts at the iliopubic eminence. The iliacus muscle originates within the iliac fossa/sacral ala and inserts at the lesser trochanter of the femur.

The psoas major and minor muscles receive innervation of the L1-3 branches of the lumbar plexus, while the iliacus receives innervation from the femoral nerve.

OMT is used to treat iliopsoas somatic dysfunctions to decrease pain, improve range of motion, and restore neuromusculoskeletal function.

There are several proposed mechanisms for MET, but the two commonly accepted principles are 1) post-isometric relaxation and 2) reciprocal inhibition. Both principles take advantage of the proprioceptive mechanisms within muscle fibers and joints, including the alpha motor neuron and Golgi tendon organ. Post-isometric relaxation is based on the theory that the muscle enters a refractory period following isometric contraction. During this refractory period, there is reduced muscle tone, which allows the muscle to be taken further into the restrictive barrier. Reciprocal inhibition hypothesizes that there is a period of antagonist muscle relaxation following the contraction of the agonist muscle, which allows the muscle to be taken further into the restrictive barrier.

CS tenderpoints form due to injury or dysfunction of the muscle resulting in altered proprioception and hyperactivity of the affected muscle. During CS, the muscle becomes passively shortened to reset the Golgi tendon and return the muscle to its proper length and alignment.