**Administration of PPD Skin Test**

In the United States, two US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved PPD tuberculin antigens are available: Tubersol and Aplisol. Other tuberculin antigens, such as RT-23, are sometimes used outside the United States. The dosage of PPD-S and RT-23 formulations differ. The dosage for PPD-S formulation is five units in 0.1 ml. No dose adjustments are required in hepatic and renal failure patients.

According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), this test is performed using the Mantoux technique, which involves injecting 0.1 mL of a solution containing five units of tuberculin-purified protein derivative into the inner surface of the forearm via the intradermal route. It should be administered two or more inches from the elbow, wrist, or other injection sites. According to the 2005 CDC guidelines, it can be administered to the back of the shoulder if neither arm can be used.

This test is performed using a one mL tuberculin syringe and a needle less than 0.5 inches, with the needle bevel facing upward. The needle should be inserted slowly at an angle of five to fifteen degrees, and the bevel should be visible below the skin. A wheal or elevation of the skin, six to ten mm in diameter, is formed when a small amount of the PPD solution is injected intradermally, ensuring the correct administration. If a wheal is not created, the test must be repeated immediately on another site at least five cm from the original administration site.

Documentation of the injection site, date and time of test administration, the name of the person performing the test, product lot number, and the manufacturer should be done. The patient should avoid touching the area and keep the site uncovered and clean. Since an allergic reaction to tuberculin is possible, epinephrine should be available.

**Reading of the PPD Skin Test**

A type IV delayed hypersensitivity reaction to the injected tuberculin PPD antigen is induced. It is a time-sensitive test. The reaction begins five to six hours after intradermal test placement but should be measured 48 to 72 hours after test placement when the peak effect occurs. After 48 to 72 hours, the reaction begins to subside. Erythema and induration are seen at the injection site. The diameter of induration should be demarcated and measured in mm perpendicularly to the long axis of the forearm. Erythema has no diagnostic value and should not be measured. Induration is palpable and should be measured by inspection and palpation.

Tests that are read after 72 hours are inaccurate as they tend to underestimate the size of the skin reaction, and therefore, the reliability of the test is compromised. Repeat testing is recommended if the reaction is not read within 72 hours. The repeat test should be administered as soon as possible, preferably within seven days of the initial test, to avoid a boosting effect. The second test site should be in a different location, like the other arm.

Proper administration and interpretation of the PPD skin test require standardizing this test procedure, adequate staff training, and supervision. Although the PPD skin test is commonly used worldwide, its interpretation is challenging.