The World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. Since the isolation and recognition of SARS-CoV-2 as the causative agent behind COVID-19, as of 9th May 2021, there have been 157,289,118 confirmed cases of COVID-19, including 3,277,272 deaths, reported to WHO. SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped virus with ribonucleic acid as its genetic material. Due to its high virulence, it has wreaked havoc on countries worldwide, with an overwhelming number of infections following outbreaks. This has led to a near-collapse of the healthcare infrastructure in some countries. With the advent of a better understanding of the disease process and the pathophysiology of severe disease, it has become clear that there is a need for therapeutic agents that can hamper the course of the disease.

**Pathogenesis of COVID-19**

The pathogenesis of COVID-19 is a complex interplay between direct tissue injury from viral invasion and a heightened immune response from the host. The early phase of the disease is characterized by viral entry into the host cells. The SARS-CoV-2 virus enters the host cells by attaching to the ACE-2 receptors that are present in abundance in the respiratory epithelium, the nasal mucosa, esophagus, etc.

Following the entry of the virus into the cells and direct virus-mediated tissue damage, the late phase of the disease commences. The host cells trigger an immune response by activating T-lymphocytes, neutrophils, and monocytes. Neutrophil recruitment is followed by the release of cytokines such as Interleukin-1 (IL-1), Interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1β, IL-8, IL-12, Interferon Gamma (IFN)-γ, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF α). In cases of severe COVID -19, there is evidence of a heightened immune response categorized as “Cytokine Storm” which leads to several deleterious effects on the body. The Cytokine storm is caused by the release of high levels of cytokines, especially IL-6 and TNF-α causing an intense inflammatory response

**The need for additional therapeutic agents**

Over the course of the past year, our understanding of the pathophysiology of COVID-19 has improved. With ongoing randomized controlled trials evaluating therapies for COVID -19, like the RECOVERY Trial recruiting over 39,000 individuals, the guidelines for therapy for COVID-19 remain fluid. Despite a better understanding of the disease, the mortality and morbidity associated with COVID-19 remains unacceptably high.  The recent wave of overwhelming cases in the Republic of India is a grave example of the potential for disaster with COVID-19. There is a need for agents that can be added to the existing arsenal of approved medications. An ideal therapeutic agent should be reliable with robust clinical benefits. The recommendation for its use should be backed by evidence, and it should have a favorable and benign side effect profile. Apart from this, the agent should be readily available to the masses, should be inexpensive, and should be able to meet an exorbitant demand with an efficient supply chain. In an attempt to apply these criteria through this review; we evaluate the evidence for and against the concurrent use of Remdesivir and Baricitinib, indications and contraindications, mechanism of action, and the side effect profile of these drugs.