**Common Features of Autorefractors**

**Fixation target:**This feature is present in all autorefractor to control patient fixation and accommodation. This is also known as the phenomenon of proximal accommodation, which makes it difficult to assess the determination of appropriate refractive correction. Some autorefractors may have colored photos of outdoor scenes to make them understandable and comfortable for the patient.

**Source of Electromagnetic Radiation**

**Primary**

In modern-day autorefractors, infrared radiation is used in the range of 780 nm and 950 nm as the primary radiation source. The near-infrared radiation (NIR) is used because of two reasons-

- NIR is reflected from the retina

- NIR is invisible to the patient

**Secondary**

This is backscatter from the fundus. The method by which autorefractors determine the sphere power, cylinder power, and axis is determined by the secondary source used by the instruments' detection system.

**Nulling Principle**

These autorefractors change their optical system until the refractor correction of the eye is neutralized. This is the point at which the null point is reached. These instruments are made to function with a high signal/noise ratio, as they can be optimized near the null point.

**Open Loop Principle**

These autorefractors, also called non-nulling instruments, make measurements by analyzing the type of radiation. These instruments can determine the refractive state quickly as they are non-dependant on the optical system to move the null point.

**Ocular Refraction Allowance for Visible Light Versus Near Infrared Rays**

Due to the eye being achromatic, an allowance has to be calculated for the difference between visible light and NIR. This approximates to around 800 to 900 nm, for which the eye is 0.75 to 1 diopter sphere hypermetropic shift relative to 500 nm.

**Allowance for Refraction Plane**

The refraction plane may differ between visible light and infrared radiations, and in some cases, both may vary from the plane of the recipient layer of the retina. Thus an extra allowance of 0.50-0.75 D is made in addition to the effect of chromatic aberration.

**Vertex Distance**

Autorefractors determine the refraction at the corneal plane of refraction. However, most autorefractors are inbuilt with an option to convert the spectacle plane of refraction by using the vertex distance.

**Modern Refractometers**

A large number of novel autorefractors have prevailed in the market after 1960. The modern autorefractors have been grouped as objective and subjective.

**Comparison of Subjective and Objective Refractometer**

**S. No**

**Characteristic**

**Subjective Refractometer**

**Objective Refractometer**

1

Light Source

Visible light

Infrared light

2

Time required for refraction

4-8 minutes

2-4 minutes

3

Details provided

Provides more information and corrected distant visual acuity is obtained from refraction.

It does not provide much information except Humphrey Automatic Refractor, which gives visual acuity.

4

Patient cooperation

More patient cooperation is needed, suitable for children above eight years

Less patient cooperation is required, ideal for children above five years

5

Ophthalmic pathologies

Better results in patients with hazy ocular media when visual acuity is less than 20/60

Better result in macular diseases.

6

Over refraction

Comparatively easier in patients with spectacles, contact lenses, or IOL

Difficult in patients with spectacles, contact lenses, or IOL

7

Results

Vision analyzer and SRN provide refined subjects results

Provide preliminary refractive findings

**Objective Autorefractors**

The objective autorefractors are recent devices also called autorefractors alone. These are modern devices with the facilities of electronic, electronic optical, charged coupled device cameras, and computer revolutions. Currently, autorefractors and automated keratometers are in high demand and use.

**Objective Autorefractors Available Commercially**

The objective autorefractors work on the following principles

- Schiener principle

- Optometer (retinoscopic principle)

- Best focus principle

- Image size principle

- Ray-deflection principle

- Knife-edge principle

**Subjective Autorefractors Available Commercially**

**Subjective Autorefractor-7**

This has spherical optics. Since astigmatic correction refinement is impossible and visual acuity determination is possible only with spheres, this autorefractor is considered a screening instrument.

**Vision Analyzer**

Humphrey first introduced this instrument in 1975. The instrument was combined with Humphrey Lens Analyzer to develop the over-refraction system. The vision analyzer employs an innovative optical system and methods for performing subjective refraction.

**SR-IV Programmed Subjective Refractor**

This is based on the optometer principle. This instrument has a cylindrical lens that moves and achieves spherocylindrical power over a wide range. Many trials with SR-IV indicate that the Simulcross system provides nearly as accurate results as the conventional subjective technique.