Remdesivir is a broad-spectrum antiviral agent that has previously demonstrated antiviral activity against filoviruses (Ebola viruses, Marburg virus), coronaviruses (SARS-CoV, MERS-Co-V, SARS-CoV-2), paramyxoviruses (parainfluenza type III virus, Nipah virus, Hendra virus, measles, and mumps virus), and Pnemoviridae (respiratory syncytial virus). Remdesivir was shown to exhibit antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in vitro studies, and it was proposed as an investigational drug early during the pandemic. However, based on data from randomized clinical trials that demonstrated superior clinical efficacy of remdesivir to placebo, remdesivir became the first antiviral drug approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for clinical use in the management of patients with severe suspected or laboratory-confirmed COVID-19. It is the first drug approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for clinical use in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 illness. This activity examines the pharmacology, dosing, indications, contraindications, and adverse events of remdesivir to optimize patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Review the indication of remdesivir alone or in combination with other drugs.
- Outline the recommended doses for remdesivir in both pediatric and adult patient populations.
- Describe the importance of close monitoring of renal and hepatic function before, during, and after the use of remdesivir.
- Describe the importance of the interprofessional team approach, especially given the limited published literature on this drug's clinical efficacy and safety profile.