There are three interrelated pathogenic models for the development of HFM. No model is completely concordant with the varying presentation of HFM. Distinct phenotypes of HFM may be caused by different factors influencing separate pathogenic models.

- Vascular abnormality and hemorrhage. In 1973, Poswillo proposed embryonic hemorrhage around the stapedial artery as the cause for HFM through successful animal models.

- Interference with Meckel’s cartilage development. The Meckel’s cartilage arises from the first branchial arch and develops into the malleus, incus, and mandible. Disruption during this morphogenesis from teratogens, hemorrhage, and genetic defects can result in unilateral malformed ossicles and mandibular hypoplasia.

- Abnormal migration, proliferation, and differentiation of NCC. Direct insults to the NCC can occur through genetic defects, teratogens, and environmental factors. OTX2 is a gene essential for NCC development with OTX2 deletion found to cause mandibular dysostosis.

HFM can present with a spectrum of deformities involving the eyes, ears, and the first two pharyngeal arches. Ocular deformities include strabismus, anophthalmia, microphthalmia, eye asymmetry, cleft eyelid, and exophthalmia. Auricular abnormalities include preauricular appendage, preauricular fistula, microtia, ear asymmetry, and external auditory canal atresia. Deformities of the first and second pharyngeal arches include cleft lip and palate, bifid tongue, mandibular hypoplasia, maxillary hypoplasia, oral malocclusion, and dental malformations.

Although the term HFM implies facial involvement only, patients with HFM often have associated extracranial defects.