All healthcare workers should encourage adequate nutrition for their patients. While scurvy is very rare in North America, it may develop in people deprived of food or those with intestinal problems. Whenever a deficiency of one vitamin is discovered, it is important to screen for other concomitant vitamin deficiencies. As deficiency is primarily related to poor intake, those affected also may have a poor intake of other essential vitamins and minerals. Vitamin B12, folate, calcium, zinc, and iron have been notably low in this patient population. Additionally, vitamin C’s role in iron absorption causes those with scurvy to be more prone to bleeding, and iron deficiency, in particular, should be assessed.

The primary care provider, nurse practitioner, dietician, and pharmacist, operating as a cohesive interprofessional team, should educate patients about a healthy diet rich in fruits and vegetables. In addition, patients should be encouraged to stop smoking and quit alcohol. Any patient that fails to improve within a few weeks should be referred to a specialist to determine the primary cause of vitamin C deficiency. Only through an interprofessional team approach can the morbidity of vitamin C deficiency be lowered and patient outcomes optimized. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

When patients with Vitamin C deficiency are diagnosed, treatment is with supplements plus a change in diet. Improvement of constitutional symptoms often occurs within 24 hours, with spontaneous bleeding improving over days to weeks. Corkscrew hairs take up to a month to resolve, and complete resolution is usually seen by three months. Bone abnormalities may require surgical intervention. [Level 5]