The **test dose**preceding the procedure is fundamental and allows the patient to be enrolled and to verify the dose for the titration. It can be performed continuously through a catheter connected to an external pump, or through a single bolus (0.1 mg of intrathecal morphine). Test positivity is indicated by pain reduction of at least 50% compared to the baseline. The single bolus is repeatable after 24 hours (test dose + 0.1 mg morphine) and in case of failure to respond, at a distance of 24 hours (test dose + 0.2 mg) and then 48 hours (test dose + 0.3 mg). The lack of a clinical response must lead to a re-evaluation of the patient. The effective test dose may represent the starting dose. However, to limit post-implant drug-induced side effects, the initial daily dose can be achieved by reducing the screening test dose to which the patient responded positively by 20% and thus increasing it by 20% after 3/5 days, to reach the test dose. If necessary, it is possible to increase of 10 to 20% until obtaining a correct attenuation of the pain.

Usually, the intrathecal dose of morphine can be increased gradually as in cancer pain dosages grow rapidly in the first six months and then stabilize. On the contrary, in non-cancer pain dosage increases are usually more gradual and continue over time. Of note, several studies showed that an escalation of the dose does not necessarily indicate the development of tolerance, but only that the progression of the disease, changes in the affective state, or underdose may require an increase in the dose.

The preparation of the enrolled patient continues with the administration of antibiotics (e.g., cephalosporins) as prophylaxis and the preparation of surgical instruments.