The diagnosis of Systemic sclerosis is a clinical diagnosis. Early detection of the disease and the extent of involvement and continuing surveillance for internal organ involvement is crucial in the management of patients with SSc.

**Clinical Evaluation**

Skin thickness shall be evaluated by the modified Rodnan skin score, which gives scores 0 to 3, 0 for uninvolved areas, and 3 for severe skin thickening. The score should be followed up as the skin thickness progression rate carries prognostic value. Nail fold capillary exam shall be performed in all patients with Raynaud phenomena with suspicion for SSc. The multisystemic physical exam shall be performed at each visit to evaluate for underlying organ involvement. Close monitoring of blood pressure in the clinic as well as at home is strongly recommended, especially in patients with a recent diagnosis of DcSSc has new-onset hypertension, or significant worsening of baseline hypertension can be an indicator for scleroderma renal crisis.

**Autoantibody Tests**

Autoantibodies not only serve as an important diagnostic tool, but they also carry prognostic value and can predict disease phenotype and disease outcome. Anti-Nuclear Antibody (ANA), when measures by direct immunofluorescence, is positive in more than 90% of the cases of SSc. In patients who are negative for the ANA, other differential diagnoses shall be ruled out before confirming the diagnosis of SSc. Other more specific autoantibodies are positive in 60 to 70% of cases of SSc. These more specific autoantibodies are mutually exclusive and can be present several months to years before the clinical diagnosis of SSc.

Anti-centromere antibody: Anti-centromere antibodies target 4 centromere antigens (CENP -B, -A, -C, D) and are seen in LcSSc, although it may rarely be seen in DcSSc as well. They can also be seen in Sjögren syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus. Anti-centromere antibodies are associated with an increased risk of pulmonary arterial hypertension. They are also associated with limited cutaneous involvement, lower risk of interstitial lung disease, and overall better survival compared to the other autoantibodies.

Anti-topoisomerase I (Scl-70) antibody: Anti-SCL-70 antibodies target the catalytic region of DNA helicase topoisomerase I. Anti-SCL-70 antibodies are seen in DcSSc, and rarely in LcSSc. Anti-SCL-70 antibodies are associated with an increased risk of diffuse cutaneous involvement, interstitial lung disease, and cardiac involvement.

Anti-RNA polymerase III antibody: Anti-RNA polymerase III antibodies target the eukaryotic RNA polymerase III. These are more specific for DcSSc and are associated with rapidly progressing and aggressive diffuse skin involvement, poor cutaneous outcomes, and scleroderma renal crisis. Anti-RNA polymerase III antibodies are also associated with a lower risk of interstitial lung disease and pulmonary hypertension. Some studies have indicated an association of malignancies in patients with SSc positive for Anti-RNA polymerase III antibodies.

Anti-U3-RNP (fibrillarin) Antibody: Anti-U3-RNP antibodies are present more in African Americans and associated with overall poor prognosis, more internal organ involvement, diffuse cutaneous involvement, interstitial lung disease, pulmonary arterial hypertension, scleroderma renal crisis, myositis/myopathy, and cardiac involvement.

Other autoantibodies: Anti-Th/To antibodies are associated with limited skin disease. Anti-PM/Scl antibodies are associated with limited skin disease and overlap syndrome with a higher risk of inflammatory myositis and interstitial lung disease. Anti-U1-RNP antibodies are more common in African Americans and are associated with overlap syndrome and mixed connective tissue disease with limited cutaneous involvement and more risk of inflammatory arthritis, myositis, lupus-skin rashes, and lupus nephritis. Anti-Ku antibodies are also associated with overlap syndrome in SSc with more inflammatory arthritis and myositis.

**Laboratory Evaluation**

Complete blood counts to check for anemia which may be multifactorial, shall be done. The renal function along with 24-hour urine protein or urine protein/creatinine ratio shall be closely monitored. Inflammatory markers usually do not add significant significance although, a significant elevation in these markers can be seen in patients with active inflammatory myopathy or inflammatory arthritis. Muscle enzymes, including creatine kinase and aldolase, may be elevated especially when inflammatory myopathy is present.

**Ancillary and Radiographic Evaluation**

X-rays of the extremities can reveal calcinosis and loss of distal phalanx. Periarticular erosions are rare and uncommon, although periarticular osteopenia can be seen. Musculoskeletal ultrasound can show features of tenosynovitis. When muscle involvement is suspected, the electromyogram/nerve conduction velocity test is the initial test of choice and, if abnormal, shall be followed by a muscle biopsy. The imaging modality of choice for evaluation of interstitial lung disease is a high-resolution CT scan, as chest x-ray may not show subtle findings. Pulmonary function tests, including spirometry, lung volumes, and diffusion capacity, can detect a restrictive pattern in interstitial lung disease very early in the disease. A lung biopsy is of very limited value and shall be avoided unless other diagnostic concerns. Transthoracic echocardiography is usually initially done when pulmonary arterial hypertension is suspected, although right heart catheterization shall be followed to confirm the diagnosis and to rule out other etiologies. Electrocardiography and Holter monitor can be useful in detecting arrhythmias. Pericardial effusions can be well visualized on transthoracic echocardiography. Cardiac MRI may be needed in patients where myocardial involvement is suspected. Upper GI endoscopy, esophageal manometry, barium swallow studies, and 24-hour pH probe can be used when esophageal involvement and upper GI involvement are suspected. Esophageal dysmotility leading to a dilated esophagus with imaging finding of excessive air in the esophagus is a characteristic finding that can be seen on a CT scan.