Takayasu arteritis is a condition in which pathogenesis is poorly understood. It is believed that pathological infiltration of inflammatory cells in the aorta and its different luminal layers and branches are the underlying mechanisms for this disease. This inflammatory process eventually leads to dilation, occlusion, or stenosis of the affected vessel, which can all present in a variety of clinical manifestations.

Takayasu arteritis is a chronic disease with many episodes of exacerbations and remissions of the inflammatory processes. Adult women are primarily affected as they represent 80% to 90% of cases. This disease onset is between 10 to 40 years old, and the diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis tends to be delayed due to the sub-acute onset of symptoms in this disease. This can sometimes lead to worsening progression of disease in this asymptomatic period.

Since the pathophysiology can affect the vessels in different ways, patients can present with a wide array of clinical symptoms. Non-specific findings such as fever, fatigue, and malaise can be the only symptoms present early in the course of this disease. Other common signs and symptoms include weak peripheral pulses, hypertension, limb claudication, gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, and murmurs.

- Physical exam: Physical exam should include careful examination of peripheral pulses and cardiac auscultation. Blood pressure reading in all extremities can also be used as a tool to help aid in diagnosis.

- Laboratory: This condition is largely an inflammatory process so inflammatory markers such as ESR and CRP should be obtained. However, these values can still be within the normal range and not reliable in the detection of the active disease process.

- Diagnostic imaging: Imaging of the aorta is needed to determine the extent of damage to the aorta. Computerized tomography (CT) of the chest or MRI can be used to detect patency of the aortic lumen.

Histology shows infiltration of predominantly lymphocytes, histiocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells in the media of the aorta and its branches. Progressive damage and destruction of the lamina and media can lead to aneurysmal dilation or dense scarring.

The mainstay of treatment for this condition is steroids. Steroids suppress the progression of the disease and can sometimes reverse early complications. Surgery is an option for patients with aneurysms or severe stenosis. The patient can eventually be weaned off of steroids with symptom and inflammatory marker improvement.