The goal of radiation therapy is to provide a lethal dose of radiation to the tumor without harming the surrounding normal tissue of the bladder and rectum.

No post-radiation prostate biopsies are recommended unless additional local therapy is being considered.

After radiation therapy, the PSA is expected to decrease for about 18 months.

Treatment failure is usually noted by a rise in PSA level of 2 ng/ml or more above the baseline level before initiation of radiation therapy.

**External Beam Radiation Therapy**

Treatment fields are calculated and individualized from MRIs or CT scans, as some patients will need treatment for the seminal vesicles and/or regional lymph nodes. These other areas are included in the radiation field when there is direct evidence of tumor involvement or the calculated likelihood of malignancy is 15% or more.

The current standard of care is to use conformal techniques, such as intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT). Such conformal techniques allow higher dosages to be given to the prostate and tumor while not significantly increasing exposure to the surrounding tissues to minimize late side effects.

Treatment usually consists of daily exposures (5 days a week) for up to 8 weeks. This typically amounts to a minimum of 38 to 45 fractions of 1.8 to 2 Gy. The American College of Radiology recommends a total dose of 75 to 78 Gy. (At our institution, our radiation oncologists use a total dose of 77.4 Gy.) Doses higher than 81 Gy are not recommended due to increased risks of radiation cystitis and proctitis.

The use of hormonal therapy in combination with radiation has demonstrated improved overall survival in intermediate and high-risk disease. It appears that hormonal therapy increases tumor radiosensitivity by interfering with DNA double-stranded break repair.  That is why the addition of hormonal treatment with LHRH agonists or similar medications before starting radiation therapy is now generally considered the standard of care. Preliminary data suggests adding enzalutamide to standard hormonal therapy will enhance this radio-sensitizing effect.

Various drugs are being investigated as possible prostate cancer radio-sensitizers. Besides hormonal therapy and enzalutamide described above, these include statins, IL-37, parthenolide, and even green tea. So far, none are currently recommended for clinical practice.

**Complications from External Beam Radiation Therapy**

Significant areas of concern include prostate size and potential radiation side effects on the bowel and bladder (radiation proctitis and cystitis).

There is an increased risk of hematuria in up to 15% of patients, especially if anticoagulated. Managing hemorrhagic complications of radiation cystitis includes oral pentosan polysulfate and hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Severe hematuria may require cystoscopy and continuous bladder irrigation. If not successful, bladder instillations with 1% alum, aminocaproic acid (Amicar), and formalin may be required (up to a 10% formalin solution can be used, but 4% is the preferred concentration).

Erectile dysfunction is another relatively common complication reported in 30% to 45% of men who were potent before starting radiation therapy.

There are also possible issues with fatigue and increased fracture risk.

There is a slightly higher incidence of secondary malignancies after definitive radiation therapy.

**Stereotactic Ablative Radiotherapy (SABR)**

The role of stereotactic radiotherapy in prostate cancer is less well defined than standard external beam radiation. With stereotactic therapy, the individual fractionated dosages are higher, typically 7 to 8 Gy each, which allows for a much reduced total treatment time, usually only about a week. Higher fractionated dosages beyond 8 Gy are not recommended as they have been associated with increased toxicity and side effects. Stereotactic radiotherapy is less suitable for patients with very large prostate volumes (greater than 75 to 100 mL) or prior TURP surgery. Most experts prefer real-time tracking, and early reports suggest using urethral catheterization during treatment planning and simulation improves urethral identification.  Newer SABR delivery systems include gantry devices that are currently undergoing clinical trials. It is hypothesized that using SABR for metastatic cancer may be reasonable to reduce the seeding of additional tumors, which may ultimately increase overall and progression-free survival. This strategy has already been shown to improve survival in metastatic non-small cell lung cancer but is still theoretical for use in prostate cancer.

Stereotactic ablative radiation therapy (SABR) may increase the patient's immune response.  The proposed mechanism is by releasing additional tumor antigens due to the larger fractional radiation dosage, which then prompts the increased immunological response.

Overall, stereotactic radiotherapy appears to be similar in efficacy to other definitive treatments for low and intermediate-risk prostate cancers. This treatment is a reasonable alternative for appropriate low and intermediate-risk patients who desire the markedly reduced treatment schedule and have access to the technology. There have not been sufficient numbers of higher-risk patients reported to date to comfortably recommend stereotactic radiation to the high-risk prostate cancer group, although early reports suggest improved biochemical (PSA) control compared to standard external beam radiation therapy.

**Brachytherapy (Radioactive Seed Implants)**

Brachytherapy is another form of radiation therapy that involves surgically implanting tiny radioactive seeds into the prostate. Conceptually, this allows a higher total dose to be delivered to the prostate without increasing exposure to surrounding structures. It also allows for optimal treatment in patients where transportation and other issues make standard external beam therapy more difficult. Most prostates will accept from 75 to 125 seeds.

Hormonal therapy can shrink the prostate if it is too large for therapy (greater than 60 gm). Three months of hormonal therapy will decrease the size of the prostate by about 30%.

When combined with brachytherapy, hormonal therapy has been shown to improve survival outcomes, so it is usually recommended.

Seeds are placed transperineally using TRUS and a template plan that has been previously worked out by a radiation therapist or physicist.

Radioactive materials used include iodine 125, palladium 103, and cesium 131. Cesium has the shortest half-life.

Several trials have examined outcomes between standard radiation therapy (hormonal deprivation plus external beam radiotherapy) with or without a brachytherapy booster in locally advanced or aggressive prostate cancers. No clinically significant improvement was noted between these groups suggesting no benefit to the addition of a brachytherapy boost even in higher-risk patients.

**High-Dose Rate Brachytherapy**can also be done using hollow needles placed through the perineum, then loaded with iridium 192 or similar. These typically are left in place for 24 to 40 hours, during which time the patient is admitted to a hospital. The newer trend is to treat with only 2 fractions per day, allowing the patient to go home at night.

External beam radiation can then be used to treat regional lymph nodes and other areas outside the prostate not adequately controlled by the seeds alone.

Outcomes are similar to external beam radiation and radical prostatectomy surgery, but there are no head-to-head trials. However, some evidence suggests that brachytherapy might be somewhat more effective than external beam, at least in some patients.

The most common complications reported from brachytherapy include exacerbation of urinary tract and rectal problems along with erectile dysfunction and seed migration. In other words, the complications are very similar to external beam therapy with the additional risk of radioactive seed embolization, which may occur in up to 55% of brachytherapy patients. The use of stranded seeds, such as "Rapidstrands," significantly reduces the seed migration rate. The clinical impact of seed migration is still unclear.

**American Urological Association and American Society for Radiation Oncology Joint Guidelines Statement on Radiation Therapy**

- If a patient is undergoing radical prostatectomy for localized prostate cancer, discuss the possibility of adverse pathologic findings indicating an increased cancer recurrence risk (clinical principle).

- If adverse pathologic signs, such as seminal vesicle invasion, positive surgical margins, and extraprostatic extension, are found, inform the patient that the risk for biochemical (prostate-specific antigen [PSA]) recurrence, local recurrence, or clinical progression of cancer is lower following a combination of radical prostatectomy and adjuvant radiation therapy than it is after radical prostatectomy alone (clinical principle).

- If adverse pathologic signs are found at prostatectomy, offer adjuvant radiation therapy to the patient (standard; evidence strength, Grade A).

- Inform patients that PSA recurrence after surgery is associated with a higher risk of metastatic prostate cancer and increased mortality risk (clinical principle).

- Biochemical recurrence should be defined as a detectable or rising post-surgery PSA value of at least 0.2 ng/mL, with a second confirmatory level of at least 0.2 ng/mL (recommendation; evidence strength, Grade C).

- A restaging evaluation should be considered in patients with a PSA recurrence (option; evidence strength, Grade C).

- Offer salvage radiation therapy to patients who, after radical prostatectomy, demonstrate PSA or local recurrence but have no distant metastatic disease (recommendation; evidence strength, Grade C).

- Inform patients that radiation therapy is most effective against PSA recurrence when PSA levels are relatively low (clinical principle).

- Inform patients that radiation therapy may cause short or long-term urinary, bowel, and sexual adverse effects, but also discuss the treatment’s potential benefits as a means of controlling disease recurrence (clinical principle).

Proton Beam Therapy can theoretically deliver a higher radiation dose more precisely than standard techniques. While theoretically an improvement, there are no randomized trials comparing proton beam therapy directly with standard radiation treatment. The current recommendation from the American Society for Radiation Oncology states that the best available data suggests that outcomes are similar between proton beam therapy and standard intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT).

Carbon Ion Therapy is another type of particle beam irradiation under investigation in Japan. Preliminary data appears promising.

**Treatment Selection: Radiation Therapy versus Radical Prostatectomy**

Radiation therapy and radical prostatectomy surgery are both highly effective for controlling most cases of localized prostate cancer. Treatment selection is then based on other factors such as patient preference, co-morbidities, age, availability of high-quality therapy, and transportation issues.

Technology is continually changing to optimize radiation delivery to cancer while minimizing side effects, peripheral exposure, spillage, and long-term complications. It is difficult to compare radiation therapy and radical surgery results as we are looking now at the outcomes data from radiation therapy delivered 10 to 15 years ago when the technology was less advanced than what is typically given today.

**The best available data suggest no significant difference in overall survival in most cases of potentially curable, localized prostate cancer treated with either external beam radiation therapy, stereotactic radiotherapy, brachytherapy (radioactive seed implants), or radical prostatectomy surgery.**