Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is the imaging modality of choice for visual evaluation of spinal cord ischemia, which should include axial and sagittal diffusion-weighted MR imaging examinations. Characteristic MR imaging features of acute spinal cord ischemia include diffusion restriction in the ASA territory on diffusion-weighted images and a pencil-like hyperintense signal on sagittal T2-weighted images, with or without cord enlargement. Axial MR images show a central T2-hyperintense signal on either side of the median fissure because there is relative sparing of the peripheral and posterior cords due to collateral vessels from the vascular pial plexus and both posterior spinal arteries. In some cases, a central T2-hyperintense signal resembling "snake eyes" appears in the anterior spinal cord on either side of the median fissure. Although this finding is considered specific for spinal cord infarction, it can also appear in association with compression myelopathy and various infectious or inflammatory spinal conditions.

Laboratory workup consists of complete blood cell count; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; electrolyte, glucose, creatinine, and cholesterol levels; liver function test; protein electrophoresis; coagulation tests; electrocardiogram. These tests are done to screen for conditions that cause ischemic damage to vessels such as diabetes mellitus, atherosclerosis, and hypercholesterolemia. Serological tests for borreliosis, Lyme, syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, human T-cell lymphotropic virus, and herpes virus are necessary if infections are a consideration as a cause of infarct. Patients can also have screening for antinuclear and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, which can clue into a vasculitis as a cause. The cerebrospinal fluid should undergo analysis for cell count; glucose and protein levels, and oligoclonal bands as well as for the presence of antibodies to particular pathogens. CSF analysis is likely to show increased protein concentration without pleocytosis or intrathecal synthesis of immunoglobulins.