Few pathological changes occur in pure conduction block injuries (first grade, see Sunderland classification below). All other grades of nerve injuries undergo an anterograde degeneration process distal to the injury location, known as Wallerian degeneration. This process starts hours after the injury with axonal and myelin fragmentation. The neurotubules and neurofilaments lose their organization, and the shape of the axons becomes irregular due to varicose swelling. Axonal continuity gets lost at 48 to 96 hours from injury, and impulses conduction halts. The myelin disintegration is slightly slower than axonal degradation.

Schwan cells b activated within 24 hours post-injury. Along with migrated macrophages, they phagocyte the axonal and myelin debris to clear the injury site in a period that can range from a week to months. The whole degenerative process is 5 to 8 weeks long at the end of which the endoneurial tubes would have shrunk in diameter despite swelling for two weeks post-injury. Schwan cell bands (bands of Bungner) remain inside the endoneurial tubes to guide axonal reinnervation.

In grade III injuries, a more significant local inflammatory reaction is detectable along with the retraction of the cut nerve fibers due to the elasticity of endoneurium. The resultant proliferation of fibroblasts creates a thick fibrous scar leading to a fusiform swelling in the injury site. This result is worse in fourth and fifth-grade injuries where, additionally, Schwann cells and axons are not limited to the fasciculi or endoneurial tubes anymore. Consequently, the proximal stump becomes a swollen bulb of Schwann cells and scar tissue impeding axonal regeneration. The proximal nerve fibers, on the other hand, undergo degradation that can range from minimal to involving the cell body. The extent of the degradation depends on the proximity of injury to the cell body as well as its severity.