There are no laboratory tests that are specific for psoriatic arthritis. Acute phase reactants such as ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) and CRP (C-reactive protein ) may be elevated, as in most inflammatory diseases. However, a normal ESR and CRP should not be used to rule out a diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis as these levels are increased in only about 40% of patients.

Radiographic changes show some characteristic patterns in psoriatic arthritis, consisting of erosive changes, gross joint destruction, joint space narrowing, and "pencil-in-cup" deformity.

Axial features, including sacroiliitis and spondylitis, are characterized by the formation of syndesmophytes (ossification of the annulus fibrosis). The features which differentiate psoriatic arthritis from ankylosing spondylitis are the asymmetric and often unilateral presentation of sacroiliitis and syndesmophytes in psoriatic arthritis are often non-marginal, bulky, asymmetric, and discontinuous skipping vertebral levels. Plain radiography, CT scan, ultrasound, and MRI are all useful in assessing patients with psoriatic arthritis.

**Classification Criteria**

The most accepted classification criteria for psoriatic arthritis is the CASPAR criteria (Classification of Psoriatic Arthritis ) which have been in use since 2006.

********Moll and Wright Criteria (1973)********

- Inflammatory arthritis (peripheral arthritis and/or sacroiliitis or spondylitis)

- The presence of psoriasis

- The absence of serologic tests for rheumatoid factor

**CASPAR Criteria (2006)**

**Clinical Features/Characteristics/Points**

- Skin psoriasis: present - 2 / previously present -1 / family history, patient not affected - 1

- Nail lesions: onycholysis, pitting, hyperkeratosis - 1

- Dactylitis: present or past, documented by a rheumatologist - 1

- Rheumatoid factor: negative by any method except for latex - 1

- Juxta-articular bone formation: distinct from osteophytes - 1

Per CASPAR criteria, psoriatic arthritis is considered present in patients with inflammatory arthritis who have at least 3 points; this has a specificity of 98.7% and a sensitivity of 91.4%.