# Continuing Education Activity

Cutis verticis gyrata (CVG), also known by the name paquidermia verticis gyrata, cutis verticis plicata, and "bulldog" scalp syndrome, is a rare benign cutaneous disorder that is characterized by convoluted folds and deep furrows of the scalp that mimic cerebral sulci and gyri. Primary non-essential cutis verticis gyrata can be associated with neuropsychiatric and ophthalmological abnormalities. This form now has the name cutis verticis gyrata-intellectual disability (CVG-ID). Secondary and primary non-essential cutis verticis gyrata have associated abnormalities, while primary essential CVG has no associations. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of cutis verticis gyrata and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the presentation of a patient with cutis verticis gyrata.
- Review the three categories of cutis verticis gyrata.
- Summarize the treatment and management strategy for cases of cutis verticis gyrata.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with cutis verticis gyrata.

# Introduction

Cutis verticis gyrata (CVG), also known by the name paquidermia verticis gyrata, cutis verticis plicata, and “bulldog” scalp syndrome, is a rare benign cutaneous disorder that is characterized by convoluted folds and deep furrows of the scalp that mimic cerebral sulci and gyri.

# Etiology

Cutis verticis gyrata has been given a classification system as CVG is a manifestation of a variety of diverse causes rather than an individual disease entity.

# Epidemiology

Cutis verticis gyrata is a rare disorder, predominately seen in men, with a reported prevalence of about 1 in 100000 males and 0.026 in 100000 females.

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis of primary cutis verticis gyrata remains unclear. A hormonal influence has been postulated as this disorder usually manifests in postpubertal men.

# Histopathology

The histological appearance of primary cutis verticis gyrata can show significant variation from case to case. Histological features range from essentially normal skin architecture to thickened connective tissue with hypertrophy or hyperplasia of adnexal structures with or without an associated increase in collagen fibers and trapping of the apocrine and eccrine glands.

# History and Physical

Cutis verticis gyrata presents with symmetric, redundant scalp folds that exhibit deep furrows and convolutions.

# Evaluation

Due to the many disorders that can cause secondary cutis verticis gyrata, it is only possible to render the diagnosis of primary CVG after complementary investigations have ruled out local or systemic diseases that are secondarily causing cutis verticis gyrata.

# Treatment / Management

In secondary cutis verticis gyrata, treating the underlying disorder usually causes regression of CVG; however, sometimes further intervention may be required

Surgical modalities range from simple excisions to tissue expansion and skin grafts for patients with more extensive scalp involvement

# Differential Diagnosis

The appearance of CVG is quite distinctive, and making a clinical diagnosis is usually easy. The challenge is to diagnose underlying or associated conditions accurately. The physician must be aware of the common associations and corresponding differential diagnosis. Cutis verticis gyrata now falls under three categories: primary essential, primary nonessential, and secondary.

Secondary cutis verticis gyrata has been reportedly associated with pachydermoperiostosis (idiopathic hypertrophic osteoarthropathy), cerebriform intradermal nevus, acromegaly, and other less frequent cause of CVG such as inflammatory diseases of the scalp, scleromyxedema, leukemia, lymphoma, syphilis, acanthosis nigricans, neurofibromas, nevus lipomatosus,  tuberous sclerosis, cylindroma, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, amyloidosis, diabetes mellitus, cutis laxa, intracerebral aneurysm, cutaneous focal mucinosis and the misuse of anabolic steroids.

# Prognosis

Cutis verticis gyrata may be disfiguring, but the process is essentially benign, and the prognosis is good

# Complications

Cutis verticis gyrata is essentially a benign process; however, secondary causes associated with CVG and their complications require management.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The patient should be aware of cutis verticis gyrata classifications and most importantly the associations relating to CVG. The benign nature must be made clear to the patient.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Cutis verticis gyrata is essentially a benign process. However, an interprofessional team that involves shared decision making is vital. The handling of primary CVG and its secondary associations involves a interprofessional approach to improve outcomes and decrease morbidity. The work-up should include dermatologists, pediatricians, internists, primary care providers, nurse practitioners, and geneticists to ensure consideration of all possible underlying conditions. For surgical correction, a combined approach involving dermatologists and plastic surgeons is often necessary. an interprofessional team approach, including the physician specialties cited along with nursing personnel, is a prudent approach to care in this condition, providing the best chance for an optimal outcome. Dermatology nurses and nurse practitioners participate in patient and family education, arranging follow-up, and coordinating information exchange between the team members. [Level 5]