Geographical distribution of infections due to Trichosporon species varies, but data collected between 1997 and 2005 during the ARTEMIS DISK Surveillance Study found that infections with Trichosporon are predominantly found with equal frequencies in tropical and temperate areas such as South America, the Middle East, India, Southeast Asia, Africa, Europe, Japan, and parts of southeastern USA.

Most cases of white piedra have been reported in children and young adults, particularly females. Different studies have come to a mutual consensus, where colonization from Trichosporon in admitted patients to the hospital wards can be from 1% to 3%. In the outpatient setting, asymptomatic volunteers had skin colonization at higher rates, 12.4%. The mode of transmission of superficial Trichosporon spp. infections is not clear, but the main reported risk factors include close contact, poor hygienic habits such as bathing in stagnant waters, long hair, and humidity. Sexual transmission has been reported in cases of pubic white piedra, which a report from a clinic in Houston, Texas reported as more common in black men. The disease presented with genital symptoms in young men 40% of the time. A Danish study reported rectal colonization rates of 13% among men who have sex with men and 2.5% among heterosexual men who attended a sexually transmitted diseases clinic.

In invasive infection, epidemiology is quite different. Most cases are seen in patients with neutropenia plus malignancies, either hematological or from a solid organ. Actually, disseminated trichosporonosis has been reported, right after candida, as the second most common yeast infection in patients with hematological malignancies, reaching a mortality rate of 80% despite antifungal therapy.

Another group that is at increased risk are neonates with low birth weight, premature neonates with AIDS, patients on steroids or with intravascular catheters, patients who had heart valve surgery or liver transplant, and patients with kidney failure who are on dialysis.