There is no cure for Treacher Collins syndrome, and treatment is aimed at meeting the specific manifestations and needs of each individual patient.

**Obstructive Sleep Apnea**

At birth, the airway may be compromised secondary to maxillary hypoplasia (which can narrow the nasal passages into choanal stenosis or atresia) or, more commonly, due to mandibular hypoplasia with secondary retro-positioned tongue and obstruction of hypopharyngeal spaces.

**Feeding Difficulties**

Feeding support via a gastric tube may be necessary for patients with mandibular hypoplasia (because of persistent airway obstruction and frequent hypoxic episodes) or choanal atresia.

**Speech Delay or Impairment**

Tracheostomies can interfere with speech and can result in subglottic scar tissue and subsequent stenosis.

**Ear Malformations and Hearing Impairment**

Early evaluation by a pediatric otolaryngologist and formal audiological testing coupled with the early fitting of hearing aids will help in the acquisition of communication skills.

Not all patients with TCS receive middle ear reconstruction for this reason and are therefore individually selected based on their specific presentation and personal motivation.

**Eye Anomalies and Visual Impairment**

Orbital dystopia correction and lateral canthopexies are rarely required and are rarely aesthetically normalizing and have low patient satisfaction. The overall appearance of the eye position is a function of the craniofacial skeleton and is usually asymptomatic. Despite the malposition, the visual function is usually normal or near-normal.

**Malar and Mandibular Hypoplasia**

Craniofacial reconstruction is occasionally required, and the age of maxillomandibular reconstruction is dictated by severity, but the most aesthetic results are seen in patients who receive these surgeries near the time of early skeletal maturity (15-17 years old in females and 17 to 21 years old in males).

**Cleft Palate**

Cleft palate repair occurs around one year of age.

**Psychological Concerns**

It is important to pay attention to the psychological needs of the patient with TCS in order for them to build confidence and lead a normal life.