The presence of characteristic pelvic venous changes on imaging supports the diagnosis but is not necessary for forming the final diagnosis. Dilated ovarian veins with incompetency of the valves is also a common finding in asymptomatic women.

For patients with PCS, in whom an intervention is being planned, require evaluation for pelvic venous reflux with ultrasound, retrograde internal iliac or ovarian venography, computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging.

**Ultrasound**

The first line imaging study for pelvic congestion syndrome is pelvic ultrasound. Ultrasound helps rule out the presence of pelvic masses or uterine problems as the underlying cause for pelvic pain. Using color-Doppler and conventional B-mode of ultrasound, the pelvic anatomy, ovarian changes, uterine enlargement, and dilated uterine and ovarian veins can be evaluated.

Retrograde flow of blood with an increase in the size of the left ovarian vein and a decrease in velocity of the blood flow can be observed using ultrasonography. Enlarged, tortuous pelvic venous channels can be noted. The incompetency of valves in the pelvic varicose veins can be noted using Valsalva's maneuver. These varicoceles will show variable duplex waveform on such maneuvers. Polycystic changes of the ovary are also seen in patients with pelvic congestion syndrome.

**Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance**

The anatomical details of the pelvic vasculature along with the tissue of the pelvic cavity can be easily visualized with computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. Since CT utilizes radiation, it is not recommended in premenopausal women.

For diagnosing pelvic vasculature varices, magnetic resonance venography is a good modality. It is a noninvasive imaging technique with low risk. But the specificity of this imaging modality for venous pathologies is low since the patient is in a supine position for this examination.

The direction and velocity of flow in different vascular channels can be assessed with phase-contrast velocity mapping, which is an MRI-based technique. This technique can be used to evaluate pelvic veins.

**Venography**

The gold standard for diagnosing pelvic congestion of the vasculature is ovarian and iliac catheter venography. Ovarian veins are catheterized by approaching via percutaneous jugular and femoral pathways. The distension of the venous channels is better assessed when a venogram is done during Valsalva. Venographic diagnostic findings of PCS that can be seen include incompetent pelvic veins (with diameter more than 5-10 mm), and congestion of flow in venous channels of ovarian, pelvic, vulvovaginal, and thigh veins. Venous reflux in ovarian veins can also be noted.

**Laparoscopy**

Chronic pelvic pain is a major cause of gynecologic diagnostic laparoscopies. According to certain reports, more than 40 percent of such laparoscopic procedures are due to chronic pelvic pain.