The middle cerebral artery is the most common, pathologically affected blood vessel overall. We describe some of the most common pathologies below.

**Embolism of the MCA**

An embolism is a detached mass, typically a dislodged thrombus, gas, or fat, which is transported through the blood vessels until it is lodged in the MCA. The arterial occlusion impedes perfusion of oxygenated blood to the brain parenchyma, resulting in an ischemic stroke causing cerebral edema and brain parenchyma tissue necrosis. As a general rule, a proximal occlusion will cause damage to a large surface area and be devastating. In contrast, a distal occlusion will cause damage to a small surface area, resulting in a less severe clinical presentation. Thrombus formation commonly is associated with sites proximal to the MCA, such as internal carotid plaques, common carotid plaques, and atrial fibrillation, resulting in thrombus formation and embolism. Furthermore, it is worth noting that cardiac defects such as atrial septal and ventral septal defects may result in a paradoxical embolism. This subtype is denoted as such because the thrombus being transported through the superior or inferior vena cava bypasses the respiratory circulation through the cardiac defects and potentially result in an MCA embolism.

As previously mentioned, an embolism of the MCA results in an ischemic stroke. A stroke of the MCA is denoted as middle artery syndrome. Middle artery syndrome presents with contralateral sensory loss of the legs, arms, and lower two-thirds of the face due to tissue necrosis of the primary somatosensory cortex. Contralateral paralysis of the arms, legs, and face may be observed due to necrosis of the primary motor cortex, which is observed clinically as muscle weakness, spasticity, hyperreflexia, and resistance to movement (upper motor neuron signs). Ipsilateral eye deviation is observed due to frontal cortex Brodmann area 8 becoming ischemic, impairing planning of eye movement, symptoms that are exacerbated by contralateral homonymous hemianopsia. A dominant, most commonly left-sided, hemisphere stroke results in Broca aphasia if the superior division of the MCA is affected. In contrast, Wernicke’s or conduction aphasia may be seen if the inferior division of the MCA is affected. A non-dominant, most commonly right-sided, hemisphere stroke results in hemineglect syndrome, presenting with anosognosia, apraxia, and hemispatial neglect.

**Lenticulostriate Infarct**

Infarction of the deep, perforating lenticulostriate branches of the MCA also is most likely caused by an embolism of cardiac origin. Lenticulostriate vessels tend to result in lacunar infarcts, which may be differentiated from those above due to lack of cortical involvement. The most common clinical presentation of lacunar infarcts of the lenticulostriate branches is one of pure motor involvement. This presentation is due to the posterior limb of the internal capsule commonly being affected. It is stipulated that lipohyalinosis may have a large role in the development of lenticulostriate infarcts; however, additional evidence to support this claim is needed.

**Charcot-Bouchard Microaneurysms**

Charcot-Bouchard microaneurysms are stipulated to be caused by chronic hypertension in small terminal lenticulostriate vessels. The rupture of the Charcot-Bouchard aneurysms is associated with intracerebral hemorrhages, which tend to cause tissue necrosis due to lack of anastomosing blood vessels. Common sites affected by Charcot-Bouchard microaneurysms include the thalami, basal ganglia, cerebellum, and pons.

**Arteriovenous Malformations**

Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are congenital arteriovenous connections which can be found anywhere in the brain. Clinically, they most commonly are seen in young patients ranging from 20 to 40 years of age and carries a yearly hemorrhage risk between 1% to 4%. Conventional surgery, radiosurgery, and endovascular embolization are commonly used to treat AVMs.

**Saccular Aneurysms (Berry aneurysms)**

Saccular aneurysms are the most common subtype of an aneurysm. These usually present in areas of bifurcation/trifurcation due to blood vessel weakness and outpouching. Saccular aneurysms present about a third of the time in the MCA. They are associated with risk factors such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADKPKD), Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, cigarette smoking, hypertension, and age. Risk factors increase the probability of rupture and intracerebral hemorrhage. As previously discussed in the surgical considerations section, surgical resection and endovascular embolization are commonly used to treat saccular aneurysms in high-risk patients.