The diagnosis and management of kernicterus are based on the following investigations:

**Hematologic Studies**- most important parameter

- Total and direct bilirubin - indirect bilirubin (bound bilirubin, free bilirubin, and lumirubin in patients receiving phototherapy).

- Blood type (mother and infant) and Coomb test - helps in the assessment of Rh incompatibility and its treatment with Rho(D) immune globulin to prevent erythroblastosis fetalis (the most fulminant type of hemolytic hyperbilirubinemia).

- Reticulocyte count - can help in the assessment of ongoing hemolysis, anemia, and hematopoiesis. A peripheral blood smear can also help in providing clues to the cause of hemolysis.

- Complete blood count - part of all routine investigations and crucial in ruling out sepsis.

- Serum electrolytes - assessment of serum electrolytes (Na+, K+, Cl-, HCO3-, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine) is important as they may provide a clue to the cause of the patient's symptoms. An increase in the potassium level may indicate hemolysis; a decreased or increased sodium level by itself can lead to altered mental status changes; alteration in the bicarbonate level may reveal any acidemia or alkalemia.

- Others - additional tests like a lumbar puncture and chest x-ray to rule out sepsis, and transcutaneous bilirubin measurement is helpful in a few cases. If the above results are inconclusive, it might be necessary to check the ammonia levels, lactate levels, heavy metal levels (lead, chromium, nickel, etc.), and serum acetaminophen levels.

**Imaging Studies**

- Head ultrasound, CT, and MRI - not routinely used to diagnose kernicterus. They are indicated only when lab results are inadequate or inconclusive. They may aid in ruling out other causes of encephalopathy.

- Brainstem evoked auditory response (BEAR) - used to identify the most common sequelae of bilirubin toxicity i.e., hearing impairment.