Cerebral blood flow is technically difficult to determine. Cerebral perfusion pressure is the major factor in determining cerebral blood flow. Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) may be estimated by measuring intracranial pressure (ICP) and the mean arterial pressure (MAP), CPP=MAP-ICP. ICP itself is a function of the relative amounts of blood, brain parenchyma, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the inelastic space of the cranium. As put forth in the Monro-Kellie doctrine, an increase in the volume of blood, brain parenchyma, and/or CSF intracranially necessitates a compensatory decrease in the volume of another compartment or ICP will rise. As will be discussed below, head injury can increase ICP. If ICP approaches the MAP, CPP falls to dangerously low levels. The body responds by increasing the MAP and dilating cerebral blood vessels, which further raises ICP, thus continuing the vicious cycle that can lower CPP and lead to brain ischemia and long-term injury.

The factors that affect outcomes in CHI can be broken down into primary and secondary brain injuries. Primary brain injury is the direct damage to brain parenchyma from the force of impact. Primary brain injuries include contusions, hematomas, diffuse axonal injury (DAI), direct cellular damage, disruption to neurochemical and electrochemical function, and loss of the blood-brain barrier. Secondary brain injury is subsequent neuronal damage due to the release of neurotransmitters, the presence of inflammatory mediators, and apoptosis. Secondary brain injury should be distinguished from secondary insult, which refers to circumstances such as hypoxia and hypotension, among many others, that may accelerate brain damage and worsen outcomes.

Brain edema can occur extracellular swelling (cytotoxic edema), and this may be fatal by impairing cerebral perfusion and other mechanisms.