Sickle cell anemia is characterized by two major components: Hemolysis and vaso-occlusive crises (VOC). The defect in the beta-globin gene makes the sickle hemoglobin (HbS) molecule susceptible to converting into rigid, elongated polymers in a deoxygenated state. The sickling process is cyclical initially, where sickle erythrocytes oscillate between the normal biconcave shape and the abnormal crescent shape (acquired under low oxygen pressure). However, there comes a time when the change becomes irreversible, and the sickle erythrocytes develop a permanent sickle shape increasing the risk for hemolysis and VOC. All variants of SCD share the same pathophysiology leading to polymerization of the HbS component.

Multiple factors inherent to sickle erythrocytes, like low affinity of HbS to oxygen, physiologically high 2,3-diphosphoglycerate, and increased sphingokinase-1 activity, lead to deoxygenation, which promotes polymerization of HbS. In addition to this, high concentration of HbS, abnormal activity of Gados channel leading to dehydration, and repeated damage to red blood cell (RBC) membrane also increase the risk of polymerization of HbS.

Oxidative stress contributes to hemolysis by auto-oxidation of HbS, leading to erythrocyte cell membrane damage. The increased expression of xanthine dehydrogenase, xanthine oxidase, and decreased expression of NADPH oxidase increase the oxidative stress within sickle RBC. A hemolyzed cell releases free hemoglobin (scavenges nitrous oxide) and arginase 1 (competes for L-arginine) that prevent the action and formation of nitrous oxide and contribute to oxidative stress and vascular remodeling (arginase-1 converts arginine to ornithine).

Besides the polymerization of the HbS and intravascular hemolysis, several other factors also contribute to vaso-occlusion. For example, the sickle RBC (expresses several adhesion molecules on the surface), free heme and Hb, reactive oxygen species, and endothelium interact with each other and with neutrophils and platelets to promote vaso-occlusion and thrombosis.