Adult fibrosarcoma is a very aggressive subtype of soft tissue sarcomas with a rate of recurrence of around 50%. Fibrosarcomas tend to respond poorly to chemotherapy which may be attributed to the intrinsic resistance to chemotherapeutic agents.

There is limited data regarding histology-driven treatment for various subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma. The benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy in fibrosarcoma is debatable. Neoadjuvant treatment with MAID protocol has shown benefit in high-grade soft tissue sarcomas including fibrosarcomas, with a lower rate of recurrence, metastasis, and improvement of survival.

In advanced or unresectable tumors, doxorubicin is the most commonly used chemotherapeutic agent and is usually considered the first-line drug with response rates ranging between 18 – 25%. There is no specific second-line therapy however some chemotherapeutic agents have shown benefit including ifosfamide with a response rate of around 25%  in pretreated soft tissue sarcomas including liposarcomas.

The combination of gemcitabine and docetaxel has shown a response rate of 16.7% with an acceptable toxicity profile. Huiwen Ma et al reported a response rate of 25%, disease control rate of 82%, and better tolerance with apatinib, a VEGFR 2 inhibitor, when compared to standard second-line chemotherapy.

There is emerging data regarding the efficacy of immunotherapy in soft tissue sarcomas. The combination of chemotherapy with pembrolizumab has shown some promising results in phase ½ non-randomized trials. Further studies are warranted to explore its benefits in patients with soft tissue sarcomas including fibrosarcomas.