A Monteggia Fracture (radial head dislocation with a concurrent proximal ulna fracture) places the anterior interosseous branch of the median nerve at risk over the site of the ulna fracture, where it can be stretched or compressed, resulting in traction or compression neuropathy. Posterior interosseous nerve palsy is also possible secondary to entrapment, stretching, scarring, displacement, or direct trauma. Open reduction and internal fixation of the ulna fracture will concurrently reduce the stress on the nerve and have been associated with a return to baseline function of the nerve.

Carpal tunnel syndrome is a common pathology of the median nerve as it passes beneath the narrow flexor retinaculum (transverse carpal ligament) of the wrist. Overuse of the tendons can lead to inflammation and compression of the median nerve as it passes through, causing significant pain and weakness in the affected hand. Numbness and/or pain will be present in the first three and a half digits of the affected hand, and typically this is worse at night. Weakness is usually present in the thenar eminence if severe. Lifestyle risk factors for the development of carpal tunnel syndrome include repetitive tasks (such as typing, computer work, or writing), weight gain, pregnancy, and overuse of the hands (mechanics, carpenters, cashiers). Hypothyroidism, diabetes, arthritis, or previous injury can also predispose to carpal tunnel syndrome. Conservative measures of treatment include bracing, splinting, occupational therapy, and over-the-counter (OTC) anti-inflammatory medications. If these fail to resolve symptoms, surgical intervention with a carpal tunnel release may be warranted.

Pronator syndrome is a median nerve compression injury similar to carpal tunnel syndrome. However, the pain is localized to the anterior proximal forearm due to compression of the nerve by the muscle bellies of the pronator teres muscle. Patients will complain of paresthesia in the distribution of the median nerve. However, there will also be numbness over the palm. The risk factors for pronator syndrome are similar to those of carpal tunnel syndrome (repetitive tasks). However, there has not been substantial literature to support surgical decompression to provide symptomatic relief. Most patients (50% to 70%) will recover with conservative therapy, including rest, ice, immobilization, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, and occupational therapy.