Most good Samaritan laws do not apply to medical professionals or career emergency responders during on-the-job conduct. However, some extend protection to professional rescuers when they are acting in a volunteer capacity.

Research shows that increasing physician awareness of these protections increases the likelihood to help. In one study of residents and fellows, roughly half the respondents reported being present at a medical emergency outside the work setting.  The majority indicated that they experienced reluctance to help because of concerns about liability exposure outside of the clinical setting. After being educated about good Samaritan laws, most indicated they would be more likely to assist if they had a prior understanding of these laws.  An overwhelming majority requested this information to be part of their medical education. They further indicated this additional education would increase their likelihood to offer assistance in these instances.

There has been a recent push to establish so-called "bad Samaritan" laws. These laws essentially establish a duty to aid those in need.  These laws are not strictly applicable to health care providers.  Three states – Minnesota, Rhode Island, and Vermont – impose a broad obligation to rescue individuals in an emergency.  While, Hawaii, Washington, and Wisconsin, have legislated the duty to report crimes to authorities.  However, these laws have not had vigorous enforcement.  Also, many states require healthcare providers to report certain kinds of criminal acts, such as gunshot wounds and child abuse.  A few states require healthcare professionals to stop and render aid during an emergency; this only applies if helping a victim can be accomplished without placing themselves in danger.

Although the vast majority of good Samaritan laws are state laws, one particularly applicable federal law involving physicians and other health care providers is the 1998 Aviation MedicalAssistance Act (AMAA). This law provides coverage for "good Samaritans" while in flight (Section 5b).

The 1998 Aviation Medical Assistance Act provides liability protection for a healthcare professional acting as a good Samaritan. Nevertheless, HCPs may initially experience trepidation providing care in an aircraft. They may be unaware that a first aid kit, an emergency medical kit, and an automatic external defibrillator are available on every plane. Flight crews training in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and a support system, including a ground-based consultation service, provides radio assistance from an on-call physician.

The most common inflight emergencies involve syncope or near-syncope (32.7%), gastrointestinal (14.8%), respiratory (10.1%), and cardiovascular (7.0%) symptoms. Diversion of the aircraft from landing at the scheduled destination to a different airport because of a medical emergency occurs in an estimated 4.4% (95% CI, 4.3%-4.6%) of inflight emergencies.

**Conclusion**

Although the primary intent of good Samaritan laws is clear, the real-world application can be quite different.  All health care providers should familiarize themselves with the specific laws and protections in their state.  However, as this article illustrates, when flying or traveling in other municipalities, some unique responsibilities and coverages exist.  When unsure of the local liability protections, one may simply want to do as the good Samaritan did.