The management of cholinergic crisis encompasses three stages: (1) prehospital care, (2) emergency department management, and (3) Inpatient care.

**Prehospital Care**

Prehospital care includes the initial stabilization of the patient and the removal of the offending toxic agent. Decontamination should be initiated as soon as possible if poisoning with organophosphate or nerve gas is the primary culprit of cholinergic crisis. All clothing should be removed from the patient’s body to prevent continued contamination and to prevent cross-contamination of first responders.

**Emergency Room****Management**

Regardless of the etiology  of cholinergic crises, the core principle in stabilization is ABC: Airway, Breathing, and Circulation.

**Airway and Breathing**

Care should be taken to ensure that the airway is patent and the patient is breathing spontaneously. The airway should be secured if there is a concern for airway compromise.

Indications for advanced airway management and intubation in cholinergic crisis are :

- Copious oral and nasal  secretions compromising the patency of the airway

- Altered mental status with a Glasgow Coma Score less than 8

- Evidence of hemodynamic instability

- Profound weakness of the respiratory muscles

**Circulation**

Vascular access should be established immediately with two large-bore peripheral intravenous access. Fluid should be started to maintain adequate circulation with continuous pulse oximetry and monitoring of vital signs. In the case of hemodynamic instability, central venous access should be established for infusion of vasoactive medications.

In the emergency department, the primary focus on initial management is the maintenance of the airway and hemodynamic stability. If the patient is already intubated, ventilatory support should be continued .

**Inpatient Management**

Inpatient care includes continued cardiopulmonary support and monitoring. Patients with a cholinergic crisis should be admitted to the intensive care unit.

**Antidotes for cholinergic crisis**

Two types of antidotes are used for a cholinergic crisis: atropine and oximes.

**Atropine**

The first antidote is atropine. It is an effective agent for the muscarinic effect of acetylcholine. It competitively binds to the postsynaptic muscarinic receptor thereby preventing further action of ACh. Atropine dose is about 0.03- 0.05 mg/kg for pediatric and about 2 mg for adult patients. It is recommended to give atropine until signs of atropinization is present:

Signs of atropinization

- Tachycardia

- Warm, dry, and flushed skin

- Mydriasis

Atropine does not have any effect on the nicotinic receptors.

**Oximes**

For the nicotinic effect in cholinergic crisis, the antidote is a class of drugs called the “oximes.” Examples of oximes are pralidoxime and obidoxime

In the United States, pralidoxime chloride is the most commonly used antidote. Its mechanism of action is like that of a "molecular crowbar" that separates the bonded nerve gas or organophosphate from acetylcholinesterase. The separated AChE can then continue the process of chemical breakdown of ACh. There is a window period during which oximes can be given before there is an irreversible bonding of nerve gas to AChE. This phenomenon is known as "aging

Pralidoxime should be given to patients with signs of respiratory muscle weakness or generalized muscular weakness. It should be administered until there is an improvement in muscle weakness. It does not cross the blood-brain barrier hence the central nervous system effect of organophosphate poisoning is not neutralized. This is achieved by using atropine.

**Other medications in cholinergic crisis**

Seizure and agitation in cholinergic crisis can be treated with benzodiazepine-like midazolam or lorazepam. Care should also be taken to avoid drugs like loop diuretics, theophylline, and caffeine and succinylcholine in organophosphate poisoning as this can make the symptoms of toxicity worse.

In the management of cholinergic crisis secondary to reversal of neuromuscular blockage with neostigmine, atropine or glycopyrrolate can be administered to lessen the cholinergic effects of the neuromuscular blockage reversal.

Consultation with a clinical toxicologist and intensivist is recommended in the treatment of cholinergic crisis.