Components of the history should include:

- Onset: abrupt vs. gradual

- Duration: second, minutes, days, or weeks

- Triggered or spontaneous symptoms

- Medications they are currently taking and any recent medication changes

- Alcohol or caffeine intake

- History of recent head trauma

- Associated symptoms that would suggest a central (neurologic) etiology, such as dysarthria, dysphagia, diplopia, truncal ataxia, or cerebellar signs.

- Associated signs and symptoms may suggest a cardiovascular etiology, such as chest pain, arrhythmia, dyspnea, or orthostatic blood pressure changes.

In addition to a general physical exam and complete neurologic exam, specific components of the physical exam should include:

- Nystagmus:

- Bidirectional nystagmus or spontaneous vertical or rotatory nystagmus is suspicious for a central cause
- BPPV- fast component towards the affected side, fatigable 
- Vestibular neuritis – fast component away from the affected side, suppressed by visual fixation

- HINTS exam

- The HINTS exam is a bedside test that can help distinguish between central and peripheral causes of vertigo and dizziness. Notably, it should only be performed on patients who are currently symptomatic (acutely vertiginous). It consists of 3 parts:

- Head impulse: the patient should be able to maintain fixation with rapid movement of their head from side to side. Inability to do so (a positive test) is evidenced by horizontal nystagmus followed by a rapid corrective saccade.
- Nystagmus: Direction-changing or untestable nystagmus is considered a positive test and should prompt a workup for a central etiology.
- Test of skew: eyes are alternately covered. Upward deviation of the uncovered eye is a positive test and should prompt a workup for a central etiology.

- Gait and balance testing

- A positive Rhomberg test, where the patient loses balance or falls when the eyes are closed, can be seen with bilateral vestibulopathy or somatosensory dysfunction. 
- A wide-based gait is suggestive of cerebellar dysfunction

- Vital signs

- Frank hypotension
- Orthostatic hypotension (defined as blood pressure drop from sitting to standing:  systolic blood pressure decrease of 20 mm Hg or a diastolic blood pressure decrease of 10 mm Hg)
- Delayed orthostatic hypotension (usually detected on tilt-table testing)

The history and physical examination are aimed at deciphering whether there is a central (neurologic) vs. peripheral (vestibular) cause for the dizziness and imbalance. Hallmarks of a central cause include a normal (negative) horizontal head impulse test, direction-changing nystagmus, and positive skew deviation on the HINTS exam. The TITRATE algorithm breaks down acute and episodic vestibular syndromes by timing and triggers to suggest a likely diagnosis.

Within episodic vestibular syndromes, triggered vertigo with a positive Dix-Hallpike is classic for BPPV. When the Dix-Hallpike is negative, the presence of orthostatic vital signs leads to the diagnosis of orthostatic hypotension. A Dix-Hallpike with atypical nystagmus is worrisome for a central etiology and should prompt emergent imaging. When the onset of an episodic vestibular syndrome is spontaneous (versus triggered), the likely diagnoses are vestibular migraine and Meniere disease. It is important to assess for vascular risk factors such as hypertension, dyslipidemia, cerebrovascular or coronary artery disease, and hypothyroidism. The ABCD2 score is used as part of the TITRATE algorithm as a tool to identify features suggestive of brain ischemia.

Diagnostic criteria for BPPV:

- Episodes of vertigo or dizziness triggered by a change in position, typically lying down or rolling onto the side from a supine position

- Attacks last < 1 min

- The Dix-Hallpike test will produce torsional and vertical nystagmus towards the affected ear after a few seconds.

Diagnostic criteria for Meniere disease:

- Two or more episodes of spontaneous vertigo lasting 30 minutes to 12 hours

- Low- to medium-frequency sensorineural hearing loss

- Unilateral tinnitus, ear fullness, and hearing loss in the affected ear may fluctuate

Diagnostic criteria for vestibular neuritis:

- Sudden onset of vertigo lasting at least 24 hours, often accompanied by oscillopsia, nausea, and a tendency to fall

- Absence of cochlear symptoms

- Absence of associated neurological symptoms and signs

Diagnostic criteria for vestibular labyrinthitis:

- Vestibular neuritis plus hearing loss

- occurs commonly after a viral illness such as a URI or otitis media

Diagnostic criteria for vestibular migraine:

- Five or more episodes of vertigo or dizziness with nausea

- Symptoms of moderate-severe intensity lasting 5 minutes to 72 hours.

- At least 50% of the episodes should be accompanied by migraine features such as unilateral headache, photophobia, phonophobia, or aura.

- Current or previous history of migraine

Diagnostic criteria for superior canal dehiscence:

- At least 1 of the following symptoms 

- Bone conduction hyperacusis
- Sound or pressure-induced vertigo and/or oscillopsia (illusion of an unstable visual world) time-locked to the stimulus
- Pulsatile tinnitus
- Autophony (hearing one’s internal bodily sounds loudly)

- At least 1 of the following signs or diagnostic tests

- Nystagmus evoked by sound or by changes in the middle ear or intracranial pressure
- Low-frequency negative bone conduction thresholds on pure tone audiometry
- Low cervical Vestibular Evoked Myogenic Potential (VEMP) thresholds or high ocular VEMP amplitudes

- Evidence of dehiscence of the superior semicircular canal on temporal bone CT

Diagnostic criteria for persistent postural-perceptual dizziness:

- Dizziness, vertigo, or unsteadiness are present for 15 out of 30 days for a period of 3 or months.

- Symptoms last several hours, may wax and wane, and become worse as the day progresses

- Symptoms occur without provocation but are exacerbated by Upright posture, active or passive motion, and exposure to moving visual stimuli or complex visual patterns

- Symptoms cause significant functional impairment and distress

Diagnostic criteria for bilateral vestibulopathy:

- Disequilibrium and oscillopsia when walking or standing worsened in darkness and/or on uneven ground

- Asymptomatic while sitting or lying down under static conditions

- Reduced or absent angular vestibulo-ocular reflex function bilaterally

Diagnostic criteria for perilymphatic fistula:

- Loss of hearing (sensorineural), tinnitus, ear fullness, and/or dizziness following barotrauma that either

- Associated with perilymph biomarker testing with high sensitivity and specificity or
- Associated with the visualization of perilymph leakage in the middle ear, and symptoms resolve after treatment of the leak