The first and foremost goal in patients with XLA should be an avoidance of infections. This includes measures to prevent infections by frequent handwashing, maintaining good respiratory hygiene, and, if possible, drinking only treated water.

The emergence of immunoglobulin replacement therapy has caused a paradigm shift in the management of patients with XLA. Observational studies have shown that intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy has reduced the rate of infections and hospitalizations resulting in reduced morbidity and mortality. Some studies have shown a reduced incidence of bacterial infections from 0.4 to 0.06 per patient per year.

However, there are a few drawbacks to the use of IVIG. Firstly, even though IVIG protects against most of the common pathogens, a few uncommon ones to which the donor pool has not been exposed are not protected against. Secondly, out of all types of immunoglobulins, only IgG is replaced while IgA and IgM are not and have their own unique functions. Finally, passive immunity through IVIG does not replace the rise in immunoglobulins seen in a healthy individual after exposure to foreign antigens.

In addition to IVIG, treatment with antibiotics for active infections should be done. In these individuals, recurrent pneumonia and other respiratory tract infections can lead to chronic lung problems such as bronchiectasis, chronic sinusitis, and chronic bronchitis. Thus, regular monitoring for these conditions using appropriate tests such as imaging studies is recommended as even subclinical infections can predispose individuals to develop them.

Role of longterm antibiotic prophylaxis is not strongly supported by data.

Even though immunoglobulin replacement is a safe and effective treatment strategy for these patients, Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is an alternative. The risks of allogeneic HSCT such as rejection, graft-versus-host-disease make the treatment option less safe. The tedious procedure of HSCT and the difficult procurement of a suitable donor are additional factors that make it a less popular treatment option. However, in some patients, especially in developing countries, the costs of regular IVIG or its inconvenience, and the unavailability of IVIG can lead to opting for this treatment modality.