Osteochondroma is a benign bony tumor that is mainly asymptomatic, and thus usually discovered incidentally. Although management of osteochondroma is the duty of orthopedic surgeons, interprofessional collaboration is a must for providing optimal care to the patient. In fact, initial detection of osteochondroma may be the ER physician, radiologist, nurse practitioner, or family physician either incidentally while investigating for another complaint or while investigating for complaint related to osteochondroma itself. A definitive diagnosis cannot be achieved without the participation of the pathologist and radiologist to confirm osteochondroma and exclude malignant features.

Symptomatic osteochondromas or those that carry suspicious malignant features will require surgery to excise the tumor. Performing any surgical procedure is a great example that demonstrates teamwork and cooperation among different healthcare professions — starting from the pre-operative phase that prepares the patient for the surgery.  This phase is mainly the role of anesthesiologists in which they assess the patient's fitness for surgery. The medical team may also be involved in the pre-operative phase either if the patient has any known medical illness, or due to a newly discovered issue during the pre-operative investigation. During the operation, the orthopedic surgeon, anesthesiologist, nurses, and many others will collaborate to perform the surgery. Pharmacists can also weigh in with medication needed for the procedure itself, as well as post-surgical pain control and possible antibiotics, making recommendations to the team and also monitoring for drug interactions and cautioning other team members regarding potential adverse events. Complications associated with osteochondroma may demand the involvement of additional specialty, including a neurosurgeon and vascular surgeon to manage neurovascular complications. Finally, post-operative care and monitoring is an important phase in which both nurses and surgeons who performed the surgery will ensure there are no postoperative complications, and the patent is eligible for a safe discharge. To conclude, diagnosis and management of osteochondroma necessitate the collaboration of different healthcare professions, and achieving optimal care by the orthopedic surgeon alone is an impossible mission.

Osteochondroma diagnosis and management clearly an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, pharmacists, and possibly physical therapists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V]