The illness begins with nonspecific symptoms such as fever and malaise, upper respiratory tract symptoms such as a cough, rhinitis, sore eyes, and myalgia. Over the next three to four days, a blistering rash and erosions appear on the face, trunk, limbs, and mucosal surfaces.

- Erythematous, targetoid, annular, or purpuric macules

- Flaccid bullae

- Large painful erosions

- Nikolsky-positive (lateral pressure on the skin results in shedding of the epidermis)

Early on, toxic epidermal necrolysis displays widespread tender erythroderma and erosions (with or without targetoid rash), whereas Stevens-Johnson syndrome is characterized more by targetoid rash, with fewer areas of denudation.

Mucosal ulceration and erosions can involve lips, mouth, pharynx, esophagus and gastrointestinal tract, eyes, genitals, upper respiratory tract. About half of patients have involvement of three mucosal sites.

The patient is very ill, anxious, and in pain. Liver, kidneys, lungs, bone marrow, and joints may be affected by Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis. Typical symptoms include:

- Fever, malaise, headache, anorexia, pharyngitis­

- Symptoms due to acute dysfunction of ocular, pulmonary, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, renal, and hematological systems.

Features may overlap with other severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR), such as acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (causing subcorneal pustules) and drug hypersensitivity syndrome (causing a morbilliform eruption and involving other organs).