The diagnostic basis of hereditary CRC is from clinical findings, family history, genetic tests, and diagnostic images.

**Physical examination:**Should include evaluation of adenopathies, mainly supraclavicular, cervical and axillary, digital rectal examination, abdominal palpation in search of masses or ascites, hepatomegaly suggesting a hepatic metastatic compromise.

**Total colonoscopy:**It is a gold standard technique since it allows the resection and biopsy of the lesions observed during the procedure.

**Family history****:**more than one criterion raises suspicion of LS.

- **Modified Bethesda criteria,**which are:
- Patients with CRC belong to families that meet the criteria of Amsterdam
- Patients with two neoplasms associated with HNPCC, including synchronous or metachronous CRC and extracolonic cancer (endometrium, ovary, gastric, hepatobiliary, small intestine, ureter, or renal pelvis)
- Patients with CRC and a first-degree relative with CRC, extracolonic neoplasm associated with HNPCC or colorectal adenoma; one of the cancers diagnosed before 50 and the adenoma before 40 years of age
- Patients with CRC or endometrial cancer are diagnosed before 50 years of age
- Patients with CRC in the right colon and histologically undifferentiated are diagnosed before 50
- Patients with CCR-type cells in the signet ring (composed of more than 50% of signet ring cells) were diagnosed before 50
- Patients with colorectal adenoma are diagnosed before 40 years of age

- **Amsterdam criteria II,**which are:
- Three or more relatives affected by a neoplasm associated with HNPCC (CRC, cancer of the endometrium, small intestine, ureter, or renal pelvis), one of them being a first-degree relative of the other two, and;
- Two or more successive generations were affected, and;
- One or more relatives affected by CRC were diagnosed before 50 years of age, and;
- Exclusion of FAP in cases of CCR.

**Molecular and genetic testing:**LS Diagnosis is made by tumor testing with MMR immunohistochemistry and  PCR for MSI (microsatellite instability), a genetic phenotype that characterizes these tumors. Therefore, having a positive genetic test (MSI), a positive Bethesda or Amsterdam item, and the tumor located on the right side of the colon are highly suspicious findings of Lynch syndrome.

**Diagnostic Imaging:**It is suggested to perform computed tomography with the contrast of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis to estimate the stage of the disease in all patients with colorectal cancer. Additionally, It is suggested to perform computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis to assess the status of the mesorectal margin in selected cases.

Specific aspects of individuals' family history of CRC would influence the age at which, planning to begin screening and the frequency of screening. Following details with the family history of the number of first-degree relatives should be considered before planning for a screening schedule;

- Established diagnosis of CRC

- Advanced polyp that harbors any of the following characteristics:

- Adenoma size of equal to or greater than 1 cm
- Presence of high-grade dysplasia
- Adenoma with a villous component

- Advanced sessile serrated lesion with any of the following characteristics:

- Sessile polyp with a size equal to or greater than 1 cm
- Serrated adenoma with equal or greater than 1 cm size
- Presence of dysplasia in a sessile serrated polyp

According to the response to the above questions, the following screening schedules are recommended. If equal to or more than one first-degree relative is affected, the screening is to be initiated either at the age of 40 or at the age equal to 10 years younger than the affected FDR, whichever comes earlier. Moreover, a continuous schedule plan with either colonoscopy every five years or annual fecal immunochemical testing (FIT) are recommended.

Consequently, if the first-degree relative has a polyp without a well-established tissue diagnosis of either an advanced adenoma or a serrated polyp, the individual would be categorized as average risk.

**High-risk Syndrome Screenings**

Specific screening schedules should be planned for individuals with Lynch-associated cancers. The schedule should be organized based on the following characteristics; 1. personal and family history of cancer, 2. the gene affected, and 3. the mode of ascertainment of the familial mutation. According to some expert opinions, and due to the significantly lower lifetime cancer risk for carriers of germline PMS2 mutations, screening recommendations must be tailored to the MMR gene alone. Moreover, a later mean age of colorectal cancer (CRC) onset in germline MSH6 carriers should dictate a modified screening schedule.

Collectively, screening is recommended for the following individuals considering the Lynch-associated cancers:

- Individuals with either a pathogenic germline mutation in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes or epithelial cellular adhesion molecule (EPCAM) deletions that can inactivate Mutation S Homolog 2 (MSH2)

- Individuals at risk for Lynch syndrome, including individuals in families meeting Amsterdam I or II criteria and individuals meeting revised Bethesda guidelines

- High-risk individuals with an equal or greater than 2.5 to 5 % risk for MMR mutation according to the prediction models