******General Principles******

- Treatment should be guided by disease severity, degree of joint damage, the extent of extra-articular disease, patient preference, and other comorbidities.

- Non-pharmacological therapies, including physical therapy, occupation therapy, exercise program, and smoking cessation, should be strongly encouraged and incorporated into the treatment plan.

- **Treat-to-Target approach**is the most effective way to control disease activity and minimize joint damage.

- Due to the heterogeneous presentation of psoriatic arthritis, the type of treatment initiated depends on the domains involved, including peripheral arthritis, enthesitis, dactylitis, axial disease, and skin/nail disease.

- In treatment-naïve patients, NSAIDs ( non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ) are generally useful for symptoms of mild peripheral arthritis.

- Mild to moderate peripheral arthritis may be treated with conventional synthetic DMARDs (disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs) such as methotrexate or occasionally sulfasalazine; the latter is ineffective for skin disease.

- Severe peripheral arthritis usually receives treatment with biologic DMARDs, especially TNF (tumor necrosis factor) inhibitors.

- Axial disease and enthesitis are usually treated the same way except for the fact that there is a minimal role of conventional synthetic DMARDs. Patients who fail NSAIDs should automatically transition to biologic DMARDs.

- A TNF inhibitor is usually recommended over an IL-17 inhibitor, IL-12/23 inhibitor, abatacept, or tofacitinib.

- An IL-17 inhibitor is usually recommended over an IL-12/23 inhibitor, abatacept, or tofacitinib.

- An IL-12/23 inhibitor is usually recommended over abatacept or tofacitinib.

- In patients with severe psoriasis, an IL-12/23 inhibitor or an IL-17 inhibitor may be used instead of a TNF inhibitor.

- Tofacitinib may be used instead of a TNF inhibitor in patients preferring oral medication and who do not have severe psoriasis.

- ACR/NPF (American College of Rheumatology/National Psoriasis Foundation) 2018 guidelines recommend a TNF inhibitor over conventional synthetic DMARDs (labeled as OSM, oral small molecules) as a first-line treatment in treatment-naïve psoriatic arthritis patients.

A summary of various drugs used in treating psoriatic arthritis appears in a tabular form in Table 1.

**Active Psoriatic Arthritis (as defined in ACR/NPF 2018 guidelines)**

Defined as “disease-causing symptoms at an unacceptably bothersome level as reported by the patient, and judged by the examining clinician to be due to psoriatic arthritis” based on ≥1 of the following:

- Swollen joints

- Tender joints

- Dactylitis

- Enthesitis

- Axial disease

- Active skin and/or nail involvement

- Extra-articular inflammatory manifestations such as uveitis or inflammatory bowel disease

**ACR/NPF Guidelines for the Treatment of Psoriatic Arthritis: 2018. Initial Treatment**

Oral small molecule (OSM): methotrexate (MTX), sulfasalazine (SSZ), leflunomide (LEF), cyclosporine (CSA), apremilast

- Treat with TNF inhibitor over oral small molecule (OSM): May consider OSM such as MTX in patients with mild psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis, patient preference, contraindication to TNF inhibitor.

- Treat with TNF inhibitor over IL-17 inhibitor: May consider IL-17 inhibitor in patients with severe psoriasis or contraindication to TNF inhibitor.

- Treat with TNF inhibitor over IL-12/23 inhibitor: May consider IL-12/23 inhibitor in patients with severe psoriasis of contraindication to TNF inhibitor.

- Treat with OSM over IL-17 inhibitor: May consider IL-17 inhibitor in patients with severe psoriasis and/or psoriatic arthritis.

- Treat with OSM over IL-12/23 inhibitor: May consider IL-12/23 inhibitor in patients with severe psoriasis and/or psoriatic arthritis or concomitant inflammatory bowel disease.

- Treat with Methotrexate over NSAIDs: May consider NSAIDs in patients with mild psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis.

- Treat with IL-17 inhibitor over IL-12/23 inhibitor: May consider IL-12/23 inhibitor in patients with concomitant inflammatory bowel disease.

**EULAR Recommendations for the Management of Psoriatic Arthritis with Pharmacological Therapies: 2019 Update**

Non-steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs), Disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD), Conventional synthetic DMARD (csDMARD), Biologic DMARD (bDMARD), Monoclonal antibody (mab) Targeted synthetic DMARD (tsDMARD), Janus kinase (JAK), Phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4)

Overarching principles

- Psoriatic arthritis is a heterogeneous and potentially severe disease that may require multidisciplinary treatment.

- Treatment of psoriatic arthritis patients should aim at the best care and must be based on a shared decision between the patient and rheumatologist, considering efficacy, safety, and costs.

- Rheumatologists are the specialists who should primarily care for the musculoskeletal manifestations of patients with psoriatic arthritis, with significant skin involvement work with a dermatologist.

- The primary goal of treating patients with psoriatic arthritis is to maximize the health-related quality of life through control of symptoms, prevention of structural damage, and normalizing physical and social function by controlling inflammation is an important component.

- When managing patients with psoriatic arthritis, non-musculoskeletal manifestations (skin, eye, and GI tract) and comorbidities (metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular disease, and depression) should be considered.

**Recommendations**

- Treatment should be aimed at reaching the target of remission or, alternatively, low disease activity by regular disease activity assessment and appropriate adjustment of therapy.

- NSAIDs may be used to relieve musculoskeletal signs and symptoms.

- Local glucocorticoid injections should be considered adjunctive therapy in psoriatic arthritis; systemic glucocorticoids may be used with caution at the lowest effective dose.

- In patients with polyarthritis, a csDMARD should be initiated rapidly, with MTX preferred in those with relevant skin involvement.

- In patients with monoarthritis or oligoarthritis, particularly with poor prognostic factors such as structural damage, high ESR or CRP, dactylitis, or nail involvement, a csDMARD should be considered.

- In patients with peripheral arthritis and an inadequate response to at least one csDMARD, therapy with a bDMARD should be commenced; when relevant skin involvement, an IL-17 inhibitor or IL-12/23 inhibitor may be preferred.

- In patients with peripheral arthritis and an inadequate response to at least one csDMARD and at least one bDMARD, or when a bDMARD is not appropriate, a JAK inhibitor may be considered.

- In patients with mild disease and an inadequate response to at least one csDMARD, in whom neither a bDMARD nor a JAK inhibitor is appropriate, a PDE4 inhibitor may be considered.

- In patients with unequivocal enthesitis and insufficient response to NSAIDs or local glucocorticoid injections, therapy with a bDMARD should be considered.

- In patients with predominantly axial disease, which is active and has an insufficient response to NSAIDs, therapy with a bDAMRD should be considered, which according to current practice, is a TNF inhibitor; when there is relevant skin involvement, IL-17 inhibitor may be preferred.

- In patients who fail to respond adequately to or are intolerant of abDMARD, switching to another bDMARD or tsDMARD should be considered, including a switch within a class.

- In patients with sustained remission, cautious tapering of DMARDs may be considered.