In general, all trauma is managed by an interprofessional team of specialists that also includes nurses, physical therapists, dietitians, social workers, and occupational therapists. Those sustaining neck injuries associated with neurological deficits often require prolonged treatment that may extend for months. Thus, a visiting nurse is ideal to follow up on these patients. For those who have difficulty swallowing because of injury to the esophagus, one may even require a temporary feeding tube. In addition, those with a tracheostomy often require a home care nurse until they are weaned off the tracheal tube.  Only through interprofessional care can the outcomes be improved and the quality of life of these patients be improved.

**Outcomes**

Overall, injuries to zone 1 have the highest morbidity and mortality. Zone ll injuries are the most common after penetrating trauma, but because they can be readily accessible, they also have the best prognosis. Injuries to Zone ll can be challenging because access to some structures may not be easy. The prognosis of these injuries is guarded. In individuals who suffer complete transection of the spinal cord, the injury is almost always fatal. Individuals who do retain neurological function including preservation of rectal tone, usually have a good outcome. However, if the neurological deficits persist, the outcomes are poor. When the vasculature structures are injured by blunt trauma, the outcomes are worse compared to penetrating injuries. In many neck injuries, one also has to search for airway and esophageal injuries as they may not always be apparent. Overall, the mortality rate for patients suffering penetrating trauma to the neck varies from 2-5%, but if a major blood vessel has ruptured, this is often fatal in about 70% of cases.