Testicular torsion often presents as an abrupt onset of unilateral scrotal pain. The pain may be constant or intermittent, but not positional. The patient may have associated symptoms of nausea or vomiting. There may be associated lower abdominal and inguinal pain, or alternatively, these may be the presenting complaint rather than scrotal pain.

The testicle may be in an abnormal or transverse lie and maybe in a high position. The testicle may be swollen, erythematous, and have an absence of the normal cremasteric reflex; however, it should be noted that the presence or absence of the cremasteric reflex is not as sensitive as once thought. Additionally, the cremasteric reflex is unreliable in young patients, especially those less than one year old.

The Prehn sign is not reliable for predicting torsion (relief of pain with testicle elevation).

Torsion of the testicular appendages is more common and not dangerous. During early-onset, this may be differentiated from testicular torsion by maximal tenderness to palpation near the head of the epididymis or testis, an isolated tender nodule, and/or a blue dot appearance on the testis. The characteristic blue dot is due to the cyanotic torsed appendage.  The testicular appendage tends to calcify and degenerate over two weeks, and typically no surgical intervention is required.

Other differential diagnoses to be considered are epididymitis, orchitis, inguinal hernia, symptomatic hydrocele, testicular necrosis of other etiology, and scrotal hematoma.