Because astrocytes fulfill many essential functions, their dysfunction has implicated them in several neurological disorders. Examples include Alzheimer disease (AD),

In Alzheimer disease, increasing cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta and gamma secretases (instead of alpha-secretase, which normally cleaves APP into a nontoxic form that the body can clear) cause abnormal beta-amyloid plaques to form.

Astrocytes affect epilepsy and Huntington disease by regulating homeostatic conditions in the CNS. Mutations in the Kir4.1, aquaporin-4 (AQP4), GLT-1, or GLAST genes contribute to epilepsy by impairing astrocytes’ ability to regulate potassium, water, and glutamate levels in the extracellular fluid within the CNS.

Astrocytes also initiate neuronal death in parkinsonism and can trigger demyelinating disease. In idiopathic Parkinson disease, neurons die in the pars compacta of the substantia nigra when alpha-synuclein deposits accumulate. These alpha-synuclein deposits form a histological marker useful in diagnosing parkinsonism.

Alexander disease and inherited forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are examples of diseases that stem from errors in astrocyte genetics. Alexander disease is a genetic astrogliopathy in which glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) mutations disrupt astrocytes' formation of intermediate filaments, causing symmetrical white matter lesions in the frontal lobe and sometimes elsewhere in the brain.

As the traditional "neuron-centric" view of the brain gives way to a more comprehensive understanding that includes the complex contributions of astrocytes and other non-neuronal cells, future research is turning to the astrocyte's role in new therapeutic approaches. As investigators learn more about how astrocytes function malfunction, new insights may enable treatment strategies that would not have been possible in decades past.

**Disclaimer:**This scholarly activity was supported (in whole or in part) by HCA and/or an HCA-affiliated entity. The views expressed in this publication represent those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of HCA or any of its affiliated entities.