The equipment required for a cesarean delivery varies based on the clinical scenario.

Luckily, such emergency scenarios are rare. Various consumable and reusable items are utilized to make a cesarean safer for the surgeon, the pregnant patient, and the fetus. Again, the clinical scenario dictates the equipment used.

The surgical suite should have a surgical bed or table, which can move up and down based on the surgeon’s needs. Associated with the surgical table are the rests for the patient’s arms, a safety strap or belt to ensure the patient does not fall off the table, and some ramp (or even a rolled blanket) to achieve left lateral tilt of the patient. Surgical step stools should be available for the surgeon and assistant(s).

A blanket warmer is often present in the operating room suite. This device provides warming for both the patient and the neonate. An indwelling catheter is usually placed in the patient’s bladder before the surgery. The operating room should also have overhead lighting to provide adequate illumination of the surgical field. Most consumables commonly utilized during surgery often get stored in the surgical suite, including sutures, gloves, gowns, wound dressings, and hemostatic agents.

Once the patient is on the surgical table, a surgical drape maintains the sterile surgical field - this can either be fenestrated or not fenestrated around the patient’s abdomen. It usually contains lateral pouches to catch amniotic or other fluids. The drape is usually secured to two poles on either side of the patient’s shoulders, obscuring the patient’s view of the surgical field. Clear drapes are also available, allowing the patient to watch the surgery and subsequent delivery of the infant. Many hospitals may have a standardized “surgical pack” specific to cesarean delivery, and this pack may contain the necessary drapes. It may also contain surgical towels, a bulb suction, umbilical cord clamps, suction tubing, or other consumables specific to a cesarean.

At the head of the surgical table is the anesthesia equipment, which includes monitors for patient vital signs, organizational cabinets, medications for achieving adequate anesthesia, and airway equipment. Even though cesarean deliveries usually take place with a regional anesthetic, general anesthesia can be necessary. Therefore, all equipment needed for obtaining and maintaining a patient’s airway should be readily available.

Most hospitals have a standardized “surgical tray” specifically for cesarean sections. This tray contains the surgical instruments traditionally used during the procedure and may vary by region or hospital. This tray may include several kinds of scissors (bandage, Metzenbaum, straight and curved Mayo), several kinds of clamps (Kelly, Kocher, Allis, Babcock), sponge forceps, several kinds of tissue forceps (Adson, Russian, Ferris Smith, smooth), retractors (bladder blade, Army Navy, Richardson), knife handles, needle drivers, suction (Yankauer or Poole), or other instruments.

The availability of a standardized surgical pack and cesarean instrument tray can be beneficial. For example, if an emergency cesarean is needed, this will mitigate the time-consuming need to gather appropriate equipment. In addition to standard instrument trays for the cesarean section, a hysterectomy instrument tray should also be available. A peripartum hysterectomy is relatively rare, but it is becoming more common. Having the appropriate instruments readily accessible can save precious time in an emergency.