Effaced and compressed against the internal dura by a herniated nucleus pulposus, the cauda equina may be pinched within the lumbar cistern and affect downstream targets. The clinical significance of this medical event, known as cauda equina syndrome (CES), cannot be overstated due to the possible progression to complete paralysis and/or permanent disability. CES is a rare and emergent scenario characterized by variable symptoms that may include anesthesia of the inner thighs, a condition termed saddle anesthesia. Urinary retention and incontinence of the urinary bladder and bowels are also possible findings. There are 2 modes of CES presentation: acute onset, which is associated with a poorer prognosis, and insidious onset, which typically begins as low back pain but progresses to bowel and urinary incontinence.

Findings also may include sciatica, failure to achieve an erection, a diminished or absent patellar, Achilles, or anal reflex, and loss of rectal sphincter tone with perianal hypesthesia. Hyporeflexia is a lower motor neuron sign caused by impingement of the descending cauda equina nerves against the dura. A high index of suspicion should be advised when a patient has a chief complaint of urinary retention with associated back pain or shooting pains in the lower extremity. In one retrospective study of 39 patients with CES, most sensory disturbances such as reported feelings of pins and needles were localized to the L3-L4 and L5-S1 dermatomes.

Nerves of the cauda equina are most often compressed by an intervertebral disc herniation, which typically occurs in a posterior and lateral trajectory due to the thin nature of the posterior longitudinal ligament. Compression may also occur due to tumors, lumbar region synovial cysts, stenosis, or trauma, and imaging studies are likely to indicate the presence of an intraspinal mass. Immediate surgical decompression should be undertaken to prevent permanent sequelae. In a study where 69% of patients had a sudden onset of CES symptoms, there were significant differences in the resolution of sensory and motor deficits in patients treated within 48 hours compared to those treated greater than 48 hours after the onset of symptoms.

Nerves of the cauda equina may also be affected in meningomyelocele, a severe form of spina bifida caused by a folic acid deficiency in the pregnant female. In meningomyelocele, neural tissues including the meninges and nerve roots protrude through a vertebral defect, typically in the lumbosacral region, and is accompanied by neurological deficits below the level of the lesion.