Treatment requires a multidisciplinary treatment approach. It is important to believe that the woman has pain.  In many cases, the woman has been struggling for a long time in silence, or she has seen many practitioners, and no one has helped her. Different practitioners may be involved in the care of this patient. When a patient finds the correct practitioners, they may include a gynecologist with a special interest in vulvovaginal disease health usually involved in the societies ISSWSH and ISSVD, a dermatologist, a neurologist, a pain management specialist, a urologist, and/or a physical therapist who specializes in women's health.

**Treatment Modalities**

- Vulvar self-care: Avoid irritants, directly or through diet

- Oral "pain-blocking" medications: These may be effective in alleviating vulvodynia pain. The classes of drugs are tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), and anticonvulsants. The TCAs are used most often, and the most commonly used among them are amitriptyline and nortriptyline. Because nortriptyline has fewer side effects, it is usually the first choice. The dose is lower than that which is used to treat depression. Due to side effects, it is suggested to begin with very low doses and increase gradually. The more commonly used SNRIs are duloxetine and venlafaxine, and the anticonvulsants typically used are gabapentin, pregabalin, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, and topiramate.

- Topical medications applied directly to the vulva can alleviate pain as long as there are no allergens in the ointments. These are usually compounded. Examples combined or used alone are lidocaine, estrogen, testosterone, and gabapentin.

- Women's health physical therapy has become an effective addition to the treatment of vulvodynia. Most patients should be referred for evaluation and treatment of pelvic floor muscle weakness and spasm. Treatment includes exercises, massage, soft tissue work, and joint mobilization.

- Nerve block, psychotherapy, mindfulness, yoga, and neurostimulation are also helpful in treatment.

- Surgery is reserved for specific patients. It is for provoked vestibular vulvodynia. Vaginal advancement involves removing the vestibule and the involved area of the vagina. Physical therapy and the use of dilators after therapy are recommended.