Anaerobic infections are common in both outpatients and inpatients. Because these infections can affect various organs and present in diverse ways, they are best managed by an interprofessional team. Primary care providers, nurse practitioners, and other healthcare workers need to consult with an infectious disease expert when faced with an infection that does not respond to conventional antibiotics or has an odd presentation. General surgeons are often consulted for drainage. The pharmacist should review the choice of medication, drug interactions, and patient compliance and report concerns to the team. Nurses should assist with coordination of care, facilitate communication between the interprofessional team members, and assist with patient and family education. Specialty trained nurses, including medical-surgical and infection control, should be involved, as needed.

Anaerobic infections, when misdiagnosed, carry a high mortality.

The prognosis depends upon the type of anaerobic infection.

- In this era of tetanus vaccination and the availability of supportive care, tetanus is not seen in the developed part of the world. In any child with clean penetrating, wound tetanus vaccination should ensue, and in cases of the contaminated wound, consideration should be made on the use of tetanus vaccine and tetanus immunoglobulins based on the last tetanus vaccine.

- Any contaminated wound should be cleaned, and the removal of a foreign body should be done.

- Good dental and oral hygiene prevent anaerobic infections.

- For abdominal surgeries requiring entrance of hollow viscus, an antibiotic with anaerobic activity such as cefoxitin should be considered.