There are 3 primary stages in the POCT process: pre-analytical, analytical, and post-analytical. The pre-analytical phase occurs before running the POCT on a sample and involves collection, transport, preparation, and loading. The analytical phase is the stage in which the actual testing sequence of a POCT is conducted. The post-analytical phase begins when testing is complete, and an obtained result is available. During this phase, the obtained result from the test is communicated for treatment through the electronic medical record (EMR) or written or verbal instructions directly to the treatment team. The post-analytical step is also when "so-called" critical values, which are values that deviate significantly from normal reference values and indicate a pathological process. The resultant values are interpreted during this step to guide appropriate actions and interventions.

Specimen collection and handling are critical components of POCT since testing is performed directly on the collected specimen.

Adhering to the manufacturer's instructions for use (MIFU) or package insert is crucial in ensuring accurate testing in POCT. This is particularly important regarding sample preparation, including factors like centrifugation time, and may vary between manufacturers and sample types. Professionals performing POCT should carefully follow the specific instructions provided by the manufacturer for each apparatus used. Professionals prefer some POCT methods that utilize whole blood as they eliminate the need for additional processing steps or centrifugation. Additionally, sample collection containers must be within the manufacturer's date stamp to maintain the quality and reliability of the testing process.

POCTs are more susceptible to interfering substances and have a narrow margin of error due to smaller sample sizes compared to conventional laboratory tests.

Proper technique is crucial when drawing samples, particularly when accessing a central line.

Samples collected for blood gas analysis are susceptible to changes in oxygen partial pressure. Therefore, it is crucial to maintain anaerobic conditions during sample collection to ensure accurate laboratory values.