MI utilizes several techniques and skills to encourage patients to discontinue harmful behaviors and transition to behaviors that improve their health. The spirit of MI is essential regardless of whether the patient is pre-contemplative or maintaining change. It is important always to implement a sense of partnership and empathy between the provider and patient. When providers offer open-ended questions regarding patient motivations, it creates a sense of compassion and interest, allowing patients to open up. It was discovered early on in MI that simply giving patients the facts and information on why change is beneficial, or warnings against their current behaviors tended to have the opposite response and caused more resistance.

Researchers determined that MI is appropriately utilized when at least 70% of questions are open-ended. Additionally, providers should practice active listening and reflection regarding their patients. Repeating the patient's words in a neutral way is the most straightforward strategy a healthcare professional can utilize to allow the patient to feel heard and can be expanded upon to allow patients to reflect on other perspectives as well as their own inconsistencies. Evocative open-ended questions help orient patients to a goal-oriented mindset and enable them to talk themselves into change.

Asking the patients their personal pros and cons to utilizing the intervention, as well as how important they think the intervention is, helps the provider to understand their internal values. Providers can then gently challenge these views by exploring the extremes if they do or do not utilize the behavioral change. Reflection can also assist the provider in shifting the focus away from barriers and reframing negative interpretations to positive ones. Throughout the process, it is important to emphasize that every patient has a personal choice and to listen to their wishes.

It is then possible to use the Elicit-Share-Elicit strategy to learn what information they obtained from the discussion, share pertinent facts, and reassess their knowledge and how they will utilize it.