# Introduction

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is a bilateral structure located in the anterior part of the hypothalamus. It is the central pacemaker of the circadian timing system and regulates most circadian rhythms in the body.

# Structure and Function

The suprachiasmatic nucleus consists of two nuclei comprised of approximately 10000 neurons located on each side of the third ventricle, directly above the optic chiasm. The SCN divides into "core" and "shell" subregions, with vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) in the retino-recipient core and arginine vasopressin (AVP)-expressing cells in the shell.

In the core subregion, VIP increases during the dark period, whereas GRP increases during the light period and is specifically activated by direct inputs from photosensitive ganglion cells in the retina via the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT).

# Embryology

The suprachiasmatic nucleus is one of many nuclei of the hypothalamus. During the early embryonic development of the nervous system, the prosencephalon or forebrain differentiates into the diencephalon and telencephalon. Originating from the ventral part of the diencephalon, the hypothalamus subdivides into four rostrocaudal segments: the preoptic, anterior, tuberal, and mammillary segments. Each region three mediolateral zones, known as the lateral, medial, and periventricular zones.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The blood supply of the hypothalamus originates from the circle of Willis, which lies inferior to the hypothalamus at the base of the brain. The vascular morphology of the suprachiasmatic nucleus includes branches of the anterior cerebral artery and the anterior communicating artery.

# Nerves

**1. Afferent Projections and Neurotransmitters**

The afferent projections of the suprachiasmatic nucleus were described initially in the early 1980s through research with hamsters. Krout and colleagues discovered that approximately 40 brain regions have monosynaptic projections to the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

The RHT receives direct inputs from photosensitive ganglion cells in the retina. By secreting glutamate into the core VIP regions of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the RHT mediates the photic regulation of circadian rhythmicity.

The median raphe nuclei from the midbrain release serotonin neurotransmitters to retinorecipient regions of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, specifically its VIP-containing regions. The primary role of the median raphe nuclei is to modulate pacemaker responses to light within the SCN. During the daytime, serotonin activates the circadian pacemaker by potentiating glutamate input, then at nighttime inhibits this input. Serotonin regulates SCN neurons by both presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms.

Other afferent projections to the suprachiasmatic nucleus arise from the pedunculopontine, parabigeminal, and laterodorsal tegmentum nuclei. These projections carry cholinergic neurotransmitters to the SCN.

**2. Efferent Projections and Neurotransmitters**

Most monosynaptic efferents of suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons terminate in nearby hypothalamic and thalamic nuclei. In the hypothalamus, efferent SCN projections terminate at several nuclei: the medial preoptic nucleus, subparaventricular zone, ventromedial nucleus, dorsomedial nucleus, ventral lateral geniculate nucleus, and lateral septal nucleus.

The major polysynaptic efferents of suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons project to the pineal gland. During the night, these fibers release norepinephrine and stimulate postsynaptic beta-1 and alpha-1 adrenergic receptors on pinealocytes, triggering the production of melatonin. Melatonin serves as a humoral signal that varies in intensity as the nights lengthen then shorten throughout the year. Melatonin production is thereby prolonged in the winter season when nights are longer, as compared to the summer season when melatonin production shortens.

As the master oscillator, the suprachiasmatic nucleus uses humoral and neuronal inputs to coordinate peripheral circadian clocks. Peripheral organs including the lung, liver, kidney, heart, and muscle all produce circadian gene expression based on the combination of photic input to the SCN and non-photic input such as the timing of food intake or motor activity.

# Physiologic Variants

**Seasonal Changes**

The neurotransmitters involved in the suprachiasmatic nucleus' circadian activity also affect other seasonal processes. In the winter, melatonin rhythms are delayed by approximately 90 minutes compared with those of the summer. Levels of serotonin (5-HT) peak between October and November before declining again and reaching a nadir between December and January. Reductions in 5-HT concentrations during the winter months coincide with an increased prevalence of seasonal affective disorder during this period. Rodent studies have shown that changes in 5-HT production from the midbrain raphe nuclei affect circadian behavior and neuroendocrine rhythms. In the early autumn months of August to October, the number of vasopressin-containing and VIP-containing neurons is significantly higher than in the late spring months of April to June.

**Age-related changes**

Increasing disruption of the sleep-wake cycle is an expected phenomenon of normal aging. Approximately 40 to 70% of elders experience chronic sleep disturbances. Nakamura and colleagues conducted in vivo studies of aging mice and found reduced-amplitude electrical activity from the SCN as well as decreased neuronal efferent projections from the SCN to the subparaventricular zone of the hypothalamus.

# Clinical Significance

**Chronopharmacology**

Detailed knowledge of the suprachiasmatic nucleus' afferent and efferent projections and its respective neurotransmitters is essential for understanding the mechanisms of the master circadian clock, and for suggesting intervention targets to address circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Designing effective pharmaceutical interventions depends upon many factors that include multiple components of drug absorption, metabolism, excretion, and chronopharmacology; optimal drug doses may vary depending on when administration occurs within the circadian cycle.

**Mood Disorders**

Research has linked disrupted circadian rhythmicity with mood disorders including bipolar disorder, seasonal affective disorder, and other depressive disorders. Patients with major depressive disorder, for instance, frequently report early morning awakenings and insomnia. It has been postulated that circadian rhythms are phase-delayed in major depressive disorder.

**Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders**

**1. Advanced sleep phase (ASP) disorder and delayed sleep phase (DSP) disorder**

Approximately 50 to 70 million adults in the United States live with chronic sleep disorders that have adverse effects on their health and quality of life. The International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD-3), published by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM), classified more than 80 distinct sleep disorders.

**2. Shift work sleep disorder**

Shift work sleep disorder affects adults with non-standard work schedules that include overnight shifts and rotating day-night schedules that disrupt normal 24-hour sleep-wake cycles. Aging adults begin to lose circadian adaptation to shift work schedules and tend to become sleepier during the daytime compared with young adults who perform similar shift work.

**3. Irregular sleep-wake rhythm (ISWR) disorder**

In irregular sleep-wake rhythm (ISWR) disorder, the sleep-wake cycle loses its normal circadian rhythm. ISWR disorder is often associated with intellectual disability in children and dementia in elders with risk factors that include comorbid psychiatric and medical illnesses.