As previously noted, solitary osteochondromas are generally discovered incidentally on radiographs while patients with HME present with symptoms leading to radiographic evaluation. Osteochondromas involving the long bones (most common location) generally have a pathognomonic appearance and require no further imaging evaluation. On radiographs, the lesions localize to the surface of the bone in the region of the metaphysis, when involving long bones, with medullary and cortical continuity. The lesions may be sessile or pedunculated. When pedunculated, they point away from the adjacent joint. The characteristic cartilage cap is not easily assessable on radiographs. Not surprisingly, lesions in skeletally immature patients may increase in size over time. However, osteochondromas should not enlarge following skeletal maturity. Enlarging lesions in skeletally mature patients is concerning for malignancy. Additional radiographic findings concerning for malignant transformation would include changes in morphology, periostitis, or new indistinctness of the cortical margins. Lesions of the flat bones (scapula, pelvis, spine) are often indeterminant on radiographs and require further imaging to demonstrate the corticomedullary continuity.

If the patient is symptomatic or demonstrates concerning radiographic features, further evaluation with cross-sectional imaging (MRI, CT, or US) is indicated to assess for potential complications. MRI is ideal for assessing the cartilage cap, which if thickened, may indicate malignant transformation. The cartilage cap will demonstrate intermediate to high signal on T2 and proton density (PD) weighted images. Cartilage caps are generally thicker in skeletally immature patients (range 1 to 3 cm). In skeletally mature patients, the cartilage cap is generally only a few millimeters. Cartilage caps greater than 2 cm, especially in skeletally mature patients are concerning for malignant transformation and require tissue sampling.

MRI also offers an exceptional assessment of other complications. Bursae show up well on T2 and PD fat-suppressed images appearing as well defined hyperintense fluid collections with or without bursitis. MRI is also useful to assess displacement and/or impingement on neurovascular structures. In patients with neurologic findings, the involved nerve may be displaced, enlarged, and/or demonstrate a hyperintense T2/PD signal. Additionally, the musculature innervated by the affected nerve may demonstrate edema (acute denervation injury), fatty infiltration (chronic denervation injury) or both. Vascular complications may include pseudoaneurysm formation, compression, or occlusion. The presentation of vascular complications will vary depending on the involvement of arterial or venous structures. In the setting of fracture, MRI will demonstrate bone marrow edema and periosteal reaction. The extent of these findings will vary with chronicity and the extent of healing.

Patients with HME commonly demonstrate bowing deformities of the long bones, short stature, and short extremities. The distribution of the multiple lesions varies in the literature with some authors reporting bilateral symmetric distribution while others report unilateral. The individual lesions are similar to the solitary form with both sessile and pedunculated lesions present. Malignant transformation is more common in patients with HME, and therefore, clinical and imaging surveillance is required.

Bone scintigraphy is generally not helpful as both benign and malignant lesions may demonstrate increased radiotracer activity.