The first step in the management of PCT is the avoidance of precipitating and susceptibility factors. Since this is a photosensitive skin condition, sunlight avoidance is the key until the porphyrin levels have normalized. The wavelengths inducing porphyrins are in the range of 400-410nm, and only titanium dioxide or zinc oxide containing sunscreen is effective.

The mainstay therapies of PCT are phlebotomy and hydroxychloroquine. Depending on the specific comorbidities and susceptibility factors, we can choose one over the other.

**Phlebotomy:**Any condition leading to iron overload in the patient is a clear indication for phlebotomy, and in such cases, phlebotomy is preferred over hydroxychloroquine. Different protocols have been tried, such as removing one unit or 450 ml of blood every two weeks. Strict serial monitoring of ferritin levels is done, and a downward trend in serum ferritin level is the goal of phlebotomy (till a ferritin level of less than 20 ng/ml is seen).

**Hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine:**These are preferred therapies in cases where ferritin levels are not elevated (below 600 ng/mL) or a patient without an HFE mutation. They act by inhibiting the formation and secretion of porphyrins.

**Chelation therapy:**Iron chelation was considered to be an alternative in people with iron overload-induced PCT, but after comparative studies with phlebotomy and hydroxychloroquine, it was not found to be as efficient. However, deferoxamine and deferasirox can be used in patients with contraindications to both phlebotomy and hydroxychloroquine. The disadvantages of chelation therapy other than being expensive due to the use of a subcutaneous pump were the failure to normalize the porphyrin level even after 12 months of treatment.