**Methotrexate and Folic Acid Deficiency**

Methotrexate, a folic acid antagonist, is commonly used in cancer chemotherapy, inflammatory and autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis. As an irreversible competitive inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase, it blocks the conversion of dihydrofolate (DHF) to tetrahydrofolate (THF). It therefore prevents cellular proliferation by preventing the synthesis of thymidine, a building block for nucleic acid synthesis and thus ultimately inhibiting DNA and RNA synthesis. Therefore, all patients receiving methotrexate are given supplemental folic acid to prevent hematologic, gastrointestinal, and hepatic side effects.

**Megaloblastic Anemia**

Deficiency of either folic acid or cobalamin (vitamin B12) can result in megaloblastic anemia due to inhibition of DNA synthesis caused by decreased availability of purines and pyrimidines (Thymidine monophosphate). This results in enlarged red blood cells and accumulation of significant, immature precursors (megaloblasts) of RBCs in the blood and bone marrow.  The folate deficiency manifests in fatigue, muscle weakness, tingling of extremities, and loss of joint position/coordination.

**Neural Tube Defects**

Folic acid deficiency is a known cause of neural tube defects such as spina bifida and anencephaly. During the first few weeks of fetal development, folic acid is a critical requirement for several folate-dependent processes. Therefore it is important that pregnant women and those planning to conceive ensure adequate folic acid consumption.

**Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (MTHFR) Deficiency**

Mutation in the MTHFR gene results in elevated plasma levels of homocysteine (hyperhomocysteinemia) as the defect in this enzyme prevents the conversion of homocysteine to methionine. MTHFR is the rate-limiting enzyme that catalyzes the formation of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate from N5, N10-methylene tetrahydrofolate, a cosubstrate for methylation of homocysteine to methionine. Genetic testing is available to identify this condition. It is important to diagnose hyperhomocysteinemia early since it is a risk factor for atherosclerosis, venous thrombosis, myocardial infarction, and other cardiovascular conditions.

**Antibiotics**

Trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole are antibiotic drugs used in combination for the treatment of certain bacterial infections. Trimethoprim inhibits DHFR and prevents the synthesis of THF. Sulfamethoxazole is a structural analog of para-aminobenzoic acid that inhibits the bacterial synthesis of DHF.