Body mass index or BMI is a statistical index using a person's weight and height to provide an estimate of body fat in males and females of any age. It is calculated by taking a person's weight, in kilograms, divided by their height, in meters squared, or BMI = weight (in kg)/ height^2 (in m^2). The number generated from this equation is then the individual's BMI number. The National Institute of Health (NIH) now uses BMI to define a person as underweight, normal weight, overweight, or obese instead of traditional height vs. weight charts. These classifications for BMI are in use by the NIH and the World Health Organization (WHO) for White, Hispanic, and Black individuals. The cutoffs underestimate the obesity risk in the Asian and South Asian populations, so their classification has slight alterations. The BMI number and classifications are listed below.

- Severely underweight - BMI less than 16.5kg/m^2

- Underweight - BMI under 18.5 kg/m^2

- Normal weight - BMI greater than or equal to 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m^2

- Overweight – BMI greater than or equal to 25 to 29.9 kg/m^2

- Obesity – BMI greater than or equal to 30 kg/m^2

- 
              
- Obesity class I – BMI 30 to 34.9 kg/m^2
              
              
- Obesity class II – BMI 35 to 39.9 kg/m^2
              
              
- Obesity class III – BMI greater than or equal to 40 kg/m^2 (also referred to as severe, extreme, or massive obesity)

- Asian and South Asian population

- 
              
- overweight - BMI between 23 and 24.9 kg/m^2
              
              
- obesity - BMI greater than 25 kg/m^2