**Data Analysis From the Vascular Quality Initiative for Promotion of Quality In Vascular Medicine**

In 2011, the SVS created its own patient safety organization called the Vascular Quality Initiative (VQI). The VQI enables its member institutions (that provide the VQI with their own data) to access the VQI's entire database, which extends to 2001 and includes data from nearly one million procedures. The VQI includes data from patients who have undergone vascular surgery or minimally invasive image-guided vascular procedures. Retrospective analyses from this database have risen exponentially since the first publication in 2014 and reached several hundred analyses per year as of 2021.

Nearly all of the analyses include nonrandomized data, which is poor at allowing causal inferences and does not enable accurate effect sizes to be determined.

Many of the database analyses are traditional outcome-based assessments focusing on how different surgical/procedural techniques (including types of equipment used) did or did not affect patient outcomes. For example, one analysis found that patients undergoing superficial femoral artery endovascular stenting had fewer complications if the procedure was performed with popliteal artery access than upper extremity artery access, while the technical success of their procedures was equivalent regardless of whether the arterial access point was the popliteal artery or an upper extremity artery.****

Relatively few analyses specifically investigate the processes or structures that may be responsible for the outcomes of interest.

Nevertheless, the data have been used to evaluate many processes, structures, and outcomes pertinent to healthcare service quality, including:

- Medical management of patients undergoing surgical/endovascular procedures

- Patient risk stratification

- Health law creation and enforcement

- Cost of care and its ramifications for decisions on care reimbursement or recommendations

- Federal and other national healthcare organization guidelines/standards

- Local hospital policy on postoperative patient follow-up

- Procedure time planning

- Physician assessment and

- Patient-customer experience.

The following discussion of findings obtained from the database is organized according to the topic headings listed. The type of each cited study is included to indicate the level of evidence.

**Medical Management of Patients Undergoing Surgical/Endovascular Procedures**

- Drug therapy:

- Patients prescribed aspirin and a second antiplatelet drug after revascularization procedures for severe lower extremity ischemia had higher survival rates at hospital discharge than patients administered one antiplatelet drug alone.
- Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs/angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) were independently associated with improved survival and amputation-free survival in patients undergoing peripheral vascular intervention (PVI) for chronic limb-threatening ischemia (CLTI).****This suggests that an RCT should be performed to determine whether ACEs/ARBs can be found to have a similar effect when confounding variables are eliminated.

- Oxygen-carrying capacity therapy: Patients undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair who had low preoperative hemoglobin levels were found to be more likely to have AKI than patients with normal hemoglobin levels, and patients with postoperative AKI had lower survival rates than patients without AKI.****case-control]****This suggests that VCHPs should agree upon a minimum threshold to optimize patients' hemoglobin levels prior to performing AAA repair.

**Patient Risk Stratification**

- Overall disease/morbidity status: Patients who underwent endovascular AAA repair and had low Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group functional status scores had higher inpatient and one-year post-procedure mortality than similarly exposed patients who had normal scores.****This suggests that ECOG status is useful for predicting mortality for patients in this setting.

- Baseline anatomy status: Superficial femoral arteries with small native calibers were less likely to maintain patency after angioplasty alone than large arteries.****case-control]****This suggests that patients with small SFAs have a higher risk for poor angioplasty outcomes.

**Hospital Resource Meaningful Use**

- Hospital unit services: Patients who underwent AAA repair who were treated at hospitals where all such patients were observed post-operatively in an ICU had longer lengths of stay without having improved morbidity or mortality compared to similar patients treated at hospitals where postoperative patients were selectively admitted to the ICU depending on their postoperative health status.****retrospective cohort]****This suggests that a blanket policy of post-AAA repair ICU admission does not promote meaningful use of resources.

- Radiology services: Patients who underwent AAA repair and who underwent stress tests prior to surgery did not experience a statistically significant reduction in perioperative adverse cardiac events or mortality compared to similar patients who did not undergo stress tests.

- Anesthesiology services: Patients who underwent outpatient brachiocephalic fistula creation surgery under general surgery had increased hospital admissions and similar 1-year access occlusion and reintervention rates compared to similar patients who underwent regional anesthesia.

**Health Law Creation and Enforcement**

- Patients with aortic aneurysms in states agreeing with the federal government to undergo Medicaid expansion policies were found to have higher rates of elective procedures. They decreased procedural complications compared to patients in non-Medicaid expansion states.****This suggests that providing patients with health insurance enables more patients to have an aneurysm repair prior to a point where performing the repair becomes risky.

- Patients with kidney failure in Medicaid expansion states were more likely to be able to undergo the algorithm recommended by the National Kidney Foundation guidelines (i.e., definitive surgical treatment without prior temporizing non-surgical pre-dialysis care) than patients in non-Medicaid expansion states. Hispanic patients, in particular, experienced this benefit.****This suggests that providing these patients with healthcare insurance enables them to seek treatments in their best long-term interests instead of receiving short-term emergency fixes that have less beneficial outcomes overall.

- Smoking tobacco taxes were associated with decreased cigarette use in patients seeking care for intermittent claudication.****This suggests that financial incentives can help modify some poor health habits in patients with vascular disease.

**Cost of Care and Its Ramifications for Decisions on Care Reimbursement or Recommendations**

- A comparison of Medicare claims paid between patients undergoing elective endovascular or open AAA repair between 2004 and 2015 found no long-term differences in cumulative disease-related costs. The findings suggest that recommendations and policies for endovascular vs. surgical treatment for these patients should not be based on the relative costs of these procedures at particular institutions.

**Federal and Other National Healthcare Organization Guidelines/Standards**

- Patient screening criteria: SVS criteria were reported to be more likely to detect patients who developed AAAs than USPSTF criteria.

- Patient selection for invasive therapy: SVS guidelines state that physicians should achieve an outcome standard where they select endovascular or surgical techniques 'appropriately' to achieve at least two years of symptom-free recurrence for outpatients seeking relief from intermittent claudication in at least 50% of such patients. However, a review of the data found that, even in this group of relatively healthy patients, such 2-year periods were only achieved in about one-third of patients undergoing invasive therapy regardless of whether an endovascular or surgical technique was used.****This suggests that the national 'standard' is not a realistic measure of real-life outcome rates.

- Threshold parameters for determining care quality: AHRQ publishes on its website a list of patient safety indicators (potentially avoidable adverse outcomes, abbreviated as PSI), which was on its tenth revision as of 2020. Some insurance companies grade hospital performance based on whether adverse outcomes occur that match one of AHRQ's PSIs.  Review of the outcomes of 154 patients at a single hospital reported that both the American College of Surgeons' National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database and the SVS VQI database were more likely to detect "important… clinically relevant" complications from open AAA repair than AHRQ's PSI list.****This suggests that AHRQ's PSI list should not be used to determine hospital grades based on AAA repair surgery adverse outcomes.

- Radiation exposure tracking:****Compared to the****calculated air kerma (the measurement used as the 'gold standard'), the dose area product was a more accurate representation of radiation exposure than fluoroscopy time.********This suggests that if the organization's fluoroscopy machine provides a dose area product, then tracking that number is more relevant and useful than tracking fluoroscopy machine use times.

**Local Hospital Policy on Postoperative Patient Follow-up**

- Patients who were lost to follow-up after endovascular AAA repair had worse outcomes than patients who remained in clinical surveillance after the procedure.

**Procedure Time Planning**

- Individual patient characteristics, specific surgical maneuvers, and types of complications were able to be quantified concerning how much more time they added to procedures.

**Physician Assessment**

- The number of years of experience performing a particular surgery (below-the-knee arterial reconstruction) was found to be more closely associated with achieving a low number of surgical complications than the volume of those surgeries the surgeon performed in the last year.****This suggests that more experienced surgeons who are doing fewer procedures can still perform as well as surgeons of any age performing more procedures and that reaching a 'magic number' on a case log for the number of procedures performed in a defined recent period is not the best predictor of procedural competency, contrary to what some hospital credentialing officials may believe.

**Patient-Customer Experience**

- Patients with varicose veins who chose telemedicine evaluations prior to decisions for next steps in invasive venous therapy had equivalent outcomes to patients with similar preoperative demographics disease severity who chose traditional in-person evaluations (that require greater time and cost for the patient-customer).****This implies that the patient-customer experience can be improved by offering telemedicine evaluations for these patients.