Prompt administration of diphtheria antitoxin, along with the antibiotics coverage, is the mainstay of treatment, as evident in some epidemiological surveys claiming it to be 97% effective.

The antibiotics are administered to neutralize the offending pathogens. The most commonly used antibiotics are penicillin and erythromycin, which are usually given for a minimum of two weeks. It should be followed by nasopharyngeal and throat culture taken 24 hours after the completion of antibiotics. If cultures are still positive, another course of antibiotics for ten days can be added. There have been many concerns regarding the antibiotic resistance of the bacteria. The first case of multi-drug resistant C diphtheria, resistant to erythromycin, was first reported by Mina et al. in Canada.

A study carried out in Vietnam in 1998 found out that there were increasing multi-drug resistant strains, which showed that four out of fifteen isolates tested were found to be resistant to erythromycin but were still sensitive to penicillin. A similar portrait was also seen in Brazil, where seven out of forty-seven tested were found to be resistant to penicillin, while that of erythromycin was two out of forty-seven,

Immunization against diphtheria begins early in life. Three initial doses are given at 4 to 8 weeks apart, starting with the first dose of the series, usually given in the second month of life. The fourth dose is given after one year of the third dose, followed by a fourth dose approximately one year after the last primary vaccination.