Due to the intrinsic and extrinsic nature of the urinary tract system, pathologies can range from neurological, obstruction, or infection.

Incontinence is a common issue that can occur in the elderly, patients with diabetes, or post-menopausal females, for example. Urge incontinence characteristically presents as the sudden feeling to pass urine with the cause most likely idiopathic. Stress incontinence is voiding after an increase in intrabdominal pressure, such as from coughing or sneezing, most likely from dysfunctional urethral closure. Overflow incontinence is an increase in post-void residual urine due to incomplete emptying of the bladder. Mixed urinary incontinence is a condition combining of both stress and urge incontinence.

The narrowing of the ureter at certain junctions, as stated above, may cause the formation of ureteral calculi due to stasis and, thus, further obstruction. The most common places are at the ureteropelvic junction, ureterovesical junction, and when they cross the common iliac vessels.

Because of its physiological function, the urinary tract system is prone to urinary tract infections (UTIs). Urethritis is more common in females because of the urethra's shorter length and proximity to the anus than in males. Cystitis is inflammation of the bladder and can present with suprapubic pain and urinary urgency and frequency. Prostatitis is inflammation of the prostate. Pyelonephritis is inflammation of the renal parenchyma and pelvis. It can present with upper UTI symptoms such as fevers, flank pain, and costovertebral angle tenderness along with lower UTI symptoms such as dysuria, urinary urgency, and frequency.