A timely diagnosis and treatment are crucial, and in most of the cases, it is necessary to admit the patient to an intensive care unit for continuous assessment. The presence of an LDH level 1 times the upper normal value, a cardiac troponin level greater than 0.25 ng/mL on diagnosis, and older age are associated with death and treatment refractory.

The first-line therapy for an acute episode is based on daily therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE). It should be started as soon as possible at 1.5 times the patient plasma volume. When the TPE supply is deficient ADAMTS-13, then remove autoantibodies, immune complexes, vWF multimers, and probably pro-inflammatory cytokines. The therapy is performed daily until the platelet count has stably recovered (greater than 150 x 10 to the power of 9/L for 2 consecutive days) with normal or normalizing LDH and no additional organ dysfunction. In refractory disease, a twice-daily TPE might be useful.

In cTTP regular plasma infusions supply ADAMTS-13. This prophylactic approach is used to avoid the acute episodes. The requirements can vary among patients, and there are no official guidelines to drive the management.

Corticosteroids continue as first-line therapy in conjunction with TPE in the absence of obvious contraindication. The role in acute episodes is related to the autoimmune nature of TTP. The benefits of this intervention include the reduction in the number of sessions of TPE to achieve remission and reduction of treatment-associated complications. Higher doses are preferred to standard doses (methylprednisolone 10 mg/kg/day for 3 days following of 2.5 mg/kg/day compared to 1 mg/kg/day) because they lead to higher remission rate.

The transfusion of platelets is controversial, and the results of studies realized in decades previous to the appearance of the standard of care suggest that this practices might be harmful. However, the majority of evidence was anecdotal, the groups studied were different, and many of them did not evaluate this relationship. Data from the Oklahoma TTP-HUS registry demonstrated no difference in the frequency of dead or severe neurologic abnormalities in patients who received platelets from those who did not. It is important to consider that this evidence should not be used to take a liberal polity for transfusion: the use of platelets should be limited to patients with overt bleeding or before invasive procedures.

Up to 50% of patients are refractory or unresponsive to the first-line therapy. In this situation, the use of rituximab might stop the autoantibody production by killing the ADAMTS-13-specific B cells. Usually, it is administered as 4 weekly doses of 375 mg/m2.

Other drugs like vincristine, cyclosporine A, cyclophosphamide, and Bortezomib could be helpful in refractory cases by suppressing the production of autoantibodies.

Historically the splenectomy showed mixed results; now it would be considered to treat patients who relapse or are refractory to TPE and/or rituximab. This in accordance with evidence that suggests that splenic B cells that produce ADAMTS/13 autoantibodies might escape to anti-CD20 therapy.

A major challenge is the unpredictable risk of relapse, usually occurring 1 or 2 years after the first episode. In patients with low activity of ADAMTS-13, the use of rituximab can reduce the risk of relapse; however, some patients experiment a relapse as late as 20 years, and the harms of treatment should be considered (infusion reactions, hepatitis B reactivation, pulmonary fibrosis and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy). Limited comparative studies exist about this topic, but some data suggest that the risk of relapse exceeds the harms of rituximab administration.