Two important muscles within the middle ear are responsible for modulating the auditory signal:

Stapedius muscle

The stapedius muscle is only one millimeter in length, making it the smallest skeletal muscle in the entire body. The stapedius is attached to the stapes and helps modulate the transfer of sound waves from the external environment to the inner ear. In particular, it serves to decrease the vibration of the stapes, thereby dampening the sound energy that reaches the cochlea. The stapedius muscle receives innervation by a branch of the facial nerve (CN VII). Dysfunction of the stapedius muscle can lead to hyperacusis, a disorder characterized by impaired tolerance to certain noises due to an inability to dampen sounds entering the middle ear.

Tensor tympani

The tensor tympani also plays a role in sound modulation by tensing the tympanic membrane to prevent loud sounds from damaging the inner ear. The tensor tympani originates in the cartilaginous portion of the Eustachian tube that connects the pharynx to the middle ear. The muscle inserts on the medial portion of the malleus. It gets innervated by the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). The tensor tympani is activated during talking, chewing, coughing, and laughing.

Middle ear myoclonus (MEM), one of many causes of pulsatile tinnitus, is due to dysfunction of either the tensor tympani or stapedius muscle. It is often characterized as a clicking sound with the involvement of the tensor tympani and as a buzzing sound when due to the dysfunctional movement of the stapedius. It has also been described as a tapping, throbbing, fluttering, or whooshing sound. The tinnitus is usually objective and, therefore, can be heard by the examiner. MEM has been treated successfully in the past with surgical removal of the involved tendon. However, there is still some controversy over what the best approach to treatment is, warranting more prospective controlled trials.