A high-frequency linear transducer should be placed on the patient’s midaxillary line in the transverse plane, at the level of the fifth rib, with the indicator oriented toward the operator’s left. With the rib, pleural line, and overlying serratus anterior and latissimus dorsi muscles visualized, the skin can be anesthetized with a small volume of local anesthetic. Then, using ultrasound guidance, the needle is advanced in-plane at an angle of approximately 45 degrees towards the fifth rib. For the superficial SAPB, the local anesthetic is injected anteriorly to the serratus anterior.

For the deep SAPB, the local anesthetic is injected anteriorly to the rib and deep to the serratus anterior. The entirety of the needle should be visualized at all times throughout the procedure, and care should be taken to avoid any vessels while traversing the soft tissue. Once the needle tip is observed in the appropriate plane, a small aliquot of 1 to 3 mL of local anesthetic should be injected to confirm placement and to hydro-dissect the fascial layers and open the potential space. After opening the fascial plane, a larger volume of dilute local anesthetic, for example, 30 to 40 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine, should be gradually injected. The local anesthetic will appear as an enlarging anechoic stripe between fascial layers. Remove the needle and cover with sterile gauze or adhesive dressing. Reassess the patient’s pain level for improvement approximately five minutes after the block is complete.