The guiding principle of treatment for intermittent claudication is that around 1% to 2% of patients with claudication ever progress to limb-threatening ischemia. Under this pretense, initial aggressive treatment strategies are discouraged. Most patients with intermittent claudication can be treated with medical interventions.

Medical management includes smoking cessation, antiplatelet agents, statin therapy, blood pressure modification, glucose control, structured walking programs, and cilostazol. Structured walking programs improve pain-free walking distance better than pharmacologic therapy alone. It is important to note that continued smoking with walking therapy restricts improvement in these patients. A three-month trial of smoking cessation, ambulation, and cilostazol is typically prescribed. Headaches are the most common side-effect of cilostazol and may warrant a dose reduction. Patients undergoing medical management should have frequent follow-ups to assess their symptom relief. Most patients are instructed to walk at least three ten-minute walks daily.

Any patient with intermittent claudication or peripheral arterial disease should also be evaluated for coexisting cardiac disease. If symptoms are worsening despite medical treatment, or if symptoms are considered disabling or lifestyle-limiting, intervention may be considered. Other considerations for invasive procedures may include atherosclerotic lesion characteristics and patient prognosis. Intervention may initially involve minimally-invasive endovascular angioplasty, stenting, or atherectomy.

Percutaneous techniques are typically performed via the femoral artery with the insertion of a sheath with wires and catheters to the diseased region. Lesions that are multifocal, long, or heavily calcified may not be amenable to endovascular repair. In these cases, intervention may ultimately require an endarterectomy or a conduit bypass. The conduit can either be an autogenous vein or prosthetic material. In 2007 the Society for Vascular Surgery developed the Trans-Atlantic Inter-Society Consensus (TASC II) guidelines that can aid physicians in determining whether endovascular or open surgery should be pursued in a patient. The classification identifies lesions as A, B, C, or D based on location, number, length, and severity of the stenosis. The complications of any surgical intervention should also be considered - these include vessel or graft conduit thrombosis, in-stent stenosis or fracture, and infection.