Craniofacial distraction osteogenesis can be utilized to help alleviate the effects of cranial malformations. Whether to avoid tracheostomy for upper airway obstruction or to relieve intracranial hypertension caused by craniosynostosis, distraction osteogenesis is widely used in the care of patients with abnormalities of the craniofacial skeleton.

Mandibular distraction osteogenesis is successful in preventing tracheostomy or allowing decannulation in 97.6% of patients with isolated Piere Robin Sequence, and >90% of syndromic PRS, but is far less successful in patients with concurrent lower airway abnormalities such as tracheomalacia. Some centers will defer mandibular distraction of the mandible until a later age in these patients, as the rate of tracheostomy is similar, whether or not they undergo mandibular distraction.

When performed for midface hypoplasia, distraction osteogenesis can greatly improve the sunken-in appearance of the face, protect the eyes from damaging intra-ocular pressures, alleviate intracranial hypertension, as well as successfully treat obstructive sleep apnea. The procedure may increase the success rate of facial advancement surgery when compared to traditional rigid methods and may avoid secondary operations, which are often required for traditional Lefort 3 osteotomies performed in childhood.

Cranial vault expansion by distraction osteogenesis may be less technically challenging than traditional single-stage vault expansion surgery, particularly in the posterior cranial vault. It has fewer complications, and grants much greater vault expansion, allowing for successful correction of intracranial hypertension.