The complications in patients with exotropia vary depending on the stage of presentation and control of exodeviation. Patients may suffer from frequent headaches, problems with prolonged reading, eye strain, blurred vision. Patients might progress from exophoria to intermittent and subsequently permanent exotropia if left untreated in the early stages. With each successive stage of disease progression, an associated worsening of fusional capacity occurs, thus predisposing to loss of binocular vision, stereopsis, and ultimately amblyopia.

Apart from the complications related to the disease process, the patient is also at a higher risk of developing other conditions like attention deficit hyperactive disorder, learning disabilities, short attention span, social inhibitions, dyslexia, etc.

Complications associated with surgery among exotropia are the same as for any other squint procedure. The anesthesia-related complications include malignant hyperthermia, oculocardiac reflex, or anaphylactic reactions. Surgical procedure-related complications include slipped or lost muscle, exposed tenons capsule, inadvertent advancement of plica semilunaris, scleral perforation. Immediate postoperative complications might include chemosis, lid edema, Dellen, pyogenic or suture-related granuloma, epithelial inclusion cyst, anterior segment ischemia, under or overcorrection, stretched scar syndrome, fat adherence syndrome, double vision, eyelid retraction or ptosis, very rarely endophthalmitis.