The equipment required for performing convex EBUS and EBUS-TBNA includes:

- A mouth guard to protect dentition and anchor the scope in an atraumatic position in the oral cavity.

- Supplemental oxygen therapy delivery via a nasal cannula or nasal catheter with pulse oximetry and blood pressure monitoring equipment.

- A fibreoptic bronchoscope with a light source and stack. This is generally performed before EBUS assessment for a thorough examination of the bronchial tree and accurate topical anesthetic application.

- Topical anesthetic spray for the oropharynx and topical anesthetic in Luer-lock syringes for delivery via the bronchoscope to the vocal cords, trachea, and main bronchi. This is typically 1% lidocaine or equivalent.

- An EBUS scope (see figure 2). This comprises a flexible fibreoptic bronchoscope with a side-viewing convex ultrasound probe. Most EBUS scopes have an oblique forward view angle of about 35 degrees, so the endobronchial image is seen that is not parallel to the direction of travel of the scope. The scope diameter is variable but is also larger than that of a standard fibreoptic bronchoscope.

- The scope is attached to a stack incorporating the light source, image display screen, and image storage system.

- An inflatable balloon is placed over the EBUS probe tip (see figure 3). This is inflated to allow better apposition to the bronchial wall, which improves image quality. A syringe with 10ml of sterile water in a Luer-lock syringe is used to inflate this during the procedure.

- An EBUS-TBNA sampling system. The needle gauge varies but is usually between 19-22G.

- Access to a wall suction unit is helpful to clear secretions to aid patient tolerance.

- A vacuum lock suction syringe – this extracts sample material under negative pressure into a sealed system.

- Rapid on-site cytologic evaluation (ROSE) is often performed. A microscope and equipment for slide preparation and staining are required.

- Sample pots, slides, and transport media, including Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) solution.