The ACL is the most commonly injured ligament and usually occurs during a non-contact event. The mechanism of injury often involves an athlete changing direction with a slight pivoting motion that introduces rotational force to a planted leg. Many patients that experience this injury report feeling and hearing a “pop” that accompanies immediate pain followed by effusion. The Lachman and anterior drawer tests are popular clinical tests used to assess for an ACL injury. MRI is the most useful imaging modality when trying to detect an ACL injury. In the young and active population, an ACL tear is usually repaired surgically to maintain stability when participating in athletic activities. In the older or less active population, an ACL tear can be treated conservatively with activity modification and physical therapy.

A meniscal tear is another very common knee injury that frequently has the same injury mechanism as an ACL tear, a pivoting motion on a planted foot. Meniscal tears may also occur in older patients as a result of degenerative changes. Sometimes the individual will notice when the injury occurs, and other times they may be unaware. It is common for a meniscal tear to accompany other knee injuries such as ligament tears. Typically, pain and effusion accompany the injury, and sometimes patients complain of knee clicking, locking, and catching during activity. Treatment is variable with each patient and ranges from conservative treatment to surgery. The McMurray test is the most used clinical technique to detect the presence of meniscal tears, with MRI being the most accurate imaging modality.

MCL injuries are also common ligamentous injuries of the knee but tend to have a different injury mechanism and treatment path. The MCL is usually injured when direct force to the lateral aspect of the knee induces excessive valgus stress. Pain usually accompanies the injury, and effusion often follows. Introducing valgus stress in a clinical setting reproduces pain with an MCL injury, along with history qualifies diagnosis. MRI can be used to confirm an MCL injury and to rule out associated injuries. Treatment frequently is conservative, with the use of a brace and non-weight-bearing activity.

The PCL is the largest and strongest ligament in the knee and is uncommonly involved in an isolated injury. A great amount of force is usually required to injure the PCL, often injuring other structures as well. The mechanism of injury entails a direct posterior force applied to a flexed knee and commonly occurs in high-energy trauma. The posterior drawer test is an examination technique used to assess for a PCL injury. Management is much like the ACL, and it can be treated conservatively or surgically depending on the patient.

Osteoarthritis of the knee is another very prevalent disease in the older population but can be seen in middle-aged patients as well. As discussed in the previous section, there are a number of factors that contribute to the timing and severity of osteoarthritis. The disease is usually chronic, and patients often complain of stiffness and pain with activity that gradually worsens over time. X-ray is the most commonly used imaging modality, and patients will often have pain with ROM testing on clinical exam. Treatment is usually started conservatively with bodyweight reduction, NSAIDS, physical therapy, and steroids. As these remedies begin to fail, a total knee arthroplasty can be performed. Although a total knee arthroplasty is a big procedure, it is overall very successful at improving the quality of life of patients that suffer from debilitating osteoarthritis.

The patellar femoral joint can often be another source of knee pathology. Patellar-femoral pain syndrome is one of the most common presenting knee complaints to sports medicine and primary care providers. This is pain that is located on the anterior aspect of the knee, and it's often aggravated by flexion of the weight-bearing knee during activities such as running, climbing stairs, or jumping. The pathophysiology of the condition is not clearly understood but is thought to be related to factors such as overuse, muscle imbalance, and improper patellar tracking. The diagnosis is made clinically, and imaging is typically only done to rule out other conditions. Treatment involves rest, stretching, physical therapy, and gradual return to activity.

Knee dislocations occur at the patellar-femoral joint and tibiofemoral joint. The latter is a much more severe injury and requires emergency medical treatment. A tibiofemoral dislocation is the result of a large amount of force and results in multiple knee structures being severely damaged. X-ray and MRI are used to assess the extent of the injury. Popliteal artery damage is the most urgent complication and must be repaired quickly to prevent irreversible deficits. Pulse, ankle-brachial index and ultrasound should be used initially to assess for artery damage. A closed or open reduction can be performed depending on the extent and details of the dislocation. The reduction may also occur spontaneously. Treatments vary; however, surgery is commonly required for the repair of the associated structures.