A thorough history and physical exam are indispensable in the diagnosis of chronic daily headaches. As noted above, a chronic headache should have 15 or more monthly episodes for at least three months. One should determine the frequency, intensity, and characteristics of the pain, as well as the aggravating and alleviating factors. Many headache types involve ipsilateral autonomic symptoms such as lacrimation, conjunctival injection, conjunctival edema, ptosis, miosis, nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, etc.

A thorough medication reconciliation, including over-the-counter analgesics, is essential. Patients with medication-overuse headaches often have a primary headache disorder, and they frequently use pain medications.

Comorbidities, sleep history, and a family history of headaches should also be noted. A secondary headache disorder should be excluded from the history and examination.

Recognition of headache "red flags" is critical in identifying secondary headaches and ordering additional diagnostic testing. Those "red flags" include:

- Age above 50

- A significant change in prior headache pattern

- Severe, "thunderclap" headache

- Systemic illness signs such as fever

- Known illness which increases the risk for secondary headaches such as cancer or HIV

- Neurologic symptoms

- Headaches associated with Valsalva maneuvers

Physical exam findings concerning secondary headache causes include focal neurological deficits, papilledema, bitemporal hemianopia, homonymous hemianopia, decreased visual acuity, or increased pain with the Valsalva method.

Primary chronic headaches often lack physical findings but may have autonomic activation or muscle tenderness in the occipital or cervical regions.