Early empiric antifungal therapy should be strongly considered in critically ill patients with risk factors for invasive candidiasis in whom the disease is suspected, as some studies have shown reduced mortality with this strategy. The decision to start therapy should be based on clinical suspicion, risk factors, and surrogate markers of candidemia (e.g., B-d-glucan). Empiric therapy should start with an echinocandin (caspofungin, micafungin, anidulafungin) as first choice therapy. Fluconazole may be considered in certain patients who are not critically ill and in whom susceptibility to fluconazole is likely. Amphotericin B can be given to patients with intolerance or contraindications to other treatments.

When blood cultures have confirmed candidemia, treatment with an echinocandin and central venous catheter removal should be the first step to takeCandida species, such as C. albicans. Repeated blood cultures should show clearance of the bloodstream infection. Amphotericin B is given in the case of azole- and echinocandin-resistant fungi.

Initial treatment with an azole should be considered in a patient with concomitant meningitis, endophthalmitis, urinary tract infections (due to low penetrance of echinocandins to this areas), as well as in patients with prior exposure to echinocandins.

Recommended duration of therapy is at least two weeks after documented clearance of the infection and longer (i.e., four weeks) for complicated infections, such as endophthalmitis, endocarditis or osteomyelitis.

Some species of Candida have particular susceptibility profiles. For example, C. parapsilosis is less susceptible to echinocandins. This should be taken into consideration when starting therapy and when titrating to culture results. Emergent resistance to different antifungals is more commonly caused by selection of species with intrinsic resistance when using certain drugs as opposed to developing resistance in a previously susceptible isolate (although this too has been reported).