The interventricular septum is an asymmetric curved structure due to the pressure difference in ventricular chambers. It is composed of five parts: the membranous, muscular (frequently referred to as trabecular), infundibular, atrioventricular, and the inlet.

Failure of development or fusion of one of the above components during morphogenesis of the embryonic heart results in a VSD in the corresponding component. Different anatomic locations and histologic variations of VSDs have led to several classifications and nomenclature systems. Complexities in describing VSDs and multiple synonyms have been improved after a new unified classification was established and categorized VSDs into four major groups:

- Type 1: (infundibular, outlet) This VSD is located below the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary) in the outlet septum of the right ventricle above the crista supraventricularis, which is why it is sometimes also referred to as supracristal. It is the most uncommon type representing only 6% of all VSDs with the exception being in the Asian population where it accounts for approximately 30%. Aortic valve prolapse and regurgitation are common because of loss of support of the right and/or the noncoronary cusps of the aortic valve. It is unusual for these defects to close spontaneously.

- Type 2: (membranous) This VSD is, by far the most common type, accounting for 80% of all defects. It is located in the membranous septum inferior to the crista supraventricularis. It often involves the muscular septum when it is commonly known as perimembranous. The septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve sometimes forms a “pouch” that reduces the shunt and can result in spontaneous closure.

- Type 3: (inlet or atrioventricular canal) This VSD is located just inferior to the inlet valves (tricuspid and mitral) within the inlet part of the right ventricular septum. It only represents 8% of all defects. It is seen in patients with Down syndrome.

- Type 4: (muscular, trabecular) This VSD is located in the muscular septum, bordered by muscle usually in the apical, central, and outlet parts of the interventricular septum. They can be multiple, assuming a “Swiss cheese” appearance. They represent up to 20% of VSDs in infants. However, the incidence is lower in adults due to the tendency of spontaneous closure.

The main pathophysiologic mechanism of VSD is shunt creation between the right and left ventricles. The amount of blood shunted and the direction of the shunted blood determine the hemodynamic significance of the VSD. These factors are governed by the size, location of the VSD, and pulmonary vascular resistance.

While VSDs are classified according to location, they can also be classified into size. The size is described in comparison to the diameter of the aortic annulus. They are considered small if they measure less or equal to 25% of the aortic annulus diameter, medium if they measure more than 25% but less than 75%, and large if they are greater than 75% of the aortic annulus diameter.

In the setting of long-standing large left-to-right shunts, the pulmonary vascular endothelium undergoes irreversible changes resulting in persistent PAH. When the pressure in the pulmonary circulation exceeds the pressure in the systemic circulation, the shunt direction reverses and becomes a right-to-left shunt. This is known as Eisenmenger syndrome, and it occurs in 10% to 15% of patients with VSD.