**Brow position:**The concept of the ideal brow position is constantly evolving, in concert with changes in fashion and the popular perception of beauty. The male brow is generally described as full and roughly horizontal, lying at the level of the bony brow ridge. In contrast, the classical female brow position is at or just above the brow ridge with the peak located laterally, 20-25 mm above and between the lateral limbus and the lateral canthus.

**Fascial layers:**Familiarity with facial anatomy from the level of the trichion down to the glabella and laterally to both lateral canthi is critical for pretrichial brow lifting, as dissection can be carried out in the subgaleal or subperiosteal planes.

- At the level of the trichion in the central forehead, the soft tissue layers are (superficial to deep): skin, subcutaneous fat, galea aponeurotica, loose areolar tissue, and pericranium.

- At the level of the lateral canthus in the temporal region, the layers include skin, subcutaneous fat, temporoparietal fascia (TPF, or superficial temporal fascia), superficial layer of the deep temporal fascia, superficial temporal fat pad, deep layer of the deep temporal fascia, temporalis muscle, and pericranium. Inferior to this, at the level of the zygomatic arch, the deep layer of the deep temporal fascia invests the deep temporal fat pad. Superior to the superficial temporal fat pad, there is only one layer of deep temporal fascia, which is synonymous with the temporalis muscle fascia.

- The conjoint tendon separates the central and lateral compartments described above. The conjoint tendon consists of a condensation of the superficial fascial layer (galea aponeurotica centrally and TPF laterally) and the deep fascial layers (pericranium centrally, and temporalis fascia and pericranium laterally). The tendon must be divided to provide adequate surgical exposure and mobilize the forehead sufficiently to elevate it.

**Supratrochlear nerve:**This is a branch of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve that provides sensation to the glabella and the medial forehead. This nerve exits the superior orbital rim through a shallow notch approximately 1.0-1.5 cm from the midline and travels superiorly in a deep to a superficial direction to provide sensory innervation to the central forehead. The nerve and its accompanying vessels traverse the corrugator supercilii muscle.

Supraorbital nerve: This nerve consists of medial and lateral branches, both of which originate from the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve; they provide sensation to the lateral brow and the lateral forehead. The supraorbital nerve exits the skull lateral to the supratrochlear nerve - in the midpupillary line - and most commonly (72.4%) traverses a notch in the supraorbital rim, but it can pass through a true foramen 27.6% of the time.

The frontal branch of the facial nerve: This branch of the facial nerve is at risk during the lateral portion of the brow lift dissection because it courses along the undersurface or deep within the TPF. Pitanguy’s line, drawn between a point 0.5 cm below the tragus to a point 1.5 cm above the lateral margin of the brow, approximates the course of the nerve.

**Facial Mimetic Muscles**

- Frontalis: This is the sole elevator of the brow; it is contiguous with the galea aponeurotica and inserts into the dermis of the brow. Contraction produces brow elevation and horizontal forehead rhytids.

- Corrugator supercillii: These paired muscles are situated along the supraorbital rims, originating from the superior aspect of the nasal bones and inserting into the dermis of the mid to lateral brow; they are responsible for vertical glabellar rhytids.

- Procerus: This is a fan-shaped muscle that depresses the medial brow. It originates along with the nasal bones and projects superiorly towards the medial heads of the brows; it is located in the midline, superficial to the corrugator muscles, and produces horizontal glabellar rhytids.

Conjoint tendon: While not a true tendon, it is a confluence of the periosteum, galea, and temporalis fascia located along the temporal line and adherent to the calvarium. It must be released to mobilize and elevate the soft tissues of the forehead.

Arcus marginalis: This is a fascial condensation along the orbital rim where the pericranium, periorbita, and orbital septum meet. Much like the conjoint tendon, this needs to be divided to allow for mobilization and elevation of the skin and soft tissue.