Physicians should always remain vigilant when managing WCT as these patients can quickly become unstable and experience sudden cardiovascular collapse. The EKG will be an essential diagnostic tool that will assist in diagnosing the etiology of WCTs. A good rule of thumb is that any EKG with WCT is VT until proven otherwise. Rapidly and accurately diagnosing WCT still remains a problem because there are numerous algorithms and complicated criteria that can be difficult to remember in an emergency situation. Approximately 90% of WCTs can be diagnosed with almost absolute certainty, but despite the availability of numerous algorithms and criteria available, 10% of cases are still misdiagnosed. For the differentiation of WCTs, this article will review the most well-known approaches but will not discuss them in detail, given that they are complicated, and its use would be challenging in an urgent setting.

Prior to the development of distinguished algorithms, WCTs were differentiated using the Traditional Criteria, which was created through the contribution of several authors such as Sandler, Swanick, Marriott, Wellens, Coumel, and Kindwall. The established subsequent step-wise algorithms would incorporate principles from the Traditional Criteria as well as developing new ones. The most famous and commonly used algorithm to date is the Brugada algorithm. Vereckei published two algorithms which proved to be superior to Brugada but were limited, given that they were more time consuming compared to Brugada. The ACC (American College of Cardiology), AHA (American Heart Association), and ESC (European Society of Cardiology) have developed an algorithm for the practical approach and evaluation of WCTs in otherwise hemodynamically stable patients. Important things to keep in mind are key aspects of the medical history (i.e., previous heart attack, history of congestive heart failure, chest pain, older age, structural heart disease) and physical exam (i.e., signs of atrioventricular dissociation) that have been discussed previously.

Morphology on EKG that is strongly suggestive for VT is AV dissociation, the finding of fusion beats and capture beats which signify AV dissociation, extreme axis deviation (NW axis), initial R or Rs wave in limb lead aVR, absence of RS complexes in precordial leads (leads V1-V6), positive or negative concordance across the precordial leads, and an R wave peak time >50 ms in limb lead II. The diagnosis of SVT as the cause for WCT would be more indicative if there is evidence of a typical BBB or fascicular block. Interestingly, if the QRS morphology during sinus rhythm is similar to the QRS morphology during an episode of WCT, this can either be SVT or VT. VT will usually be a regular rhythm depending on the timing of the WCT episode, history of anti-arrhythmic medication use, and history (or undiagnosed) focal idiopathic VT. Also, if a WCT appears to have an irregular rhythm, caution should be advised as the underlying etiology could be Afib with WPWS (or Afib with aberrancy), and mismanagement could lead to serious consequences. In concordance with EKGs, exam maneuvers can be helpful in distinguishing between SVT and VT. Vagal maneuvers (i.e., carotid sinus massage, Valsalva, coughing, etc.) cause an increase in parasympathetic tone/response, which would normally lower one’s heart rate. Tachycardia, which is resolved by vagal maneuvers, is most likely to be SVT. WCT caused by VT is typically known to not resolve with vagal maneuvers. However, interestingly enough, idiopathic outflow tract VT can be terminated from these maneuvers.