The prevalence of DIVHD varies considerably between studies for the same group of medications.

Anorexigen use has been suggested to be linked to different degrees of valvulopathy, with prevalence ranging from 6% to 30% in various studies. A study conducted with 233 anorexic users and their matched control subjects showed that 22.7% of the anorexic group had cardiac valve abnormalities versus 1.3% of the control group.

Patients taking pergolide and cabergoline have an increased risk of valvular regurgitation compared to users of other dopamine agonists. A study conducted in 2007 showed an increased risk of valvular regurgitation of up to 23.4% in patients using pergolide and up to 28.65% in patients using cabergoline compared to users of agonists such as pramipexole and ropinirole. In 2007, another study exposed an increased incidence of valvular regurgitation of 7.1 fold in the group using pergolide and 4.9 fold in the group using cabergoline when they were compared with a group of patients using other dopamine agonists as ropinirole, pramipexole, bromocriptine, and lisuride.

In 1967, Graham published a study with 36 patients treated with methysergide who developed mitral and/or aortic regurgitation with the use of this medication. Then, in 1974, ergotamine was also shown to be associated with left-sided valvular heart disease for the first time.

Droogmans et al. conducted a study where 29 subjects using or having used MDMA and 29 gender and age-matched controls were blindly evaluated with echocardiography. Eight subjects (28%) who took MDMA had significant valvular regurgitation on echocardiographic results.