The trigeminal nerve is the largest of the cranial nerves and provides sensory and motor innervation to the muscles of mastication.

**Brainstem Nuclei**

The brainstem contains the sensory and motor nuclei of the trigeminal nerve. The trigeminal nerve has three sensory nuclei: the principal sensory nucleus, the spinal trigeminal nucleus, and the mesencephalic nucleus.

**Principal Sensory Nucleus**

The principal sensory nucleus is located lateral to the motor nucleus within the posterolateral surface of the pontine tegmentum. Fibers carrying fine touch and pressure synapse in the principal sensory nucleus and subsequently ascend in the trigeminal l, which decussates to the opposite side of the brainstem. The trigeminal l and the uncrossed dorsal trigeminothalamic tract both terminate in the ventroposteromedial (VPM) nucleus of the thalamus and ultimately synapse in the somatosensory cortex ipsilateral its respective thalamus.

**Spinal Trigeminal Nucleus**

The spinal trigeminal nucleus is a caudal extension of the principal sensory nucleus and descends from the lower pons to the upper cervical levels of the spinal cord (C2-4), connecting to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.

**Mesencephalic Nucleus**

The mesencephalic nucleus is a cephalad extension of the principal sensory nucleus spanning from the level of the superior colliculus in the upper midbrain to the middle pontine level.

**Motor Nucleus**

The motor nucleus is located medial and anterior to the major trigeminal sensory nuclei within the lateral surface of the pontine tegmentum.

CN V is classified into three different branches that have distinct territories of innervation. These branches are namely the ophthalmic (V1), maxillary (V2), and mandibular nerves (V3).

**Ophthalmic Nerve (V1)**

The ophthalmic nerve (V1) is the smallest division of the trigeminal nerve. V1 is a purely sensory nerve that provides sensory innervation to the scalp, eye, nose, and forehead. It also contains sympathetic nerve fibers with contributions to pupillary dilation and supply to the ciliary body, iris, lacrimal gland, conjunctiva, and cornea. In addition to these superficial sensory functions, the ophthalmic nerve also supplies the superior portion of the nasal cavity, the frontal sinus, and even deeper structures, including the dura mater and portions of the anterior cranial fossa. It travels lateral to the abducens nerve within the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus, inferior to the oculomotor and trochlear nerves. V1 exits the skull through the superior orbital fissure and divides in the orbital apex into the lacrimal, frontal, and nasociliary nerves.

**Maxillary Nerve (V2)**

The maxillary nerve (V2) is also a sensory branch, and it supplies the territory just below the orbits and above the mouth. This includes the inferior portion of the nasal cavity, the maxillary teeth, and the maxillary sinus. It travels inferior to V1 within the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus. V2 exits the skull base through the foramen rotundum, making it the only cranial nerve within the cavernous sinus not to exit through the superior orbital fissure and subsequently crosses the pterygopalatine fossa. V2 ultimately enters the face through the infraorbital foramen.

**Mandibular Nerve (V3)**

The mandibular nerve (V3) is the largest branch of the trigeminal nerve. V3 is the only branch of the trigeminal nerve that has both sensory and motor components. V3 receives sensory information from the lower third of the face, the floor of the mouth and jaw, and the tongue. The motor root (portio minor) of V3 supplies the muscles of mastication (masseter, temporalis, pterygoids), as well as the anterior belly of the digastric muscle and the mylohyoid muscle.

**Trigeminal Ganglion**

The three divisions of the trigeminal nerve reach the trigeminal ganglion (Gasserion or semilunar ganglion), containing the cell bodies for most of the trigeminal sensory axons. The trigeminal ganglion is located within Meckel's cave, a CSF-filled space between two layers of dura mater over the petrous portion of the temporal bone. Meckel's cave encloses the trigeminal ganglion and the three trigeminal nerve roots. The trigeminal neurons in the trigeminal ganglion are pseudo-unipolar neurons with two axonal branches, one extending proximally to the brainstem and the other distally towards one of the trigeminal divisions.

**Trigeminal Root**

The trigeminal root carries sensory fibers extending from the trigeminal ganglion to the ventrolateral aspect of the pons. The trigeminal root entry zone (TREZ) is located at a distance of about 12 mm distal to the pons, where central myelin is replaced by peripheral myelin; it is considered the most vulnerable site along the nerve for neurovascular compression.