Congenital cardiac lesions with single ventricle physiology can broadly be divided into two groups based on ventricular anatomy.

- Single Ventricle physiology with single anatomical ventricle: As in Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), Tricuspid atresia (TA), Hypoplastic right heart syndrome (HRHS)

- Single ventricle physiology despite two well-developed ventricles: As in

- Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia
- Truncus arteriosus
- Severe neonatal arch stenosis/ interrupted aortic arch
- Heterotaxy syndrome, where components of the venous system return to both sides
- Double inlet left ventricle
- Double outlet right ventricle
- Unbalanced atrioventricular canal defect

**Single Ventricle Physiology with Single Anatomical Ventricle**

Due to one underdeveloped or hypoplastic ventricle, all the blood pumping needs to be accomplished by one ventricle, and venous return to this functioning ventricle is imperative for survival. In HLHS, blood from the pulmonary venous circulation reaches the right atrium through an atrial septal defect and mixes with the systemic venous return. The mixed blood is pumped into two parallel circulations from the right ventricle via the pulmonary artery.

The pulmonary artery is responsible for blood to the lungs and the aorta via the Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA) as there is a complete or near-complete obstruction to outflow from the hypoplastic left heart into the hypoplastic ascending aorta. Hence the systemic flow is ductal dependent, and the survival of these patients typically depends on the patency of the atrial septal defect/foramen ovale and the patency of the ductus arteriosus.

In the case of tricuspid atresia, venous return reaches the left atrium from the defect in the atrial septum and mixes with the pulmonary venous blood. The developed left ventricle pumps the mixed blood to the aorta and also to the pulmonary artery through the PDA or a ventricular septal defect (VSD). Their survival depends upon the patency of the atrial septum and PDA, as the right ventricle is hypoplastic. The repair in these cases is focused on the gradual transition of the parallel circulation into series circulation through staged repair via Norwood, bidirectional Glenn, and ultimately Fontan repair.

**Single Ventricle Physiology Despite Two Well Developed Ventricles**

Despite two well-developed ventricles, complete or near-complete obstruction to the outflow from one of these ventricles leads to single ventricle physiology. When the obstruction is released, biventricular physiology can be restored in these cardiac defects.