Achondroplasia results from a point mutation in the gene coding for the transmembrane portion of fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3), which resides on the short arm of chromosome 4.

- In over 80% of cases, the condition occurs due to sporadic, or de novo, mutation. Thus, a child with achondroplasia can be born to healthy parents with no family history of the disorder.

- The remaining 20% of achondroplastic individuals have at least one affected parent.

- Achondroplasia is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. It is fully penetrant, meaning all individuals who have the FGFR3 heterozygous pathogenic variant show the clinical manifestations of the disorder.

- The “unprecedented” homogeneity of mutations of this autosomal dominant disorder leads to the relative lack of heterogeneity in the achondroplasia phenotype.

- The risk to offspring of an achondroplastic individual of inheriting a mutated copy of the FGFR3 gene is 50%. When both parents are affected, their offspring have a 1 in 4 (25%) chance of having normal stature, a 1 in 2 (50%) chance at having achondroplasia (heterozygous), and a 1 in 4 (25%) chance of homozygous achondroplasia.

- The homozygous form is usually incompatible with life, usually resulting in early neonatal death from respiratory insufficiency due to a small thoracic cage and neurologic deficits from cervicomedullary stenosis.

One well-known risk factor for producing offspring with the de novo mutation is advanced paternal age, with the mutation thought to occur during spermatogenesis. An increased risk of achondroplasia is not associated with older maternal age, independently of the older paternal ages.