Precocious puberty classifies into two major categories based on the etiology

- Central precocious puberty (GnRH dependent)

- Peripheral precocious puberty (GnRH independent)

Central Precocious puberty (CPP)

This type of precocious puberty represents true pubertal development due to the earlier maturation and activation of the HPG axis. Most of the time, the common cause in females is idiopathic, and in males, there is usually an underlying pathology. It is attributable to a multitude of conditions.

The most relevant categories include

- CNS tumors – Hypothalamic hamartoma, optic glioma, arachnoid cysts, astrocytoma, ependymoma, hydrocephalus, septo optic dysplasia, pineal tumors

- CNS injury- head trauma,  cranial irradiation, cerebral palsy, infections( Tuberculous meningitis)

- Genetics – Loss of function mutation encoding the MRF3 (Makorin ring finger 3) gene, a gain of function mutation encoding the kisspeptin (KISS1) and its receptor (KISSR) genes

- Syndromes – Neurofibromatosis type 1, Sturge Weber syndrome, Tuberous sclerosis

- Environmental – internationally adopted children, withdrawal from sex steroid therapy.

- Familial precocious puberty

The most common brain lesion causing CPP is hypothalamic hamartoma. The ectopic neural cells in the lesion serve as an accessory GnRH pulse generator.  It presents with precocious puberty in infancy as early as 12 months of age. The most characteristic association is gelastic seizures, which are usually refractory to medications. The other associated features include cognitive, behavioral, and psychiatric symptoms. Increased prevalence is a noted feature in internationally adopted children. The exact mechanism is not known, but suggestions are that better nutrition and exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals can play a role. There have been some reports of familial forms, but the genetic basis is not well understood. Recent years have seen some interesting associations with mutations of kisspeptin (KISS1) and makorin ring finger (MRF3) genes and their receptors. These genes are responsible for the stimulatory and inhibitory signals to the GnRH release. Loss or gain of function mutations in these genes results in CPP.

Peripheral Precocious Puberty (PPP)

Precocious development of secondary sexual characteristics independent of the GnRH pulsatile secretion constitutes PPP; this is due to the production of sex steroids from endogenous or exogenous sources. It is less frequent compared to the CPP. Some important causes include

- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

- McCune-Albright syndrome (CAH)

- Gonadal tumors – Sex cord-stromal tumors such as Leydig cell tumors and Sertoli cell tumors, Germ cell tumors such as dysgerminoma, teratoma, and embryonal tumors.

- Adrenal tumors

- Familial male-limited precocious puberty (testitoxicosis)

- Exogenous exposure to sex steroids

- Van Wyk and Grumbach syndrome

Tumors are rare causes of PPP. There is an increased androgen production in CAH, adrenal tumors, and Leydig cell tumors. There is an increased production of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) with germ cell tumors, hepatoblastoma, pineal, and mediastinal tumors.

Testitoxicosis is a rare autosomal dominant disorder with the clinical phenotype limited to males. It is caused by a germline activating mutation of the LH receptor gene, resulting in the activation of the Leydig cells and high testosterone levels. Van Wyk and Grumbach syndrome are characterized by primary hypothyroidism, ovarian cysts, and precocious puberty. Researchers speculate that untreated primary hypothyroidism results in pituitary hyperstimulation and the production of multiple pituitary hormones resulting in precocious puberty. McCune-Albright syndrome is a sporadic condition caused by activating mutation of the GNAS 1 gene, which encodes the alpha subunit of the G protein. This gene activation increases the cAMP formation, and all its dependent receptors become hyper-functional.  It usually presents as a triad of precocious puberty, fibrous dysplasia of the skeletal system and café au lait pigmentation.  The other likely endocrine manifestations are hyperthyroidism, Cushing syndrome, and growth hormone excess.