# Continuing Education Activity

Avian influenza is a deadly disease caused by infection from an influenza virus native to birds. While often not fatal in birds, it can carry a high mortality rate when adapted to humans. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of avian influenza and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the epidemiology of avian influenza.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of avian influenza.
- Outline the management options available for avian influenza.
- Describe some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the recognition and prevention of avian influenza and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Because infection with avian influenza can be particularly deadly in comparison to other viruses, providers may not be aware of the extra caution required when evaluating possible cases of infection. This article will impress on providers the severity of the disease and the need for high suspicion in specific scenarios as well as the need for early escalation of care. Avian influenza is an umbrella term describing the disease caused by various strains of influenza A virus known to infect birds that occasionally cause outbreaks of viral illness in humans.

Influenza A viruses are part of the Orthomyxoviridae family.

The influenza A virus splits into subtypes based on the antigen present on two of the virus’s surface glycoproteins, haemagglutinin (with 16 known possible antigens), and neuraminidase (with nine known possible antigens).

Avian influenza viruses (AIVs) occur in most bird species, both wild and domestic. Generally, domestic birds are responsible for human disease outbreaks as they have more human contact. Some diseases spread, though, may be implicated in migratory birds that could carry disease to different locations where subsequent infection of domestic birds leads to human transmission.

# Etiology

Avian influenza viruses (AIVs) cause disease in humans when a strain of the virus becomes adapted to a human host either by reassortment with influenza viruses from other species or by antigenic drift or both.

# Epidemiology

Although other strains of avian influenza viruses (AIVs) are likely to have infected humans from time to time, the most well-known strains to cause infection are H5N1 and H7N9. To date, there have been no confirmed human cases of AIV infection in the United States, although there has been one confirmed death from AIVs in Canada.

# Pathophysiology

The binding of avian influenza viruses (AIVs) to human cells is mostly via specific receptors found more commonly in the respiratory tract.

Once the AIV has entered the host cell, replication may be prolonged relative to endemic human influenza viruses. In the 1997 H5N1 outbreak, the median time from infection to the detection of the virus was 6.5 days, and in some patients, no virus was detectable for up to 16 days.

Host immune response plays a role in pathogenicity, as inflammatory markers appear to be higher in patients who experience a more severe disease course, and the presence of inflammatory cells in damaged alveoli in post-mortem patient evaluation seems to support this suggestion.

# History and Physical

Clinical features of avian influenza infection are generally only known in patients requiring hospitalization. Because routine testing for avian influenza is not often necessary unless a patient presents with more severe symptoms, there is little evidence for clinical features or the prevalence of milder infections. Most patients who end up hospitalized present anywhere from 2 to 4 days after exposure but can begin over a week after transmission as well.

Most patients present with symptoms consistent with a flu-like viral illness. In these patients, especially during a known avian influenza outbreak, a thorough history is necessary to evaluate for clues that the illness is due to avian influenza. Additionally, in patients with bird contact and uncharacteristically severe viral symptoms (encephalopathy or organ failure), higher suspicion should be had for avian influenza virus (AIV) infection. Patients that work in the poultry or culinary industries have frequent contact with birds and have greater opportunity to contact the active virus. Most patients with AIV infection have had contact with poultry.

Different strains of the avian influenza virus appear to have different characteristic presentations. H5N1, for instance, usually has a presentation that includes fever and lower respiratory tract symptoms and occasionally a prodrome of non-bloody, non-inflammatory diarrhea. Other avian influenza viruses have other characteristic symptoms. H7N9 and other LPAI strains may more commonly be associated with conjunctivitis.

Regardless of characteristic symptoms, if there is a current outbreak, a patient presenting with avian influenza is most likely to have the same strain as other infected patients in the area have.

# Evaluation

Diagnosing avian influenza requires high clinical suspicion. In patients who present with viral syndromes and have risk factors such as recent live bird handling or poultry culling, there should be a high suspicion of the disease. Additional testing should evaluate for sequelae of avian influenza virus (AIV) infection, such as respiratory impairment and other organ dysfunction. As the disease can present as a severe respiratory illness, evaluation, and careful monitoring of a patient’s respiratory status should be undertaken for any patient with suspected or confirmed AIV infection. Respiratory intervention may include anywhere from supplemental oxygen to mechanical ventilation to ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) in the most severe cases.

Rapid antigen testing for AIV does exist but is often falsely negative in confirmed cases. The preferred source of a sample for testing is a nasopharyngeal swab or aspirate, but other body fluids are usable if the nasopharyngeal swab or aspirate is not available.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of avian influenza usually consists of supportive care and antiviral medications.

The World Health Organization released Rapid Advice Guidelines in 2007, outlining consensus treatment recommendations for H5N1 influenza outbreaks.

The WHO also made recommendations on chemoprophylaxis of those with possible viral exposure in the above guidelines. Of note, oseltamivir (75 mg daily) prophylaxis for 7 to 10 days after last known potential exposure for high-risk groups (household and close family contacts) receives a strong recommendation. Moderate and low-risk groups are not as strongly advised to receive chemoprophylaxis, although moderate risk groups require individual assessment.

# Differential Diagnosis

Because avian influenza, like many viral illnesses, can present with a variety of symptoms that may be like other disease processes, a broad differential is necessary. For instance, for patients presenting with a headache with or without fever, a differential should include meningitis, intracranial bleeds, migraines, and other headache syndromes. For patients presenting with respiratory symptoms, other infectious upper and lower airway etiologies should be considered, including but not limited to:

- Bacterial pneumonia

- Streptococcal pharyngitis

- Asthma

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

- Pulmonary embolism

Additionally, in patients with shortness of breath or other possible cardiac involvement, pericarditis and myocarditis should be considered.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Because human cases of avian influenza are relatively rare and generally confined to individual, unique outbreaks, there has been little opportunity for research on treatment methods for infection, and most recommendations have as their basis on accepted treatment regimens for other types of influenza virus infections. There are, though, some research trials focusing on the efficacy of vaccines for AIV.

# Prognosis

In patients requiring hospitalization for avian influenza, reported mortality is higher than 50% for all strains of avian influenza virus (AIV) infection combined, although more detailed data suggests H7N9 infection is less deadly with 35% mortality than H5N1 with a 60% mortality rate.

# Complications

Complications from avian influenza virus (AIV) infection result from either organ failure or damage, iatrogenic injury during treatment, or coinfection.

# Consultations

Any patient hospitalized with a suspected or confirmed diagnosis of avian influenza should have an infectious disease consultation to better direct care and minimize complications. While the recommendations presented here are necessary for any patient with suspected avian influenza, an infectious disease consultant may be able to better direct treatment for specific avian influenza strains and manage treatment and patient expectations more appropriately. Additionally, in the United States, it is mandatory to report confirmed cases of avian influenza to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC).

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Whenever there is a possible outbreak of avian influenza, the essential way to reduce the severity and population impact are to reduce the spread of the virus. Since human-to-human transmission is uncommon, the focus should be on reinforcing appropriate sanitation habits in the population, especially those that work around birds or that are involved in food preparation.

When an outbreak is identified, it is crucial for public health officials to identify at-risk populations and to inform the public of risk factors and ways to detect infection. Because the presence of deadly diseases in a community can incite fear and panic, announcements should include which populations are at low risk for contracting avian influenza. Those people who work with live or dead birds, including those who may handle poultry at restaurants, should be aware of symptoms of bird flu in themselves and co-workers and should be given directions for contacting local health officials and information for how to undergo evaluation if suspicion of infection is high.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Because disease outbreaks are rare and difficult to predict, well-controlled studies of treatment are nearly impossible. As such, most recommendations come from an expert consensus of review of previous outbreaks. The best way to reduce morbidity and mortality associated with avian influenza is to improve public knowledge of the disease, reduce the spread of infection once an outbreak is identified, and educate vulnerable populations on risk reduction and early recognition of disease. While providers can play an essential role in this, public health officials (often through media assistance) are critical to limiting the human impact of the disease. [Level 4]

Additionally, a high index of suspicion is often needed to diagnose early cases of avian influenza in a population. Care and detailed history-taking, as well as early testing in at-risk patients presenting with a severe viral infection, is needed to allow health care professionals to intervene early to restrict the impact of an outbreak. [Level 4]

There is currently an FDA-licensed vaccine for the H5N1 strain of avian influenza in the United States. In the case of an H5N1 outbreak in the United States, the CDC and public health officials may decide to vaccinate at-risk populations to reduce spread. Apart from the available H5N1 vaccine, no human vaccines exist for avian influenza, although there are currently vaccine development studies in progress that may result in more availability in the future (see above). [Level 4]

An interprofessional team is beneficial in the management of this disease. The emergency department and primary care providers should be cognizant of this diagnosis. Patients should receive a referral to infectious disease, intensivists, and pulmonologists. Critical care nurses monitor patients, answer patient questions, and provide updates to the team. Pharmacists review antiviral and other medications as to the dose and possible drug interactions and make recommendations to the providers where appropriate. With interprofessional collaboration and communication across both disciplines and even with media and other public health personnel, the risks of avian influenza can remain contained. [Level 5]