**Acute and Chronic Pain**

There are over 100 million people in the United States who would meet the criteria for chronic pain syndrome.

Chronic pain is estimated to cost over $600 billion annually in lost productivity and medical treatment. Lifetime chronic pain is common, with over 50% of adults being affected at some point in their lives. Over 40% of chronic pain patients indicated their pain is not controlled, and over 10% suffer long-term disabling chronic pain.

Research has shown the lifetime prevalence for chronic pain patients attempting suicide between 5% and 14%; suicidal ideation was approximately 20%.

The incidence of chronic pain is increasing due to the prevalence of obesity-related pain conditions, increased survival of trauma and surgical patients, an aging population, and heightened public awareness of pain as a treatable condition.

**Opioids**

Opioids are the most used therapeutic agent for chronic pain and are derived synthetically from generally unrelated compounds. Opiates are derived from the liquid of the opium poppy either by direct refinement or by relatively minor chemical modifications. Both opioids and opiates act on three major classes of opioid receptors: mu, kappa, delta, and several minor classes of opioid receptors like nociceptin and zeta. Simplifying significantly, the mu receptors are thought to provide analgesia, respiratory suppression, bradycardia, physical dependence, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and euphoria. The kappa agonism can yield hallucinations, miosis, and dysphoria. The delta receptor likely has pain control and mood modulation effects, but some have suggested that mu agonism is necessary for the delta receptor to function strongly for analgesia.

In the past, providers in the United States rarely prescribed opioids for any condition except chronic cancer pain. This approach began to change in the 1990s.  Dr. James Campbell addressed the American Pain Society (now bankrupt) in 1995 and urged healthcare providers to treat pain as the fifth vital sign.

**Florida and Nationwide Opioid and Benzodiazepine Related Morbidity and Mortality**

In the U.S., there are over 70,000 drug overdose deaths reported annually. There is a slight age-related decline in prescription-related opioid deaths in recent years, most likely attributed to increasing awareness of the problem by practitioners as well as the public. Opioids remain the most common cause of death related to an overdose, and deaths related to synthetic opioids such as fentanyl is rising.

According to the CDC, approximately 70% of the nearly 5,000 reported drug overdose deaths in Florida involve opioids. In Florida, synthetic opioids such as fentanyl remain stable but high. Deaths involving heroin and prescription opioids remain substantial in Florida.

Florida has seen a steady rise in use and related morbidity and mortality due to the use of heroin, synthetic cannabinoids, and novel psychoactive substances. While there has been a slight decrease in prescription opioid fatalities, at the same time, there has been an increase in overdose fatalities from opioid and non-opioid agents.

According to the CDC, fatalities from benzodiazepines nationwide and in Florida are also significant, with alprazolam being the most common drug.

**Florida Opioid Prescriptions**

According to the CDC, Florida providers write 53.7 opioid prescriptions for every 100 persons, compared to the national average of 51.4 prescriptions. This rate has been declining.

**Florida and National Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome (NOWS) and Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome (NAS)**

NOWS and NAS occur in women who use opioids in pregnancy. There is no accurate statistical reporting in Florida or the nation, but it is deemed a common cause of morbidity and mortality in infants. The commonly reported rate is 7 cases per 1,000 live births in the U.S. and 7.3 cases per 1,000 live births in Florida reported by the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP).

**Florida and National HIV and Hepatitis C (HCV) Diagnoses Related To Injection Drug Use (IDU)**

According to the CDC, nationally, about 10% of new HIV diagnoses are attributed to IDU; and in Florida, approximately 5 to 8% of new HIV diagnosis is attributed to IDU. Nationally, approximately 85% of new cases of HCV are attributed to IDU; and in Florida, reported findings are similar.