A detailed and thorough history and physical examination, with the concurrent identification of pertinent clinical risk factors, is required for all patients with a suspected esophageal injury. Appropriate imaging is an essential part of EI management. Pain associated with EI tends to be very acute, with chest pain being the principal symptom in 70% of patients with intrathoracic esophageal perforation. The pain may radiate to the back or left shoulder, depending on injury location and any associated tissue damage. Vomiting and dyspnea may be present in about 25% of patients, although this may increase with diagnostic and/or therapeutic delays. Although appreciated in only about 1 out of 7 cases, Mackler’s Triad (e.g., subcutaneous emphysema, chest pain, and vomiting) is considered to be pathognomonic for esophageal perforation. The Hamman sign, a systolic "crunching" or "rasping" sound, synchronous with the heartbeat, and heard over the precordium, is found in up to half of EI cases.

A thorough history and physical examination enhance the clinician's understanding of the location and severity of EI. This then helps prevent clinical delays, in addition to better guiding the use of diagnostic imaging. Cervical esophageal injury, for instance, may be associated with dysphonia, hoarseness, cervical dysphagia, and subcutaneous emphysema. Associated imaging workup may then be tailored specifically to these clinical findings. In contrast, perforation at the gastroesophageal junction will most likely present with acute abdominal pain, thus prompting an imaging investigation focused on the identification of peritoneal contamination source. Finally, the thoracic esophageal perforation may manifest either with mediastinal or pleural findings/complaints. Trauma victims suspected to have EI should prompt special attention if they develop a temperature greater than 38.5 C, tachycardia, or auscultation of crepitus on physical examination. This is especially important given that clinical decline toward septic shock can be rapid following the initial period with relatively few signs and/or symptoms.

Although specific diagnostic and radiographic findings are beyond the scope of this discussion, a simple chest x-ray study will demonstrate evidence of perforation in as many as 90% of cases. Despite that, the finding of subcutaneous emphysema requires approximately one hour to develop, and the findings of mediastinal widening and pleural effusion(s) may take up to several hours. Consequently, it is important to reevaluate patients whose initial workup was negative because additional evidence of EI may be detected within the initial 12 hours post-injury.