In a low-risk patient, repair of the popliteal artery aneurysm would be preferred because of the risk of acute limb ischemia, most often related to embolization, especially if an aneurysm is found to be greater than 2 cm. Indications for repair include embolization, compression, and thrombosis with limb ischemia. The gold standard is surgical repair with decompression of the aneurysm and alleviation of the venous compression.

Two open surgical approaches are possible. A medial approach includes bypassing the aneurysm from above to below the knee using either autogenous vein graft or prosthetic graft following ligation of the aneurysm above and below. The medial approach is the traditional approach, recommended in cases with acutely thrombosed popliteal aneurysms, with evidence of distal thromboembolism or if the popliteal artery aneurysm is not confined within the popliteal fossa and extends both proximally and distally. The other approach, used in this case, is a posterior approach through a serpentine incision at the popliteal fossa with an interposition graft for repair and decompression of the aneurysm, which provides the added benefit of removing extrinsic pressure from the deep veins. Also, ligation of branches feeding the aneurysm would prevent further growth of the sac.

Endovascular stent-graft repair is a minimally invasive option, which can be used if the anatomy is suitable.  This is determined with CT Angiogram measurements to ensure the existence of an adequate purchase of the graft into normal arterial tissue 2 cm above and below the aneurysm sac. This approach is particularly useful for elderly or higher-risk patients and less durable for younger, more active patients. Endovascular stent-graft repair affords the advantage of shorter postoperative hospital stays compared to open surgery. There are, however, disadvantages, including decreased primary patency (the time the revascularized region remains open without reintervention) and the need for reintervention to accomplish similar secondary patency (the time the revascularized region remains patent with intervention after occlusion). Other considerations include lower perioperative morbidity and faster recovery.  This less invasive therapy lacks long-term follow-up, carries the risk of thrombosis with hyperacute knee flexion, and has limited information regarding long-term stent durability.