Psychological, social, and biological factors can all contribute to, precipitate, or perpetuate conversion disorder. Often, there is a trauma, adverse life event, or acute/chronic stressor preceding symptoms of conversion disorder. Many patients with conversion disorder are found to have a history of childhood abuse, both emotional and sexual. Other psychological factors contributing to conversion disorder include poor coping skills and internal psychological conflicts. Patients with conversion disorder are more likely to have certain psychiatric disorders (depression, anxiety, and personality disorders) than patients with known neurologic conditions. They are also more likely to have a history of multiple somatic complaints, including symptoms like generalized fatigue, weakness, or pain, without a known cause.

- **Psychodynamic models.**These models suggest that somatic symptoms of conversion disorder are a product of emotional conflict. This emotional conflict becomes repressed into the unconscious mind and converted into a symptom. The postulation is that this scenario is a type of defense mechanism against negative feelings that the emotional conflict would induce. Other psychodynamic models focus on the development of inadequate coping mechanisms and negative interpersonal relationships that develop earlier in a patient’s life. Later in life, if the patient encounters another traumatic event, these coping mechanisms or behaviors may recur.

- **Cognitive-behavioral models.**One well-studied model suggests that exposure to information related to a specific symptom can lead to the creation of representation in memory. Conversion disorder then occurs when this representation is “activated” by an individual worrying excessively about or looking for signs of the symptom. This activation passes a specific threshold in the mind, where it overrides sensory input and becomes an actual symptom. An example would be an individual seeing someone have a seizure in a movie and creating a memory or a representation of this event in their mind. Later, they encounter anxiety, light-headedness, or dizziness, and fear that they may be experiencing symptoms preceding a seizure. They worry about having a seizure, which activates the representation or memory of a previously created seizure. This activated pathway causes them to have a psychogenic non-epileptic seizure. Cognitive-behavioral models hypothesize that behavioral and perceptual processing occurs automatically and outside of an individual’s awareness. They state that symptoms of conversion disorder may result from psychological influences at lower levels of processing.

The hypotheses formulated to explain the etiology and the pathogenetic mechanisms of FND are manifold. For example, the role of microglia and neuroimmunity and, in turn, the altered control on synaptic plasticity have are theoretical explanations. These processes could explain the FND-associated motor dysfunctions.