The osseous forearm is composed of the radius and ulna bones. The proximal radial head articulates with the capitellum of the humerus (radiocapitellar joint), rotating within the annular ligament during pronation and supination. Distally, the radius connects with the scaphoid and lunate bones of the wrist. The ulnar head supplements the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) at the wrist. Proximally, the ulna consists of the coronoid and olecranon. The alignment and stability of the radius and ulna originate from three ligamentous structures: the interosseous membrane, the annular ligament, and the TFCC. The interosseous membrane is responsible for distributing axial load force to the forearm, 60% to the radiocapitellar joint and 40% to the ulnohumeral joint. The radiocapitellar joint primarily stabilizes the proximal forearm while the TFCC predominantly supports the distal forearm.

**Classification System**

In 1967, Dr. Jose Luis Babo classified Monteggia fractures into four types. These types depend on the direction of the radial head dislocation.

Type I

- The proximal ulna is fractured and radial head dislocation directed **anteriorly**.

- Most common type in children accounting for 70% of cases, 15% of cases in adults.

- Mechanism of Injury: (1) direct blow to posterior elbow, (2) hyper-pronated force on an outstretched arm, (3) contracted biceps resists forearm extension causing dislocation and followed by impact leading to ulna fracture.

Type II

- Both the ulnar shaft fracture and radial head dislocation are directed **posteriorly**

- Mechanism of Injury: Axial load directed up the forearm with a slightly flexed elbow.

- Most common type in adults accounting for approximately 80% of cases.

- Associated with an instability of the ulnohumeral joint and high rates of radial head fracture and posterior interosseous nerve injury.

Type III

- Ulnar fracture with a radial head dislocation directed **laterally**.

- Mechanism of Injury: Varus force on an extended elbow leads to a greenstick fracture of the ulna.

- More frequently seen in children.

Type IV

- Fractures of the ulnar and radial shafts with an anterior radial head dislocation

- Rarest type and poorly understood mechanism.