Pioneers such as Ignaz Semmelweis and Florence Nightingale were among the first in medicine to make changes to process based on observation and data collection.

Going forward, healthcare education should promote quality management as part of its curriculum and interprofessional collaboration efforts. By introducing medical, healthcare, and allied professions students and practitioners to quality improvement, they will be more likely to reap the benefits of improved patient outcomes and satisfaction. Not to mention, knowledge of the benefits of quality management will enhance compliance with and feedback from all areas within the health care system. With insurance companies denying reimbursement for issues such as foley catheter or central line-associated infections developed during a hospital stay, the push for quality improvement increases.  More than just meeting criteria for reimbursement, quality management, when used to its full potential, will encourage optimal outcomes, supreme patient satisfaction, reduce work by improving efficiency, and lower overall patient and hospital costs. It all begins with collecting data to identify problems, evaluating possible causes, determining potential solutions, and subsequently monitoring corrective actions for effectiveness. These measures not only serve to improve patient outcomes, experience, and hospital performance, but also fulfill requirements by joint commission and even insurance companies. Whether it is evaluating a trauma M&M, a root-cause-analysis after a sentinel event, or the rate of catheter-associated UTI, the importance of quality improvement cannot be under-emphasized. They should continue to grow as a part of conventional health care education and practice.