Glatiramer acetate is a random-sized 40 to 100 amino acid polymer composed primarily of four amino acids, L-alanine, L-lysine, L-glutamic acid, and L-tyrosine, in a molar ratio of 4.2 to 3.4 to 1.4 to 1.0, respectively. The premise behind its mechanism of action lies in the construct that patients with multiple sclerosis have antibodies directed against myelin basic protein (MBP), a component of the myelin sheaths of neurons within the central nervous system. Glatiramer acetate’s chemical construct allows it to mimic MBP and thus a decoy for the antibodies in these patients, decreasing the inflammatory response. Otherwise, the inflammatory response allows for the vulnerability of the blood-brain barrier to demyelination and axonal injury.

The postulates from multiple clinical studies are that glatiramer acetate shifts the immune response from a pro-inflammatory state comprised of Th1 T-cells to regulatory, non-inflammatory Th2 T-Cells. The introduction of the polymer allows it to bind to major histone compatibility (MHC) complex class II molecules on MBP-specific antigen-presenting cells, preventing MBP from stimulating these cells. Instead of the usual pro-inflammatory cytokine release, such as IL-2 and IL-12, anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-4, and IL-10 are the cytokines dispersed.

While glatiramer acetate itself cannot penetrate the blood-brain barrier, its ability to induce the peripheral Th2 cells and their subsequent crossing of the blood barrier allows for the reduction of further inflammation within the CNS. This mechanism of action has been dubbed “bystander suppression.”

Additionally, in the preclinical levels thus far, it has been noted that glatiramer acetate induces a neuroprotective and/or neuro-regenerative effect. The drug increases neurotrophic factors like brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which research has discovered to be vital to neuronal and glial cell survival. There is also some evidence suggestive of glatiramer’s ability to induce remyelination and enhance neurogenesis.