Pure red cell aplasia is a rare pathology that either presents as an inherited disease or that the patient acquires secondary to other conditions. Few pearls are listed here:

- The most common presentation is isolated anemia with reticulocytopenia. Bone marrow exam shows under 1% erythroblasts

- Diamond Blackfan anemia is the most common inherited PRCA. Craniofacial and thumb abnormalities are common, but not present in all patients.

- Steroids, chronic transfusion therapy, and stem cell transplant are the most effective modalities of managing patients with Diamond-Blackfan syndrome.

- Transient PRCA most commonly results from parvovirus B19 infection. Recovery is spontaneous, and immunity to parvovirus is lifelong. One must remember that parvovirus infection-related PRCA is different from the fifth disease, where the IgM antibody against the virus is at play.

- In immunocompromised patients, no humoral immunity may develop against parvovirus, and this may lead to chronic infection and a relapsing course of PRCA.

- Acquired PRCA is both antibody-mediated as well as T-cell-mediated.

- The most common lymphoproliferative diseases associated with PRCA are chronic lymphocytic leukemia and large granular lymphocytic leukemia.

- Many drugs are associated with acquired PRCA, which the clinician should stop before starting therapy for PRCA.

- Cyclosporine is the most effective drug for PRCA with the highest response rates. A maintenance dose of cyclosporine is needed to prevent relapse of PRCA, which usually occurs when stopping the medication completely.

- Steroids are an effective alternative to cyclosporine, albeit with low response rates. They are usually used along with cyclosporine.

- Chronic red cell transfusions correlate with iron overload and hemosiderosis. Iron chelation should start early in the course of treatment.