An EKG is vital in determining BRASH syndrome from other causes of bradycardia, such as isolated hyperkalemia. It is, however, commonly underwhelming as it does not typically demonstrate the stereotypical electrocardiographic changes seen with hyperkalemia. In isolated hyperkalemia, as the serum potassium levels elevate, the T waves begin to peak with PR interval prolongation followed by QRS widening and subsequent bradycardia; however, these morphologies are commonly absent in BRASH syndrome patients.

A comprehensive metabolic panel will demonstrate some degree of hyperkalemia. Many case reports are documenting profound bradycardia associated with even mild hyperkalemia. One case report described a patient on Verapamil who developed BRASH syndrome with a serum potassium level of 5.1 mEq/L; however, potassium levels from 5.5-7.0 mEq/L are more commonly documented. Regardless of the degree of hyperkalemia, excess potassium is cardiotoxic and results in decreased membrane excitability leading to worsening bradycardia.

An acute kidney injury is also common. While the majority of these patients have a tenuous renal function at baseline, there will be an obvious decline in GFR as well as an increase in BUN and creatinine. The kidney injury often results in uremic acidosis. The remaining laboratory studies will vary depending on the patient’s presentation. However, any other laboratory abnormalities noted may help identify the inciting event that leads to this syndrome which will in turn aid in management.