When considering clinical pathologies of the fourth ventricle, they will usually present due to increased amounts of CSF fluid in that ventricle. This state can occur due to increased production of CSF fluid from the fourth ventricle choroid plexus, or an obstruction of CSF flow out of the ventricle. The majority of the clinical significance of the fourth ventricle relates to these phenomena and how they will impact the nervous system around it. It is imperative to rule out fourth ventricle compression/obstruction in patients with a sudden loss of consciousness.

Ependymomas are the third most common pediatric brain tumors but only account for 1.9% of adult primary brain tumors. They are CNS malignancies that originate from the ependymal cell lining of the ventricles. Many different types of ependymomas differ in location and histopathology. Subependymomas, also known as WHO grade I ependymomas, mostly occur within the fourth ventricle or the lateral ventricles. They are characterized histologically by a nodular pattern with zones of increased nuclear density or fibrillary stroma.

Hydrocephalus is the presence of too much CSF in the brain, which often results from a problem with CSF absorption that occurs after an insult has impaired the arachnoid granulations from correctly reabsorbing fluid. This condition is called “communicating hydrocephalus” because CSF is still able to flow throughout the ventricular system, but it is not getting absorbed as efficiently as it needs to be. Conversely, a blockage in the ventricular system by a tumor or cyst will cause “obstructive hydrocephalus,” or noncommunicating hydrocephalus. This means that there is obstruction of the flow of CSF, so it becomes trapped in the ventricles causing swelling of the ventricles proximal to the lesion.

A condition called fourth ventricle outlet obstruction (FVOO) is a type of noncommunicating hydrocephalus that occurs when there is a disconnect between the subarachnoid space and the ventricular system. This can result from a tumor or cyst blocking the lateral or median apertures and will cause enlargement of the entire ventricular system since this is the distal-most ventricle. It is also often caused by inflammatory processes following hemorrhage, infectious disease, or congenital anomalies of the fourth ventricle. To diagnose FVOO, additional studies such as those on a three-dimensional constructive interface in steady-state (3D-CISS) are often necessary.

Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM) or syndrome characteristically demonstrates a cystic enlargement of the fourth ventricle and agenesis or hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis. Most patients will present with hydrocephalus, but it often remains clinically asymptomatic for years. It can either be isolated or associated with Mendelian disorders, syndromic malformations, chromosomal abnormalities, and congenital infections. CNS disorders associated with DWM include holoprosencephaly, neural tube defects, and dysgenesis of the corpus callosum.