Cardiogenic shock is a life-threatening disorder and is the main cause of death after an acute MI. Even in the best of hands and the latest treatment, the condition carries a mortality rate in excess of 30%. The key to survival is to have prompt resuscitation with coronary artery revascularization. Unfortunately, even with revascularization, multiorgan failure is common, and long-term survival is not guaranteed. Because cardiogenic shock affects almost every other organ in the body, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team that also includes ICU nurses.

Once cardiogenic shock has been diagnosed, patient monitoring is vital. The surgeon and cardiologist need to be notified right away. The cardiac catheterization nurses need to be informed of this emergency as the initial treatment of choice is PCI. The pharmacist should make sure that the patient is on no medications that depress the heart function like beta-blockers. If an IABP is contemplated, the perfusionist should be notified. Most patients require mechanical ventilation, and hence, respiratory therapists should be involved to ensure that positive pressure ventilation is avoided.

If the patient undergoes PCI or open-heart surgery, monitoring is required as complications are common in the post-operative period. The nephrologist, pulmonologist, and internist should be involved to ensure optional care. The nurse should monitor the patient for oliguria, coagulopathy, poor oxygenation, loss of pulses, abdominal pain (mesenteric ischemia), and stroke. Close communication is vital between the interprofessional team to improve outcomes.

Even though cardiogenic shock cannot be entirely prevented, clinicians should educate patients on reducing risk factors for heart disease. Patients should be urged not to smoke, lower their lipids, and ensure better control of blood sugars. In addition, enrollment in an exercise program can help lower body weight and help achieve better control of blood pressure.