Seizures can manifest as a result of a wide variety of anatomic abnormalities within the brain as well as toxic or metabolic derangements. Anatomic abnormalities that result in seizures can be located nearly anywhere within the brain, though usually involve the neocortex or mesial temporal region, particularly the hippocampi. Because of this, imaging is typically employed to adequately scrutinize all structures of the brain with careful attention directed towards the hippocampi.

The hippocampi are situated within the medial aspect of the temporal lobes bilaterally and occupy the medial floor of the lateral ventricles. They are a core limbic structure, responsible for learning and memory formation. The hippocampus is composed of two distinct gray matter structures known as the cornu ammonis and the dentate gyrus. Anterior to posterior it is divided into the head, body, and tail segments. On coronal imaging, the hippocampal head is characterized by digitations which give its superior surface an undulating contour. The hippocampal body can be recognized by its "jelly roll" or "swiss roll" appearance of the interlocking dentate gyrus, Ammon horn, and intervening strata. White matter tracts from the hippocampus traverse its superior surface, forming the alveus, which condenses into bundles called fimbria, which continue posteriorly as the fornix. The fornix terminates just off of midline within the mamillary body; this white matter tract plays a vital role in the Papez circuit. Adjacent to the head of the hippocampus lies the amygdala and entorhinal cortex.

Hippocampal sulcus remnant cysts and incomplete hippocampal inversion are developmental variants in the hippocampus, which should not be confused with pathology.

The bilateral and symmetric nature of the hippocampi allows for direct comparison during imaging. Unilateral abnormalities may shed light on the underlying etiology of a patient's refractory epilepsy. However, gross abnormalities of the hippocampi may be bilateral in up to 10% of cases.