HCs on Ultrasound series have reported a 3 to 5% prevalence in the general population, whereas CT scan series have reported the prevalence in the range of 15% to 18%.

Simple cysts consider to be the most common pathology of the liver, with a prevalence of 2.5% to 5% of the general population and have a minimum female predilection (about 4 to 1) usually diagnosed after the age of 40. These cysts increase frequently with age and are sometimes multiple.

Isolated PCLD has a prevalence of 1 to 10 cases per 1000000 individuals in the general population, while ADPKD ranged from 1 in 400 to 1 in 1000. ADPKD represents roughly 80 to 90% of all patients with PCLD. Due to the autosomal dominant inheritance pattern of Isolated PLCD, males and females should be at equal risk. However, findings show that the female to male ratio (about 6 to 1); is thought to be due to higher levels of estrogen in females compared to males. The prevalence of liver cysts in patients with ADPLD is found to be about 60%.

The risk factors for the development and progression of severe PCLD are age, female sex, use of exogenous estrogens, multiple pregnancies, and the degree of renal involvement in case of coexisting ADPKD.

Both BCAs and BCACs are rare and comprise only a small percentage of worldwide HCs disease patients. Although rare, Biliary cystadenomas are reported to constitute up to 1% to 5% of HCs and considered the most common primary hepatic cystic neoplasm. BCAs are seen predominantly in middle-aged women (9 to 1) to males with ages ranging between 40 to 50 years old. They are slow-growing lesions and have been reported to reach sizes up to 30 cm. The reported rate of malignant transformation to BCAC can be as high as 30%. They are commonly found in the posterior segment of the right liver lobe, likely because the right lobe contains the most hepatic tissue.