Arthritis may be a disease of the joint but it also has systemic repercussions. There is no cure for osteoarthritis and it can severely diminish the quality of life and lead to depression. Depending on the type of arthritis, there may also be other organs involved. The management of arthritis is ideally done by an interprofessional team that includes a nurse, dietitian, rheumatologist, physical therapist, orthopedic surgeon, pain specialist, pharmacist, and an internist. Guidelines by the American College of Rheumatology encourage an interprofessional approach. Polypharmacy is a major concern in these patients because of the need to resolve the pain, hence the pharmacist should closely monitor the medications to prevent serious drug interactions and if narcotics are required, monitor for overuse. Almost all patients may benefit from physical rehabilitation and physical therapy. Ample evidence indicates that water-based exercise can diminish pain and improve joint function. Further, loss of weight also decreases the stress on the joint. In addition, a dietitian can help educate the patient on a healthy diet. The nursing team should assist the clinician in educating the patient on medication compliance, abstaining from alcohol, and discontinuing smoking. Since arthritis is a progressive disease, all patients should be urged to have close follow up with the primary care provider. A referral to a pain consultant early in the course may help prevent abuse of narcotics and other prescription-strength pain medications. (Level V)