A good history and physical examination are essential first steps in diagnosing Meigs syndrome. Any woman with signs and symptoms of ascites and pleural effusion would warrant evaluation for pelvic masses. Every effort should be made at the evaluation stage to rule out important differential diagnoses, especially carcinomatoses. A definitive diagnosis of Meigs syndrome could only be made after removing the tumor, followed by the resolution of the ascites and pleural effusion. Also essential to diagnosing Meigs syndrome is that histopathology of the ovarian mass has to be a benign tumor.

**Laboratory studies:**Routine blood tests like complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, lipid panel, PT/INR, pro-BNP, and urine analysis will help recognize conditions like anemia, macrocytosis, hypoalbuminemia, proteinuria, liver failure, congestive heart failure.

Even though the elevation of serum CA 125 is suggestive of ovarian cancer, its co-incidence with Meigs syndrome has been described in the literature.

Monitoring serum sex hormones will help evaluate ovarian lesions in patients with virilization or symptoms of estrogen excess.

**Imaging:**Chest X-ray helps us recognize the pleural effusion and also evaluate for metastases.

CT scan abdomen helps us delineate an alternative etiology for ascites like malignant lesions, metastases, and liver cirrhosis.

Pelvic ultrasound is a key imaging modality to evaluate pelvic organs, especially for smaller lesions.

PET CT Scan time may help delineate malignant tumors if there is strong suspicion.

**Endoscopy:**In patients with risk factors for gastrointestinal malignancy, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy should be considered to rule out esophageal, gastric, and colon cancers.

**Fluid Analysis and cytology:**Thoracentesis and paracentesis are diagnostic modalities and will provide temporary symptomatic relief for the patients with ongoing investigations.

The pleural fluid analysis includes testing for protein, LDH, cytology, gram stain, and cultures. Even though in most patients with Meigs syndrome, the pleural fluid is an exudate, there have been reports of transudative effusions. Hence, either type of pleural fluid can be seen in these patients.

Similarly, peritoneal fluid is analyzed for cytology, gram stain, and cultures. Albumin levels might be of value as a SAAG (Serum Ascites Albumin Gradient) > 1.1 g/dL may indicate portal hypertension.

**Tuberculosis testing,**including TB skin tests, pleural and peritoneal fluid testing for AFB smears and cultures, adenosine deaminase test on pleural fluid, and molecular testing, could be considered on the patients with risk factors based on their symptomatology.