Ipilimumab causes increased activation of T-cells, and thus its adverse effects generally result from excess T-cell activation. These immune-mediated reactions are very common, can affect any organ system, and are usually manageable. However, they can also manifest as serious, life-threatening complications. The most commonly affected systems include the gastrointestinal and integumentary systems, generally manifesting as a pruritic rash, diarrhea, or colitis. Other less commonly implicated systems include the hepatic, neurologic, ocular, and endocrine. Less common adverse effects include conjunctivitis, uveitis, inflammatory hepatitis, liver failure, hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, adrenal insufficiency, hypogonadism, intestinal perforation, severe enterocolitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.

Ipilimumab-associated adverse events are generally manageable with supportive measures, including loperamide and/or diphenoxylate/atropine and the occasional use of systemic corticosteroids. Most adverse effects are immune-related and occur within the first 12 weeks of initial treatment and resolve within 3 to 4 months. Severe adverse drug effects should also merit consideration as reasons to discontinue medical therapy with ipilimumab. The most common adverse effects are enterocolitis, including severe enterocolitis, moderate enterocolitis, intestinal perforation, dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, or severe rash and hepatitis, including severe and moderate hepatotoxicity. More uncommon adverse effects include neuropathies, peripheral neuropathy, Guillan-Barre syndrome, endocrinopathies, hypopituitarism, adrenal insufficiency, hypo and hyperthyroidism hypogonadism, and Cushing syndrome.

Adverse effects that occur in less than 1% of patients included nephritis, pneumonitis, iritis, meningitis, pericarditis, uveitis, and hemolytic anemia.