Treatment choice for patients with ulcerative colitis is based on both the extent of the disease and the severity. The prognosis during the first decade after diagnosis is often generally good, and most patients go into remission. Rectal application of medical therapy, via suppository or enema, is usually appropriate for isolated distal disease (proctitis); however, a rectal application is usually used in combination with systemic therapy to help target the distal colon and therefore decrease tenesmus.

First-line treatment is sulfasalazine and 5-aminosalicylates, given orally or rectally, which have a remission rate of about 50%. Glucocorticoids, orally or rectally, can be added for those who fail to achieve remission within two weeks. Except for glucocorticoids, all of these medications can be used in the maintenance of remission. Additionally, there is some evidence that probiotics are helpful in attaining remission. Fecal microbiota transplantation also shows promise in the treatment of ulcerative colitis to help establish healthy gut microbiota.

If patients are refractory to glucocorticoids, thiopurines or biological drugs can be added to therapy. Thiopurines are immunosuppressants such as azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine. Biological drugs include anti-TNF-alpha drugs, such as infliximab, adalimumab, and golimumab. Infliximab is the most widely used for ulcerative colitis and can be used in severe cases during hospital admissions. The newest class of biological drugs are anti-adhesion molecule inhibitors, such as vedolizumab, which blocks alpha-4-beta-7 integrin.

Since patients with ulcerative colitis have reduced expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) in their colonocytes, future treatment may include (PPAR-gamma) agonistic activity. PPAR-gamma is a negative regulator of NF-KB-dependent inflammation. Novel 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) analogs are being developed that have greater PPAR-gamma activity. Cardiotoxicity and metabolic toxicity restrict the use of existing PPAR-gamma agonists.

Colectomy is curative in patients with ulcerative colitis since the disease is restricted to the colon. Indications for surgery are a failure of medical therapy, intractable fulminant colitis, toxic megacolon, perforation, uncontrollable bleeding, intolerable side effects of medications, strictures, unresectable high-grade or multifocal dysplasia, cancer, or growth retardation in children. The procedure of choice is proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA); however, in patients who are ineligible for IPAA proctocolectomy with ileostomy is a viable alternative.

Because of the risk of colon cancer, colonoscopy is recommended at regular intervals.

All patients need maintenance therapy to prevent relapse. Oral aminosalicylates are the drugs of choice but others may respond to azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine.

There is no specific diet for patients with ulcerative colitis but many develop lactose intolerance. Unlike Crohn disease, there is no role for elemental or parenteral nutrition.