The fact that this article's title is Diversity and Discrimination suggests there is a link between these two.  It is hypothesized that an inverse relationship exists between discrimination and diversity.  It has been a prevailing thought within the medical community that discrimination would decrease and equity would increase if the percentage of underrepresented minorities reached a critical mass. Evidence suggests that although diversity is a goal unto itself, diversity alone does not create equity.  More than half the pediatricians and gynecologists in the United States are now female, yet department leaders remain predominantly male.

These results are similarly found in the nursing profession. The male advantage in nursing has been described as a “glass escalator,” in which men are put on a fast track and almost pushed to achieve positions that include greater responsibility, higher salary, and more organizational benefits.

While an increase in diversity may not eliminate all problems related to healthcare disparities and discrimination, we strongly encourage healthcare systems to take steps to promote diversity amongst providers.  A larger talent pool that includes providers with heterogeneous customs, experiences, and problem-solving tactics, can create more innovative approaches to systems-based problems.

Numerous studies have shown that increased provider diversity is associated with improved healthcare quality. Concordant care, defined as a patient and provider sharing a common attribute such as race, ethnicity, or gender, has been associated with improved quality of care.

Poor access to quality care continues to impact minority and low-income individuals in the United States disproportionately.  Recruitment and retention of providers who are underrepresented in medicine is one potential solution.  Underrepresented minority physicians are more likely to serve in areas with a physician-shortage and serve underserved groups, including minorities, low-income individuals, and the uninsured.

We urge healthcare groups and systems to consider the following actions to improve the recruitment and retention of employees from underrepresented groups:

- Eliminate financial barriers to higher education for socioeconomically disadvantaged groups via the development of scholarships, grants, and tuition assistance.

- Create mentorship and pipeline programs to increase the number of underrepresented minorities in healthcare careers. When possible, these mentorship pairings should be race and gender concordant.

- Offer opportunities for coaching and leadership training for HCPs from underrepresented groups.

- Use transparent processes to select committee members and leaders with diverse backgrounds and viewpoints.

- Provide pay transparency and freely accessible objective steps for promotion and salary increase.

We urge healthcare groups and systems to consider the following actions to quell discrimination and accelerate the remedy of healthcare disparities:

- Acknowledge that past discrimination and current implicit biases lead to inequities related to race, gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and disability that still exist in the healthcare setting. Denying that discrimination and bias exist limits progress.

- Educate HCPs on the impact of health disparities and structural racism on patient outcomes. Equip healthcare trainees and practitioners with tools and resources to confront macroaggressions and microaggressions.

- Create a zero-tolerance policy for harassment and discrimination that includes a safe reporting mechanism for both the victim and the reporter.

- Increase support for healthcare disparities research.