Assessment for intubation should take into consideration potential complications. Hypoxemia is a feared complication of intubation that may be precipitated by multiple attempts with poor oxygenation between attempts, misplaced endotracheal tubes, and failed intubation. Oxygenation can be optimized by pre-oxygenation and apneic oxygenation. To avoid an unrecognized misplaced endotracheal tube, immediate confirmation of the tube position should take place. In cases of anticipated difficult airways, physicians should consider if RSI, DSI, or awake intubation using direct, video, or fiberoptic laryngoscopy is most appropriate for the patient.

Cardiovascular complications can arise as a result of direct pharyngeal manipulation as well as induction medications. Bradycardia can result from vagal stimulation during direct laryngoscopy. Some sedative medications can cause hypotension that can lead to hemodynamic compromise and cardiac arrest during the intubation of critically ill patients. Appropriate resuscitation before intubation can mitigate some of these risks. Patients should also have large-bore and reliable intravenous or intraosseous access to administer intubation and resuscitation medications if required.

Other complications include laceration to the oropharynx from direct manipulation, trauma to the teeth, and aspiration of vomit or objects from the oropharynx, such as dentures. Complications after intubation include uvular and mucosal necrosis from the pressure of the endotracheal tube against these anatomical structures. Tracheal rupture is extremely rare but can result from tracheal necrosis from cuff overinflation or direct trauma from the tube or stylet. Using manometry to inflate the cuff to a goal of 20-30cm water can prevent some of these complications.