External hemorrhoids affect millions of people and even though not life-threatening can seriously affect the quality of life. Over the years, many treatments have been developed to manage hemorrhoids but none is perfect. Today, the aim of treatment is to prevent hemorrhoids in the first place. Hemorrhoids are best managed by an interprofessional team that includes an emergency department physician, general surgeon, gastroenterologist, and an internist. The primary care provider, pharmacist, and nurse practitioner play a vital role in educating the patient on preventing these lesions.

Conservative therapy is considered first-line treatment for symptomatic hemorrhoids. This includes increased dietary fiber, stool softeners, and increased water intake.  Rubber band ligation is a minimally invasive treatment option for first, second, and some third-degree internal hemorrhoids that do not respond to conservative therapy.

The primary care clinicians and nurses should educate the patients on the need to change lifestyle to prevent hemorrhoids; this means becoming physically active, eating a high fiber diet, drinking ample water, taking a stool softener, reducing body weight and avoiding prolonged seating. These simple measures not only reduce the risk of hemorrhoids but also decrease healthcare expense. Only via an interprofessional approach can the morbidity of hemorrhoids be reduced.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes for most people who do not change lifestyle are not satisfactory. Even those who undergo surgery cannot be guaranteed of a good result. Pain, urinary retention and recurrence are common postoperatively. 12. (Level V)