Pulmonary embolism occurs when clots break off and embolize into the pulmonary circulation.

Pulmonary emboli are typically multiple, with the lower lobes being involved more frequently than the upper, and bilateral lung involvement being more common.

Large emboli tend to obstruct the main pulmonary artery, causing saddle embolus with deleterious cardiovascular consequences. In contrast, smaller sized emboli block the peripheral arteries and can lead to pulmonary infarction, manifested by intra-alveolar hemorrhage. Pulmonary infarction occurs in about 10% of patients.

PE leads to impaired gas exchange due to obstruction of the pulmonary vascular bed leading to a mismatch in the ventilation to perfusion ratio because alveolar ventilation remains the same, but pulmonary capillary blood flow decreases, effectively leading to dead space ventilation and hypoxemia.

Also, mediators, such as serotonin, are released, which cause vasospasm and further decreased pulmonary flow in unaffected areas of the lung. Local accumulation of inflammatory mediators alters lung surfactant and stimulates respiratory drive resulting in hypocapnia and respiratory alkalosis.

In PE, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) increases due to the mechanical obstruction of the vascular bed with thrombus and hypoxic vasoconstriction. Pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) increases if thromboemboli occludes greater than 30% to 50% of the total cross-sectional area of the pulmonary arterial bed.

Increased PVR increases the right ventricular afterload, which impedes right ventricular outflow, which, in turn, causes right ventricular dilation and flattening or bowing of the interventricular septum. The desynchronization of the ventricles may be increased by the development of the right bundle branch block. The decreased RV outflow and concomitant RV dilation reduce left ventricular filling, thereby compromising cardiac output.