In the trauma patient, a systemic approach of the entire patient must be conducted, without exception, as outlined by the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) Program. An initial assessment of the patient is of utmost importance before focusing on the specific anatomic regions of obvious traumatic injury. The concept of this initial assessment, as outlined by the ATLS, includes a systematic evaluation including a primary survey, resuscitation, and detailed secondary survey with continuous re-evaluation through all steps.

The primary survey is designed to identify immediate life-threatening injuries quickly. Therefore, the universal approach has been established by the ATLS to follow the following in specific order: airway maintenance, breathing (ventilation), circulation (including hemorrhage control), disability (neurologic status), and exposure. Airway assessment and management have the highest priority of any injured patient irrespective of mechanism or wound location.

During the primary survey, complete exposure of the patient is essential, as is to roll the patient potentially to both sides, as to not overlook penetrating injuries that may not be easily identifiable when lying in a supine position. The assessment includes an examination of the perineum, buttocks, and lower gluteal, anal, or groin folds (as is vital to examine the patients back, flanks, and axilla).

Recognition of rectal injuries requires a high level of suspicion in those evaluating any patient with a penetrating wound. This suspicion should increase with any identification of penetrating wounds to the lower abdomen, pelvis, perineum, buttocks, or thighs. Penetrating wounds should be counted and marked (one approach is a simple paper clip gets taped adjacent to the penetration site) to help physicians hypothesize missile projection. If the count is an odd number of penetrating wounds, the physician should have heightened suspicion that a foreign body may remain in the victim.

As with all penetrating wounds via knife, spear, or other large objects, these should not get removed until the patient is in a controlled environment, i.e., the operating room, no matter the location of the foreign body.

In all patients who are hemodynamically stable, alert, and oriented, obtaining a detailed history of the events surrounding their injury is essential. Questions pertinent to ask include proximity of projectile when fired, and caliber of the weapon if known. With all patients, it is crucial to attempt to obtain previous past medical, past surgical, and social histories as well as current patient medications and known drug allergies.