The pathophysiology of migraine remains controversial. One theory of ocular migraine is that it is due to vasospasm within the retinal or ciliary vasculature while others think it is a spreading depression of the neuron in the retina that is similar to the spreading depression of the cerebral cortex. The spreading depression of the cerebral cortex is usually seen in the visual aura of a classic migraine; it has been observed in patients having an episode of retinal migraine, vasoconstriction of both veins, and arteries that could be diffuse or segmental. It also can be noticed by ocular hypoperfusion on fundoscopy. Fluorescein angiography can confirm the diagnosis. The fluorescein angiogram shows delayed filling or occlusion of the central retinal artery and its branches with either a normal ciliary circulation or patchy choroidal defects and capillary dropout.

Retinal migraine attacks are precipitated by similar factors as a migraine with aurae such as stress, smoking, hypertension, hormonal contraceptive pills, exercise, bending over, high altitude, dehydration, hypoglycemia, or excessive heat. Strong family history in these patients suggests that a retinal migraine has a genetic predisposition but no clear pattern of inheritance has been described. The vasospasm theory is controversial due to the complexity of the retinal vascular supply. Retina has dual circulation, central retinal artery supplies, inner retinal layers, lacks adrenergic innervation, maintains sensory nerves, and is auto-regulated. The choroidal circulation supplies the posterior retina including the photoreceptors it carries adrenergic fibers without autoregulation.