Testing the DTR is quick and easy but requires a proper technique for a reliable response. The examiner taps the muscle's tendon with an examination hammer, and the response is observed and graded. For effective and reliable results, the patient should be as relaxed as possible. If the patient thinks about the test or has a rigid posture, its integrity is limited.

To properly elicit a response, the proper tools are required. In use today are multiple reflex hammers, typically with a weight of 80 to 140 grams. With the appropriate technique, any reflex hammer can be utilized.

- The Taylor hammer

- The Krauss hammer

- The Troemmer hammer

- The Berliner hammer

- The Babinski reflex hammer

- The Rabiner reflex hammer

- The Dejerine reflex hammer

- The Queen Square reflex hammer

Proper technique includes specific attention to the following:

- Amount of hammer force used to obtain contraction

- Velocity of the contraction

- Strength of the contraction

- Duration of the contraction

- Duration of the relaxation phase

- Response of other muscles not tested

**Testing the deep tendon reflexes**

**Biceps Reflex**

Support the patient's forearm by resting it on the forearm of the examiner, with the arm midway between flexion and extension. The examiner's thumb should be firmly placed over the biceps tendon, with fingers curled around the elbow. Tap briskly. The forearm should flex at the elbow.

**Triceps Reflex**

Support the patient's forearm by resting on the forearm of the examiner, with the arm midway between flexion and extension. The triceps insertion should be located on the olecranon. Tap just above the insertion. The forearm should extend.

**Brachioradialis Reflex**

Support the patient's arm at the elbow and identify the brachioradialis tendon at the wrist. Its insertion is located at the base of the styloid process of the radius, about 1 cm lateral to the radial artery. The thumb of the hand supporting the elbow of the patient should be placed on the biceps tendon. Tap the brachioradialis tendon with the other hand. The brachioradialis reflex will show flexion and supination of the forearm. The finger jerk reflex may also be elicited by this maneuver and will show flexion of the fingers.

**Knee Jerk**

The patient's legs should swing freely on the side of the examination table, with the examiner placing one hand on the quadriceps. Tap the patellar tendon and look for quadriceps contraction and extension of the leg at the knee.

**Ankle Jerk**

The patient's legs should swing freely on the side of the examination table, with the examiner placing one hand underneath the sole of the patient's food and dorsiflexing it slightly. Tap the Achilles tendon just above its insertion on the calcaneus. The foot should plantarflex in response.

When testing lower extremity reflexes such as the patellar or ankle reflex, if no visible response is initially observed, the examiner may then use the Jendrassik maneuver. This maneuver consists of the patient clenching their teeth, flexing their elbows, and tightly interlocking both sets of fingers. The patient is instructed to pull their hands apart while keeping them interlocked. This maneuver causes voluntary upper motor neuron innervation, which counters some of the descending inhibition sent by the brain to the lower motor neuron reflex arc. It also prevents conscious inhibition of the reflex by the patient, as they focus more on the maneuver and less on the examiner.