The use of systemic chemotherapy in treating non-pediatric extremity and trunk sarcomas has been studied extensively but has suffered from low enrollment and inconsistent results, making it difficult to determine the overall benefit to patients. Most conventional chemotherapy regimens are anthracycline-based as they appear to be the most active agents in sarcoma patients. Systemic therapy can be utilized in neoadjuvant, adjuvant, metastatic, and recurrent settings.

There are other systemic agents considered second-line agents after patients have failed anthracycline-based regimens. Temozolomide, an alkylating agent, has been utilized as a single agent in patients with advanced and pretreated STS.

New trials utilizing targeted agents and immunotherapy have been initiated and have made their way into the guidelines in particular circumstances. Pazopanib, an oral multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has demonstrated single-agent activity in non-lipogenic STS. The PALETTE Trial was a randomized study for patients with advanced STS who had failed anthracycline-based chemotherapy.

Isolated Limb Perfusion (ILP) is another technique that allows for the delivery of significantly higher doses of chemotherapy in patients with recurrent or primary STS that would otherwise require amputation. The technique involves isolating the patient’s arterial and venous system to allow exclusive delivery to the area of interest and prevent systemic exposure. Typically agents include melphalan, dacarbazine, doxorubicin, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). The treatment response rate was 76%, and the 3-year limb preservation was 71%.

Concurrent chemoradiotherapy has also been studied using three cycles of preoperative MAID (mesna, doxorubicin, dacarbazine, and ifosfamide) with 44Gy of split-course radiotherapy interdigitated with chemotherapy. The results were compared against historical controls and did demonstrate superior overall survival, distant metastasis, and disease-free survival but at the cost of significant hematologic toxicity, with three patients suffering fatal toxicities.