# Introduction

Impression materials are classified as either elastic or non-elastic based on mechanical properties.

Hydrocolloids were the first elastic materials used in the dental field. Hydrocolloids produce an imprint providing high-definition details despite undercuts. While the impressions deform upon removal, they later adapt to the original shape due to their elastic properties. Alginate is an elastic, irreversible hydrocolloid that offers lower costs, improved patient tolerance, ease of manipulation, reduced execution times, and the possibility of obtaining a detailed impression in a single step.

# Anatomy and Physiology

**Composition**

Alginate is an irreversible hydrocolloid material that can reproduce soft and hard tissue details when in the presence of water. Alginates are salts produced from the combination of alginic acid with either sodium, calcium, potassium, or magnesium.

**Setting Mechanism**

The setting mechanism of alginate is a chemical reaction between the salt sodium alginate and the reactor calcium sulfate.

The retarder can slow the setting reaction, giving rise to dental alginates with different working times. Type I is a fast set that hardens within 1 to 2 minutes, and type II is a standard set that hardens within 2 to 5 minutes.

**Properties**

Alginates are mucostatic impression materials. When freshly spatulated, alginates have low viscosity and record the soft tissues without compressing them. Alginates are easy to manipulate, affordable, and have rapid setting times.

However, several downsides of dental alginates have been described. Alginates provide a less accurate reproduction than elastomers; they have low tear strength and are likely to tear when removed from deep undercuts, such as interproximal and subgingival areas; they can only be poured once, producing only one plaster model; and they have poor dimensional stability when pouring is delayed.

An ideal impression material would have sufficient dimensional stability over time to allow for pouring whenever convenient.

# Indications

Alginate is one of the most frequently used materials in dentistry and is the impression material of choice when accurate detail reproduction is not paramount. Alginates can be used to create study casts, preliminary impressions, provisional crown or bridge impressions, opposing arch impressions, and fabricate orthodontic casts, sports mouth guards, occlusal splints, and bleaching trays.

# Contraindications

Very few allergic reactions to alginates have been reported. Alginate impression material is contraindicated in patients with a severe allergy to crystalline silica, calcium sulfate, or potassium titanium fluoride.

# Technique or Treatment

**Selection of Correct Tray**

Trays for alginate impressions must have retention, such as perforations.

**Mixing**

The mixing method can significantly affect the elastic recovery and tensile strength of the impression. Dental alginates are often manually mixed, but proprietary mechanical mixing devices are available. Alginate is supplied as a powder with a measuring scoop and a cylindrical cup for measuring water. The recommended powder-to-water ratio is usually 1:1 but is set by the manufacturer.

Manual mixing is performed by adding the measured powder to a flexible rubber bowl and subsequently adding the corresponding amount of water. Mixing must be rapid, wiping or stropping against the side of the rubber bowl with a wide-blade spatula. The final mixture must have a creamy consistency but should not fall from the spatula when lifted.

Manufacturers have introduced a "dustless" alginate designed to reduce the dust encountered after tumbling; the powder is thicker and less prone to become airborne. In addition, color indicators have been added to some formulations to identify setting reactions, allowing the operator to decide when to proceed to the next step of impression-making.

Semiautomatic mechanical mixing devices, available since 1978, create a less viscous mixture with fewer bubbles.

**Loading**

Alginic adhesives are required to dry for five minutes and must be applied before preparing the alginate.

**Impression Taking**

When placing the tray in the mouth, retract one side of the lip using a mouth mirror or gloved finger.

Remove the set impression with a quick snap, breaking the seal between the oral tissues and the tray by gently pushing with the finger or applying air directly into the buccal sulcus and then pulling with downward pressure. Rinse the impression with cold water to remove any surface saliva, debris, or blood. Disinfect the rinsed tray.

**Disinfection of Impressions**

Impression materials will contact saliva and blood during impression taking. Oral microorganisms and other infectious pathogens can be transmitted from impressions to dental laboratories.

The first step in disinfecting impressions is to rinse them well with tap water, which removes a significant number of microorganisms from the impression.

Alginates are usually disinfected during the preparation step by spraying or mixing the alginate powder with a disinfectant solution instead of water, allowing the impression to be poured immediately.

Disinfected gypsum die stones may also be used, avoiding the distortion experienced by the impression material during other disinfection maneuvers.

# Clinical Significance

Alginate impressions play a key role in daily dental practice due to their easy manipulation, fast set times, and affordable price. Understanding the properties, mode of setting, and manipulation of dental alginates is essential to achieve correct and predictable impressions, translating into good dental casts and avoiding the need to repeat the impression. Furthermore, decontaminating and disinfecting dental impressions to decrease the risk of cross-contamination must be emphasized. The selection of the appropriate disinfection method is dictated by the properties of the material, namely imbibition, syneresis, and evaporation. Thorough knowledge of the mechanical properties of alginates enables clinicians to selectively utilize these materials to optimize outcomes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Creating dental impressions and the resulting dental casts is one of the best examples of collaborative work between dental clinicians, nurses, and laboratory technicians. The dentist selects the appropriate material and corresponding stock tray for the clinical case. The nurse usually mixes and loads the freshly made alginate into the tray. The nurses are also responsible for cleaning and disinfecting the impressions and either pouring them with gypsum or packing them to send to the laboratory. The package must contain documentation of adequate disinfection. The technician fabricates the impression if the impression arrives at the lab unpoured.

Understanding the inherent properties of irreversible hydrocolloids reduces errors and improves patient outcomes.[Level 4]