Injuries to the axillary artery are rare but can cause limb loss and most commonly arise from penetrating or blunt trauma to the shoulder. Examples include but are not limited to anterior shoulder dislocation, reduction of anterior shoulder dislocation, and humoral neck fracture.

**Axillary Artery Aneurysm**

Axillary artery aneurysms are one of the injuries that can occur due to penetrating or blunt trauma. However, they may develop from atherosclerotic processes over long periods, but this is exceedingly rare.

Ultrasound is also very useful for detection and diagnosis. An aneurysmectomy and grafting with a saphenous vein is commonly the surgical procedure employed to reverse these complications. Another treatment option for patients is an endovascular aneurysm repair.

**Arterial Positional Compression**

Axillary artery thrombosis and aneurysm may also be seen, although very rarely, in healthy athletes that perform frequent overhead throwing motions such as pitching a baseball or hitting a volleyball. In the throwing motion, the anterior displacement of the humerus places compression on the third portion of the axillary artery. Intermittent axillary artery compression may cause chronic changes in downstream vascular sufficiency. This could lead to subsequent thrombosis and aneurysms. Medical staff dealing with these athletes should be vigilant for symptoms of ischemic pain, cold intolerance, numbness, or arm fatigue immediately following practice or competition. They should note that symptoms will present later in the disease process because only significant embolization or decreased blood flow causes perceptible changes in temperature or sensation.

CT angiogram and magnetic resonance angiogram can be used to diagnose or screen athletes at risk of symptomatic arterial positional compression. A further example of this is quadrilateral space compression syndrome, a space bordered by the humerus, teres major, long head of triceps, and teres minor, which contains the posterior circumflex humeral artery and axillary nerve, which are vulnerable here to compression.