Due to the increased risk of aneurysmal rupture, intervention rather than a watchful waiting is advised for aneurysms greater than 2 cm in diameter. Other indications for intervention include: symptomatic patients, women of childbearing years, concomitant pregnancy, and cirrhotic patients planning to undergo orthotopic liver transplantation or Porto venous shunting procedures.

Open surgical approach: Open surgical intervention is considered the gold standard approach for SAA repair. Techniques involving resection of an aneurysm with interposition bypass are ideal for aneurysms located in the proximal to the mid-splenic artery. Resection of an aneurysm can be combined with splenectomy in cases of a hostile abdomen or distal aneurysms located near the splenic hilum. Patients with ruptured splenic aneurysms should undergo urgent laparotomy and control of hemorrhage with ligation of an aneurysm. Preservation of the spleen is encouraged when possible, but splenectomy should be performed if adequate hemostasis is impossible to achieve otherwise.

Endovascular approach: Endovascular intervention has gained a lot of popularity recently in managing aneurysms. Techniques vary according to the type of an aneurysm, location, whether preserving the splenic artery will be preserved, and the condition of collaterals. Fusiform true aneurysms are better treated with a stent graft (covered stent), while tortuous, saccular aneurysms are treated with aneurysmal coiling techniques. Pseudoaneurysms can be treated with embolization using liquid embolic agents to thrombose the inflow and outflow arteries or filling the sac itself. Distal splenic embolization should be avoided.

Minimally invasive laparoscopic approach:  The laparoscopic approach is a safe therapeutic alternative for cases of elective splenic aneurysm repair. Different techniques have been employed including ligation of the mid-splenic artery via stapling or clipping to splenectomy alone for distal SAAs near the hilum. Splenectomy with distal pancreatectomy may be necessary when the aneurysmal wall is severely inflamed and adherent to the tail of the pancreas. The laparoscopic approach carries the advantage of the rapid recovery, shorter hospital stay, and less postoperative pain compared with the open approach. The laparoscopic approach is also suitable and safe in pregnant SAA patients. Compared with the open approach, laparoscopic splenic aneurysm repair has a lower risk of preterm labor in these patients due to minimal manipulation of intra-abdominal contents.