There are many different subtypes of pigmented purpuric dermatosis. Their clinical presentation can mainly distinguish these, but some have unique histopathology as well.

**Progressive Pigmentary Dermatosis (Schamberg Disease)**

This condition presents as an eruption on the legs that consists of red-brown macules and patches with pinpoint red puncta. These stippled puncta have been likened to grains of cayenne pepper as the skin lesions can often have orange-brown color due to hemosiderin deposition. Although initially described in adolescents, it can affect all ages and, on average, presents in the fifth decade of life.

**Purpura Aannularis Telangiectodes of Majocchi**

This variant presents with annular patches of punctate red-brown macules and patches on the legs with punctate petechiae at the border. The annular (ring-like) configuration of the patches with central clearing is unique, and annular plaques also can manifest. This eruption typically begins on the lower legs but can spread proximally and may also occur on the arms and trunk. This subtype is most common in females.

**Lichen Aureus**

The hallmark of lichen aureus is the presentation of ovoid golden orange to mildly purpuric macules, patches, and plaques. They may be quite pruritic, although they are often asymptomatic. The lesions are often unilateral and localized to the legs but can involve the trunk and arms. It is most common in young adults and can have a chronic course that may persist for years. This eruption is also distinguished by a dense band of lichenoid dermal inflammation, in contrast to the other subtypes of pigmented purpuric dermatitis, which do not exhibit lichenoid histopathology.

**Pigmented Purpuric Lichenoid Dermatitis of Gougerot and Blum**

This eruption is distinguished by red-brown to purpuric ovoid papules and plaques that occur on the lower extremities. Although it is named lichenoid dermatitis, it does not typically exhibit lichenoid histology. Clinically, this condition can mimic Kaposi sarcoma, and therefore, skin biopsies are helpful to make an accurate diagnosis.

**Eczematoid-Like Purpura of Doucas and Kapetanakis**

This condition is characterized by mild scale overlying purpuric and petechial macules, papules, and patches. It is often pruritic, and the lesions can be extensive and may involve the trunk and arms in addition to the lower extremities. It typically self-resolves over many months.

**Disseminated Pruriginous Angiodermatitis (Itching Purpura)**

Itching purpura presents acutely on the legs with diffuse purpuric, orange to brown macules and patches, accompanied by severe pruritus. It can evolve to become widespread and often has a chronic course. It is most common in middle-aged men.

**Unilateral Linear Capillaritis (Linear Pigmented Purpura)**

This eruption presents as a linear distribution of purpuric to red-brown macules, unilaterally on a lower extremity. It commonly self-resolves. Unilateral linear capillaritis has been reported as a segmental variant of Schamberg disease or lichen aureus.

**Granulomatous Pigmented Purpura**

This subtype of pigmented purpuric dermatitis has been most often reported in patients of Asian descent. It occurs as red-brown macules, papules, and plaques on the feet and ankles but can occur on the hands and wrists. It is distinguished by dense granulomatous inflammation in the dermis with thickened capillaries and hemosiderin deposition.