# Continuing Education Activity

A histrionic personality disorder, or commonly known as a dramatic personality disorder, is a psychiatric disorder distinguished by a pattern of exaggerated emotionality and attention-seeking behaviors. A histrionic personality disorder is categorized within the "Cluster B" of personality disorders. Cluster B personality disorders include conditions such as narcissistic personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, and antisocial personality disorder. These personality disorders are commonly described as dramatic, excitable, erratic, or volatile. Specifically, people with histrionic personality disorder are typically characterized as flirtatious, seductive, charming, manipulative, impulsive, and lively. This activity reviews the evaluation, treatment, and management of histrionic personality disorder and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the etiology of histrionic personality disorder. 
- Review the anticipated presentation of a patient with a histrionic personality disorder. 

- Describe the treatment considerations for histrionic personality disorder. 
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination as well as collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for the patient affected by histrionic personality disorder.

# Introduction

Personality is the set of established patterns of behavior by which one relates to and understands the world around them. A personality disorder arises when one develops an inflexible and intransigent pattern of maladaptive thinking and behaving, which significantly impairs social or occupational functioning and can cause interpersonal distress.

Histrionic personality disorder, or dramatic personality disorder,  is a psychiatric disorder distinguished by a pattern of exaggerated emotionality and attention-seeking behaviors. Histrionic personality disorder falls within the “Cluster B” of personality disorders.

People with histrionic personality disorder may feel underappreciated or disregarded when they are not the center of attention. These people are typically the life of the party and have a “larger than life” presence.

# Etiology

While it is unknown what explicitly causes histrionic personality disorder, it is likely a disorder that is multifactorial in its origin. Histrionic personality disorder probably develops as a conglomeration of both learned and inherited factors.

Parenting styles may also influence the likelihood of developing a histrionic personality disorder. Parenting which lacks boundaries is over-indulgent or inconsistent may predispose children to develop histrionic personality disorder.

# Epidemiology

While approximately 9% of the general population has at least one personality disorder, the prevalence of histrionic personality disorder in the general populace runs about 2 to 3 %.

# History and Physical

Mental health care professionals will make a diagnosis of histrionic personality disorder after evaluating for abiding patterns of behavior and symptomology.

# Evaluation

Per DSM-5 criteria, a diagnosis of a histrionic personality disorder requires a pervasive and ubiquitous pattern of consistent attention-seeking behaviors and emotional dysregulation as outlined by specific manifestations. Diagnosis requires meeting **five****(or more)**of the following criteria:

- Uncomfortable when not the center of attention

- Seductive or provocative behavior

- Shifting and shallow emotions

- Uses appearance to draw attention

- Impressionistic and vague speech

- Dramatic or exaggerated emotions

- Suggestible (easily influenced by others)

- Considers relationships more intimate than they are

These patients take repression and dissociation as a significant form of defense mechanism.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of choice for histrionic personality disorder is psychotherapy. Supportive psychotherapy is a recommended modality of treatment for patients with histrionic personality disorder, as this approach is found to be encouraging, reassuring, and non-threatening.

Psychodynamic psychotherapy (also called insight-oriented therapy) has also proven to be a successful approach in treating patients with histrionic personality disorder.

Group therapy and family therapy are not typically recommended as the first-line modality in treating histrionic personality disorder. People with histrionic personality disorder tend to desire to be the center of attention, which may be distracting from therapeutic goals in a group setting.

While the gold standard for treating personality disorders is psychotherapy, patients with histrionic personality disorder may be profoundly symptomatic.

The biofeedback mechanism may help these patients control their inner feelings.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for histrionic personality disorder includes narcissistic personality disorder, borderline personality disorder, dependent personality disorder, somatic symptom disorder, and illness anxiety disorder.

# Prognosis

While there is no cure for histrionic personality disorder, many people who have histrionic personality disorder can have useful and productive lives.

# Complications

People with histrionic personality disorder are at a higher risk of developing depression than the general population.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As with other psychiatric disorders, patient education is a crucial component of successfully managing histrionic personality disorder. Patients diagnosed with histrionic personality disorder would benefit from understanding the maladaptive characteristics of their personality to gain insight and ultimately gain some control.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

To promote better outcomes for patients with histrionic personality disorder, it is vital for patients to receive an accurate diagnosis. All providers would benefit from having a greater understanding of this disorder so that patients may receive the care they need. Psychiatric disturbances can affect anyone; however, if the physician or nurse provider is not considering histrionic personality disorder as a differential diagnosis, the patient will not receive the treatment they need.

Histrionic personality disorder management requires the efforts of an interprofessional team that includes physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nursing staff, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplinary lines to drive outcomes positively. [Level V]