The management of mesenteric ischemia is an interprofessional. Many of these patients have other comorbidities and need to be assessed by other health professionals. Because of the presence of vascular disease, the other organ systems in the body also need to be closely monitored. For those who have atrial arrhythmias, the patients need long-term anticoagulation. In addition, the pharmacist must ensure that a therapeutic INR has been achieved. Periodic anticoagulation profile is mandatory. The patient should be urged to stop smoking and ensure that the blood pressure is adequately controlled. Many patients may develop diarrhea as a result of bowel resection and may develop malabsorption. Thus, a dietary consult is recommended. In some patients, long-term intravenous hyperalimentation may be required. Finally, patients who end up with a stoma will need to be seen by a stoma nurse.

**Outcomes**

Even though survival of patients following mesenteric artery ischemia has improved over the past 3 decades, the disorder still carries a very high morbidity and mortality. Depending on the time of presentation and treatment, the mortality can approach 10-80%. Even those who survive are left with a risk of re-thrombosis, short bowel, a colostomy or ileostomy. Many patients are left with a short gut and require long-term parenteral nutrition. The outcomes are usually worse in seniors, those with other comorbidities, sepsis and metabolic acidosis at the time of presentation. Early recognition of the problem can help reduce the mortality.