**Sarcoma:**Small bowel sarcomas include gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) and non-GIST tumors. The management of such lesions varies on the specific type that is identified. GISTs, in particular, have been found to have activating mutations that involve the KIT proto-oncogene, and therefore therapy has been designated to target this pathway. KIT inhibitors have become first-line, most specifically Imatinib.****A distinct difference in management for GIST and non-GIST tumors involves node resection, which is not recommended for such lesions as they rarely metastasize to regional lymph nodes. Surgical resection, therefore, involves resection of the primary lesion with particular consideration placed on ensuring there is no spillage of the resected tissue intraoperatively.

**Adenocarcinoma**: Localized small bowel adenocarcinoma is primarily managed with wide segmental surgical resection. The involved mesentery is removed at the time of surgical removal of the tumor. At the time of surgical resection, nodes are also resected as this helps determine the need for adjuvant chemotherapy. If the tumor is large and involves the first and second portions of the small bowel, a Whipple procedure may be considered.

**Neuroendocrine Tumors:**It has been previously noted that the majority of NETs arise in the jejunum and ileum and are typically well differentiated. They have been noted to be indolent in nature in most cases. However, they do carry metastasis potential. For this reason, resection of the tumor with resection of the adjacent mesentery and lymph nodes is generally recommended. This applies to patients with localized diseases.

**Lymphoma:**The majority of lesions in the GI tract that are identified as lymphoma consist of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The majority of SB lymphoma is managed with surgical resection and adjuvant chemotherapy depending on the histological subtype of NHL. Adjuvant radiation therapy is a less preferred option due to the many complications following radiation to the abdominal cavity. Studies have not proven the benefits outweigh the long-term complications.