**Symptoms**

Symptoms due to pulmonary hypertension (either primary or secondary) and/or severe TR disease include the following:

- Exertional chest pain (angina), usually due to subendocardial hypoperfusion caused by increased right ventricular wall stress and myocardial oxygen demand but occasionally caused by dynamic compression of the left main coronary artery by an enlarged pulmonary artery. This risk is greatest for patients with a pulmonary artery trunk at least 40 millimeters in diameter

- Peripheral edema due to right ventricular failure, increased right-sided filling cardiac pressures, and extracellular volume expansion.

- Exertional syncope due to the inability to increase cardiac output during activity or reflex bradycardia that is secondary to mechanoreceptor activation in the right ventricle.

- Anorexia and/or right upper quadrant abdominal pain due to passive hepatic congestion.

Uncommon symptoms include a cough, hemoptysis, and hoarseness (Ortner syndrome). Compression of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve by a dilated main pulmonary artery causes the hoarseness.

**Physical Exam**

The most prominent features of the physical examination in patients with TR are those related to the regurgitant murmur and the development of right-sided heart failure. With severe right heart failure, the patient often looks cachectic, chronically ill, cyanotic, and occasionally jaundiced (reflecting hepatic dysfunction). If TR is due to left ventricular dysfunction, signs of left-sided heart failure may dominate. Patients with PH may develop physical signs as they progress from PH alone to PH associated with right ventricular failure/hypertrophy. The systemic venous hypertension caused by right ventricular failure can lead to a variety of findings, such as elevated jugular venous pressure, a right ventricular third heart sound, and a prominent V wave in the jugular venous pulse. Hepatomegaly, a pulsatile liver, peripheral edema, ascites, and pleural effusion also may exist. Some patients with PH due to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) develop edema even in the absence of right heart failure.

**Jugular Veins**

Distended and prominent jugular veins are apparent and reflect right atrial pressure elevation.

There is a presence of distinct “c-v” wave due to systolic regurgitation through the tricuspid valve into the right atrium. With the development of ventricular hypertrophy, a prominent “a” wave may emerge within the jugular venous pulse and may be accompanied by a right-sided fourth heart sound and either a left parasternal heave or a downward subxiphoid thrust.

Jugular venous distension may be more prominent with inspiration (Kussmaul sign), a result of the increase in venous return. This finding, however, may not be very obvious with marked venous distension.

**Palpation**

Palpation of the chest may reveal a dynamic right ventricular heave due to the dilated right ventricle. A sustained systolic left parasternal lift is most frequently appreciated in the presence of significant right ventricular hypertrophy. Long-standing, severe pulmonary arterial hypertension, whether precapillary (idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension or pulmonary valve stenosis) or postcapillary (mitral stenosis, cardiomyopathy), produces right ventricular hypertrophy and a sustained lower left parasternal lift. It may be associated with a palpable presystolic a wave preceding the right ventricular lift (heave); suggesting decreased right ventricular compliance. Epigastric and subxiphoid pulsations are usually abnormal and are related to right ventricular hypertrophy and dilation or the abdominal aortic aneurysm. However, in patients with emphysema, subxiphoid pulsations may not always indicate right ventricular hypertrophy.

A hyperdynamic but not sustained left parasternal systolic impulse may be palpable when right ventricular volume is increased, as with an atrial septal defect or TR. The left parasternal impulse becomes sustained during systole when pulmonary arterial hypertension is also present. When the TR is very severe, a pulsation may be detected along the right sternal border due to flow into the right atrium.

A left parasternal and mid-precordial systolic outward impulse, similar to that associated with right ventricular hypertrophy, can be palpable in the absence of right ventricular hypertrophy; for example, in patients with significant mitral regurgitation. The systolic pulsation appears to result from left atrial expansion due to mitral regurgitation pressing the anterior structures forward toward the anterior chest wall. In some patients with Ebstein's anomaly, a right parasternal systolic outward movement, presumably due to a large, ventricularized right atrium, is appreciated.

**Cardiac Auscultation**

Heart sounds

An S3, which may vary in intensity and with inspiration, is often associated with an extremely dilated right ventricle. An S4 may also be heard if there is significant right ventricular hypertrophy. The initial physical finding of PH is ordinarily the increased intensity of the second heart sound's pulmonic component which may become palpable. Patients with preserved right ventricular function, have a closely split or single second heart sound. Right ventricle failure (or a right bundle branch block) widens the splitting of the second heart sound. When there are other associated cardiac abnormalities, auscultatory findings of these conditions also may be appreciated.

Murmur

TR is classically associated with a holosystolic murmur that is best heard at the right or left mid sternal border or at the subxiphoid area. When the right ventricle is very enlarged, the murmur even may be appreciated at the apex. There is usually little radiation of the murmur, and a thrill is not palpable. However, the murmur of TR is often soft or absent, even when regurgitation is severe. Diastolic murmurs are usually absent in TR, although a diastolic rumble may be heard, particularly if there is associated tricuspid stenosis or when there is substantial blood flow across the tricuspid valve during diastole, which may occur with an atrial septal defect.

**Maneuvers**

Interventions that result in an increase in venous return, such as leg raising, exercise, or hepatic compression, will augment the murmur of TR. The murmur also may become louder after a premature beat and prolonged diastole. On the other hand, reducing venous return with standing or amyl nitrate will diminish the intensity of the murmur. In patients with pulmonary hypertension, the intensity of the murmur may change with changes in pulmonary artery pressure.

Respiratory variation in the intensity and duration of the murmur (Rivero-Carvallo sign) may be observed with mild to moderate TR. With inspiration, there is an increase in venous return to the right ventricle; as a result, the murmur of TR becomes louder and may become longer unless it is already holosystolic.

The respiratory variation may occasionally be augmented when the patient is standing and venous return is reduced. On the other hand, respiratory variation may not be appreciated in patients with severe TR or marked right ventricular enlargement and dysfunction.

**Edema**

Ascites and peripheral edema of variable severity may be present, and anasarca can occur in severe disease. There is frequent evidence of unilateral or bilateral pleural effusions, which are more common when the TR results from pulmonary hypertension secondary to a left-sided cardiac problem (valvular or myocardial).

**Hepatomegaly**

The liver is often enlarged and tender and may be pulsatile in severe TR. Occasionally, the systolic murmur may be transmitted to and heard over the liver (with a thrill).