Treatment involves adequate drainage of the abscess in the operating room. Also, antibiotic therapy is paramount. Because cultures are not available at the time of presentation, empiric antibiotics are started at presentation. A study in 2008 by Yang et al. found three comparable antibiotic regimens: (1) ceftriaxone and clindamycin (2) ceftriaxone and metronidazole, or (3) penicillin G and gentamicin and clindamycin.

In a 2015 Iranian study by Motahari, et al., 815 of 428 cases were managed surgically while the rest were managed medically. Tracheostomy was performed in five cases. One 15-year-old with symptoms suggestive of mediastinitis died of airway compromise a day after undergoing surgical management of parapharyngeal abscess. The study concluded that if medical management fails after 24 to 48 hours, or if fluctuance or any complications are present, prompt surgical management is indicated.

It is important to determine the underlying cause of the problem and to address that specifically. For example, with odontogenic infections, early dental extraction is crucial. Airway management must always be a consideration, as there is often swelling and distortion of anatomy, the surgical airway may be preferable. Certainly, in cases of deep neck infection, early notification of otolaryngology and anesthesia for airway backup is wise. For patients presenting with a compromised airway, prompt transfer to the operating room for simultaneous evaluation, airway management, and treatment may be life-saving.