The management of sinus node dysfunction includes identifying and correcting reversible factors, as an initial step. After treating reversible causes, the treatment of sinus node dysfunction can include the placement of a permanent pacemaker. A permanent pacemaker is indicated in symptomatic patients who have documented bradycardia responsible for their symptoms or in those who have demonstrated chronotropic incompetence. A permanent pacemaker is also indicated in sinus node dysfunction secondary to medications necessitated by another medical condition. This is commonly encountered in tachy-brady syndrome where beta-adrenergic blockers are required for treatment of AF, but they suppress the SA node causing prolonged sinus pauses and syncope upon the cessation of tachyarrhythmia episodes. Moreover, it is reasonable to consider a permanent pacemaker in symptomatic patients who have bradycardia less than 40 beats per minute that were not documented to be associated with their symptoms. A permanent pacemaker is also reasonable in patients who have had a diagnostic electrophysiologic study.

When considering the type of pacemaker, the dual-chamber pacing is usually preferred due to the increased risk of AV block in sinus node dysfunction. Anticoagulation should be addressed in patients with paroxysmal atrial tachyarrhythmias since these patients are at increased risk of stroke. Dual-chamber pacemaker is recommended in patients with sinus node dysfunction due to increased risk of AV block. Moreover, atrial pacing, attained with a dual-chamber pacemaker, may reduce the incidence of AF and subsequent risk of systemic thromboembolism and stroke compared to patients who receive ventricular pacing only