Idiopathic epiretinal membrane (IERM) is commonly seen in the elderly beyond 60 years with no sex predilection. Visual acuity, Amsler grid charting, and dilated fundus examination with scleral depression is mandatory in all patients with visual distortion. Watzke Allen test is an ophthalmoscopic test done to differentiate the full-thickness macular hole from a pseudohole. On the slit-lamp fundus examination, the epiretinal membrane (ERM) appears as an abnormal reflectivity of the macular area with loss of normal convex contour and fine wrinkling of the surface. ERM is classified as an early milder form called cellophane macular reflex and a severe late form called preretinal macular fibrosis.

Cellophane macular reflex is seen as a thin transparent membrane overlying the macula with no distortion or impairment of vision. Fundoscopy shows a glistening watery silky light reflex over the macula. Preretinal macular fibrosis occurs in some cases where a cellophane membrane thickens, contracts causing retinal folds and traction lines resulting in impairment of vision and metamorphopsia. Fundoscopy of preretinal macular fibrosis reveals a semi-translucent membrane obscuring the underlying retinal details with retinal fold, traction lines, and vascular tortuosity. Severe cases might show retinal hemorrhages, exudates, macular edema, macula hole, and pseudohole. A defect in the ERM appears as a pseudohole.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a highly sensitive routinely done investigation for retinal disorders and is the investigation of choice to diagnose epiretinal membrane and vitreomacular traction (VMT). On OCT, an ERM appears as a hyperreflective layer often irregular over the inner surface of the retina. It appears corrugated with peg-like attachments to the retina. Elevation of the foveal depression is seen due to traction from ERM. In severe cases, the inner retina shows folds with thickening of macula along with cystoid spaces. Both ERM and VMT often occur together. Andrea Govetto et al. have studied 194 eyes of 172 patients with ERM with clinical charts and spectral-domain OCT imaging. They found 63 out of 194 eyes showed the presence of continuous ectopic inner foveal layers and is associated with lower visual acuity.

- Stage 1: ERMs were mild and thin. Foveal depression is present.

- Stage 2: ERMs with a widening of the outer nuclear layer and loss of the foveal depression.

- Stage 3: ERMs with continuous ectopic inner foveal layers crossing the entire foveal area.

- Stage 4: ERMs were thick with continuous ectopic inner foveal layers and disrupted retinal layers.

In stages 1, 2, and 3, all retinal layers were clearly defined on OCT. Visual acuity progressively declined from stage 1 through stage 4. Hwang classified idiopathic ERM based on spectral-domain OCT.

Group 1: Fovea-involving ERM

- 1a: Outer retinal thickening and minimal inner retinal change

- 1b: Outer retinal inward projection and inner retinal thickening

- 1c: Prominent thickening of the inner retinal layer

Group 2: Fovea-sparing ERM

- 2a: Formation of a macular pseudohole

- 2b: Schisis-like intraretinal splitting

Dr. Altaweel et al. recently proposed a detailed staging based on OCT observations.

- Stage IA: Foveal splitting with a pseudocyst

- Stage IB: Pseudocyst enlargement and extension to the outer retina with roof intact.

- Stage IIA: Full-thickness macular hole (diameter <400 microns) with posterior hyaloid face remaining attached to the roof of the pseudocyst.

- Stage IIB: Full-thickness macular hole (diameter <400 microns) with an operculum.

- Stage III: Full-thickness macular hole (diameter >400 microns) with surrounding thickened retina, including intraretinal cystoid spaces. The perifoveal and prefoveal hyaloid is separated from the macular retina.

- Stage IV: A stage III hole with a complete posterior vitreous detachment. OCT often cannot visualize the posterior hyaloid because it is too anterior.

A fundus fluorescein angiography or an optical coherence angiography (OCT-A) will help in detecting the retinal pathologies causing secondary ERM such as diabetic retinopathy, choroidal neovascular membrane, retinal telangiectasias, retinal vein occlusions, etc.