Because the infection is rapidly progressive, it is important to treat patients aggressively with antibiotics, early surgical consultation with debridement, intravenous fluid resuscitation, ICU monitoring, and adjuvant hyperbaric oxygen therapy.

It is important to get early surgical consultation without delay as this is a true surgical emergency.  Providers should not delay antibiotics to get cultures but should begin empiric treatment with antibiotics. Reasonable broad-spectrum coverage includes vancomycin and tazobactam or a carbapenem or ceftriaxone with metronidazole. If the provider suspects gas gangrene or a necrotizing soft tissue infection, then penicillin plus clindamycin should be added which will also treat group A streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis. Clindamycin should be strongly considered because it inhibits the synthesis of clostridial exotoxins and will lessen the systemic effects of these toxins. Because clindamycin is bacteriostatic and not bactericidal, it should be used in conjunction with a second anti-microbial such as penicillin.

Fasciotomy may be necessary to relieve compartment pressures. As the infection progresses into deep tissue along and under the fascia tissue compartment pressures increase, which perpetuates further tissue ischemia and necrosis. Surgical debridement should focus on removing all the necrotic tissue, and foreign bodies such as soil, debris, and shrapnel. It is also important to irrigate the wounds with copious amounts of sterile normal saline.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy should be added to standard therapy of antibiotics and surgical debridement to help improve survival.

Early IV antibiotics with early surgical debridement followed by hyperbaric oxygen therapy can salvage patients with an otherwise nearly always fatal disease. Intravenous antibiotics and early surgical debridement of the necrotic tissue reduce the fatality rate to about 30%. With the addition of hyperbaric oxygen therapy, this can be reduced down to 5 to 10%. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy helps by halting exotoxin production by the bacteria, helps to improve the bactericidal effect of the antibiotic, treats the tissue ischemia, improves reperfusion injury of the tissue, and promotes the activation and migration of stem cells and polymorphonuclear cells. Additionally, hyperbaric oxygen induces vasoconstriction reducing tissue edema, while augmenting oxygenation. The oxygen tension of the tissue increases by a factor of 1000 and this increased oxygen in the tissue helps to resolve hypoxia, improve cellular activity, inhibit bacterial growth, and affect cytokinesis that increases migration of neutrophils to the injured tissue. Hyperbaric oxygen also increases the production of growth factors such as vascular epidermal growth factor (VEGF) which induces neovascularization and tissue repair with capillary budding. This is recognized clinically as increased granulation tissue formation and is usually seen after several hyperbaric oxygen treatments.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy involves placing the patient in a pressurized chamber which can be mono-place (single patient) or multi-place (multiple patients treated at the same time). The mono-place chamber can only treat one patient at a time, and the attendant is outside of the chamber with specialized equipment and pumps to run IVs and even mechanical ventilation equipment through ports in the chamber door or wall. The disadvantage of this setup is that it limits the therapies available in the chamber and if the patient requires direct contact with the attendant, the chamber has to be depressurized, and the patient is taken out of the chamber. The multi-place chamber has the added benefit of being able to treat multiple patients at the same time, and the attendant is in the chamber with the patients allowing easier access to the patient for ventilator support, IV therapy, placement of a chest tube, or needle decompression of a pneumothorax. The treatment pressure for gas gangrene is 3 atmospheres absolute (ATA). The patient will have air brakes about every half hour to help reduce the risk of oxygen toxicity. These air brakes are usually 5 to 10 minutes in duration. The total duration of the treatment at pressure is usually about 90 minutes with 10 minutes for descent and 10 minutes for the ascent.

When treating gas gangrene the treatments start twice a day for the first 5 to 10 treatments, reducing to once-daily treatments when stabilized. Continuing hyperbaric oxygen therapy beyond the initial stabilization can speed healing of tissue and preparation for eventual tissue grafting that is often necessary to close the large defects left after surgical debridement of dead tissue. The risk of hyperbaric oxygen therapy includes oxygen toxicity which can cause seizures, hypoglycemia especially in insulin-dependent diabetics, and barotrauma which can affect the ears, lungs, or any gas-filled structures, such as the stomach, and gas embolism. These complications are rare, except for ear barotrauma which occurs approximately 43% of the time (84% of these are minor injections of the tympanic membrane).

It is crucial to get early surgical consultation without delay in the case of gas gangrene, as this is an immediate emergency.  Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be initiated without any delay to get cultures. Reasonable coverage should include vancomycin, tazobactam or a carbapenem, or a third-generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone) with metronidazole. Moreover, in case of any suspicion for gas gangrene or necrotizing fascitis, penicillin plus clindamycin should be added to cover group A streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis. Clindamycin is strongly recommended. Adjunctive measures in the treatment of gas gangrene include hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) therapy.  The function of the existing toxin is not affected by hyperbaric oxygen therapy; thus, debridement is of paramount importance. Hemodynamically unstable patients may not be candidates for HBO therapy. Moreover, animal experimental studies in animals failed to document the therapeutic efficacy of HBO.

Providers should consider the use of negative pressure wound dressing therapy once adequate surgical debridement has resolved ongoing tissue necrosis.