Testing to determine if the cochlea or related structures are involved in hearing loss begins with the Rinne and Weber tests. These tests are accomplished using a 512 Hz tuning fork to determine if the cause of hearing loss is conductive or sensorineural. Conductive hearing loss etiologies include more mechanical dysfunctions in the outer and middle ear, such as cerumen impaction, otitis media, and damage to the ossicles or tympanic membrane. Sensorineural hearing loss involves damage to the specialized nervous system that makes up the inner ear, the cochlea or nerves exiting the cochlea.

The Weber test is performed by striking the 512 Hz tuning fork and placing it on the center of the head. The patient is then asked if the sound is lateralized to one or both ears. The sound will lateralize to the dysfunctional ear with conductive hearing loss and to the functioning ear with sensorineural hearing loss.

Next, the Rinne test is performed by striking the 512 Hz tuning fork and placing it on the mastoid process of each ear. The patient is instructed to indicate when the sound is no longer heard, at which point the tuning fork is moved to the auditory meatus, and the patient is instructed to repeat the process. Normal auditory function will have a 2:1 ratio of bone-to-air conduction times. If the hearing loss is conductive, bone conduction is heard longer than or equal to air conduction. If the hearing loss is sensorineural, air conduction is heard longer than bone conduction but less than the normal 2:1 ratio.

Electrocochleography is a test that records the electrical potentials generated by the cochlea and the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII). An electrode is placed in the ear canal, on the tympanic membrane, or through the tympanic membrane on the cochlea. It measures the summating potential generated by hair cells of the cochlea and the action potentials of the cochlear nerve in response to acoustic stimulation. Electrocochleography is most useful in diagnosing endolymphatic hydrops, commonly seen in Ménierè disease, and for intraoperative monitoring of the cochlea and CN VIII.