Rarely, hallux varus is congenital. Flexible hallux varus may be found in newborns and reflects their intrauterine positioning. It corrects to valgus in early childhood when walking begins.

More frequently this deformity develops after a surgical procedure for hallux valgus because of overcorrection, excessive lateral release, over-resection of medial eminence, over-plication of the medial capsule, zero-degree or negative intermetatarsal angle, or immobilization of the toe in excessive varus after surgery. Other causes include trauma and certain systemic inflammatory diseases such as psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis.

- Congenital hallux varus is divided into primary and secondary pathologic deformity. Primary hallux varus is rare and related to an overactive abductor hallucis. Secondary hallux varus is related to great toe polydactyly, a delta phalanx longitudinal epiphyseal bracket syndrome, and metatarsus adductus.

- Medial insertion of the abductor tendon causes primary dynamic infantile hallux varus.

- Acquired adult hallux varus is an inflammatory arthropathy that includes psoriatic and rheumatoid arthritis. The mechanism of arthropathies combines destruction of the articular surfaces by distention of the joint capsule with subsequent laxity of the collateral ligaments, intrinsic muscular contracture, and pannus.

- Traumatic hallux varus occurs with sports injuries secondary to rupture of the lateral collateral ligament and conjoined tendon.

Spontaneous idiopathic hallux varus is noted incidentally, and the cause is not usually demonstrable.

Congenital hallux varus is typically due to connective tissue disorders (i.e., Marfan syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome) or is associated with Down syndrome and neuromuscular disorders (i.e., cerebral palsy).