Gross findings vary according to the types of pleuropulmonary blastomas

- Type I  pleuropulmonary tumors consist of thin-walled structures.

- Type II pleuropulmonary tumors contain a mixture of solid and cystic lesions.

- Type III pleuropulmonary tumors present as a mass with a variegated cut surface that may be hemorrhagic and or necrotic.

Microscopic findings vary according to the different subtypes:

- Type I pleuropulmonary tumor is characterized by multicystic lesions lined by respiratory-type epithelium with the presence in the cystic wall of a population of small malignant cells that can lie as a continuous or discontinuous cambium layer zone. Areas of rhabdomyoblastic differentiation may be present such as immature cartilage.

- Type II pleuropulmonary tumor is characterized by a complete overgrowth of the septal stroma by sheets of primitive small cells without apparent differentiation, areas of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma or fascicles of a spindle cell sarcoma.

- Type III pleuropulmonary blastoma is characterized by mixed sheets of blastematous and sarcomatous areas like chondrosarcoma-like, fibrosarcoma-like, rhabdomyosarcoma-like or anaplastic areas.

Morphologic features are mandatory to make the diagnosis, but the immunohistochemical study may be helpful in highlighting the diagnosis. Immunohistochemical studies show the reactivity of the tumor cells to vimentin and the reactivity of rhabdomyoblastic cells with the desmin antibody. Morphologically, Type II is similar to Wilms tumor and therefore, it is sometimes called as “extra-renal Wilms tumor”.