Although the brainstem location in which the nucleus gustatory resides is arguably the most critical for unconscious human functioning, the nucleus gustatory itself has limited clinical significance. There are several terms used to characterize pathologies in taste perception. As mentioned above in conjunction with the COVID 19 pandemic, olfaction is strongly linked to gustation and it is dysfunction of the olfactory mechanism that is the primary failure in taste (gustatory) disturbances.

- Ageusia – the absence of taste

- Hypogeusia – diminished taste

- Hypergeusia – enhanced perception of taste

- Dysgeusia or parageusia – the unpleasant perception of taste

The perception of taste can localize into two functional components: the peripheral arm and the central arm. The peripheral arm is most commonly the culprit in taste-related disorders. Abnormal saliva production, damage to taste buds, or damage to any of the branches of the cranial nerves supplying these taste buds can cause a decrease or absence in the perception of taste in the peripheral arm. One example of this is the damage to the Chorda Tympani that is a possible complication of surgery in the middle ear. This finding is, however, is infrequent as studies have documented the chorda tympani’s significant neuroplasticity allowing for the maintenance of taste in the presence of a damaged nerve.

Many taste disorders are reversible and associated with various drugs, including antibiotics, anticonvulsants, and antidepressants. Regarding peripheral lesions of the cranial nerves VII, IX, and X, the facial nerve VII (chorda tympani) is affected most frequently. In idiopathic CN VII palsy (Bell palsy) taste dysfunction usually, hypogeusia can be the presenting complaint. Other considerations include Lyme disease (neuroborreliosis), herpes zoster, or a space-occupying lesion in the cerebellopontine angle such as a meningioma or neurinoma. Rare causes of peripheral gustatory dysfunction include polyneuropathies such as porphyria, connective tissue diseases, amyloidosis, diphtheria, and posttraumatic iatrogenic neuropathy following intubation or other laryngoscopic manipulations.

An isolated taste disorder is rarely the presenting symptom of either a brainstem, thalamic, or cortical lesion. Hemiageusia or hemi-hypogeusia at the level of the nucleus of the solitary tract presents with demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis, ischemia, hemorrhage, or cavernous angiomas. A taste disturbance is usually associated with other neurologic symptoms, including hemiparesis, hemi-hypoesthesia, or ocular motor disturbance. Beyond losing taste perception, bilateral thalamic lesions may result in a psychological indifference to the pleasure in food intake (hedonic loss), resulting in considerable weight loss. Disturbances of taste can understandably go unrecognized in the face of major neurologic deficits due to ischemic stroke, intraparenchymal hemorrhage, neoplasm, and infections involving the insular cortex and frontal operculum.