Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (alcohol and acid-fast bacillus) causes active tuberculosis. It is classified under the M. tuberculosis complex group, which includes four other mycobacteria that can cause active tuberculosis: M. canettii, M. microti, M. bovis, and M. africanum.

M. tuberculosis is an obligate-aerobic, nonmotile, non-spore-forming, catalase-negative, and facultative intracellular bacteria. The high lipid content of M. tuberculosis gives it many unique clinical characteristics. These include resistance to several antibiotics and the ability to survive in many extreme conditions. It also takes a long time to divide (around 16 to 20 hours), a significantly slower rate compared to other bacteria, which usually takes less than an hour.

The organism has a poor reaction to Gram stain and, thus, is not classified as gram-positive or gram-negative. However, sometimes weakly positive cells are observed on Gram stain, referred to as “ghost cells.” As M. tuberculosis retains some stains even after being treated with solutions containing acids, hence it is considered an acid-fast bacillus. The****Ziehl-Neelsen stain and the Kinyoun stain are most commonly used to identifyM. tuberculosis. The test dyes the acid-fast bacilli bright red, which makes it distinct against a blue background.

Humans are the only known host in which M. tuberculosis naturally lives and reproduces. The organism is spread primarily as an airborne aerosol from an individual in the infectious stage of the disease, although transdermal and gastrointestinal (GI) transmission is also possible.