One of the most noted and direct consequences of periodontal disease is tooth loss which arises as the progression of the disease leads to increased destruction of the periodontium, including the periodontal ligament and alveolar bone that normally anchor the teeth. However, periodontal disease not only affects the oral tissues, but has also been shown linked to several systemic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, and pregnancy complications such as preterm low-birth-weight infants

Patients with diabetes mellitus are shown to be at an increased risk of developing periodontal disease. It has been estimated that patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and severe periodontal disease have a 3.2 times greater mortality risk than people with diabetes without periodontal disease. Some of the characteristic pathological processes of this association include impaired wound healing and host responses and enhanced collagenolytic activity resulting in an increased breakdown of the periodontium. Additionally, poorly controlled diabetes is associated with the increased severity of these effects. Periodontal disease may act as an initiator of insulin resistance as research has demonstrated that periodontal disease is associated with hyperglycemia, impaired glucose tolerance, and poor glycemic control. Furthermore, the hyperglycemia experienced by this population may enhance the proliferation of the bacteria responsible for periodontal disease, thus increasing its severity in those with diabetes

Periodontal disease is associated with cardiovascular disease. As previously mentioned, the key biomarker of inflammation, C-reactive protein (CRP), has been seen to be elevated in patients with periodontal disease. CRP is also a factor associated with cardiovascular disease and cardiovascular events. There is a direct link between the bacterial level found in periodontal disease and atherosclerosis. However, a causal relationship has not yet been established

Another major complication associated with periodontal disease is pre-term low birth weight infants. There is a significant correlation between the presence of maternal periodontal disease and infant birth weight. As periodontal disease increases from none to severe, infant birth weight tends to decrease, as shown in prior research