Carvedilol is a non-selective adrenergic blocker indicated for the chronic therapy of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), hypertension, and left ventricular dysfunction following myocardial infarction (MI) in clinically stable patients.

The 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS (American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society) guideline recommends carvedilol (immediate or extended-release) as a beta-blocker of choice for HFrEF.

In addition, the 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA(American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology and Heart Failure Society of America) In patients with HFrEF, the use of the three beta blockers proven to reduce mortality (carvedilol, bisoprolol, sustained-release metoprolol succinate) is recommended to reduce mortality and hospitalizations. In addition, prescribing carvedilol on discharge is associated with a decrease in 60- to 90-day mortality and rehospitalization.

Another important study is the COMET trial published in 2003, which compared carvedilol to metoprolol tartrate. This study showed that carvedilol reduced all-cause mortality compared to metoprolol tartrate in patients with HFrEF and an ejection fraction equal to 35%.

Evidence to support carvedilol’s use in left ventricular dysfunction following a myocardial infarction (MI) is established by the CAPRICORN trial published in 2001. This study found a decrease in all-cause mortality in patients with left ventricular dysfunction following an acute MI.

Off-label indications for carvedilol include stable angina, atrial fibrillation, cirrhotic esophageal variceal bleeding prophylaxis, and ventricular arrhythmias. These “off-label” uses can be extrapolated across most beta-blockers rather than just carvedilol alone. For example, stable angina gets treated with beta-blockers, with an anti-anginal therapy targeting a heart rate of 55 to 60, regardless of which beta-blocker a clinician uses. Rate control therapy in atrial fibrillation is also achievable with nearly any beta-blocker. Note that specific beta-blockers other than carvedilol are preferable for esophageal variceal bleeding prevention; however, some studies have suggested that carvedilol may be more effective in decreasing hepatic venous pressure or preventing variceal bleeding than other beta-blockers.