The initial management of bradycardic patients that are symptomatic usually begins with the use of intravenous atropine as per the advanced cardiac life support recommendations. Unfortunately, atropine acts at the AV node and, as such, is rarely effective in raising the heart rate in patients with complete heart block. Subsequently, medical options for treating symptomatic bradycardia include dopamine and epinephrine, but both may serve as a temporary supporting measure only and might also be unsuccessful in improving the patient's heart rate in third-degree AV block. Often patients with third-degree heart block will require pacing. Transcutaneous pacing is more rapid, although both electrical and mechanical capture must be assured.

If transcutaneous pacing is not successful, a transvenous pacemaker may be required on a case-by-case basis. A cardiologist/electrophysiologist consultation for placing a permanent pacemaker is most appropriate in stable patients. Pacing may not be successful if underlying diseases causing the heart block do not receive treatment; this is particularly true in drug toxicity. Although the clinician might attempt pacing in these patients, the priority should be to treat the underlying cause.

The patients with Mobitz II block, high-degree AV block, and third-degree AV block require urgent admission for cardiac monitoring, further evaluation, consideration of a backup temporary cardiac pacing on a case-to-case basis, and eventually, the insertion of a permanent pacemaker. There is modest evidence and strong clinical consensus that patients with persistent second or third-degree AV block must receive permanent cardiac pacing therapy. The evidence is modest, and the consensus is weak for patients who have persistent bifascicular block (with or without underlying first-degree AV block) associated with transient AV block or with prolongation of PR interval.

Use of an urgent or emergent temporary transvenous pacemaker should not be a "knee-jerk" reaction to the presence of a second-degree, high grade or third-degree AV block. It should be considered after a careful evaluation of the risk-benefit ratio in clinical settings, consideration of hemodynamic stability (as gauged by the evaluation of systolic blood pressure and the degree and duration of the patient's clinical symptoms), level of AV block and presence of the type of escape rhythm. Complications are very common in patients treated with the placement of a temporary transvenous pacemaker. The complications are not just related to the implant itself but also related to the care post-implant, including the change of position of the lead, change of capture threshold, pacer malfunction, faulty programming, and/or battery depletion of the pacer box. Complications may also be related to accidental extraction of the lead by the patient. The use of a temporary pacer should be kept to the shortest duration possible to avoid patients' risk of immobility, infection, thromboembolism, and risk of cardiac perforation. The potential complications must be kept in mind as sometimes the risk-benefit ratio may significantly outweigh justifying its potential use. European Task force guidelines and other expert consensus usually strongly lean towards the fact that temporary transvenous pacing should be avoided as far as possible, and the treatment time should be kept as brief as possible.

Based on the European guidelines and a wide expert consensus,

- Temporary transvenous pacer should not be used routinely as a knee-jerk reaction in AV block and preferably be used as a last resort when the response to positive chronotropic drugs such as isoproterenol, epinephrine, or low-dose dopamine is insufficient.

- Temporary transvenous pacing should be ideally limited to cases of (i) high-degree AV block without a stable escape rhythm, (ii) life-threatening bradyarrhythmias that may occur during interventional procedures such as percutaneous coronary intervention, or, rarely, in acute settings such as acute myocardial infarction, drug toxicity or in a condition with a concomitant systemic infection where permanent pacing device should ideally be delayed until clearance of infection. For example, patients with stable blood pressure, a persistent junctional escape rhythm, a persistent ventricular escape rhythm, or those with a subacute onset can be monitored carefully on telemetry.

- If the indication for permanent pacing is definitely established, every effort should be made to implant a permanent pacer as soon as possible. The general expert notion is that routine implantation of a temporary pacer before a permanent pacer may increase the risk of complications such as device infection of a permanent implant, other risks of possible complications related to two invasive procedures instead of one, and also potentially increase the risk of cardiac perforation, especially in cases with an extended delay between the temporary pacer and permanent pacer lead implantation.

In patients with heart block secondary to an acute myocardial infarction, temporary pacing can be considered in the cath lab. In patients with acute inferior infarct secondary to an occluded right coronary artery, timely restoration of arterial perfusion may often lead to improvement of the complete heart block. On the contrary, a complete heart block related to an anterior infarction is more likely to eventually require the placement of a permanent pacemaker than patients with inferior infarction. In a large recent study utilizing the National Inpatient Sample databases in patients with STEMI, the incidence of complete heart block was found to be approximately 2.2% in acute ST-elevation MI patients. It demonstrated that the in-hospital mortality was significantly higher in patients with complete heart block than those without it. Although temporary pacing was higher in inferior MI patients, the need for an eventual permanent pacemaker was significantly higher in anterior MI patients.

Regardless, cardiac catheterization and attempt for successful restoration of perfusion should not be delayed in patients with acute MI and complete heart block. Timely perfusion increases the likelihood of native rhythm restoration.