In line with all acute traumatic injuries and fractures, specifically high-energy elbow fracture-dislocations, initial evaluation should proceed according to Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocol.

Concomitant fractures, dislocations, and injuries throughout the ipsilateral extremity have been reported. Distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) tenderness may represent an interosseous ligament disruption and the potential for concurrent Essex-Lopresti injury.

Fracture-dislocations present with significant edema, pain, and visible deformity. In contrast to normal 100-degree arcs of flexion/extension (approximately 30 to 130 degrees) and pronation/supination (50/50 degrees), patients may demonstrate limited elbow or forearm motion, particularly in supination/pronation, following injury.

Visible inspection may reveal ecchymosis or edema with tenderness over the lateral elbow; deformity may be possible in the setting of associated dislocation. It is important to evaluate flexion/extension, pronation/supination, and the presence of mechanical elbow blocks. Aspiration of joint hematoma and injection of local anesthesia may aid in mechanical block diagnostics.

A thorough neurovascular exam should be performed prior to proceeding with any form of reduction or extremity manipulation. The ulnar nerve is most vulnerable to injury secondary to its position along the medial humeroulnar joint. Brachial artery injury, although rare, can lead to ischemia and compartment syndrome, which are seen more often in pediatric patients.

Evaluation of elbow stability includes a posterolateral drawer and posterolateral pivot shift tests, and varus/valgus instability stress testing. The DRUJ-specific examination includes palpating over the wrist for tenderness and translation >50% in the sagittal plane. Palpate along the interosseous membrane for tenderness and perform a radial pull test at the time of surgery; if >3 mm translation, there should be a concern for longitudinal forearm instability (Essex-Lopresti).