Diuretic treatment calls for careful assessment of extracellular fluid volume, urine output, electrolyte levels in plasma and urine, body weight, acid-base status, serum glucose, and BP regularly with particular emphasis on patients with cardiovascular, hepatic, renal, or metabolic disorders and in elderly individuals. Prerenal azotemia is of concern due to diuretic-induced hypovolemia, and blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels require monitoring.

Ototoxicity is a risk with the use of loop diuretics, and special precautions are necessary. Baseline auditory tests are necessary (especially when planning large bolus doses at high infusion rates), which will help evaluate on a case-by-case basis the effect of loop diuretics on auditory functions after a certain length of treatment. Periodic sequential monitoring of auditory functions is also advisable, and the possibility of switching to a different diuretic therapy should be contemplated in case of any adverse outcomes.

Clinical cardiac status should be assessed in patients on diuretics (especially MI, HF, or other cardiac conditions), as they are prone to develop HF due to the abrupt increase in the fluid shift between the compartments.

Failure of a diuretic agent to increase urine output should prompt cessation of the diuretic agent as it could be evidence of undiagnosed underlying renal pathology.

Frequent administration of mannitol can worsen cerebral edema and hence should be administered every 6 to 8 hours, as suggested in Table 4.

**Diuretic Abuse**

Diuretics are not highly controlled drugs and hence have a high probability for misuse, particularly with athletes who might abuse them for rapid weight loss or to conceal the presence of other banned drugs. The use of diuretics is prohibited in athletes. (Athletes require a prior exemption for therapeutic use in athletes) and is routinely screened for by the world anti-doping agency. If it persists chronically, such abuse can lead to detrimental effects on CV and thermoregulatory functions, which could lead to death when combined with excessive physical activity as encountered in athletes.

**Diuretics in Diagnosis**

- **Furosemide/Fludrocortisone test (FFT)**: Furosemide, combined with the mineralocorticoid fludrocortisone, has gained popularity as a diagnostic screening tool for distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA). dRTA is a condition where there is a defect in urinary acidification due to the failure of alpha-intercalated cells to secrete H+ ions in the distal tubules (refer to the mechanism of action of PSDs). There are four different types of dRTA, usually diagnosed by ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) loading test, but due to disturbing GI symptoms after administration, the test is sometimes abandoned. NH4Cl combines with HCO3+ ions to form urea in the liver, thus decreasing the HCO3+ levels in the blood stressing the kidneys to reabsorb more HCO3+ ions in exchange for H+ ions, thus acidifying the urine. In patients with dRTA, this test can lead to systemic metabolic acidosis as kidneys cannot reabsorb HCO3+ ions due to H+ ion secretion defect. If the urine pH is greater than 5.3, then the test is considered positive for dRTA. FFT is a palatable alternative that is better tolerated. Furosemide increases the distal delivery of Na+ ions, and fludrocortisone being a mineralocorticoid, enhances the Na+ reabsorption via ENaCs and increases H+ ion secretion via the alpha-intercalated cells. This combination thus can acidify the urine without the metabolic acidosis induced by NH4Cl. In people without dRTA, the urine pH is lower than 5.3 with FFT, whereas patients with dRTA cannot lower their pH leading to its diagnosis.

- **Mannitol challenge test (MCT)**: Mannitol can be an agent in a challenge test in the diagnosis of asthma. In this test, dry powder of mannitol is inhaled, which leads to hyperosmolality of bronchial periciliary liquid inducing cell shrinkage to equilibrate the osmolality. This further results in the release of pro-inflammatory mediators from inflammatory cells (particularly mast cells), resulting in smooth muscle constriction. A 15% decrease in forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) is a positive result, suggesting an easily elicited active airway inflammation, indicating airway hyperresponsiveness. Though MCT is a very safe test, it has only a moderate sensitivity to detect asthma but high specificity. In comparison, direct bronchial challenge tests such as histamine or methacholine challenge tests have less specificity when compared to MCT.