Hypothyroidism is mainly treated with levothyroxine monotherapy.

Thyroid replacement treatment can exacerbate co-existing adrenal insufficiency. Patients with known or suspected adrenal insufficiency should be tested and treated for adrenal insufficiency while awaiting results.

Replacement levothyroxine dose is 1.6 mcg/kg per day; however, in elderly and atrial fibrillation patients, it is important to reduce the dose

Switching to the intravenous (IV) form in the hospitals is indicated when a patient is unable to take thyroid replacement orally, or there is suspected myxedema coma. The dose of levothyroxine is reduced to generally 50% of the oral dose. The conversion is somewhat controversial in terms of the exact dose as different experts use different conversion percentages.

Gel formulations of thyroid hormone replacements, such as Triocent, are being used in malabsorption syndromes. Medications such as sucralfate, calcium preparations, and bile acid sequestrants can interfere with the absorption of levothyroxine.

Based on the 2012 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Hypothyroidism in Adults by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid Association, therapy should be monitored and titrated based on TSH measurements. Serum-free T4 can also be used. Labs should be drawn every 4 to 8 weeks until target levels are achieved after starting the treatment, after any dose changes, changes in formulation or brand of levothyroxine,

Patients with cardiac disease should be monitored for the development of any symptoms of angina and atrial fibrillation.

Effective treatment helps to achieve a clinical improvement of signs and symptoms, along with an improved sense of patient well-being and normal TSH (or free T4 levels as applicable).

A comprehensive workup for other differentials is recommended for unresolved symptoms in the presence of biochemical euthyroidism. There is a lack of strong evidence supporting the routine inclusion of triiodothyronine (T3) preparations with levothyroxine in the treatment of hypothyroidism.

If symptoms persist despite normalization of TSH/free T4 levels, then non-endocrine etiologies should be considered.