Cirrhosis is a result of continuous liver injury, inflammation, fibrosis, and necrosis. Alcoholism and chronic hepatitis B and C commonly cause cirrhosis. Hepatitis C is the most damaging. The fibrosis present in cirrhosis occurs from the secretion of TGF-beta from the Ito cells in the space of Disse.

Cirrhosis usually represents with end-stage liver disease and, as such, liver function is greatly compromised. The diminished ability to produce protein and detoxify substances results in symptoms of portal hypertension, hyperestrinism, and hypoalbuminemia. Decreased clotting factor synthesis results in coagulopathy. Its presentation arises from manifestations from diminished hepatic function and portal hypertension.

Sequelae of portal hypertension include portosystemic shunts that result in varices in various locations, caput medusae, and hemorrhoids. Other manifestations of portal hypertension include ascites, spider angiomas, hepatic encephalopathy, hepatorenal syndrome, and splenomegaly. Esophageal varices are the most common cause of death in cirrhotic patients.

The Child-Pugh score and model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score are both used to assess and determine prognosis in cirrhotic patients. Both look at a combination of variables to score the patient. The Child-Pugh score evaluates ascites, hepatic encephalopathy (HE), total bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin time or INR. The MELD score uses creatinine, bilirubin, and INR. While both are used to create a predictive model for cirrhotic patients, the MELD score is the scale of choice for the evaluation of liver transplant patients.

Jaundice is often a sign of altered bilirubin metabolism. The first sign of jaundice is often yellowing under the tongue, followed by scleral icterus (yellowing of the sclera). There are numerous causes for jaundice, which can typically be classified by getting a fractionated bilirubin where indirect bilirubin (unconjugated bilirubin) and direct bilirubin (conjugated bilirubin) are measured. The result of the fractionated bilirubin can help identify the etiology of the cholestasis into prehepatic and intrahepatic or extrahepatic causes.

A common etiology of prehepatic jaundice is hemolysis where the level of hemolysis overwhelms the conjugating capacity of the liver, resulting in a buildup of unconjugated bilirubin, causing jaundice. Causes of intrahepatic cholestasis can be congenital diseases, such as Gilbert syndrome, and Crigler-Najjar syndrome. In these congenital diseases, the enzyme responsible for bilirubin conjugation, UGT, is mildly deficient or completely deficient, respectively. Dubin-Johnson and Rotor syndrome are causes of direct bilirubinemia as there is a defect in canalicular transport of conjugated bilirubin. Other causes of post-hepatic cholestasis are an obstruction, such as due to a stone or malignancy. Viral hepatitis can result in both indirect and direct hyperbilirubinemia.