Although rare, it is important to acknowledge the existence of primary malignant tumors of this cell type as their histology is distinct from schwannomas. Malignant transformation may show malignant epithelioid cells, which occur even without neurofibromatosis.

**Classic Schwannoma**: This is an encapsulated tumor with two distinct histological regions. Antoni A tissue shows hypercellular spindle cells, sometimes palisade around eosinophilic areas (Verocay bodies). Immunostain is positive for S100 protein staining.

**Cellular schwannoma**: It is a relatively uncommon but significant variant of schwannoma. It is located principally in the paravertebral region. It shows compact hypercellular areas composed entirely of Antoni A areas and devoid of Verocay bodies. Cellular schwannoma prompts consideration of malignancy due to its high cellularity, increased mitotic activity, fascicular growth pattern, and occasional locally destructive character. Clues that aid in the diagnosis include the presence of histiocyte aggregates and high expression of pericellular collagen IV. The diffuse expression of the S100 protein is uncommon in spindled malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST), which should point toward cellular schwannoma if present. Cytokeratin immunoreactivity may manifest in some cellular schwannomas and may indicate cross-reactivity with glial fibrillary acid protein. It is important to note that cellular schwannoma is characterized by weak expression of desmin, smooth muscle actin, CD117, and DOG1.

Despite their high cellularity, cellular schwannomas do not have malignant potential and do not metastasize. Local recurrence varies and may be higher compared to classic schwannomas. This recurrence relates partially to the location considering the propensity for deep anatomic regions not always amenable to gross total resection. However, recurrent lesions have slow growth. Most of the time, mitotic activity does not exceed 5 per 10 high-power fields. Mitotic activity above 10 per 10 high power fields may occur in rare instances. If other diagnostic features of cellular schwannoma are present, the proliferative action is still compatible with a benign diagnosis.

**Plexiform schwannoma**: This variant occurs in subcutaneous or cutaneous superficial locations and is defined by a pattern of growth that may be considered plexiform**.**Plexiform schwannoma is associated with schwannomatosis, NF2, and other schwannoma-predisposing syndromes**.**These tumors may not be as circumscribed as a classic schwannoma, and a capsule might even be absent. They involve multiple fascicles. The tumors have an Antoni A pattern. Neurofilament protein immunoreactive axons are present within the lesion.

Plexiform schwannomas that originate in deep anatomic lesions are more problematic. The anatomic locations may be within soft tissues or principal peripheral nerves. They may demonstrate high mitotic activity and cellularity and may not be easily distinguishable from MPNST. Although their potential for malignancy is negligible, these tumors may have a relatively high local recurrence, occurring in approximately 50% of the cases**.**

**Melanotic schwannoma**: This subtype of schwannoma may be described as a distinctive, rare, potentially malignant neoplasm that presents with epithelioid cells and melanin accumulated in neoplastic cells and melanophages. Usually arises around the spinal nerve roots. It is positive for MelanA and sometimes for glial fibrillary acidic protein and neurofilament protein.