If baclofen toxicity is suspected, the patient needs medical assessment immediately. This requires an integrated approach with multiple healthcare professionals. This team often involves EMS, nurses, emergency medicine physicians, toxicologists, intensivists. In certain circumstances, it may also involve a nephrologist or a physician who specializes in intrathecal pumps. Once the patient has reached the emergency department, the nurse and the physician are responsible for the following:

- Obtaining vital signs

- Assessing cardiac conduction delays by obtaining an EKG and placing the patient on a cardiac monitor

- Assessing airway, breathing, and circulation and watching for respiratory depression or profound CNS depression

- Provide endotracheal intubation and ventilation if needed

- Obtain laboratory studies and imaging studies

- Provide cardiovascular support with intravenous fluids or vasopressors as needed

- Give benzodiazepines if the patient is seizing

- Call a poison control center and/or a medical toxicologist for further recommendations

- Consult nephrologist for possible dialysis if deemed necessary by the toxicology service

- Consider an EEG on intubated or seizing patients

- If the patient gets baclofen administered via an intrathecal pump, a physician who specializes in intrathecal pumps needs to be consulted

- Consult intensivist for admission and monitor in an ICU setting

After stabilization in the emergency department, the patient will most likely require an intensive care unit. The involvement of interprofessional healthcare teams early on in the patient’s presentation is vital to provide the best overall outcome. Management is generally supportive. Even in patients with profound CNS depression mimicking brain death, patients may begin to have neurologic improvement after 24 to 48 hours.

The patient should be observed for baclofen withdrawal if this is a chronic medication. Once the patient is stabilized and returns to their baseline mental status, the reason for the overdose should be obtained; if there is a concern for an intentional overdose, psychiatry should be involved for further management.