The currently recommended starting dose for mirtazapine is 15 mg per day, which patients can take without regard to meals, administered as a single dose of an oral tablet, preferably in the evening just before sleep because of the common sedative effect of mirtazapine. In controlled clinical trials to establish the efficacy of mirtazapine in managing major depressive disorder, the most effective range was determined to be around 15 to 45 mg daily. However, the exact relationship between the dose of mirtazapine and the satisfactory response in managing major depressive disorder remains yet to be adequately established; patients who did not respond to the initial 15 mg dose could benefit from dose increases to a maximum of around 45 mg per day. Because the elimination half-life is about 20 to 40 hours, changes in dose should not be made for at least 1 to 2 weeks to allow for sufficient time to assess the therapeutic response to the given dose.

Sudden cessation of mirtazapine use could cause discontinuation syndrome in patients. Therefore, a slow and gradual reduction in dose is recommended to minimize discontinuation syndrome symptoms. Sudden cessation of treatment could cause depression, panic attacks, tinnitus, restlessness, vertigo, decreased appetite, insomnia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and sometimes hypomania or mania.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Mirtazapine is extensively metabolized by the liver; hence clinicians should be cautious while prescribing mirtazapine in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Clearance of mirtazapine is significantly reduced in renal disease; use with caution if GFR<40 mL/min/1.73 m.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Mirtazapine is classified as a former FDA "pregnancy risk factor class C." The clinical implication is that mirtazapine should only be given to pregnant women if needed.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Clinical data suggest that maternal doses of up to 120 mg daily produce low levels of mirtazapine in milk and would not cause any adverse outcomes in breastfed infants, especially if the infant is older than two months in age. In addition, a safety scoring system finds mirtazapine use acceptable during breastfeeding. However, the case report noted possible sedation and weight gain with mirtazapine. Case reports noted possible sedation and weight gain with mirtazapine, and exclusively breastfed infants should be monitored for adverse drug reactions and adequate growth if mirtazapine is used during lactation.

**COVID-19 considerations:**In an observational study involving 7230 patients, 345 patients received antidepressants. The study revealed that the use of antidepressants, including mirtazapine, was significantly associated with a reduced risk of intubation or death in hospitalized patients( p < 0.05).