Non-operative management focuses on the initial restriction of provoking maneuvers. Typically, an anti-inflammatory and/or corticosteroid injection are utilized as initial treatment as well. Gentle ROM activities are recommended. Glenohumeral internal rotation deficit (GIRD) is a common associated finding in throwing athletes. Focus on stretching the posterior capsule is also a focus of rehabilitation. As symptoms diminish, a structured rehabilitation protocol focusing on rotator cuff and pericapsular strengthening exercises are utilized.

Operative management varies widely depending on patient activity level and treatment goals. Additionally, classification and severity of the SLAP tear, in combination with concomitant pathology, affects the type of operative management selected. Trends in the early 2000s showed an increase in SLAP repairs.

Types I and III SLAP tears may be selected to undergo simple debridement as the integrity of the biceps anchor is not completely compromised. Unstable SLAP lesions are typically repaired with anchor fixation, and the extent of the injury typically determines the pattern of repair. The ultimate goal of fixation for all repair techniques is to provide a robust and stable fixation, promoting the stability of the glenohumeral joint and allowing for adequate rehabilitation without failure of repair.

Alternatively, the biceps anchor may be sacrificed, and a biceps tenotomy or tenodesis performed. Tenodesis can be performed by subpectoral, all-arthroscopic, and mini-open techniques. While elite athletes and young patients typically undergo repair, these techniques provide satisfactory results for a wide variety of patients.

Management of paralabral cysts is dependent upon location and concomitant symptomatic nerve compression. In the absence of compressive symptoms, a range of non-operative treatments can be considered, including observation, anti-inflammatories, or percutaneous aspiration.