**Complications Associated With Contact Lens**

Contact lenses can be damaged or spoiled by use over time and may create various problems. There can be physical damage to the lens, change in lens color, loss of lens, and deposits over the lens.

**Physical Damage to the Lens**

Damage to the lens can occur in the form of lens breakage, chipping, and cracking while inserting or removing the lens. The biochemical degradation of the lens also causes physical damage to the lens.

**Lens Discoloration**

This can occur due to systemic uses of drugs such as rifampicin, fluorescein, and phenylephrine.

**Loss of Lens**

This occurs more commonly in the pediatric age group than in adults. Most widely reported with rigid lenses than soft lenses and more familiar with extended wear lenses than daily wear.

**Deposits over Lens**

This is another common problem with CL. This is more commonly reported with extended wear, daily-wear soft, RGP, and hard lenses. The deposits can be from the tear film, lens handling, cosmetics, topical drugs, and pollutants like dust and fumes.

The lens deposits can be proteinaceous as well as lipid-laden deposits. These can cause physical damage to the lens, physiological impairment of diffusion of gases, blurred vision, hazy vision, halos, distortion, polyopia, photophobia, aberrations, and astigmatism. The treatment is that lenses should be replaced when the deposits are clinically significant. The daily-wear lenses should be replaced after every six months.