**Teams and Systems**

About corporate liability, jurist Joel Prentiss Bishop [from New Comments on the Criminal Law Upon a New System of Legal Exposition. (1892) § 417, 255–56.] wrote:

Since a corporation acts by its officers and agents, their purposes, motives, and intent are just as much those of the corporation as are their actions taken. If, for example, the invisible, intangible essence or air which we term a corporation can level mountains, fill up valleys, lay down iron tracks, and run railroad cars on them, it can intend to do it. It can act therein as well viciously as virtuously.

Just as logic exists for attributing bad business practices and outcomes to corporations themselves and not just to individuals, it exists for attributing bad healthcare services (acts of commission or omission) and outcomes to teams and systems in addition to individual health care providers (HCPs).

Successful healthcare continuity depends on good communication. Inadequate communication often results in fragmented care, which leads to procedural complications, hospital readmissions, and declines in patient functional status, especially for patients with high baseline risks, such as patients with chronic and/or complex illnesses. The Joint Commission (TJC) reported that it was made aware of 2378 sentinel events in the United States in 2014, and it divided those events into categories of causes. The top three categories were:

- Mistakes attributed to individual persons not pertaining to leadership (547)

- Mistakes attributed to leadership errors (517)

- Mistakes in communication, not otherwise specified (489)

Despite this assessment, even TJC, along with many other organizations and individuals in the quality profession, have taught that the root cause of 'the majority of problems in business is most appropriately attributed to the inadequacy of a process, team, or system and not primarily on the inadequacy of an individual.

The odds of achieving quality improvement success can increase with well-functioning multidisciplinary teams compared with individuals working independently. Collaboration may expand the range and depth of expertise applied to a problem. One or more persons who are directly involved with or closest to the performance of the process of concern should always be on the team. Healthcare quality managers should seek input from all persons in the chain of service delivery. Inefficiencies not apparent to one person or a group of persons in the process chain may be raised by others elsewhere. Inefficiencies that are observed but cannot be corrected by one person due to that person's lack of power can be corrected by a person on the team with more power. The managerial approach behind Lean, as used by the Toyota company, emphasizes:

- Hoshin (direction), which is managers introducing changes only after having received input from the lowest-ranked employees, and

- Gemba (actual place) is managers making decisions based on direct contact or observation with the process and not third-party reports discussed in conference rooms. Managers can maximize quality improvement potential in the organization by empowering their employees.

For healthcare quality management to become as advanced as QM in other professions, and for America to catch up to other countries (and achieve Donabedian's goals) in providing healthcare, persons and organizations that have might (as in 'might makes right') must set higher-level standards, e.g.:

- The policy writers of TJC could require that hospitals conduct certain numbers or types of PDSA cycles to maintain accreditation. Or executives in a healthcare organization with a reputation for excellent healthcare quality could require that their managers conduct certain numbers or types of PDSA cycles and set the bar for other HCOs.

- Government officials could require healthcare managers to pass examinations where they demonstrate knowledge and skills to receive accreditation in QM (just as persons in many healthcare professions must).

**Reaching Consensus And Prioritizing Efforts At Quality Improvement**

QI teams should always analyze data. Because of differences in bias, even in the presence of data, disagreements regarding the best courses of action are inevitable. In addition to standard voting techniques, modified voting techniques are available that promote a course of action that can be most acceptable in a utilitarian manner. The nominal group technique (NGT) combines anonymous brainstorming (each person generates ideas independently) and voting. NGT limits discussion (i.e., back and forth debating) and emphasizes moving forward with a decision based on previously held beliefs. Multi voting (multi-round voting) enables a sequential, progressive narrowing of choices. Once one round of voting is performed, the options receiving the least votes are removed. Additional rounds of voting are performed until the best option or until a prioritization of options is reached. The Delphi method combines multi-voting and NGT. This method enables reaching decisions that have 'general support' by all members.

Voting is usually stopped when necessary to maintain all voters' favor regarding a statement without requiring overly specific conclusions backed by unanimous agreement. Reaching consensus using these techniques improves teamwork and team member engagement more than decision-making strategies based on 'the majority rules' or 'might makes right.' Prioritizing which options are most important when they entail factors competing for attention is challenging. Tools exist that use objective measures to narrow a list of possible choices to one or several choices, including weighting by ranking, value stream mapping, and creating prioritization matrices.

Weighting by ranking goes by various other names and has multiple permutations. It generally involves deriving a rank or hierarchy of scores (values that are measured or calculated but are not entirely arbitrary) for categories of concern (such as tasks, costs, or other attributes). Different options that share these features can be compared using their performance in the different categories in a spreadsheet to determine the best option. For example, determining what method to use to inform patients of post-operative appoints may involve a decision of three options, such as sending a letter through regular mail, sending a text message, or calling by telephone. The categories of concern may include cost, time, and likelihood of receipt. The categories can be given weights of importance, and the options can be ranked according to their overall score across all three categories.

Value stream mapping (VSM) is a decision tool that uses weighting by ranking and is often displayed as a flow chart. In VSM, sub-processes of a larger overall process are assigned weighted values based on relative levels of importance, and which are summed into a final score called a criticality index that determines which process is the most critical for concentrating effort and devoting resources. Common components of a criticality index are:

- The frequency of the problem (how often during iterations a particular activity/task/issue occurs on a critical path),

- The severity of the problem, if or when it occurs, and

- The ease of detection of the problem early on before it becomes unmanageable.

Prioritization matrices are tools that display options along multiple axes (e.g., X, Y, and Z) of competing interests (e.g., time vs. money; or the interests of upper management vs. mid-level management vs. non-management level employees) and plot options or problems according to their importance along each axis. Prioritization matrices are usually drawn in a two-dimensional format in a spreadsheet and assigned scores using weighting by ranking; in this fashion, numerous options or categories (more than just two or three) can be prioritized. Healthcare managers can prioritize quality improvement projects under the following non-mutually exclusive categories:

- Improving service

- Improving safety

- Reducing cost

- Maintaining a competitive edge