There are several reasons for recording in the health care environment. Some clinical sites already video their actual resuscitations and perform debriefings of actual patient care.

Traditional simulation sessions may also be recorded. Sometimes, these recordings are not reviewed by the participants. In these cases, access to the recording of simulations or actual resuscitations may aid research or drive subsequent quality improvement projects.

Proponents of video-assisted debriefing (VAD) cite several benefits with this method. One frequently cited benefit is obtaining an objective record of what happened during the simulation.

The second benefit of VAD is the opportunity for learners to observe their performance from a different perspective. It may highlight the performance of either an individual or the whole team and allow for reflection of communication and teamwork during simulated events.

The third benefit of VAD is that it may help fill in learning gaps. There is data to suggest that video-assisted debriefing improves subsequent performance in both teams and individuals.

Although there are potential benefits to VAD, there are several concerns as well. Competent technical support may help prevent most audio/visual- or equipment-related problems. However, realistically speaking, there is no way to eliminate the risk of these issues.

A second concern with the use of VAD is the potential threat to psychological safety. Much emphasis is placed on the concept of the learning environment being a “safe container” for learning.

Additionally, concerning the use of VAD, while some studies have suggested mild effectiveness, others have found mixed efficacy. The same early study found no difference in VAD versus VD for subsequent improvement in nontechnical skills. They also found a trend toward lower post-test scores among those participants who had received VAD.

Opponents of VAD cite the time spent on video review could have been applied to a complete verbal debriefing opportunity. Finally, incorporating a video review process adds the additional layer of recording equipment expenses.

Results on the direct comparison between VAD and VD are mixed.

One early study addressed anesthesia residents performing nontechnical skills. The participants who had no debriefing showed no improvement in subsequent simulations. The participants who had either VD or VAD demonstrated improvement, but neither group improved more than the other.

Other authors have also failed to demonstrate significant differences between VD and VAD for time-based skills, or overall improvement.

Others have found that video did appear to provide more information than only a single perspective could.