Treatment types include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination of the above modalities depending on the stage of the tumor. The goal of therapy is to control local disease and prevent distant metastasis. Efforts should be made to find a suitable clinical trial for all patients. For stage I disease, radiation therapy (RT) alone is the standard of care. Radiation therapy fields usually involve the nasopharynx only although neck nodes can be included.

Radiation therapy alone used to be the standard treatment for all patients with locally advanced nasopharyngeal cancer until the 1990s. A phase III intergroup study showed that patients with stage III and locally advanced stage IV disease had statistically significant improvement in progression-free survival and overall survival with bimodality treatment of radiation therapy with systemic chemotherapy. This demonstrates that most of the recurrence of nasopharyngeal cancer is in the metastatic setting which was able to be controlled with systemic chemotherapy. In locally advanced disease (stage II, III, IVA, IVB), bimodality treatment with concurrent cisplatin with radiation therapy is recommended. This should be followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil in patients who can tolerate further treatment. Induction chemotherapy before concurrent chemotherapy and radiation treatment has been studied in a few trials and has shown a good response, although data remains insufficient and this is a category three recommendation. If the residual tumor is seen on follow-up imaging after completion of chemotherapy and radiation treatment, resection of residual tumor and/or neck dissection may be warranted.

For metastatic disease (stage IVC), platinum-based combination chemotherapy is recommended. Regimens can include cisplatin/5-FU, cisplatin/paclitaxel, and cisplatin/gemcitabine. Imaging should be repeated within 6 months of completion of treatment to ensure a good response.