The clinical relevance of the thyroglossal duct adheres to its embryologic function. The descent of the thyroid primordium begins at the base of the tongue, specifically at the foramen caecum, until it reaches its final resting place at the level of the 2nd and 3rd cartilage of the trachea, where the thyroid primordium will differentiate itself into the thyroid gland.

Clinically, the failure for the thyroglossal duct to obliterate by the 10th week of gestation is a frequent cause for the apparition of midline neck masses, called thyroglossal duct cyst. Around 7% of the normal population will suffer from this condition. The location of these masses can appear anywhere along the traject of the thyroglossal duct, and can even result from partial obliteration of the duct. This, essentially, means that if at any point in the pathway, the duct did not obliterate itself, a possible cystic mass will appear.

Most cystic masses arise at the infrahyoid level (65% of the cases) and result from the secretion of the epithelial lining that remained from the non-obliterated duct, resulting in possible inflammation and, therefore, the formation of a thyroglossal duct cyst. These are the most common cause of midline neck masses around the world.

Around 70% of the cases in which thyroglossal duct cyst are present are found during childhood, with a prevalence of intracystic thyroid tissue ranging from 5% to 62% of the cases, meaning that the prevalence of thyroglossal duct cyst carcinoma is very low.

Other masses may arise from the persistence of the thyroglossal duct, such as thyroglossal duct cyst carcinomas, which are more prevalent in women within the age range of 20 to 50 years old. The exact etiology behind these carcinomas is not well understood, and even though they are very well associated with various types of thyroid cancer, they account for less than 1% of the cases. The most common form of cancer associated with thyroglossal duct cyst carcinoma is the thyroid papillary carcinoma, which is present in 85% of the cases. Following the papillary thyroid carcinoma, histologically speaking, the most common cancers associated with thyroglossal duct cyst carcinoma are the squamous cell carcinoma, follicular cell carcinoma, anaplastic carcinoma, epidermoid carcinoma, and Hurthle cell carcinoma.

As for the treatment and prognostics of these masses, given that the most common type of thyroglossal duct cyst carcinoma is the papillary thyroid cancer, the prognosis is good. Because the treatment of papillary thyroid cancer has improved over the years, patients tend to respond well to the usual therapy. As for other types of carcinoma, prognosis worsens as cancer becomes more aggressive, and thus, the treatment options become limited due to the poor response to chemotherapeutic and radiotherapeutic agents.