Several clinical factors guide treatment decisions for fascial dehiscence. If a patient experiences evisceration, the bowel should be wrapped in gauze moistened with warm saline to prevent fluid losses, and the patient should be prepared for emergent abdominal exploration to return the bowel to the abdominal cavity and provide overlying closure.

In the stable patient who experiences dehiscence with no evidence of underlying infectious complications, nonoperative management can be considerations if the skin overlying the fascial defect remains closed to prevent evisceration. For patients with a prolonged open abdomen course, abdominal contents may become frozen; these patients are at relatively low risk of bowel herniation and may not require future repair of the defect. For patients who do not have a frozen abdomen, the defect can be monitored and allowed to develop into a controlled hernia, which may be repaired at a future date in an elective fashion once the patient has recovered from the index procedure, and acute inflammation has resolved; importantly, no signs of peritonitis, strangulation, or obstruction should be present if nonoperative management is to merit consideration. Additionally, the clinician must weigh the risk of bowel strangulation posed by small defects.

Indications for operative intervention include evisceration, evidence of bowel strangulation/ischemia, bowel obstruction, or undrained infectious collection. Return of herniated bowel contents to the abdominal cavity should occur. Superficial, deep, or organ space infections should be drained and washed out. Nonviable tissues require debridement; bowel resection may be necessary if bowel segments are irreversibly ischemic.

Multiple techniques are available for closure of the fascial defect. If the dehiscence is small and fascia is healthy, the edges can undergo debridement, and primary closure can take place. Augmentation of the repair with mesh has been shown to improve outcomes and reduce recurrence; surgeons should avoid mesh in infected cases or cases requiring bowel resection, though consideration of biologic mesh repair is reasonable. Large defects that do not easily approximate may need to be managed with progressive wound closure, including open abdomen with vacuum therapy, sequential tightening of progressive closure devices (such as Wittmann patch), or creation of planned hernia via the development of cutaneous flaps closed over the defect. In severe cases, the application of a biologic graft for eventual skin grafting may be necessary.

Abdominal component separation may be useful in some large defects; however, care must be taken not to negatively impact future reconstructive options as patients experience fascial dehiscence requiring reoperation are at high risk of incisional hernia formation in the future. Consequently, component separation in the acute setting is not a routine recommendation. Patients with large defects are likely better treated in the acute setting in a nonoperative manner if able, or with a non-fascial disrupting technique as mentioned above if surgical intervention is needed; staged repair with various component separation techniques can then be pursued in both the expectantly managed groups and those who develop subsequent incisional hernias with greater options for fascial release and closure.

If closure does not take place immediately and incisional hernia is allowed to develop, then re-closure can be pursued at a later time to prevent complications related to hernia incarceration, obstruction, or strangulation. Adequate time, usually at least 2 to 3 months, should elapse to allow for healing from the initial procedure. The patient’s clinical status should be optimized, including nutrition factors, in addition to adequate management of comorbidities. Ideally, patients will have returned to their baseline functional status before elective fascial repair. The above-listed techniques are all applicable for re-closure, with the additional benefit of a clean field and the opportunity for non-absorbable mesh placement. No difference has been identified in subsequent wound complications with continuous vs. interrupted suture repair of defects or with the type of suture material used.