**Cardiac Evaluation**

The preliminary cardiac evaluation must be directed towards evaluating both the electrophysiologic status of the heart as well as structural and functional status. As such, workup must include a 12-lead ECG and transthoracic echocardiography for all patients.

**Electrophysiologic Assessment**

- A 12-lead ECG is useful only to the extent of detecting ongoing arrhythmias. Additionally, it may provide useful insight into ventricular myocardial status (evidence of ventricular hypertrophy) as well as indicate prior cardiac ischemic episodes. However, transient arrhythmias, particularly paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, will be missed.

- Holter monitoring has now become a part of the baseline evaluation of all cases of suspected cardioembolic strokes. Fundamentally similar to an ECG, it has the same drawback of evaluating the conduction system for a relatively limited period of 24 hours.

- Implantable loop recorders (ILRs) can record activity for as long as three years. Thus, their utility in clinical practice continues to increase, and their use has helped identify several cases of "missed" atrial fibrillation. Also, it is very important to note that a patient on oral anticoagulation with atrial fibrillation has to fall 295 times per year for the risk of traumatic subdural hematoma.

**Structural and Functional Assessment**

- Transthoracic echocardiography: Transthoracic echocardiography forms the cornerstone of cardiac evaluation. Ventricular hypo- or akinesia, aneurysms, as well as most valvular lesions, can be identified. However, aA key limitation is that visualization of the left atrial appendage is rarely possible using this imaging modality.

- Transesophageal echocardiography: The transesophageal approach permits the use of higher-frequency probes that provide a significantly higher image resolution, and permit visualization of very minute pathologies, including intra-valvar abscesses. A steeper learning curve and lack of universal availability limit its utility as a primary modality of cardiac imaging. An echocardiogram may detect the following pathologies:

- Atrial septal defect

- Patent foramen ovale

- Atrial septal aneurysm

- Atrial thrombus

- Atrial myxoma

- Aortic arch thrombi

- Mitral valve vegetations

**Neurologic Evaluation**

Although the imaging modality of choice will differ based on the time of presentation of the patient (i.e., within the window period or outside it), the following principles govern the process of evaluation:

- Parenchymal assessment:

- MRI scans are, by far, the best available imaging modality to evaluate neural parenchymal status. The increasingly available 3 Tesla devices provide an unrivaled image resolution. Various imaging sequences help not only delineate the infarcted area but also help provide a temporal frame where history is sketchy. For instance, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) can help identify even hyper-acute infarcts by selecting the appropriate b-value. The presence of cortical stroke in multiple vascular territories should give suspicion for a cardioembolic etiology. The appearance of an infarct in the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence indicates that the infarct has developed, at least partially, over 6 hours back. MRI scans can even accurately detect hemorrhagic infarcts by means of susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI). Key limitations, however, are the relatively long duration required for the scan - a formidable contraindication in hemodynamically unstable patients - and ensuring compliance in claustrophobic patients. The increasing availability of "open MRIs" and "virtual-reality based systems" help alleviate the latter, but the former remains a major problem.
- CT scans: CT scans are excellent imaging modalities for detecting or ruling out hemorrhage. Rapid imaging and ease of reporting, even in settings with limited expertise, remain its key redeeming features. That said, it shows limited sensitivity in detecting infarcts early on in their evolution. Large infarcts may exhibit subtle signs such as sulcal effacement or "the hyperdense middle cerebral artery (MCA) sign," although these are inconsistent features that may easily be missed.

- Vascular status assessment:

- MR angiography: Magnetic resonance angiography is a useful imaging modality, particularly in patients with renal impairment, as it does not require the use of intravenous contrast media. However, it is prone to various artifacts, including potentially overestimating stenotic lesions.
- CT angiography: CT angiography remains the investigation of choice for evaluating cerebral vasculature; it's only drawback being that it is not an option in patients with renal impairment.

**Serological Assessment**

Although most standard guidelines recommend against instituting this as a routine practice, the evaluation of patients for hyper-homocysteinemia secondary to metabolic vitamin B12 deficiency continues to have a role in the evaluation of a patient of stroke.