The treatment of EP depends on the underlying etiology and is directed towards the alleviation of the underlying etiology.

In a patient with risk factors and positive serology for parasites, an empiric trial of mebendazole can be given.

In acute EP, intravenous corticosteroids are started with rapid improvement, as early as 12 hours and within 48 hours in almost all cases, which is then followed by switching to oral steroids which are tapered over 2-4 weeks.

Chronic EP responds very well to corticosteroids, with an improvement in symptoms and the radiological opacities within days to weeks. There is no established dose of corticosteroids. However, prednisone can be started at 0.5mg/kg/day with most patients requiring prolonged treatment (greater than 6 months) because of relapse while decreasing below a daily dose of 10 to 15 mg/day of prednisone. Of note, only around 30% of the patients can be weaned off prednisone therapy in their lifetime.

In EGPA, corticosteroids are also the mainstay of therapy. Depending on the severity, patients can be given either pulse dose methylprednisolone or prednisone 1 mg/kg/day and tapered slowly over months. In severe disease or with multisystem involvement such as heart, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract, cyclophosphamide can be used as steroid-sparing therapy.

In hypereosinophilic syndrome, Imatinib is a first-line therapy in patients with the myeloproliferative variant of HES. Corticosteroids may be used, especially in the “lymphocytic variant” of HES (with response in only about half of the patients). The anti-IL-5 antibody mepolizumab has recently been shown to be beneficial as a corticosteroid-sparing agent

For ABPA, oral corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment, with recent evidence showing itraconazole gives added benefit. Steroids are tapered over a few months.

Diethylcarbamazine is the drug of choice for tropical pulmonary eosinophilia.

Ascariasis is treated with oral mebendazole or albendazole. Strongyloides is treated with ivermectin, even if only antibodies are found to be positive, due to the risk of hyperinflation in the future.