Initial presentations of frontotemporal dementia are individualized based on the disease variant being expressed; however, in later progression, there is a significant overlap between behavioral and language subsets. Being a mostly clinical diagnosis, a thorough history must be obtained from patients and families to confirm the disorder and delineate which variant is present.

Symptoms of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) can be organized into six categories of behavioral or cognitive decline. Behavioral disinhibition featuring socially inappropriate behavior, loss of social decorum, or impulsive, careless actions are often observed. Apathy is common and is frequently misdiagnosed as depression. Loss of empathy or sympathy is characterized by a lack of interest or disregard for other's feelings. Perseverative, stereotyped, or compulsive behaviors manifest as repetitive movements, compulsive and ritualistic routines, and stereotyped speech. Hyperorality and dietary changes can include binge eating, change in preference for sweets and alcohol, and pica with oral exploration. Executive dysfunction can occur, sparing loss of episodic memory and visuospatial skills characteristic of Alzheimer's dementia. Deficits in three of these six diagnostic criteria are required for a definitive diagnosis of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD).

The language variant of frontotemporal dementia known as primary progressive aphasia (PPA) is divided into three clinical syndromes, nonfluent/agrammatic primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA), semantic variant primary progressive aphasia (svPPA), and logopenic aphasia. Clinical criteria for nfvPPA include effortful speech, speech apraxia, and agrammatism. Object knowledge and single-word comprehension are unaffected; however, complex sentence understanding may be impaired. Semantic dementia features anomia and impaired single-word comprehension. Along with these classic findings, three of the following four phenomena must be present: impaired object knowledge, surface dyslexia, and dysgraphia, spared repetition, and no disruption of speech production. Patients with logopenic variant PPA exhibit word-finding difficulty and repetition of sentences and phrases. Phonological speech errors are displayed, while single-word comprehension, object knowledge, motor speech, and simple grammar are unaffected. As with all frontotemporal dementia presentations, language variants are heterogeneous, and later stages feature overlapping symptoms as neurodegenerative pathologies spread to varied cerebral structures.

Further overlap can be seen in frontotemporal dementia-related syndromes such as motor neuron disease, corticobasal degeneration, and progressive supranuclear palsy. The ALS-parkinsonism-dementia complex has been described and demonstrates the coexistence of these motor neuron pathologies with frontotemporal dementia. Corticobasal degeneration presents with asymmetric movement impairment, and progressive supranuclear palsy features supranuclear gaze palsy with postural instability and falls. These conditions can coincide with behavioral and language deficits found in frontotemporal dementia.