The VL has a broad, continuous origination about the proximal femur. Origin points include the intertrochanteric line, greater trochanter, lateral aspect of the linea aspera, gluteal tuberosity, and the lateral intermuscular septum. The fibers of this muscle converge and contribute to the quadriceps tendon, insert on the lateral aspect of the patella, and terminally insert on the tibial tuberosity via the patellar tendon.

The VL is enclosed by a strong fascial layer known as the fascia lata. The fascia lata thickens laterally as it blends into the iliotibial tract. The intermuscular septae that divide the thigh into anterior, medial, and lateral compartments receive their fibrous division from the deep aspect of the fascia lata. The lateral intermuscular septum is much stronger than the other two and separates the VL and VI of the anterior compartment from the short and long heads of the biceps femoris and the posterior compartment. The lateral intermuscular septum between the anterior and posterior compartments forms an inter-nervous plane which may be used as an important intraoperative landmark.

Anatomically, the VL is bordered laterally by subcutaneous tissue, and medially, it is bordered by the femur and the VI at the level of the greater trochanter. The RF forms the anteromedial border while the posteromedial aspect of the VL is bordered by the intermuscular septum, sciatic nerve, and biceps femoris muscle at the level of the greater trochanter.

Functionally, the vastus lateralis functions as a primary extender of the knee. In conjunction with the VM, the VL stabilizes the knee joint. The VL is part of the intermediate layer of the quadriceps tendon. The other part of the intermediate layer is the VM. These 2 muscles fuse to form a continuous aponeurosis that inserts on the base of the patella. Reflections of the aponeurosis extend laterally and medially to insert on the sides of the patella. Laterally, the VL ends in an aponeurosis that blends with the lateral patella or RF tendon, and distally, the fibers of the vastus lateralis combine with the vastus medialis fibers to form the retinacular ligament of the knee, which inserts on the tibial condyles and ultimately forms the anterior capsule of the knee. This patellar retinaculum helps keep the patella aligned over the femur.