Proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) represent a class of drugs most prominently known for their use in acid-related disorders. Omeprazole, a drug belonging to this class, is among the top 10 most prescribed drugs in the United States. PPIs are derivatives of the heterocyclic organic molecule benzimidazole. They are often the first-line agents amongst gastroenterologists for the following

- Esophagitis

- Non-erosive reflux disease

- Peptic ulcer disease

- Prevention of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced ulcers

- Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome

- Part of the triple therapy regimen for Helicobacter pylori infections

The FDA has approved the following PPIs as of 2015:

- Omeprazole

- Esomeprazole

- Lansoprazole

- Dexlansoprazole

- Pantoprazole

- Rabeprazole

PPIs also have utility in treating pediatric diseases. Currently, these drugs are FDA approved to treat symptomatic GERD in the short term and for healing eosinophilic esophagitis in the pediatric population.

As for non-FDA-approved uses, PPIs have been used as an add-on therapy for patients on antiplatelet therapy before or after endoscopic procedures with a high risk of bleeding sequelae, functional dyspepsia, and eosinophilic esophagitis. Touched on above, PPIs may also be useful in conditions that may result in heavy NSAID use, such as acute coronary syndrome or chronic pain, as a preventative measure against NSAID-induced ulcers. Furthermore, new research is exploring the potential anti-tumor effects of PPIs in the treatment of melanomas, multiple myeloma, colorectal cancer, lymphomas, metastatic breast cancer, and other cancer pathologies.