TPK is one of the most difficult ophthalmic surgeries as surgery is performed in an inflamed and open globe. TPK should be attempted by an experienced surgeon with good exposure to performing keratoplasties.

Before the surgery, the donor tissue should be available, and the count and storage condition should be checked. The tissue is made available from the eye bank. The corneoscleral rim from the donor's eye should be stored in 4 C McCarey-Kaufman, Cornisol, or chondroitin sulfate-containing media having gentamicin.

The criteria for TPK storage are not as strict as for a graft with optical penetrating keratoplasty quality. In case of tissue shortage, the cryopreserved or glycerin-preserved cornea and sclera have been suggested. A good quality donor tissue in TPK also helps in visual rehabilitation in TPK. The integrity of healthy corneal tissue has inherent advantages, such as the epithelium remaining intact and the risk of infection is minimized. A clear graft also helps to assess the anterior chamber reaction during the postoperative period.

**Lid Speculum or Sutures**

A good self-retaining speculum of the lid or lid sutures helps prevent pressure on the globe.

**Scleral Fixation Ring**

Scleral fixation rings like the Flieringa ring provide structural support and make the surgery easier. Killingsworth suggested that the scleral fixation ring should be avoided as it makes suturing difficult when the globe is hypotonus. The use Flieringa ring is variable and varies from surgeon to surgeon and center to center.

**Conjunctival Peritomy**

In cases with large or eccentric grafts, conjunctival peritomy is recommended to avoid passing the suture through the conjunctiva. In my cases, practitioners rarely attempt a peritomy because if taken care of and the needle direction is kept right, the suture passes through the sclera. Peritomy becomes mandatory in cases with the scleral extension of the infectious foci to avoid cheeses wiring of the scleral tissue. Cautery can be done in cases where there is excess bleeding.

**Paracentesis**

A small initial paracentesis in the accessible area is recommended. It has a few advantages. First, it reduces the intraocular pressure in cases with secondary glaucoma, second anterior chamber exudates can be drained through the paracentesis, and third viscoelastic can be put which helps push the iris lens diaphragm backward and helps in good trephination, which prevents injury to the iris.

**Host Trephination**

Before trephination, the size of the infiltrate is measured with the help of calipers, and subsequently, the infiltrate with a 0.5 mm free margin of the cornea is marked with the use of ink. A central dot over the central portion of the cornea, followed by eight subsequent markings, is done in the peripheral cornea. Next, the sharp edge of the trephine is ink marked, and after aligning the trephine with the markings over the cornea, the recipient bed is trephined partial thickness.

Care should be taken to avoid excess pressure over the recipient bed as it can damage the iris lens diaphragm and may lead to the extrusion of intraocular contents.

The advantage of suction trephines is that lower incidence of shallowing of the anterior chamber and iris prolapse compared to free blade trephines. Suction trephines help to provide peripheral support and counter traction with the advancing blade, whereas the free blade trephines depend totally on the stability of the cornea, which is minimal in cases with perforation. As per the literature, the Hanna trephine is comparatively easier to use than the Hessberg Baron trephine as it provides a wide ring of peripheral suction, resulting in less central corneal distortion and holding the cornea in a more natural configuration. The trephines can be disposable as well as reusable. The disposable ones are readily available. Rao et al. suggested using cyanoacrylate glue or a patch graft in perforated eyes. They also suggested freehand dissection in cases with extensive perforation or entire corneal involvement.

**Graft Size**

Graft size depends on the size of the infiltrate. Usually, the donor corneal button size is kept 0.5-1mm larger than the recipient trephined bed. Small grafts, eccentric grafts, and patch grafts have inherent disadvantages, such as sutures obscuring the visual axis and causing crowding of the anterior segment. Large grafts are more prone to graft rejection, failure, and post-keratoplasty glaucoma (peripheral anterior synechiae formation and synechial angle closure).

The size of the trephine usually varies from 7.00 mm to 12.00 mm. The important goal is removing the diseased host rim even if the graft size is larger. After trephination, the recipient should be divided into two parts and sent for microbiological and histopathological analysis. The material can be inoculated in blood agar, chocolate agar Sabouraud's dextrose agar, brain heart infusion broth, and non-nutrient agar with E.coli.

**Anterior Chamber Entry and Management**

After marking the recipient bed with a trephine, anterior chamber entry is done with the help of a side port blade; subsequently, a 360-degree host cornea is excised. Once the diseased corneal portion is removed, the anterior chamber exudates, and purulent and fibrous membranes are removed with the help of forceps or can also be irrigated slowly. The iris is cleared of membranes, and occasionally the iris can bleed. Efforts should be made to minimize bleeding from the iris surface. Various authors have suggested using intracameral antifungals and antibiotics to irrigate the iris surface and reduce the infective foci.

**Peripheral Iridectomy**

This is followed by peripheral iridectomy. Some authors perform one; some perform two iridectomies to prevent pupillary block glaucoma postoperatively. Care should be taken to avoid damage to the anterior lens capsule and the lens. There can be torrential bleeding sometimes after performing an iridectomy. The bleed can be controlled with gentle irrigation or minimal adrenaline.

**Lens Management**

The recommendation is to preserve the lens in most cases as it acts as a barrier against migration of infection to the posterior segment and vitreous. Donnenfeld recommended 2% pilocarpine over the iris surface in phakic and pseudophakic patients to preserve the iris lens diaphragm and prevent spontaneous lens expulsion.

The following case scenarios are based on the author's recommendations for lens management.

- In an elderly patient with a hard cataract and no retro iris exudates, lens removal can be attempted, and the posterior capsule should be preserved. This helps push the iris lens diaphragm backward, opens up the angle, and helps prevent synechial angle closure glaucoma postoperatively.

- In another case scenario, if there are retroiris exudates and the lens is cataract, lens removal should be performed to prevent the recurrence of infection, and it also helps in anterior chamber formation.

- In cases with lens abscess, the lens should be removed.

- In pseudophakic patients with endophthalmitis, the IOL should be explanted. The lens should be preserved in patients younger than 50 with early cataracts and no retroiris exudates.

**Open Sky Vitrectomy**

Automated anterior vitrectomy is recommended in cases with spontaneous lens expulsion and posterior capsular breach to remove the prolapsed vitreous. Intravitreal antimicrobials should be injected in these cases. The vitrectomy should be prompt and meticulous to prevent the risk of expulsive choroidal hemorrhage. A vitreous tap is also recommended in these cases for culture and sensitivity. If the microorganisms are unknown, intravitreal injection of vancomycin (1 mg in 0.1 mL) and ceftazidime (2.5 mg in 0.1 mL) should be given in aphakic patients and patients complicated by lens expulsion.

**Donor Button Preparation**

Here again, there are two schools of thought. The question is whether to perform donor button excision before the host trephination or after host trephination.

**Suturing the Donor Button**

The donor button is sutured to the host rim with interrupted 10-0 monofilament nylon sutures. In cases with the cornea to limbal sutures, 9-0 monofilament nylon should be used. In cases of emergency when a particular suture type is unavailable, 10-0 or 9-0 can be used interchangeably.

The suture depth should be 90% on the donor and host sides. The literature review also suggests 75% depth, but most surgeons attempt 90%. Complete thickness sutures should be avoided, as they form a suture tract from where aqueous can lead, and it also acts as a nidus for infection to pass from the cornea to the anterior chamber. Most surgeons prefer a 1:1 ratio of suture bites on the host and donor sides.

However, some prefer larger bites on the host side to prevent cheese wiring of the host tissue through a potentially necrotic zone. All suture knots should be buried on the host side. Additional sutures can be attempted to prevent any subtle leak, and wound closure should be done meticulously. Pressure should be avoided over the globe throughout the surgery. Intracameral moxifloxacin should be given, and anterior chamber formation should be done.

**Check for Leakage**

Before closing the case, fluorescein dye can be spread over the graft host junction and looked for any leaks. A cotton bud or a swab can also be used to look for leaks. In case of any suspected leakage, additional sutures should be placed.

**Pad and Bandage**

After completion of the surgery, a pad and bandage are applied, preferably under a topical antibiotic or ointment cover. The pad and bandage can be opened after 4 to 6 hours, and appropriate postoperative drugs should be given.

**Postoperative Management**

Postoperatively the patient should be started on antimicrobials for a brief initial period. Antibiotics should be started 6 to 8 times daily, along with adjuvant therapy in cases with bacterial keratitis as the etiology. Similarly, in patients with fungal etiology, antifungals should be started. The duration of antimicrobial therapy is governed by the severity of infection, microorganism load and virulence, and the pre-operative and postoperative culture results.

After 3 or 4 weeks, the patient should be started on topical steroids if there are no signs of infection. The concept I follow is if the pre-operative and postoperative culture reports are negative and there are no clinical signs of infections, steroids can be started after two weeks post keratoplasty. If either of the culture reports is positive, it is better to wait three weeks before starting steroids; if both are positive, it is better to wait at least 4 weeks before starting steroids.

Fungal and Acanthamoeba keratitis cases usually require long-term postoperative antimicrobial therapy for several months. Cycloplegics are needed to relieve ciliary spasms, reduced uveitis, pain, pupillary block, posterior synechiae, and PAS formation. Antiglaucoma drugs are required to reduce the raised intraocular pressure in cases with trabeculitis, PAS, and uveitis after TPK.

Topical steroids should be started after a brief interval, as explained above. Topical steroids reduce inflammation and improve visual outcomes. Initiation of steroids should be under antimicrobial cover for approximately two weeks, and later patient can be given steroids alone. Topical steroids can be given from day 1 in viral keratitis cases under antiviral cover. Lubricating eye drops helps in reepithelization. In patients with neuroparalytic keratitis, dry eyes, and recurrent graft infection, lateral tarsorrhaphy with conjunctival flap should be considered.

**Postoperative Drug Regimes**

**Bacterial Keratitis**

- Topical moxifloxacin or gatifloxacin or tobramycin, or amikacin 6-8 times per day to reduce the bacterial load (based on the etiology)

- Topical timolol or other adjuvant antiglaucoma medications two times per day. Miotics and prostaglandins should be avoided in an inflamed eye.

- Topical homatropine or atropine two times per day

- Topical lubricating hydroxypropyl methylcellulose or carboxymethylcellulose eye drops to regularize and smoothen the ocular surface. It also promotes re-epithelialization.

- Oral anti-inflammatory drugs such as diclofenac or paracetamol reduce pain and periorbital edema.

**Fungal Keratitis**

Topical natamycin, voriconazole, or itraconazole 6-8 times daily to reduce the fungal load (based on the etiology). Rest adjuvant drugs remain the same. Oral ketoconazole may be required in cases with scleritis and endophthalmitis.

**Acanthamoeba Keratitis**

Topical chlorhexidine or poly hexamethylene biguanides or neomycin, along with adjuvant drugs.

**Pythium Keratitis**

Topical linezolid or azithromycin along with adjuvant drugs. Oral azithromycin may be required in cases with scleritis and endophthalmitis.

**Viral Keratitis**

Topical antibiotics and steroids, along with adjuvant drugs.

**Steroid Regimen**

Initially, steroids are started 3 or 4 times for the first seven days under antimicrobial cover as steroid initiation may invite infection. Once there are no signs of infection, I prefer to continue the steroid regimen 4/3/2/1 for 3 months each and later once for lifelong and antiglaucoma coverage. The patient should be regularly followed up to look for any signs of infection and loose suture removal intermittently, if any. All suture removal can be done in 12 months. If the graft in TPK fails after a period of time, then optical penetrating keratoplasty (OPK) can be attempted 12 months postoperatively once suture removal has been done. OPK can also be attempted in one-eyed patients at 6 to 8 months.