The therapeutic range of clonazepam is from 0.02 to 0.08 mcg/mL. Any level over 0.08 mcg/mL is considered toxic. The symptoms of overdose develop rapidly.

**Initial Presentation**

The initial symptoms appear within a few hours with symptoms of CNS depression such as:

- Somnolence

- Diplopia

- Slurred speech

- Motor impairment

**Severe Presentation**

If the overdose is severe, then it may result in severe symptoms such as:

- Respiratory depression

- Hypoxemia

- Apnea

- Hypotension

- Bradycardia

- Cardiac arrest

- Pulmonary aspiration

- Coma

Severe consequences of clonazepam use alone are rare, but the toxicity increases significantly if other CNS depressants, such as opioids, ethanol, barbiturates, etc., are coadministered.

**Treatment of Toxicity**

Supportive care and medical observation are the mainstays of the treatment. The supportive care includes monitoring vitals, IV fluids for hypotension, atropine for bradycardia, and maintaining the patency of the airway by intubation or artificial respiration if respiratory depression develops.

The use of flumazenil, a competitive benzodiazepine receptor antagonist, as the antidote is controversial as its use correlates with lowered seizure threshold and widened QRS complex resulting in adverse effects. Flumazenil's side effects do not outweigh the potential benefits. It has no role in multidrug toxicity and should only be used following a consultation with a medical toxicologist.

The use of illicit benzodiazepines in combination with opioids is increasing, leading to synergistic toxicity and increased mortality. Consequently, increasing awareness among providers, patient education, and community involvement regarding hazards associated with illicit benzodiazepines is crucial.