Evaluation should include:

- **Lab Studies**- Lab studies are often not as specific in identifying one of the discussed. If one of the lesions has resulted in an acute coronary syndrome, one can expect elevation in white blood cell count. Cardiac-specific biomarkers such as troponin T and troponin I will be elevated 4 to 8 hours after injury and will peak between 12 and 24 hours.

- **Electrocardiography (ECG)**- ECG has variable results in each clinical scenario. Nearly half of individuals with angina pectoris have no acute abnormalities on ECG. The most common findings in those who experience angina pectoris include 1 mm ST-depressions and t-wave inversions. Of course, if these lesions have resulted in an unstable plaque, one would look for signs of an acute coronary syndrome and specifically 2 mm ST-elevations in contiguous leads (STEMI). Reciprocal changes in the opposite lead to the increased specificity of this diagnosis.

- **Stress Testing –**Those suspected of undergoing acute coronary syndrome should have coronary angiography and possible PCI. Those in whom the diagnosis is unclear and considered stable should experience some form of stress testing. Exercise ECG is the procedure of choice in individuals with no resting ST-segment anomalies. Ischemic changes may present in this form of testing.

- **Coronary Angiography –**Coronary angiography is the gold standard in diagnosing coronary lesions. Coronary angiography allows one to evaluate the anatomy and extent of diseased vessels. Coronary angiography does have some limitations, including vessel overlap and visualization limited to the vessel lumen.