The blood supply to tibial nerve structures is provided primarily by the popliteal artery, with two exceptions provided at the end of this section. The popliteal artery is a continuation of the femoral artery, a large artery that enters the lower extremity through the femoral sheath after passing under the inferior margin of the inguinal ligament. This major artery of the lower extremity gives off a deep femoral branch proximally in the anterior thigh, then continues its course inferiorly. The femoral artery then dives posteriorly through the adductor hiatus in the adductor magnus muscle to gain access to the posterior thigh. After crossing into the posterior thigh, its name changes to the popliteal artery.

**Popliteal Artery and branches**

Subsequent to passing through the adductor hiatus, the popliteal artery can be visualized in the popliteal fossa directly paralleling the tibial nerve. It continues its course inferiorly to pass deep to the plantaris and gastrocnemius heads to reach the superficial surface of the popliteus muscle- at this point, the artery bifurcates into the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. The anterior tibial artery dives anteriorly to pass between the two heads of the tibialis posterior muscle. It then continues anteriorly through the superior portion of the interosseous membrane to supply the anterior compartment of the leg.

The posterior tibial artery continues inferiorly past the popliteus alongside the tibial nerve to then pass through the tendinous arch of the soleus. Now in the deep posterior compartment of the leg, it gives off the peroneal artery at a point below the plane of the tibial plateau.

The posterior tibial artery follows the tibial nerve throughout the length of the deep posterior compartment, giving off muscular branches to supply this compartment. The artery then enters the tarsal tunnel in a path just anterior to the tibial nerve. Quite similar to the tibial nerve, just proximal to the tarsal tunnel the posterior tibial artery gives off a medial calcaneal branch, and distal to the tarsal tunnel the artery bifurcates into medial and lateral plantar arteries. These arteries follow a similar course as their corresponding nerves, supplying all of the muscles of the plantar foot to then terminate as common and proper plantar digital branches.

The two exceptions of tibial nerve territory blood supply are as follows. First, the femoral artery, while still in the anterior thigh, gives off the deep femoral artery. This artery then sends four perforating branches which also pass through the adductor magnus muscle (superior to the adductor hiatus) to supply posterior thigh muscles. Second, the femoral artery gives off the descending geniculate artery before entering the adductor hiatus; this is one of six geniculate arteries that anastomose around the knee joint, while the remaining five are branches of the popliteal artery. These arteries provide collateral circulation to the supply the knee joint and associated ligaments during knee flexion, but they also may supply tendons near the knee joint.