Age gives crucial clues to the diagnosis of the disease. The pediatric age group with a palpable pulse with two strokes should indicate PDA with a left to right shunt. The younger patient usually points towards a diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with an obstruction or bicuspid valve disease, whereas mixed aortic valve disease is more common in the elderly population. Pulsus bisferiens can be more pronounced by the Valsalva maneuver.

**History**

Common clinical presentations are syncope, dyspnea, chest pain, and palpitations. Long-standing problems can remain asymptomatic and present with signs of acute pulmonary edema and heart failure. HOCM can present with sudden cardiac death and life-threatening arrhythmias, especially in younger athletes.

**Physical Examination**

On palpation of a peripheral pulse (radial artery), two upstrokes distinguished by a mid-systolic gap in the systole are characteristic of pulsus bisferiens.

- Wider pulse pressure is seen in aortic regurgitation.

- Jugular venous pressure (JVP) examination may reveal a classical 'a' wave in HOCM.

- The apex beat is displaced in severe aortic regurgitation, whereas; in HOCM double beats can be felt at the apex.

- Auscultation: On careful cardiac evaluation, various murmurs can be heard during auscultation. The following murmurs can be observed along with pulsus bisferiens, which may clinch the clinical diagnosis. Ejection systolic murmur in the aortic area (aortic stenosis), early diastolic murmur on the left sternum (aortic regurgitation), mid-diastolic or early diastolic low-pitch rumble murmur at the apex (severe aortic regurgitation) which is also called as Austin Flint murmur, ejection systolic murmur along the left parasternal area (HOCM).

Aortic regurgitation can also present with other clinical signs such as blanching and flushing of the forehead and face (lighthouse sign), bobbing of the head synchronous with the arterial pulse****(de Musset sign), repeated flushing and blanching of the capillaries in the nail beds (Quincke sign), alternating systolic miosis and diastolic mydriasis in both pupils (Landolfi sign), pulsations of the retinal arteries on the fundoscopic examination (Becker sign), pulsations of the uvula (Muller sign), systolic pulsations of the liver (Rosenbach sign) and spleen (Gerhard sign), a pistol shot sound both during systole and during diastole on auscultation (Traube sign), diastolic-systolic murmur over the femoral arteries (Duroziez murmur).