The ankle's anatomy can be broken down into osteology, musculature, and neurovascular structures.

The ankle joint is made up of the distal tibia, the distal fibula, and the talus. The distal tibia articulates with the distal fibula to form the distal tibiofibular articulation and the talus, forming the tibiotalar joint. This is an important anatomical distinction as this is the true “ankle” joint. Oftentimes the subtalar joint, which is the articulation between the talus and the calcaneus, is included when discussing the ankle joint; however, this is, technically, not a part of the ankle but, rather, the hindfoot.

The distal tibia has three distinct portions: the plafond, the lateral distal tibia, and the medial malleolus. The plafond is the actual weight-bearing portion that articulates with the talus below. The distal physis ossifies around the age of one year and typically fuses around the age of 18 to 20 years. The physis closes in a predictable manner, first centrally, followed by medially, and finally laterally. As a result of this phased closure, there are unique adolescent ankle fractures such as the tillaux fracture and the triplane fracture.

The distal fibula, commonly referred to as the lateral malleolus at the level of the ankle joint, ossifies around the age of 4 years and fuses around the age of 18 to 20 years. As previously mentioned, it serves as an important attachment site for the two syndesmotic ligaments (AITFL and PITFL). It also serves as an attachment site for the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL), the posterior talofibular ligament (PTFL), and the calcaneofibular ligament. Avulsion fractures are common due to the multiple ligamentous attachments to the lateral malleolus. The lateral malleolus serves as a bony restraint to lateral translation of the talus within the tibiotalar joint and is important in the stability of the ankle joint.

The talus ossifies around the age of 7 months and fuses around the age of 13 to 15 years. It is composed of a head, neck, body/dome, posterior process, and lateral process. The talus articulates with the navicular, the calcaneus, and the distal tibia. The body is mostly covered with articular cartilage, and the majority of the body weight is transmitted through the dome upon weight-bearing.

The musculature at the level of the ankle joint tends to be more tendinous, as the bulk of the muscle bellies are more proximal in the leg. As the muscles travel distally, their tendons cross the ankle joint and insert on the bones of the foot. The four compartments in the leg each have their own set of muscles.

**Four Leg Compartments**

**Anterior Compartment**

- Tibialis anterior

- Extensor hallucis longus

- Extensor digitorum longus

- Peroneus tertius

**Lateral Compartment**

- Peroneus longus

- Peroneus brevis

**Superficial Posterior Compartment**

- Gastrocnemius

- Soleus

- Plantaris

**Deep Posterior Compartment**

- Popliteus

- Flexor hallucis longus

- Flexor digitorum longus

- Tibialis posterior

The nervous structures surrounding the ankle joint include the saphenous, tibial, sural, superficial peroneal, and deep peroneal nerves. The saphenous nerve, the terminal branch of the femoral nerve, descends in the superficial medial leg and anterior to the medial malleolus. It provides sensation to the medial ankle and has no motor function. The tibial nerve originates from the anterior division of the sacral plexus and descends posterior to the medial malleolus into the tarsal tunnel. It provides sensation to the medial heel and provides a motor function to the superficial and deep posterior compartment muscles. The sural nerve is formed from the medial sural cutaneous nerve, a branch of the tibial nerve, and the lateral sural cutaneous nerve, a branch of the peroneal nerve. It runs subcutaneously in the posterolateral leg to provide sensation in the posterolateral distal leg. It does not provide any motor function. The superficial peroneal nerve is a branch off of the common peroneal nerve. It runs in the lateral compartment of the leg and crosses anteriorly 10 centimeters above the lateral malleolus. It provides sensation to the anterolateral leg and ankle and provides a motor function to the lateral compartment muscles. The deep peroneal nerve branches off of the common peroneal nerve. It runs in the anterior compartment of the leg with the anterior tibial artery. It does not provide any sensation in the leg or around the ankle joint and provides a motor function to the anterior compartment muscles.

The main vascular structures surrounding the ankle include the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. The anterior tibial artery branches off of the popliteal artery and courses beneath the tibialis anterior and extensor hallucis longus tendons anterior to the ankle joint where it forms the dorsalis pedis artery in the foot. The posterior tibial artery is also a branch off of the popliteal artery. It runs with the tibial nerve in the deep posterior compartment and lies between the flexor digitorum longus and flexor hallucis longus tendons posterior to the medial malleolus where its pulse is palpable.