**What is the difference between mental capacity and competence, and how are these determined?**

Historically, a difference between mental competency (a legal determination) and capacity (a functional, clinical assessment) received emphasis; however, recent literature suggests this distinction is less important than initially thought. The evaluation to determine capacity must be by a physician and can be done so by a trusted physician if specifically requested in the power of attorney document. In time-sensitive situations or when the requested physician is unavailable or not designated at all, two licensed physicians must agree on the mental status of the patient in question.

The process of determining capacity is one of the most vital functions of the physician seeking to enact a power of attorney for decision-making. Broadly, this assessment can take place with the following approach:

- Communication

- Patients should be able to express not just their wishes, but also their rationale behind their preferences; this allows physicians access to the patient’s motivations and insight, which are vital to assess in determining capacity.

- Understanding

- Patients should be able to recall conversations about treatment options and recognize causal relationships within the treatment plan. Understanding is often affected by problems with memory, attention, or overall intelligence.

- Appreciation

- Patients should be able to appreciate the consequences of the illness, treatment options, or the decision to forego treatment, and how the outcome will affect him or her directly. Patients can often be in denial from either a lack of intelligence or emotion about the state of their illness, thus robbing them of their ability to appreciate the consequences of such illness as affecting them directly.

- Rationalization

- Patients should be able to process the risks and benefits of treatment options and come to the conclusion that coincides with their best interests and goals. The ability to reason effectively can often be diminished by psychiatric disorders, though this is not always the case.

It is important to remember that capacity is not static and can change from absent to present as a patient progresses through the healing process. Similarly, a patient’s non-capacity to make one decision does not necessarily deem that patient not to have the capacity to make any other decisions regarding their care.

**Why is the Power of Attorney Important Clinically in the Emergency Department?**

The course of patients that enter the hospital links inextricably to the care they receive within the emergency room, and this has important ethical and financial implications for the patient and patient’s family, the physicians involved, and the hospital. It is often the case that upon initiation of treatment that sustains the life of the patient, be it ventilator support for breathing or vasopressor support for proper circulation, it becomes challenging to adhere to the desires of the patient in question. This situation becomes especially true if doing so would mean direct harm to the patient’s immediate chances of survival.

As frontline providers, emergency physicians are afforded the unique opportunity to broach important ACP questions with patients and their families early, and in doing so can pave the way for all physicians to provide compassionate care that empowers patients to live their last few moments on their own terms. Proactively participating in ACP with families has been shown to fundamentally improve the costs of providing care while also diminishing the likelihood of stress, anxiety, and depression in surviving relatives.