Ketamine administration can be either IV or IM. The onset of action, when given IV, is within seconds. When administered IM, the onset of action is approximately 4 minutes, with a duration of action from 15 to 30 minutes. Dosing needs to vary according to the desired effect, the patient's age, and underlying conditions. Children metabolize the drug more rapidly than adults and may require higher or additional dosing; elderly patients metabolize ketamine more slowly and may need lower dosing. When using larger total doses of ketamine, administering it more rapidly than normal, or using ketamine with sedatives, barbiturates, or narcotics, exaggerated responses may occur, and prolonged recovery times should be expected.

The initial IV dose of ketamine ranges from 1 to 4.5 mg/kg (0.5 to 2 mg/lb) administered over 60 seconds for those 16 years old or older. A dose of 2 mg/kg (1 mg/lb) is the average amount required to produce approximately 5 to 10 minutes of anesthesia/dissociation, with the onset of action in about 10 to 30 seconds and a duration of action of approximately 5 to 15 minutes. Additional doses can be administered IV or IM  to maintain anesthesia without producing significant cumulative effects for more prolonged anesthesia. Either one-half or full additional doses may be repeated as needed. Dosing adjustments will be required if used in combination with other drugs, such as IV benzodiazepines or narcotics. When using diazepam in adults, maintenance should be via slow infusion at 0.1 to 0.5 mg/minute of ketamine. Additional doses of diazepam in the amount of 2 to 5 mg are an option.

- In adults, an alternative induction dose is 1 to 2 mg/kg IV at a rate of 0.5 mg/kg/min. IV diazepam 2 to 5 mg can be given over 60 seconds to reduce emergence phenomena. In most cases, 15 mg IV or less will suffice.

- The initial IM dose of ketamine ranges from 6.5 to 13 mg/kg (3 to 6 mg/lb). A 10 mg/kg (5 mg/lb) dose usually produces 12 to 30 minutes of surgical anesthesia with an onset of action in 3 to 5 minutes.

- In children, the IM dosing range is from 9 to 13 mg/kg (4 to 6 mg/lb) and usually produces surgical anesthesia within 3 to 4 minutes following injection.

- Sub-dissociative dosing (low dose ketamine) is dosed at 0.1 to 0.4 mg/kg IV.

Illicit use of ketamine includes snorting or inhalation, and it is ingestable in food/drinks.

Tonic-clonic movements may present during the administration of ketamine.  These movements do not mean that additional doses of the anesthetic are required.