A Swan-Ganz catheter or right heart catheter is a quadruple-lumen catheter with a thermodilution sensor that is attached to a pressure transducer outside the body, with this transducer, is possible to determine the central vein pressure, right atrial pressure, right ventricular pressure, and pulmonary artery pressure

The catheters size range from 60 to 110 cm in length and 4F to 8F in caliber

Each of the 4-lumen is placed in a specific distance through the length of the catheter, and each of them has a specific function, as explained

- The blue lumen or CVP port represent the right atrial lumen. Ii is at 30 cm from the tip of the catheter and rests within the right atrium. It is the proximal port and can be used for infusion. This port can assess central venous pressure (CVP) and right atrial pressure.

- The white or clear lumen terminates close to the prior lumen, at 31 cm from the tip of the catheter and lies in the right atrium. This port is used for infusion.

- The yellow lumen or PA distal is the pulmonary artery lumen is the distal port at the tip of the catheter. This port does the measurement of the pulmonary artery pressure. Mixed venous can be drawn from this port too.

- The thermistor is a red/white connector that consists a temperature-sensitive wire that terminates 4 cm proximal to the tip of the catheter. The terminal portion of the wire is called the thermistor bead, and it rests in a main pulmonary artery when the catheter tip is positioned correctly. The connection of the thermistor port to cardiac output (CO) monitor allows determination of a CO using thermodilution.

- The red port is the balloon port. Air is introduced to inflate the balloon and removed when needs to be deflated.

- The pulmonary artery catheter has a balloon that can be inflated and helps the clinician place the tip of the catheter in the pulmonary artery.

- Within the catheter, there are black lines that help to measure the length of the catheter. One thin line is 10 cm, and a thick black line indicated 50 cm.