The microscopic findings of different etiologies are:

**Poststreptococcal Glomerulonephritis:**Light microscopy picture shows that the glomeruli are diffusely enlarged with endocapillary proliferation and neutrophil infiltration. The immunofluorescence microscopy shows a "stary sky pattern" due to subepithelial "lumpy" granular deposition of IgG and C3. Electron microscopy will demonstrate the "lumpy" subepithelial immune deposits. Mesangial deposits may also be seen in some patients.

**Staphylococcal Glomerulonephritis:**The majority of patients have focal endocapillary glomerulonephritis with peripheral capillary occlusion due to endothelial cell proliferation and neutrophil infiltration. Capillary tufts may show necrosis. "Lumpy" subepithelial immune deposits are seen.  In some patients, mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (also called membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis or MPGN) may be seen with marked mesangial proliferation and granular immune deposits within the basement membrane.

**Crescentic Glomerulonephritis:**The crescent is formed by the proliferation of epithelial cells in the parietal layer of the Bowman capsule. Macrophages, fibrin exudates, fibroblasts, complement products may be seen trapped in the mesangium and the Bowman's capsule space.

- In Goodpasture syndrome, there is a linear deposition of IgG antibodies and C3 along the GBM.

- Lupus nephritis has a "full-house pattern" with IgG, IgM, IgA, C3 immune deposits present diffusely in the mesangium, sub epithelium, and sub-endothelium.

- Anti-GBM antibodies or immune complexes are not detected by immunofluorescence and electron microscopy in pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis. Vasculitis may be seen on renal biopsy.