The following are some of the critical disease conditions associated with the pituitary gland.

**Pituitary Adenoma**

The most common pathology in the sellar region is the pituitary tumor. They classify into microadenomas (less than 10 mm) and macroadenomas (more than 10 mm). These macroadenomas can compress the adjacent structures. When it extends laterally, the cavernous sinus is compressed, producing ophthalmoplegia. The patients will present with diplopia due to cranial nerve compression. They may also present asymptomatically or with headaches. All the cell lines are capable of producing an adenoma.

**Prolactinoma:**This is the most common type of functioning secretory adenoma. They remain asymptomatic for an extended period until they cause compression or mass effect on the normal surrounding tissue causing hormonal dysfunction, visual changes, hydrocephalus, and hypogonadism.

**Cushing Disease:**This results from an ACTH secreting pituitary adenoma. They present with symptoms such as proximal myopathy, psychiatric disturbances, obesity, purple striae over the abdomen, extra fat around the neck termed buffalo hump, and hypertension. The standard method for resection of the tumor is transsphenoidal adenectomy. The route is via the posterior wall of the sphenoid sinus, which forms the inferior border of the pituitary gland.

**GH Secreting Adenoma:**This adenoma produces a lot of GH, which can cause acromegaly or gigantism. The patient may present with carpal tunnel syndrome, proximal myopathy, and rarely hypertension or diabetes mellitus.

**Stalk Compression Syndrome:**The patient presents with symptoms of hyperprolactinemia with raised prolactin concentration in the presence of a sellar or suprasellar mass compressing the stalk.

**Pituitary Apoplexy:**Pituitary adenomas that are often asymptomatic may enlarge in size and acquire additional arterial blood supply directly and undergo hemorrhagic infarction. The clinical presentation includes abrupt onset headache, visual symptoms like diplopia due to cavernous sinus compression, panhypopituitarism with low blood pressure, focal neurological deficits. The apoplexy triad includes headaches, visual changes, and vomiting. Clinicians can misdiagnose this condition as a subarachnoid hemorrhage. An emergency CT will show an enlarged pituitary fossa with some blood, and an MRI will confirm the diagnosis.

**Sheehan Syndrome:**This is due to the infarction and necrosis of the pituitary gland. It can be described as postpartum hypopituitarism, as postpartum hemorrhage is closely associated with its etiology. The gland enlarges during pregnancy, which causes the superior hypophyseal artery to get compressed. If the patient experiences a drop in her blood pressure during childbirth, this causes infarction and necrosis of the gland. The patient will commonly present with failure to lactate during the postpartum period, ultimately leading to a deficiency of the anterior pituitary hormones.

**Lymphocytic Hypophysitis:**This condition is commonly associated with pregnancy. It is an autoimmune condition with diffuse lymphocytic infiltration that destroys normal tissue with scaring. Imaging with an MRI shows homogenously enhancing and enlarged glands.

**Granulomatous Hypophysitis:**This is a non-caseating granuloma with Langerhans type giant cell. When it is present in the posterior lobe, it may be due to neurosarcoidosis.

**Empty Sella Syndrome:**There are two types of empty sella syndrome that are differentiated according to the cause. The primary empty sella syndrome is a defect in the diaphragma sellae that allows the contents above to herniate into the sella, thus compressing the gland. The secondary empty sella syndrome is due to causes such as tumors or surgery. This syndrome is associated with multiparous women, obesity, and benign intracranial hypertension. In multiparous women, this may be due to the repeated enlargement and involution of the gland leading to the gland becoming flattened. This condition must be differentiated from craniopharyngioma and Rathke's cleft cyst as they may also present with a cyst within the same location.

**Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone(SIADH):**This is a condition with excessive production of antidiuretic hormone, which can result from various conditions such as nervous system disorders, neoplastic, ectopic sources such as paraneoplastic syndromes, head trauma, and drugs. The patients will present with altered mental status, seizures, or even more severe cases with coma. There will be hyponatremia due to dilution with free water. The urine analysis will show increased concentration and osmolality.

**Craniopharyngiomas:**Two variants are classified based on clinical and genetic features, which are the adamantinomatous (aCP) and papillary (pCP) craniopharyngiomas. The aCP occurs in children, and pCP is exclusive to adults. The embryonic theory proposed states that this develops from the ectopic embryonic remnants of Rathke's pouch. The metaplastic theory states that the squamous epithelium that is part of the gland undergoes metaplasia and transforms.

**Rathke’s Cleft Cyst:**This is a benign cyst that originates from the mucinous substances in the remnants of Rathke's pouch. The cyst contains the pink eosinophilic substance. Due to chronic inflammation, they may develop xanthogranulomas or cholesterol crystals.

**Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia-1(MEN-1):**This is a genetic, endocrine neoplastic syndrome. There is an abnormal growth in the pituitary gland, parathyroid gland, and pancreas.