The sulfonylureas, like glipizide, can interact with several other drugs and induce hypoglycemia. The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, some azole antifungals, sulfonamides, probenecid, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, beta-blockers, quinolones, and salicylates can potentiate hypoglycemia in the presence of glipizide. Patients who are prescribed any of these drugs while taking glipizide need close monitoring of their blood sugars to prevent hypoglycemic attacks. The management of patients with low blood glucose secondary to glipizide can be with IV dextrose or oral glucose tablets, depending on the severity of the clinical presentation. The management of the drug toxic effect is to restore and maintain euglycemia.

Conversely, with the use of drugs like thiazide diuretics, corticosteroids, thyroid hormone, phenothiazines, phenytoin, estrogen-containing contraceptives, calcium channel blockers, and nicotinic acid, there is the potential for hyperglycemia in patients taking glipizide. In some patients, a sudden loss of blood glucose control may occur. Further, upon withdrawal of these medications, there is a risk of hypoglycemia. If a patient declines the use of glipizide, an alternate oral hypoglycemic drug may be an option, or they may need to switch to insulin therapy.

All patients with diabetes mellitus should be encouraged to exercise regularly, discontinue smoking, eat a healthy diet, and control their body weight. There is ample evidence today showing that reduction in body weight leads to better blood glucose control and decreased need for oral hypoglycemics.