Detailed assessment mandates systemic examination, including complete integumentary, musculoskeletal, neurological, and vascular evaluations.

**Integumentary**: the integrity of overlying volar and dorsal skin should be examined to rule out or diagnose concomitant injuries, ensuring documentation of each skin injury.

**Musculoskeletal**: obvious angular or rotational deformities of the digits warrant further investigation for fracture or ligamentous injury, with appropriate realignment or reduction prior to evaluating flexor tendon integrity or neurovascular sequelae. Should a completely lacerated flexor tendon be appreciated, one could expect the digit to assume extension at the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint. Individual tendons should be inspected on each finger. Flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) can be isolated by blocking PIP flexion and assessing active DIP flexion, as FDP is the only flexor tendon to traverse the DIP joint. Flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) is examined by preventing flexion of other digits and evaluating isolated PIP flexion, as all FDS tendons share a common muscle belly. Loss of digital flexion and normal “flexor cascade” (tenodesis effect) is consistent with complete tendon transection, where there is an absence of normal flexor tone with passive wrist extension. Painful digital flexion is suggestive of a partial tendon injury. FDP avulsion injuries may present with a clinically painful nodule indicative of a retracted tendon.

**Neurological**: sensation should be evaluated with static and moving 2-point discrimination tests before injecting a local anesthetic. Loss of sensation in a digital nerve distribution after sharp laceration portends a nerve transection until proven otherwise.

**Vascular**: capillary refill of the volar pulp and nail bed should be assessed. Delayed capillary refill or poor turgor suggests digital artery laceration. An Allen test can be performed in this circumstance.

Inquire as to the status of tetanus vaccination and the timeline since the last booster dose.

Obtaining anterior-posterior/lateral/oblique radiographs to rule out fractures or retained foreign bodies is a useful adjunct to primary history and physical examination. When the continuity of a flexor tendon is in question or to assess a suspected partial laceration, an ultrasound can be considered. Intraoperative fluoroscopic images may be utilized, pending the findings during surgical exploration.

Physical exam findings will often suggest the presence or absence of flexor tendon injury, conferring clinical correlation of the laceration, overlying skin injury, and/or mechanism, which could subsequently benefit from elective surgical exploration and possible repair. After a complete evaluation of the skin, skeleton, tendons, nerves, and vascular supply, judgment regarding the need, timing, and nature of surgical repair can be confidently formulated.