**Chemotherapy for Osteosarcoma**

- Chemotherapy is the standard of care. It can be given either neoadjuvant and/or adjuvant setting. The ideal timing of chemotherapy (i.e., preoperative versus postoperative) is not clear. 

- Von Rosen was the first to introduce the concept of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the management of osteosarcoma.
- Besides, the advantages of neoadjuvant chemotherapy include an improvement in the quality of life brought about the amelioration of symptoms, treatment of micrometastatic disease, to increase chances of complete resection, and assessment of response to chemotherapy (degree of necrosis).


- In those who receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy, if the tumor at the surgery has ≥ 10% residual cancer, a change in the chemotherapeutic regimen might be beneficial (MD Anderson approach).

- **Regimens for nonmetastatic, resectable disease:**
- The standard of care is

- Cisplatin and doxorubicin,
- MAP (high-dose methotrexate (HD-MTX), doxorubicin, and cisplatin), or
- MAP + Ifosfamide per the AOST 0331 (EURAMOS-1) trial
- Three and four-drug combinations are preferred for young patients (<40 years old), with good performance status
- 10 weeks of neoadjuvant chemotherapy
- 19 weeks of adjuvant chemotherapy (starting one week postoperatively)
- Caution should be exercised with high-dose methotrexate in adults. 




- For those intolerant to HD-MTX, 

- Carboplatin, ifosfamide, and doxorubicin is a reasonable approach. However, this has a higher risk of secondary malignancies.

- **Regimens for relapsed/refractory disease:**
- Etoposide plus ifosfamide is the most commonly used second-line regimen.
- Other options include
- regorafenib,
- high dose ifosfamide ± etoposide,
- sorafenib (alone or in combination with everolimus),
- cyclophosphamide and topotecan,
- docetaxel and gemcitabine, or
- gemcitabine alone.


- The following combinatorial regimens may be considered useful in specific circumstances - cyclophosphamide and etoposide; ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide; HD-MTX, etoposide, and ifosfamide.
- Samarium 153 – ethylene diamine tetramethylene diphosphonate is indicated in the management of relapsed or refractory disease after progression on second-line therapy.

- **Regimens for metastatic disease at diagnosis:**
- If not a candidate for surgery, there is no consensus. Common options include

- AOST 0331 protocol (HDMTX, doxorubicin, and cisplatin), or
- AOST 06P1 protocol (HDMTX plus doxorubicin, cisplatin, ifosfamide, and etoposide)


- Other treatment approaches that have been evaluated in the metastatic setting - concomitant use of HD-MTX and ifosfamide; etoposide and ifosfamide in the maximum tolerated doses along with the use of haematopoetic stem cell factors; carboplatin and etoposide; gemcitabine and docetaxel, and use of liposomal and aerosolized preparations.

**Radiopharmaceuticals**

Intratumoral heterogeneity limits the use of radiopharmaceuticals such as 153-Sm-EDTMP and 153-Sm-DOTA. Radium 223, in combination with chemotherapeutic approaches, may be used.

**Immunotherapy**

A higher percentage of CD 8 positive T lymphocytes within the tumor has been shown to correlate positively with the prognosis. A higher degree of genomic instability and PD-L1 expression also point towards the possibility of heightened sensitivity to immune checkpoint blockade. Multiple cell-surface proteins have also been exploited as possible targets of treatment.

Three specific approaches involving targeted antibodies have been suggested – monoclonal antibodies targeting cell surface proteins, bispecific T cell engagers, and antibodies coupled cytotoxic agents.

Monoclonal antibodies that have been explored for exploring a potentially beneficial role include trastuzumab against HER 2, cixutumumab, which targets insulin-like growth factor 1, and the monoclonal antibody against glycoprotein nonmetastatic B - glembatumumab vedotin. Monoclonal antibodies targeting disialoganglioside GM 2 (found in both primary and recurrent tumors) alone or in combination with other immunoadjuvants such as sargramostim or interleukin two have also been used.

Other immunotherapy approaches include dendritic cell vaccines in combination with chemotherapeutic agents such as decitabine (to upregulate antigen expression) and gemcitabine (to increase cytotoxicity directed against tumor cells and decrease myeloid stem cells). A trial combining the first viral oncolytic therapy T-Vec (Talimogene laherparepvec) along with PD 1 blockade in the management of sarcomas is underway.

While Chimeric antigen receptor T cells Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor and tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor one have demonstrated prolongation of survival in preclinical studies, CART cells targeting HER-2 are being studied in the adult osteosarcoma population. Future adoptive therapies involving the use of gamma delta T cells, unmodified CD 8 T cells, and T cells engineered with high-affinity receptors are in the pipeline.  A pediatric phase II trial of ipilimumab in the pediatric age group demonstrated a similar toxicity profile along with an increase in activated CD 8 lymphocytes. The absence of absolute anti-tumor responses has not deterred the exploration of various combination immunotherapy approaches directed against CTLA – 4, PD -1, and PD – L1.

Strategies that target the tumor microenvironment have also been developed for use in the clinical trial setting.

**Bone Targeted Therapies**

Osteosarcomas are unique in that bone-targeted therapies such as bisphosphonates and anti RANK ligand monoclonal antibody (denosumab) have been evaluated in trials, which were aimed at re-positioning these approaches, which are otherwise supportive, as curative.  The use of bisphosphonates in osteosarcomas is only recommended in the setting of a clinical trial after a recent study evaluating the role of zoledronic acid in combination with chemotherapy failed to demonstrate an improvement in the overall survival, relapse-free survival, or the histological response.