Hearing loss is the third most common chronic health condition in aging adults and affects one in five children to some degree by the age of 18. Relationships between the severity of hearing loss and the severity of ear disease, as well as the relationships between hearing loss and communication, social, and educational deficits in children, make catching hearing loss early a critical healthcare task.

Pure-tone audiometry is a low-risk, low-cost procedure but can provide crucial information regarding differential diagnosis, symptom etiology or pathophysiology, and guidance for appropriate treatment. Any time a hearing loss or abnormal auditory perception is reported as a symptom, a referral to audiology for testing that includes pure-tone evaluation should be part of the evaluation process.

The close correlation between ear health and hearing abnormalities makes coordination between otolaryngologists and audiologists critical. Pure-tone testing is also key for pre- and post-treatment evaluation when outcome measures include the preservation or improvement of hearing as a significant indicator of efficacy, such as for idiopathic sudden sensorineural hearing loss, and otologic surgeries, including tympanoplasty, stapedotomy, semicircular canal dehiscence resurfacing, or mastoidectomy.

Due to the myriad causes of hearing loss, care coordination among healthcare providers relying on pure-tone audiometry may include general practitioners, pediatricians, otolaryngologists, oncologists, neurologists, speech-language pathologists, and audiologists. Inter-professional communication and care coordination are essential for evidence-based, timely management of patients and optimal treatment outcomes. [Level 4]