# Continuing Education Activity

Ropinirole is a medication used to manage and treat Parkinson's disease and restless leg syndrome. It is a dopamine agonist (D2). The dopamine receptors (D2) are g-protein-coupled inhibitory neurons that inhibit adenylyl cyclase and calcium (Ca2+) channels and activate potassium channels leading to their physiological functions. This activity reviews the indications, contraindications, mechanism of action, adverse events, and other key elements of ropinirole therapy.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of action of ropinirole.
- Summarize are the common adverse effects of ropinirole.
- Outline the contraindications for ropinirole.
- Explain the importance of care coordination between members of the interprofessional team when using ropinirole therapy.

# Indications

Dopamine agonists (DA) are drugs used in the treatment of a variety of central nervous system disorders. The ergoline (e.g., bromocriptine) and non-ergoline dopamine agonist (ropinirole) are very useful in treating Parkinson disease. Ropinirole is one of the US Food and Drug Administration-approved medications indicated for treating restless legs syndrome (RLS) and Parkinson's disease. Pharmacologically, it acts by selectively binding to the D2 receptors. It effectively treats both early and advanced-stage Parkinson disease and can improve the "on" time and minimize the "off" time of the disease. It is also helpful in the management of sleep disturbances and nocturnal psychosis associated with Parkinson disease.

**Parkinson Disease (PD)**

Parkinson's disease is a condition characterized by the loss of dopamine receptors in the substantia nigra pars compacta leading to both cognitive and motor decline. The slow movement, stiff joints, and tremors are characteristic features of this disease.

**Restless Leg Syndrome (RLS)**

RLS is also known as Willis-Ekbom disease. It is the uncontrollable urge to move the legs following a sensation commonly described as burning, painful or tingling.

# Mechanism of Action

Ropinirole has a high affinity for and stimulates the post-synaptic dopamine receptors D2 in the central and peripheral nervous systems. The dopamine receptors (D2) are g-protein-coupled inhibitory neurons predominantly in the striatonigral, mesolimbic, and tuberoinfundibular systems. They inhibit adenylyl cyclase and calcium (Ca2+) channels and activate potassium channels leading to their physiological functions.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Ropinirole upon oral administration is rapidly absorbed and reaches peak plasma concentration in about 1 to 2 hours. About 50% of the drug is first-pass metabolized, and the absolute bioavailability is 45% - 55%. It reaches steady-state concentrations within two days of initiating ropinirole. A high-fat diet may delay absorption, and ropinirole is better absorbed in a fasting state. Food does not change the extent of absorption of ropinirole; however, the Tmax is prolonged by 2.5 hours, and the Cmax is shortened by 25% when the drug is taken with a high-fat meal.

**Distribution:**Ropinirole has an apparent volume of distribution 7.5 L/kg, and 40% of the drug is bound to plasma proteins.

**Metabolism:**The majority of ropinirole is metabolized by the liver by N-despropylation and hydroxylation process to form the inactive metabolites. Cytochrome P450 1A2 is the primary enzyme involved in the metabolism of ropinirole.

**Excretion:**The elimination half-life of the ropinirole immediate-release tablet is approximately 6 hours, and less than 10% of the orally administered drug is excreted as an unchanged drug in urine.

# Administration

- Orally; Two oral formulations are available, the immediate release tablets (0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg, 2 mg, 3 mg, 4 mg, and 5 mg) and prolonged/extended-release tablets (2 mg, 4 mg, 6 mg, 8 mg, and 12 mg). The immediate-release form is administered three times daily, while the extended-release is once daily.

- On the other hand, the therapeutic level for this drug is between 0.4 and 6 ng/mL; its use requires caution in older patients (greater than 65 years) and women on hormonal replacement therapy (HRT) because of slower clearance of the medication in these groups.

- In PD treatment, a dose within 6 to 24 mg of extended-release formulation is usually well-tolerated. Still, care is necessary to titrate the dose to the symptoms of the disease, and the clinician can individualize this from patient to patient.

**Parkinson Disease**

**Immediate-release tablets:**Once initiated, If a significant interruption in therapy with ropinirole tablets has occurred, re-titration of dose may be needed.

The dose is titrated gradually every week as follows.

Ropinirole tablets should be discontinued gradually and taper down over seven days in patients with Parkinson disease as follows. First, reduce the administration dose from three times daily to twice daily for the first four days. Then, again for the next three days, reduce to once daily before complete cessation of ropinirole tablets.

**Renal Impairment:**Dose modification is not required in patients with moderate renal impairment (CrCl  30-50 mL/min). Patients with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis are started on 0.25 mg three times a day. Further dose increments are based on the need for efficacy and tolerability. in patients receiving regular dialysis, the recommended maximum daily dose is 18 mg daily. Supplemental doses after dialysis are not needed. Studies are not performed to evaluate ropinirole tablets in patients with severe renal impairment without regular dialysis.

**Extended-release tablets:**The initial dose is  2 mg administered once daily for two weeks. Then the dose may be increased by 2 mg every week or longer intervals based on the patient’s response to ropinirole and its tolerability. The maximum dose is 24 mg administered daily.

**Restless Legs Syndrome**

The recommended initial adult dose for RLS is 0.25 mg once daily about two hours before the onset of symptoms. A dose of 2 mg or less would suffice, and it is a good practice to start on a low dose. In patients with RLS, Ropinirole is usually started at a dose of 0.25 mg per day, incrementing 0.25 mg every two to three days until the reduction of symptoms.

**Renal Impairment:**Dose adjustments are not required in patients with moderate renal impairment (CrCl  30-50 mL/min). Patients with RLS and end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis should be started on 0.25 mg once daily. Further dose increments are based on the need for efficacy and tolerability. The recommended maximum daily dose is 3 mg daily in patients receiving regular dialysis. Supplemental doses after dialysis are not needed.

**Pregnant Women:**If patient using ropinirole intends to get pregnant or get pregnant, they should report to their clinician. Ropinirole is pregnancy category C medicine. Animal studies have reported teratogenic effects, so advise patients of this potential risk.

**Breastfeeding Women:**There is a lack of information on its use during breastfeeding. Since ropinirole suppresses serum prolactin, it can interfere with lactation. Alternative medicine is preferred while breastfeeding newborn or preterm infants.

# Adverse Effects

As with most dopamine agonists, ropinirole's most frequently reported adverse effects are nausea, vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal pain, hallucinations, somnolence, dizziness, leg edema,  viral infection, syncope, orthostatic hypotension, and asthenic condition (i.e., asthenia, fatigue, and/or malaise).

Rare cases of hypersensitivity reactions, falling asleep during activities of daily living, and somnolence, especially if concomitantly using CNS depressants, hallucinations, compulsive behaviors, augmentation, early morning rebound RLS, fibrotic complications, and retinal degeneration is, also reported in clinical trials and postmarketing experience.

**Peripheral Edema**

Reports exist of peripheral edema in patients in up to one-third of the patients on the extended-release form.

**Anterocollis**

The definition of this condition is the head positioned in flexion, resembling a "drooping head," a very rare side effect reported in a patient taking ropinirole. Discontinuation of the medication progressively reversed the symptoms over about four months.

**Pisa Syndrome**

Cases of ropinirole-induced Pisa syndrome also referred to as "pleurothotonus," have appeared in the literature. It is characterized by an abnormal lateral flexion of the trunk to the right or left. After about a year on the medication, this condition occurred among the cases described. The posture disappeared about there months after discontinuing the medication. However, Pisa syndrome is reportedly irreversible despite discontinuing this medication.

**Reversible Dyskinesias**

Another movement disorder observed with ropinirole is severe reversible dyskinesias, very rare. This dose-dependent choreoform dyskinesia occurred in ropinirole monotherapy up to a dose of 15 mg daily but was also observed at a dose of 6 mg daily.

**Dermal Eruptions**

Like many D2 agonists, ropinirole, in rare cases, caused fixed dermal eruptions thought to be due to the inactivation of T cells.

**Withdrawal Symptoms**

Withdrawal-emergent hyperpyrexia and confusion are reported in patients where ropinirole treatment is abruptly stopped, or the dose is rapidly tapered down. It resembles the neuroleptic malignant syndrome without specific etiology. Withdrawal Symptoms include insomnia, anxiety, apathy,  depression, sweating, fatigue, and pain, which do not respond to treatment with levodopa. It is recommended to inform patients about the potential for withdrawal symptoms and monitor symptoms during taper down and after treatment cessation.

**Drug Interactions**

- CYP1A2 enzyme is induced by omeprazole and smoking and can decrease the plasma concentration of ropinirole.

- CYP1A2 is inhibited by fluoroquinolones (such as ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin), fluvoxamine, and mexiletine and can increase the plasma level of this drug.

- Hormone replacement therapy (HRT, high dose estrogens) reduces the clearance of ropinirole, and hence dose adjustment may be required when starting or stopping HRT.

- Dopamine antagonists phenothiazines, thioxanthenes, butyrophenones, and metoclopramide can reduce the efficacy of ropinirole.

# Contraindications

- Clinicians should avoid using ropinirole in persons who misuse alcohol and patients with liver failure.

- Ropinirole is contraindicated in patients who experience hypersensitivity reactions and anaphylaxis, including rash, pruritus, urticaria, and/or angioedema to ropinirole or any of the excipients.

# Monitoring

- Patients initiating ropinirole therapy or escalating doses of ropinirole should be monitored for signs and symptoms of orthostatic hypotension.

- It is recommended to inform patients about the potential for withdrawal symptoms with ropinirole and monitor those signs and symptoms during and after discontinuation of ropinirole.

# Toxicity

Ropinirole can cause death when taken with alcohol, and persons who excessively consume alcohol should not use the drug. A lethal level up to six times the therapeutic dose correlates with death.

Patients with liver insufficiency require close monitoring; a report of a case of liver toxicity exists. The medication is metabolized majorly in the liver, and the toxicity may be due to an immune reaction or a possible toxic metabolite of the drug.

There have been reports of patients who intentionally or accidentally took more than the maximum recommended daily dose of ropinirole in clinical trials. General supportive measures are recommended, and vitals should be maintained when necessary. The largest overdose reported with ropinirole in clinical trials was 62 mg daily for seven days (total 435 mg). Of these patients who used doses higher than 24 mg per day, commonly reported adverse reactions were related to its dopaminergic activity, i.e., nausea, dizziness, hyperhidrosis, visual hallucinations, claustrophobia, palpitations, chorea, asthenia, and nightmares. Additional symptoms reported in overdose patients included vomiting, agitation, chest pain, increased coughing, fatigue, orthostatic hypotension, syncope, dyskinesia, somnolence, and confusional state.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients and caregivers should receive education about the medication, its use, adverse effects, signs of toxicity, and drug withdrawal. Compliance with medication can be extremely challenging, especially in PD, and once-daily prolonged release ropinirole greatly improves medication compliance. Additionally, the severity of the motor symptoms such as tremor and rigidity may also be an important factor to consider to improve the compliance and management of these patients.

RLS can be very challenging in its chronic state because of the disruption of sleep for both the patients and family members. Ropinirole has demonstrated an improvement in the quality of sleep, quality of life, and mood of patients with RLS.

When prescribing ropinirole, the pharmacist should consult and verify the appropriateness of therapy the optimal starting dose and check for potential drug-drug interactions. Nursing staff can monitor patient progress with the patient or caregivers, assess compliance, answer questions, and monitor for adverse events, reporting anything of concern to the clinician. These interprofessional team activities can optimize ropinirole therapy and drive better patient outcomes. [Level 5]