Technetium-99m (99mTc) is a radionuclide nuclear agent that is FDA approved for diagnostic imaging of the brain, bone, lungs, kidneys, thyroid, heart, gall bladder, liver, spleen, bone marrow, salivary and lachrymal glands, blood pool, and sentinel nodes.  This agent should be used by an interprofessional team, which includes a radiologist, nurse, technologist, and physician specializing in their respective field. The handling of technetium-99m should only be done by trained healthcare professionals who are licensed and authorized to use radioactive agents. The clinician administering the radioactive isotope should be familiar with any acute life-threatening adverse effects such as hypersensitivity reactions that may occur during administration.

Physicians should fully inform patients about preparatory instructions before imaging. The results of the imaging should be interpreted and reviewed by a radiologist or trained technologists. During pregnancy, patients should be counseled and provided information on the risks of administering technetium-99m as it is a pregnancy category C contraindication. Patients should receive clear explanations of radiation toxicity during pregnancy and avoidance of breastfeeding during pregnancy. The interprofessional team should counsel patients on the adverse effects of technetium-99m, and the early and late complications that may arise, and the severity of the complexity. Clear communication within an interprofessional team can minimize adverse effects and maximize the results of various diagnostic modalities to optimize patient care.