Differentials of asbestosis include the diseases involving the interstitium of lungs such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, interstitial pneumonitis, rheumatoid arthritis, hypersensitive pneumonitis, pleuropulmonary fibroelastosis, drug-induced pneumonitis, combined pulmonary fibrosis, and emphysema. Diagnosis of asbestosis requires the exclusion of these differentials.

**Non-specific Interstitial Pneumonitis**

This may be idiopathic or associated with other connective tissue disorders. Lower lobe involvement, ground-glass opacities, impairment of pulmonary functions mimic this condition with asbestosis, but female predominance and rare honeycombing help in differentiation. History of exposure and histopathology is important to rule out other similar conditions.

**Chronic Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis**

It is an allergic reaction based upon the antigen-antibody interaction following exposure to allergens. Clinical presentation of hypersensitive pneumonitis such as dyspnea, cough resembles that of asbestosis. So lung biopsy with histopathology evaluation is required. It involves interstitial inflammation with granulomas and giant cells, usually throughout the whole lung, as compared to more pronounced fibrosis in the lower lobes of the lung in asbestosis.

**Rheumatic Disease**

The rheumatic disease involves the interstitium of the lung in about 10% of cases. Unlike asbestosis, other systemic manifestations like arthritis, Raynaud phenomenon, muscle weakness, skin changes are present in rheumatic disease.

**Drug-induced Interstitial Pneumonitis**

Some drugs used for purposes other than pulmonary diseases have pulmonary toxicity involving interstitium as their side effects. Anagrelide, a phospholipase A2 inhibitor, lamotrigine, cyclophosphamide, bleomycin, nitrofurantoin, etc are the drugs that cause pulmonary toxicity.

**Pleuropulmonary Fibroelastosis**

Pleuropulmonary fibroelastosis is a rare benign condition. Though this disease simulates asbestosis, this condition involves pleura and subpleural parenchyma almost simultaneously. Fibrosis is due to elastic fiber proliferation. But in asbestosis, pleural involvement is not parallel to parenchymal fibrosis as pleural involvement is usually the late presentation. And also, pleuropulmonary fibroelastosis may involve the upper lobe of the lungs.

**Silicosis**

Silicosis has more tendency to undergo fibrosis than asbestosis, forming a whorled pattern of collagen fibers that can be appreciated in histology. Occupational history makes an easy way out to exclude silicosis. Fibrosis may also involve hilar lymph nodes and sometimes the calcification called egg-shell calcification.

**Sarcoidosis**

Sarcoidosis is a chronic granulomatous disease of the lung which involves the multisystem. CD4+ to CD8+ cells ratio is increased as in asbestosis, but it has a more pronounced increment than in asbestosis. Histopathology reveals noncaseating granuloma, asteroid bodes, Schaumann bodies are characteristic of sarcoidosis not found in asbestosis.

**Coal Worker Pneumoconiosis (CWP****)**

It is also called black lung disease. It is the coal dust-induced progressive massive fibrosis disease. Cut section and biopsy of the lung of workers working in coal mines show black patches mixed with fibrosis.

**Combined Pulmonary Fibrosis and Emphysema**

Usually, emphysema is highly associated with smoking and occurs without fibrosis. The co-existence of fibrosis and emphysema was first established in 1990.