**Localised Disease**

The choice of the operative procedure has shifted from a radical nephrectomy to nephron-sparing strategies with active surveillance and the use of minimally invasive techniques. This shift towards minimally invasive approaches, which limit overtreatment and iatrogenic kidney injury, has been necessitated by diagnosing smaller lesions and the potential for chronic kidney disease (which is known to develop after radical nephrectomy approaches) to impact the patient’s quality of life adversely. Targeted systemic therapies with angiogenesis inhibitors and immune checkpoint inhibitors have been used to manage metastatic, advanced, or surgically inoperable renal cell carcinoma.

**Role of Active Surveillance**

The slow median growth rate, as well as a substantial percentage (one fifth) of resected tumor specimens turning out to benign, along with the potential to prevent surgery-related complications, has led to the concept of active surveillance for renal tumors. Active surveillance may also be carried out for larger tumors in those with multiple risk factors and limited life expectancy to determine the rate of tumor growth. Though there has been no consensus on the absolute tumor size and the rate of growth at which a more radical approach needs to be adopted, tumor size of more than 3-4 cm and growth rates exceeding 0.4-0.5 cm have been defined as possible cut-offs. Initial imaging at 3 to 6 months, every six months for the next two years and annually after that, has been recommended for tumors that meet the criteria for active surveillance.

**Minimally Invasive Techniques**

Renal ablative approaches (cryotherapy and radiofrequency ablation) that use the properties of energy to destroy tumor cells have been used to manage small tumors that have been detected incidentally. Potential complications include bleeding, abscess formation, and adverse effects involving the bowel, bladder, spleen, and pancreas. While comparable recurrence-free survival and cancer-specific survival rates have been demonstrated, a lower degree of decline in Glomerular filtration rate has been demonstrated using minimally invasive techniques (radiofrequency ablation), as per the results of a systematic review and meta-analysis.

**Determination of Presurgical CKD Risk and Strategies to Preserve Renal Function Postoperatively**

Cancer is not the commonest cause of death in patients with solitary renal masses. It has been observed that these patients share common risk factors with patients with chronic kidney disease and that cardiovascular events are a common cause of mortality. This has been attributed to common risk factors such as increasing age, male gender, smoking, presence of diabetes mellitus, and hypertension. The presence of albuminuria usually indicates the presence of advanced disease (higher grade or later stage).

It should be emphasized that the goals of management in those with T 1a tumors need to include preservation of renal function, minimizing cardiovascular mortality, and managing chronic kidney disease. Screening of patients for postsurgical CKD can be done by calculation of glomerular filtration rate and measurement of albuminuria. Stringent preoperative control of blood pressure, good glycemic control, and prevention of hypoperfusion and avoidance of nephrotoxic strategies could mitigate renal injury. The determination of differential kidney function by nuclear scintigraphic techniques has been advised. Intrarenal damage due to hypoxia and loss of renal function due to resection might reflect in changes in postoperative GFR.

**Surgery**

Nephron sparing surgery involves removing all tumor tissue, with preservation of as much normal renal parenchyma as possible. It is found to be related to comparable oncological outcomes and better long term cardiovascular outcomes than radical surgery.

Indications for nephron-sparing surgery include the presence of a single anatomical and functional kidney, hereditary forms of renal cell cancer in those at risk of developing a malignancy in the contralateral kidney in the future, patients who may be prone to develop dysfunction in their functioning kidney in the future or localized tumors with a healthy contralateral kidney, those with bilateral synchronous RCC’s and Von Hippel Lindau syndrome. Partial nephrectomy is also indicated in those with T1 tumors and a normally functioning contralateral kidney, where it has been shown to have equivalent oncological outcomes when compared to radical surgery.

Tumor size, depth, location, and proximity to the hilar vascular structures and pelvicalyceal system are important factors that help in determining the feasibility of nephron-sparing surgery.

Various scoring systems such as the PADUA, RENAL, and C-index have been developed to assess the feasibility of performing a nephron-sparing procedure in selected patients. The application of these scores aids in the improvement of the selection of patients, providing optimum surgical management, reporting of research outcomes, and prediction of treatment outcomes.

Robot-assisted partial nephrectomy and open approaches are utilized for complex tumors; laparoscopic approaches should be reserved for low and intermediate-risk categories and smaller tumors. Shorter warm ischemia times, lesser postoperative complications, lower blood losses, and duration of postoperative stay have been observed with RAPN (when compared to LPN approaches).

Although minimal tumor-free margins have been recommended to prevent recurrences, positive tumor margins (irrespective of the technique employed) have been demonstrated in 1 – 6 % cases.

Robotic approaches have been associated with a shorter hospital stay, lower volume of perioperative blood loss, better postoperative pain control, and faster time to recovery.

Most international guidelines recommend a cytoreductive approach in patients known to have tumors limited to the primary site without any significant metastatic spread. A cytoreductive approach may also be the preferred treatment option in patients with metastatic disease who have received multiple systemic targeted approaches earlier.

**Radical Nephrectomy**

Radical nephrectomy involves removing the entire kidney, perirenal fat, suprarenal glands, and regional lymph nodes. Adrenal sparing surgery can be attempted in inferior pole tumors less than 5 cm in size. Regional lymph node dissection can be performed in those with lymph node involvement demonstrated on CT scan or on the table (during the procedure). While the open approach remains the gold standard for the treatment of more complex cases, stage 1 and 2 tumors may be treated radically with a traditional laparoscopic approach. The robotic approach has also been positioned as a viable alternative in patients with venous tumor thrombosis.

**Adrenalectomy, Venous Thrombectomy and Lymph Node Dissection**

Adrenalectomy, which was considered a mandatory component of radical procedures, can now safely omitted if no macroscopic disease is diagnosed at the time of preoperative workup or surgery. Lymphadenectomy has shown a survival advantage only in intermediate and high-risk patients.

There is no proven role for sentinel node biopsy. Data on the utility of lymphadenectomy in this setting are not definitive. While lymphadenectomy may have a role in the staging of large tumors, there are no guidelines for its use as a salvage procedure.

Surgical management has been advised in the management of venous thrombosis involving the renal vein and inferior vena cava. Caval thrombectomy may be safely performed along with radical nephrectomy for the management of tumors with thrombus that does not extend beyond the diaphragm. The extent of resection is decided primarily by the extent of the tumor at the time of operation. A minimum modification of the operative procedure may be warranted when the thrombus is confined to the renal vein; however, dissection involving the vena cava, mobilization of the right atrium, opening up of the right atrium, and cardiopulmonary bypass may be necessary with more extensive involvement. Complete vascular control, prevention of tumor embolization, stringent hemodynamic monitoring, and ensuring ready availability of tissues for caval replacement and venous bypass, if required, are strict urological principles, which need to be adhered to while performing surgical nephrectomy and thrombus removal.

**Localized Disease Treatment According to Tumor Stage**

T1 Tumors (less than 7 cm) – Partial nephrectomy is the treatment of choice. A long term cancer-specific survival equivalent to partial nephrectomy has been demonstrated for minimally invasive approaches but at a slightly higher rate of recurrence. Active surveillance is indicated in elderly patients with short life expectancy or significant comorbidities and solid renal tumors measuring less than 40 mm.

T2 Tumors (more than 7 cm): Laparoscopic radical nephrectomy is the preferred treatment option.

T3 and T4 Tumors (Locally Advanced RCC) – Open radical nephrectomy is the treatment of choice, though laparoscopic approaches have been gaining momentum.

**Adjuvant Approaches**

**Adjuvant Treatment**

A pooled analysis of various trials using Sunitinib (S-TRAC, ASSURE), Sorafenib (ASSURE), and pazopanib (PROTECT) in the adjuvant setting have failed to show any benefit in disease-free survival or overall survival in those with intermediate/high-risk local disease or those who have undergone complete resection for localized renal cell carcinoma. It is found that the use of high dose adjuvant treatment in high-risk disease may be associated with favorable disease-free survival, at the risk of incurring higher grade adverse effects.

**Neoadjuvant Systemic Targeted Therapy**

Targeting venous tumor thrombi with an attempt to reducing their size and making them amenable for resection is an approach that is yet to find any favor. It has been a purely experimental approach and cannot be recommended outside of a clinical trial setting.

**Surveillance After Definitive Treatment**

**Solitary Renal Masses**

The American urological association recommends surveillance at baseline, abdominal imaging at three to twelve months after partial or radical nephrectomy, annually for three years following partial nephrectomy. Chest imaging is also suggested annually for three years if indicated.

**Metastatic Disease**

**Immunomodulatory Agents**

The immunogenic nature of RCC is supported by the year for three years after the act that spontaneous tumor regression has been reported. The role of the immune system in the pathogenesis is supported by the presence of multiple infiltrates consisting of immune cells. The mechanisms proposed to be underlying the action of these drugs include T cell-mediated immune regression, due to an increase in lymphocyte proliferation, cellular killing mediated by lymphocytes, and killer cells, which have been activated by lymphokines. Immune modulating drugs approved in the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma include aldesleukin and Interleukin 2.

**Nephrectomy**

The beneficial effects of surgical extirpation have been attributed to a reduction in the tumor burden, a direct immunomodulatory effect (attributed to the reduction in immunosuppression), and the creation of an inhospitable tumor microenvironment, due to iatrogenic chronic metabolic acidosis.

**Targeted Therapy**

**Sunitinib**

It inhibits multiple receptor tyrosine kinases, including VEGFR 1, 2, 3, PDGRF alpha, beta, c-kit, FLT-3, and RET. It is an orally administered drug with a half-life of 40-80 hours and a bioavailability of 50 percent. A single daily dose of 37.5 mg is administered for four weeks, followed by a drug holiday for two weeks. It is metabolized by the cytochrome 3a4 enzyme system in the liver, the active drug—excreted in the urine and feces. FDA and EMA approved in 2006. Sunitinib was approved in 2007 for use in low, intermediate, and high-risk groups as a first-line treatment option for advanced, metastatic disease.

Sunitinib has also shown benefit as a treatment option after progression on VEGF targeting agents. It has been studied in case of progression following sorafenib, and re-challenge following progression on multiple first-line settings.

ESMO magnitude of clinical benefit scale ranking of  4.

**Sorafenib**

It inhibits multiple receptor tyrosine kinases, including VEGFR 1, 2, 3, PDGFR beta, c-kit, FMS like tyrosine kinase 3, rearranged upon transfection, and rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma kinase. While c-kit, FLT Kinase 3, and RET are located upon the cell surface, Raf is an intracellular enzyme (common to all receptor tyrosine kinase pathways). REA disruption of the signal transduction, with inhibition of transcription of various proteins, due to inhibition of the intracellular phosphorylation pathways including the Raf/MEF/ERK and the PI3K/m TOR/AKT pathways is also observed. The anti-angiogenic effect of sorafenib is attributed to its effect on angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis, which is mediated via the VEGFR 1,2 (angiogenesis) and 3 (lymphangiogenesis), respectively. Inhibition of the Platelet-derived growth factor receptor on the surface of the pericytes and smooth muscle cells also contribute to this effect.

Sorafenib is administered orally in a dose of 400 mg twice daily, with an oral bioavailability of 92 percent. More than 9.5 percent of the drug is protein bound to albumin and alpha 1 acid glycoprotein. It is mainly metabolized to an N oxide metabolite by the Cytochrome p 450 enzyme system. The elimination half-life of the molecule is between 20 to 39 hours. Excretion of the glucuronide metabolite occurs via the urinary and the fecal routes.

ESMO magnitude of clinical benefit scale ranking of 4.

**Lenvatinib**

Multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor inhibits VEGFR 2, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1, 2, 3, 4, PDGFR alpha, c kit, and RET. FGFR inhibition, which is unique to lenvatinib (compared to sunitinib and sorafenib), provides an additional mechanism of inhibition of angiogenesis. It is administered in oral form in a dose of 24 mg daily, with an oral bioavailability of 90 percent. It has hepatic and renal metabolism and is excreted in the bile. Demethylated (M2) metabolite is mainly excreted via the urinary and fecal routes.

ESMO magnitude of clinical benefit scale ranking of 4.

**Axitinib**

It is a multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which inhibits VEGFR 1, 2, 3, PDGFR alpha and beta, and c-kit—administered orally in a dose of 5 mg twice daily, with a bioavailability of 58 percent. Metabolized, primarily in the liver, has a half-life of 2.5 to 6 hours and excreted in the urine (less than 1 percent). Approved for use in the second-line setting by the FDA and EMA in 2012.

ESMO Magnitude of clinical benefit scale ranking of 4.

**Pazopanib**

A multi-target receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor which inhibits VEGFR, PDGFR, FGFR, and c-kit. Administered orally in a dose of 800 mg per day, with an oral bioavailability of 21.4 percent (13.5 to 38.9 percent). 99.9 percent protein-bound, mostly to albumin and, to a lesser extent, to alpha1 acid glycoprotein. Mainly excreted unchanged through the feces as the parent compound (in an unchanged form). A minor fraction (2.6 percent) is excreted via urine.

ESMO magnitude of clinical benefit scale ranking of 3.

**Cabozantinib**

It is a multitargeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor that inhibits VEGF, AXL, and MET kinase receptors. AXL and MET receptors have been postulated to be responsible for resistance to VEGF targeted therapy. Granted FDA and EMA approval for patients with progression on first-line VEGF targeted therapy. The inactivation of the Von Hippel Lindau gene leads to the activation of various angiogenic pathways, which may be blocked specifically by cabozantinib. The substrate of cytochrome P 450 enzyme system 3A4, predominantly metabolized in the liver.

It is administered in a daily oral dose of 140 mg, with a predicted half-life of 55 hours.

ESMO magnitude of clinical benefit scale ranking of 3.

**Chemotherapy**

The role of cytotoxic chemotherapy remains poorly defined. Cytotoxic chemotherapy is usually indicated in sarcomatoid and collecting ducts variants of RCC.

**Chemotherapy Plus Targeted Therapy**

Targeted agents may also enhance the delivery of cytotoxic chemotherapy to the local site by reversal of the hypoxic tumor micro-environment and normalization of the tumor vasculature. Various agents used in combination with TKI’s, include fluoropyrimidines, gemcitabine, capecitabine, and thalidomide. However, none have demonstrated an unequivocal clinical benefit that would warrant any change in the standard of care.

**Metronomic Chemotherapy**

Targeted agents have been used in combination with low dose cytotoxic chemotherapy to reduce the toxic effects of treatment. Metronomic dosing has been used to enhance the anti-angiogenic effect of targeted therapy by preventing the recruitment of endothelial progenitor cells derived from bone marrow to the tumor vasculature. Though this approach to treatment (a combination of weekly gemcitabine, daily capecitabine with sorafenib) has been associated with partial response in 50 percent of patients, however, the findings have not been replicated.

**Immunotherapy**

PD – 1 is a type 1 transmembrane glycoprotein, which belongs to the CD28/CTLA-4 family of immune checkpoint inhibitors, whose expression has been shown to increase in response to immune stimulation/antigenic stimulation. Haematopoetic stem cells, T lymphocytes, B – lymphocytes, natural killer cells, dendritic cells, monocytes, and macrophages are known to express PD-1.

Anti PD 1 directed therapy (nivolumab) and immune checkpoint inhibition (anti cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4) in the form of ipilimumab has been found to show beneficial outcomes in renal cell carcinoma. The checkmate 025 trial, a phase 3 trial, which compared nivolumab with everolimus, demonstrated an improvement in overall survival with the use of nivolumab. The patient population in this trial consisted of locally advanced or metastatic renal cell carcinoma, who had progression of disease after treatment with at least one VEGF/VEGFR inhibitor (targeted therapy). A higher rate of long term durable responses and a higher overall response rate was also seen in the nivolumab arm. An improvement in overall survival, response rate, and a complete response rate of 10 percent was observed in intermediate and poor-risk patients in a phase 3 trial with the use of combination treatment with ipilimumab and nivolumab when compared with the sunitinib arm. While patients with intermediate and low-risk profiles had a better response to combination therapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab, those with poor prognosis had a more favorable response with sunitinib.

**Combination Therapies with Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors**

Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors with Anti-Angiogenic Agents

Anti-angiogenic agents have been shown to enhance tumor-related immune suppression by leading to a decrease in immunosuppressive cells such as myeloid-derived stem cells and regulatory T cells, cytokines (TGF beta and IL -10), and decrease in the PD -1 expression on T cells.

The IM Motion 150 study evaluated the role of combination treatment with atezolizumab (anti-PD-L1)  and bevacizumab against a comparator arm consisting of atezolizumab or sunitinib and demonstrated an improvement in progression-free survival and higher overall response rate. A PDL1 expression in excess of 1 percent was used to define PD L1 positivity. A longer PFS and higher ORR were observed in this subset of patients in the atezolizumab monotherapy arm.

The JAVELIN Renal 101 and Keynote 426 have demonstrated improved outcomes in previously untreated patients with advanced RCC with the use of avelumumab and axitinib or pembrolizumab and axitinib when compared to sunitinib alone.

Recognition of potential driver mutations in deciding the choice of the therapeutic option.

VHL and PRBM1 mutant tumors, which are known to be associated with an immune as well as an angiogenic signature, will be expected to benefit from immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy as well as VEGF targeted therapies. Whereas, tumors that possess a loss of BAP 1, which is associated with a decrease in an angiogenic profile, are expected to respond better to immune checkpoint blockade.

**Resistance Strategies to Targeted Agents**

Vaccines that have been studied in combination with targeted agents include AGS-003, which is a dendritic cell vaccine, prepared with amplified tumor RNA, which has the potential to augment the immune response against the tumor. IMA 901 is another potential vaccine candidate that underwent an evaluation in a phase 3 trial and consists of a combination of HLA class I and ii tumor-associated peptides but did not demonstrate a clinically significant increase in tumor response, which could be expected to translate into a favorable clinical outcome.

**Surgery**

Surgery of resectable metastases has been advised for solitary metachronously arising lesions as long as it is possible to obtain an R0 resection. Resection of the primary tumor has also been shown to be beneficial in those with synchronous metastasis, in those with a favorable performant status (Eastern cooperative oncology group 0-1).

**Radiotherapy**

Radiotherapy might be an alternative in patients who do not opt for surgery or in those in whom a complete (R0) resection might not be possible. Various approaches that have been employed include stereotactic radiosurgery (stereotactic irradiation delivered over single or multiple sessions) and high dose external beam radiotherapy. Stereotactic irradiation can also be used in the management of bone and brain metastasis.

**Metastatic Disease**

**First-Line Therapy**

Good risk disease - standard care - sunitinib, pazopanib, interferon and bevacizumab, tivozanib. Other options include high dose interleukin 2, bevacizumab, and low dose interferon.

Intermediate risk disease – standard care – nivolumab, and ipilimumab. Optional treatments include sunitinib, pazopanib, cabozantinib, tivozanib, a combination of bevacizumab, and interferon.

Poor risk disease – standard care – nivolumab and ipilimumab, optional treatments include cabozantinib, sunitinib, pazopanib, and temsirolimus.

**Second-Line Treatment**

Treatment options depend upon the initial treatment that was used in the frontline setting, either a tyrosine kinase inhibitor or immunotherapy with a combination of nivolumab and ipilimumab.

If a tyrosine kinase inhibitor was used in the first-line setting, the standard options include nivolumab, cabozantinib. Other optional treatments include axitinib, everolimus, or a combination of lapatinib and everolimus.

If the combination immunotherapy regimen of nivolumab and ipilimumab was used in the frontline setting, the following treatment recommendations need to be considered – Any Tyrosine kinase inhibitor or a combination of lenvatinib and everolimus.

**Third Line Treatment**

Treatment options depend upon the drugs used in the first line and the second line setting

Those who have received treatment with first-line TKI and second-line nivolumab should be considered for standard therapy with cabozantinib.

Those who have received treatment with first-line TKI and second-line cabozantinib should be considered for standard treatment with nivolumab.

Those who have received treatment with first-line TKI and second-line TKI should be considered for standard treatment with either nivolumab or cabozantinib.

Those who have received treatment with first-line nivolumab and ipilimumab and second-line TKI should be considered for standard treatment with another TKI or everolimus.

**Recent Update**

In an update published in February this year, the European society of medical oncology has endorsed the use of combination therapy with pembrolizumab and axitinib as the frontline therapy for treatment naïve advanced disease, based upon the results of the Keynote 426 trials, where this combinatorial therapy was compared with sunitinib, irrespective of the IMDC subgroup and the PD-L1 biomarker status. While the same update also makes a recommendation in favor of the use of ipilimumab and nivolumab in the intermediate and low-risk settings after analysis of the long term survival results (32 months), VEGF targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment is recommended after progression on PA/IN combinatorial regimens. Targeted therapy is also indicated in situations where the above mentioned combinatorial therapy cannot be used or is contraindicated.

**Response Assessment**

Response assessment CT scans are recommended 3 – 6 monthly in those with high risk for the first two years, a yearly CT scan is recommended in high-risk patients. A 2-4 monthly CT scan is recommended for response assessment in those receiving targeted therapy. The beneficial effect of a long term follow up is yet to be demonstrated.

Although the RECIST criteria (response evaluation criteria in solid tumors) have been used to calibrate the response to treatment, its clinical utility in prediction of changes that require dose modification or discontinuation and valid clinical endpoints is still a matter of debate.

**Palliative Medicine**

Management of adverse effects of chemotherapy, symptom directed treatment, counseling regarding goals of care, prognostication, management of cancer-associated syndromes (such as complex cancer pain syndromes, malignant bowel obstruction, metastatic spinal cord compression, pathological fractures, hypercalcemia, hyponatremia), medical symptoms in advanced cancer and provision of good end of life care are considered within the ambit of palliative medicine.

Specialized palliative medicine might include a dissection of various ethical dimensions of decisions concerning continuation and cessation of treatment, nutrition, and hydration in advanced cancer, provision of palliative sedation in the management of refractory symptoms, and end of life care.

Discussions pertaining to organ donation and withdrawal of treatment (provision of passive euthanasia) should also be considered the domain of specialized palliative medicine.

In the setting of the SARS Cov -2 pandemic, telemedicine and counseling of families of patients who are expected to have a limited life expectancy and may not be put on artificial ventilation also become the valid agenda of a palliative medicine consultation-liaison.

Management of metastasis to the central nervous system:

**Brain Metastasis**

Recursive partitioning analysis and graded prognostic assessment are used to prognosticate patients with brain metastasis. Available treatment options include the use of stereotactic brain radiotherapy, whole-brain radiotherapy, and supportive management in the form of decompressive medical therapy using mannitol, glycerol, or carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as acetazolamide. Corticosteroids, tapered according to the symptoms, also form an important component of medical decompressive therapy.

**Metastatic Spinal Cord Compression**

Various prognostication systems include the ASIA, and the Frankel scoring systems, are used to assess the severity of involvement. Treatment modalities include long course, short course external beam radiotherapy, bone-targeted agents, and corticosteroids. Surgical treatment might also be considered for patients with a single level metastasis or the presence of a bony fragment impinging upon the cord.

**Metastatic Bone Disease**

External beam radiotherapy and the use of bone-targeted agents have been recommended for palliation of symptoms and prevention of skeletal-related events (with an increase in time to first skeletal-related event). The Mirels scoring system is used to calculate the risk of development of a pathological fracture.

Among the bone-targeted agents used bisphosphonates and a monoclonal antibody against the RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa beta ligand), denosumab has been used. While zoledronic acid is the most commonly used bisphosphonate, used in a frequency ranging from monthly (in those with prior history of skeletal-related events) to three monthly, denosumab can be used in dosing of 120 mg monthly subcutaneously.

**Emerging and Future Immunotherapy Targets**

Several combinatorial strategies have been proposed to have shown promise in the development of future therapeutic strategies against tumors that show resistance to currently available strategies. The Ang/Tie 2 pathway is thought to be responsible for basal angiogenesis and vascular stability following vascular endothelial growth factor blockade.

Inhibitors targeting hypoxia-inducible factor 2 and aberrant glycolysis, aberrant glutamine, and tryptophan metabolisms such as CB 839 (glutamine metabolism) indoleamine 2.3 dioxygenase inhibitor, are being developed with an intent to lead to potential additional benefit.

Other approaches being studied include personalized vaccination, targeted radiotherapy to enhance immune responses, cytoreductive surgery following systemic therapy, and immunotherapy or targeted therapy in the neoadjuvant setting.