For asymptomatic CCH, no treatment is necessary. In mild to moderate cases, topical drops can tackle chemosis and inflammation. As mentioned previously, the presence of CCh exhibits a strong positive predictive value in the diagnosis of KCS. Lubricants, including artificial tears and gels, can, therefore, provide symptomatic relief and stabilize the tear film.  It is thought that certain ingredients in artificial tears (particularly isotonic glycerol and sodium hyaluronate) can dampen disease severity.

Corticosteroids may address the chemosis and inflammation but may require long periods of use, and antihistamine drops can decrease any rubbing/mechanical insults. A study demonstrated a subjective and objective improvement of dry eye symptoms in CCh following a 3-week course of topical methylprednisolone.

Medical treatment may not be sufficient. Other approaches to tighten the redundant conjunctiva have been trialed with varying success rates (Table 2). These include conjunctival excision, cauterization, scleral fixation of the conjunctiva, conjunctival ligation, laser conjunctivoplasty, and radio-wave electrosurgery with or without tissue grafting (e.g., amniotic membrane).

**Table 2**: Examples of surgical procedures used to correct CCh with respective advantages and disadvantages

**Technique**

**Advantage**

**Disadvantage**

Conjunctival cauterization

Reduces operating time (no sutures needed), shrinks redundant folds, decreases the risk of motility problems/scar formation, possible improved scleral fixation.



Reserved for mild to moderate cases, repeat procedures may be necessary

Excision of conjunctiva

Removes redundant conjunctiva, reduces blink-associated microtrauma, reduces interference with tear meniscus.

Over-resection -> fornix shortening, cicatricial entropion, limitation of ocular movement, suture-related complications (e.g., granuloma), secondary lymphangiectasia, prolonged postoperative recovery.

Excision of conjunctiva with amniotic membrane graft

As above + decreases the risk of fornix shortening

Focal conjunctival inflammation, scar formation, suture related complications

Scleral fixation of conjunctiva

Strengthens adhesions to the sclera, reinforces the Tenon layer,  reduces the risk of fornix shortening/ocular motility complications.

Surgically challenging, suture-related complications

Laser conjunctivoplasty, high-frequency radio-wave electrosurgery

Reduces operating time, shrinks redundant folds, less invasive

Not readily available, chemosis, hyperemia, and mild subconjunctival hemorrhage

Recession of conjunctiva with amniotic membrane

Removes redundant conjunctiva, reduces blink associated microtrauma, reduces interference with tear meniscus, restore tear reservoir

Higher cost if amniotic membrane graft used

The majority of these procedures involve excising or resecting the conjunctiva and may be effective as they relieve the mechanical obstruction. They do not, however, tackle fornix reconstruction and can cause scarring or relapses of the condition. Conjunctival recession is thought to be more effective as it restores the fornix tear reservoir.

Important surgical steps involve:

- Recession of conjunctiva and anchoring it from the limbus

- removal of degenerated Tenon capsule

- replacement of the Tenon and the conjunctival tissue by amniotic membrane grafts to possibly decrease pain and hasten recovery