Too little or too much apoptosis can have serious clinical implications such as the following:

**Tumorigenesis**

A decrease in apoptosis leads to increased cell-survival rates, leading to the development of cancers.

- In follicular lymphoma, there is a translocation of BCL2 gene from chromosome 18 to chromosome 14. This leads to excessive transcription of increased levels of BCL2 which causes over inhibition of APAF-1 and thus inactivation of caspases and apoptosis, leading to follicular lymphoma.

- Mutation or deletion of p53 genes increases the chances of developing tumor dramatically, as the cells with damaged DNA will continue to divide uncontrolled. Chemicals, radiations, and viruses can damage P53.
            People with Li-Fraumeni syndrome have only one functional copy of p53, so they are more likely to develop a tumor in early adulthood.

**Autoimmune Diseases**

A decrease in apoptosis of self-reactive immune cells can lead to the development of autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, and others.

**Neurodegenerative Diseases**

Cell death has also been implicated in many neurodegenerative disorders. Both necrosis and apoptosis occur in an acute neurologic disease like acute ischemic syndrome. In chronic neurodegenerative disorders neuronal cell death mainly by apoptosis has been implicated in examples like Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, and Huntington disease.

**Myocardial Infarction**

Necrosis was long considered the sole cause of myocardial infarction, but recent studies have shown that apoptosis also occurs mainly during the reperfusion phase after the acute infarction, leading to further myocardial damage.