As obesity levels rise in both children and adults, the healthcare team must educate the population on weight gain prevention. Possible clinical interventions are in areas of diet, physical activity, surgery, and pharmacotherapy. Even just a modest reduction in weight can improve many obesity-related conditions leading to better healthcare outcomes, improved quality of life, and reduced socioeconomic costs.

First-line management in obesity is through diet and exercise. In terms of diet, various options can be recommended, such as a low carbohydrate diet, low-fat diet, Mediterranean diet, and the Paleo diet. No one single diet is considered superior to the other in terms of weight loss, as long term adherence to a healthy eating plan is the most crucial factor for successful weight management.

For diet and physical exercise to be maintained, an individual must make permanent lifestyle changes. The healthcare professional needs to assist the patient in areas such as self-monitoring, physical activity, problem-solving, stress management, relapse prevention, and social support.

When physical exercise and diet are not successful, pharmacotherapy can be involved with multiple drugs on the market proven to be effective. These drugs are potentially useful when patients attempt lifestyle interventions for six months with no results, BMI is greater than 30, or if BMI is greater than 27 with an obesity-related condition. The FDA approved medications for weight management include orlistat, phentermine/topiramate, bupropion/naltrexone, liraglutide, and phentermine.

Lastly, surgery can be a consideration if an individual is extremely obese with no success in diet, exercise, or pharmacotherapy. Surgery can restrict energy intake by reduction of the gastric pouch and also reducing the absorption of the stomach. Various procedures can be done, such as a roux-en-y gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy, and implantation of certain devices. The type of procedure performed is all dependent on a various amount of factors such as surgical risk and patient desires. Less invasive procedures tend to have fewer surgical complications, but less weight loss and more invasive procedures tend to have more surgical complications but increased weight loss.