Injections of the trochanteric bursa can be performed without image guidance based on anatomic landmarks or under ultrasound or fluoroscopic guidance. Ultrasound guidance provides a reliable and safe modality to identify tendons and bursae, which may improve injection accuracy compared to a landmark-based method. In addition, it allows visualization of the needle tip and spread of the injectate.

Position the patient supine with the hip in a neutral position. Identify the greater trochanter by palpating the lateral aspect of the hip for a bony prominence. Place a needle on the skin at the entry site and confirm placement fluoroscopically. Administer local anesthesia to the dermis and subcutaneous tissue by injecting 1 % lidocaine with a 25-gauge hypodermic needle. Afterward, advance a 25-gauge 3.5-inch spinal needle toward the lateral margin of the greater trochanter until osseous tissue is encountered. Intermittently capture fluoroscopic images while advancing the spinal needle towards the greater trochanter to confirm the needle trajectory and locate the needle tip. Remove the stylet once the spinal needle is at the greater trochanter. After negative aspiration, administer 1 to 2 mL of iodinated contrast to confirm the location. After fluoroscopic confirmation with contrast dye, inject a combination of steroids and 1 to 3 mL of local anesthetic. Remove the spinal needle, cleanse the skin with alcohol, and apply a clean dressing.

The intrabursal local anesthetic typically provides immediate but temporary pain relief; bupivacaine can provide up to 4 to 6 hours of pain relief. The onset of pain relief from corticosteroids usually begins between 2 and 5 days postinjection, with the peak effect occurring between 10 and 14 days. Most patients experience the greatest pain relief after approximately six weeks.