Menses is the monthly shedding of the endometrial lining within the human menstrual cycle and occurs for approximately 26% of the world’s population.

There are many personal and medical reasons menstruating persons, or their caregivers, if applicable, may opt for menstrual suppression, including decreasing pain and other perimenstrual symptoms, limiting blood loss, lowering the burden of menstrual hygiene, and improving quality of life.

Medication-induced secondary amenorrhea may also be utilized in managing other health conditions such as heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, and menstrual-related blood loss in the setting of bleeding diathesis.

Commonly used hormonal contraceptives may be leveraged to achieve menstrual suppression, including continuous or extended use of the combined oral contraceptive pill (OCP), the combined transdermal patch, the combined intravaginal ring, the progestin-only pill, and injectable depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA), as well as long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARC) such as the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (IUD), and the subdermal etonogestrel implant. Less commonly used options include gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists and testosterone.

Complete cessation of menses is challenging, and success rates and associated side effects vary between methods. Patients should therefore be counseled on realistic expectations for each method and aim to decrease bleeding days and associated burdens rather than achieve complete amenorrhea.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) released a Clinical Consensus on general approaches to menstrual suppression in 2022 to guide clinicians in their patient care and counseling. This review heavily includes and is consistent with recommendations from this Clinical Consensus.