The goal of management is to achieve remission, defined as less than three stools daily and no watery stools, and to improve quality of life. The first aspect of management is to stop any possible offending agents causing symptoms, which includes some medications, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and to avoid and/or stop smoking.

Initial management of symptoms includes antidiarrheal agents such as loperamide.C. difficile infection. If the patient continues to have three or more stools daily with at least one being watery, the addition of a glucocorticoid such as budesonide is a recommended therapy. With budesonide, 6 to 8 weeks of therapy is typically necessary for complete resolution.

If patient symptoms continue despite the above therapy, additional agents may be needed. Cholestyramine at a dose of 4g four times per day may help until diarrhea resolves. Cholestyramine is a bile acid binding resin utilized for diarrhea with concurrent bile acid malabsorption, which can occur. If diarrhea continues to persist after 2 weeks, bismuth subsalicylate can be given at a dose of 524mg (3 tabs) 3 times daily.

Some patient will continue to have symptoms despite the above treatment. It is important to realize that approximately 10 to 20 percent o patients are non-responders.

Currently, maintenance therapy is not recommended secondary to side effects with budesonide. However, if this is necessary, the lowest dose possible should be utilized, and the dose should not exceed 6mg daily. Patients can be treated intermittently with budesonide to induce remission as well.