Both atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) and atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH) are characterized by the criteria put forth by Page et al.

ADH is characterized by an atypical monomorphic epithelial population of luminal origin within the breast that is between normal/usual hyperplasia and low-grade ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) on the spectrum of intraductal proliferative lesions. ADH will share some of the features of DCIS without meeting the full criteria for low-grade DCIS. The architectural features of low-grade DCIS include cribriform spaces with polarized lumens composed of highly monotonous cells with fine chromatin in a solid, cribriform, or micropapillary pattern.

When the above architectural and cytologic criteria are met, size can be used to distinguish ADH from low-grade DCIS, where low-grade DCIS requires the full involvement of two or more ductal units and the lesion is greater than 0.2 cm in size. Like ADH and ALH, DCIS will retain myoepithelial cells, as evidenced by positive immunohistochemical staining (e.g., with p63).

ALH is characterized by an intraductal over-proliferative epithelial population within the acini of terminal duct lobular units. These proliferations consist of small, round uniform cells that do not overlap, appear more dyshesive, and have increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. Nuclear atypia should be minimal. Loss of E-cadherin staining is characteristic for ALH and is also seen in more advanced lesions such as lobular carcinoma in situ or invasive lobular carcinoma. The distinction between ALH and lobular carcinoma in situ is that with ALH, there should be less than 50% involvement of the acini in the TDLU.