As the second-largest bone in the body, the tibia's main function in the leg is to bear weight with the medial aspect of the tibia bearing the majority of the weight load.

**Tibial Osteology**

The Proximal Tibia:

- Lateral condyle - lateral proximal aspect of the tibia that articulates with the femur

- Medial condyle - medial proximal aspect of the tibia that articulates with the femur

- Lateral tibial plateau - the superior articular surface of the lateral condyle

- Medial tibial plateau - the superior articular surface of the medial condyle

- Intercondylar area 

- Anterior area: located anteriorly between the medial and lateral condyle. The attachment point of the anterior cruciate ligament. 
- Posterior area: located posteriorly between the medial and lateral condyle. The attachment point of the posterior cruciate ligament. 
- Intercondyloid eminence (tibial spine): located between the articular facets and consists of a medial and lateral tubercle. The depression posterior to the intercondyloid eminence serves as attachments for the cruciate ligaments and menisci.

The Tibial Shaft:

- The shaft of the tibia is prism-shaped and has 3 surfaces (lateral, medial/anterior, and posterior) and 3 borders (anterior, medial, and interosseous).

- Anterior border: divides the medial and lateral surface
- Medial border: divides the medial and posterior surface
- Interosseous border: divides the lateral and posterior surface
- Medial/anterior surface: palpable down the lower leg, commonly referred to as the shin. It contains the tibial tuberosity. 

- Tibial tuberosity: bony protrusion of the anterior tibia where the patellar ligament inserts 


- Lateral surface: serves as the border and attachment of the interosseous membrane which connects the tibia and fibula. 
- Posterior surface: Contains the soleal line

- Soleal line: oblique line located on the posterior tibia and serves as the origin for the soleus, flexor digitorum longus, and tibialis posterior muscles.

- Serves as the origin or insertion point of many muscles including tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum longus, soleus, tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus, sartorius, gracilis, quadriceps femoris, semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and popliteus muscles.

The Distal Tibia:

- The distal portion of the tibia is shaped like a box. 
            
              
- The inferior surface provides a smooth articulation with the talus.
              
              
- The anterior surface is covered by extensor tendons and provides an area for ankle joint capsule attachment.
              
              
- The posterior surface has a groove for the tibialis posterior muscle.
              
              
- The lateral surface has a fibular notch which serves as an attachment for the interosseous membrane.
              
              
- The medial surface is a large bony prominence that makes up the medial malleolus.

- Medial malleolus: distal protrusion of the tibia which articulates with the talus

- Groove for the tendon of tibialis posterior is located on the posterior aspect of the medial malleolus

- Fibular notch: location of the tibiofibular joint