Although CRT has been incorporated into different support guidelines (e.g., concerning advanced pediatric life-support), controversies exist regarding its accuracy in different clinical settings, as discussed above.

In February 2019, The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) published The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK Randomized Clinical Trial comparing mortality of fluid resuscitation guided by CRT vs. serum lactate in 424 patients with newly diagnosed septic shock from 28 different ICUs around the world.

CRT may also be of prognostic value in critically ill patients. One study conducted by Lima et al. examined the relationship between peripheral perfusion and progression of organ failure by relative SOFA score increase in a cohort of 50 hemodynamically stable ICU patients with a recent diagnosis of circulatory shock. Perfusion status was characterized by examiner-measured CRT and cutaneous temperature readings to increase reliability, as discussed above. Results showed that patients in the reduced perfusion group were 7.4 times more likely to have worsening organ dysfunction and 4.6 times more likely to have hyperlactatemia (p < 0.05). The authors conclude that the worsening of organ dysfunction in hemodynamically stable patients following resuscitation can be identified through the subjective assessment of perfusion status.

CRT is also an important examination component in patients with hemorrhage and can help differentiate stages of hemorrhagic shock. CRT may or may not be prolonged in patients with class II shock but will undoubtedly be prolonged in both class III and IV shock.