There are specific physiologic changes of pregnancy that increase aspiration risk in this population. Minute ventilation, oxygen consumption, and carbon dioxide production are increased in early pregnancy, while the gravid uterus displaces the diaphragm upward in late pregnancy, substantially reducing functional residual capacity. Cardiac output, heart rate, stroke volume and circulating blood volume are all increased during pregnancy. The gravid uterus increases intra-abdominal pressure, predisposing patients to reflux. Progesterone-mediated relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) and prolonged gastric emptying time increase the risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease and aspiration of gastric contents during general anesthesia.

Chemical pneumonitis is more likely following the aspiration of gastric contents if pH is less than 2.5 and volume is at least 0.3 mL/kg body weight. The basis of these calculations is a 1974 study by Roberts and Shirley following direct placement of acid into a Rhesus monkey’s right mainstem bronchus.

Clear liquids are permissible during labor based on findings by William Beaumont, a military surgeon, who treated an individual with a gunshot wound to the stomach who had developed a gastric fistula. This injury allowed him to discern gastric emptying time for liquids versus solids. Beaumont stated that liquids pass through the stomach shortly after arrival, and gastric emptying of liquids is an exponential process; the rate of emptying is based upon the amount that remains in the stomach. The rate of emptying of solids is constant and starts an hour after the meal: about half reaches the duodenum within a few hours.