**Symptoms**

The underlying etiology of enophthalmos usually determines the presenting symptoms. These symptoms can include:

- Facial asymmetry

- Double vision

- Dry eye

- Cosmetic complaints

- Droopy upper eyelid (ptosis)

- Difficulty focusing

- Deep superior sulcus

**Clinical Examination**

In unilateral cases, the asymmetry of the orbits and globes may be obvious. The deep-set eye may show the associated deep sulcus, relative ptosis, lagophthalmos, and reduced palpebral fissure. Many patients will have associated hyperglobus, hypoglobus, esoglobus, or exoglobus.

The best way to visually examine for relative enophthalmos is the chin-up position, also known as the dog's view or the lover's view (attributed to the French, but this may be apocryphal).

**Objective Measurement of Enophthalmos**

The orbit is comprised of seven bones. The superior wall involves the lesser wing of the sphenoid and the orbital plate of the frontal bone. Both the zygomatic bone and the greater wing of the sphenoid form the lateral wall. The inferior wall is composed of three bones: the zygomatic,  the maxilla, and the palatine bones. Finally, the medial wall is made of the sphenoid, the ethmoid, and the maxilla.

**Clinical Measurement: Exophthalmometry**

The clinical assessment of enophthalmos is measured with respect to the individual's orbital margins and is the degree of the anteroposterior position of the globe. A popular tool for clinical assessment is ex ophthalmometry. This allows the clinician to diagnose and monitor the changes in the globe position. Several different exophthalmometers are available, each with its advantages and disadvantages.

**Hertel exophthalmometer:**measures from the lateral orbital rim to the apex of the corneal surface. It is relatively easy to use in the clinical setting, but its use is dependent on the integrity of the lateral orbital rim, which is often lost in orbital-zygomatic fractures. It has also been found that inter-observer variation is high.

**Naugle exophthalmometer:**is a similar, horizontally placed bar between two lateral canthi; it takes this a step further by using a 4-point fixation system, involving the superior and inferior orbital margins. Black markers along the length of the instrument aid in finding the midpoint of the pupils, thereby allowing the user to easily reposition the instrument for a serial of reproducible measurements. A study comparing Hertel and Naugle exophthalmometry found Naugle measurements to be more reliable in those who have suffered orbito-zygomatic fractures, where the lateral border of the orbit is disturbed, and the patient experience is more pleasant.

**A Leudde prism exophthalmometer:**allows parallax error to be removed when observing both eyes to assess the degree of enophthalmos or exophthalmos. A parallax error occurs when the viewing angle changes between observers who do not view an object from an angle that is perpendicular to the object.  The Leudde prism is used as a ruler and placed on the lateral orbital rim as a point of reference.

**The Mourits exophthalmometer:**combines the use of prisms placed along with a graduated metal frame (much like the Hertel instrument) and is thought to be a reliable tool when compared to Leudde and Hertel tools.