Patients with intermittent exotropia are often asymptomatic. The most common presentation is parents reporting either closure of one eye by the child when going in bright light or an occasional deviation noticed, particularly when the child is daydreaming or physically tired. Most patients are asymptomatic, which is related to a well-developed suppression mechanism. In addition, patients often exhibit normal retinal correspondence when the eyes are aligned but abnormal retinal correspondence on sensory testing when one eye deviates.

Various symptoms that may be reported in patients with intermittent exotropia are as follows.

- Transient Diplopia: Occasionally, patients may complain of intermittent binocular horizontal double vision or discomfort associated with eye deviation.

- Asthenopic symptoms are experienced in the initial phases when fusion begins to succumb and eyes deviate from the ortho position. Patients may complain of eyestrain, blurring, headache, and difficulty with prolonged reading.

- Diplophotophobia: Closure of one eye in bright sunlight. Bright sunlight dazzles the retina, disrupting the fusion and thus causing the deviation to manifest.

- Micropsia: This can occur as a result of accommodative convergence to control the deviation.

Classification of Intermittent Exotropia: Burian classified intermittent exotropia into 4 groups based on distance and near deviations.

- Basic type: when the difference between the distance deviation and near deviation is less than 10 prism diopters. These patients have normal fusional, accommodation, AC/A ratio, and proximal convergence.

- True divergence excess: after a patch test, the distance deviation exceeds the near deviation by at least 10 prism diopters. These patients can be associated with a high or a normal AC/A ratio. Patients with a high AC/A ratio have a potential for overcorrection if surgery is performed based on the distance deviation.

- Convergence insufficiency: the deviation for near exceeds the deviation for distance by at least 10 prism diopters.

- Pseudo-divergence excess: when distance deviation exceeds the near deviation by more than 10 prism diopters, but after monocular patch test, the difference between distance and near deviation decreases to less than 10 prism dioptres. The patch test breaks the associated higher tonic fusional convergence in these patients, and thus an increase in near deviation is noticed following this test bringing the near deviation close to distance deviation values. This has been described by Kushner as tenacious proximal fusion.

Kushner modified this classification and expanded this to add categories like tenacious proximal fusion, high AC/A ratio, low AC/A ratio, proximal convergence, and pseudo-convergence insufficiency.