The eye is a complex structure with many small organs that are essential for vision and movement of the eye. An injury to any part of the eye can result in discomfort, reduced vision, and in some cases, blindness. The eye is a source of injury, infection, and multiple medical diseases. It is important for all health practitioners to be able to identify and describe the anatomical features of the eye. Multiple diseases can directly or indirectly affect the fovea, thus reducing or erasing perfect vision.

A well-known disease that involves the fovea is age-related macular degeneration (AMD). AMD is a degenerative disorder of the retina that affects the macula lutea. Individuals with AMD retain their peripheral vision but lose their central vision, which manifests as scotomas and metamorphopsias. Despite the loss of photoreceptors within the fovea, the retina has an innate ability to use the remaining photoreceptors in the most effective manner possible. The retina creates a pseudo fovea, which is a fixation point that stabilizes vision. AMD is the most common cause of blindness for people older than the age of 75, affecting over 13 million Americans. The majority of cases are “dry” or nonexudative, which presents as a gradual loss of central vision. A classic finding on the exam with dry AMD is drusen, which is a yellow extracellular material that deposits between Bruch’s membrane and the retinal pigment epithelium. There is no proven effective treatment or prevention of dry AMD. On the other hand, exudative, or “wet”, AMD does have effective treatments to slow or halt the progression of the disease. Wet AMD is characterized by choroidal neovascularization that can lead to rapid loss of vision due to bleeding. Standard treatment of wet AMD involves serial anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) injections to stop choroidal neovascularization and promote macular healing. Risk factors for AMD have been identified and include age, ethnicity, smoking, alcohol use, diet, family history, and certain chronic medical conditions such as cardiovascular disease or myeloproliferative disorders.

Most of the time macular degeneration, which results in the death of photoreceptors cells in the fovea, occurs in older individuals. However, it is possible for younger individuals to suffer from macular degeneration is possible. Stargardt disease is the most common form of juvenile macular degeneration. Stargardt disease is almost always inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The most common cause of Stargardt disease is a mutation in the ABCA4 gene that is responsible for creating proteins that clear away vitamin A byproducts inside photoreceptors; as these byproducts accumulate, central vision decreases. The progressive vision loss from this disease also results from the death of photoreceptor cells in the macula. Stargardt disease usually destroys central vision but preserves peripheral vision. The vision loss is not correctable with prescription eyeglasses, contact lenses, or refractive surgery. Future treatment may involve human embryonic stem cell transplantation, which has been shown to be a safe treatment option, but nevertheless remains a controversial alternative.