Rectal foreign bodies constitute a proctological emergency. Numerous approaches have been described in the literature that can be used to extract RFBs with their number as large as the variety of foreign bodies reported.

One should move from the least invasive to complex, more invasive approaches. The majority of foreign bodies can be removed by the transanal approach. The standard technique for the transanal approach involves the combined use of analgesia, sedation, anesthesia, and an attempt at manual removal of the foreign body**.**Manual extraction should be attempted first, and if unsuccessful, may be removed in the operating room. Manual removal success depends on the size of the clinician's hand and the adequacy of anal sphincter relaxation. Patients may also be asked to perform a Valsalva maneuver to help propel the RFB caudally. Manual removal should not be performed in the case where there are signs of perforation or peritonitis as they need surgical evaluation. It should also be avoided if the RBF is a sharp object, which has increased the risk of trauma to the mucosa and to the provider.

Body packers are another subset of patients where RFB removal ought to take place in the operating room given the fragility of the packaging holding drugs, and the risk of systemic toxicity should cause the contents to spill during removal.

Using a Foley catheter may aid bedside RBF removal. Passing a foley catheter past the object can allow air to pass the object to break the vacuum seal that may occur in these cases.

Other techniques:

- Magnets to removal metal objects.

- Using clamps to break up organic material, such as fruit or vegetables, into smaller, easier to removal pieces.

- Inflating a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube inside objects, like a bottle or a jar, to provide traction.

- Obstetrical vacuum device.

Some patients may need more advanced approaches if bedside manual removal is unsuccessful. At times manual extraction may be successful in the operation suite due to deeper sedation levels and relaxation of the sphincter.  55% of patients that have RFB proximal to sigmoid required operational intervention

Another approach for RFB removal is a transanal minimally invasive surgical technique (TAMIS). A laparoscopic trocar is placed through the anus and hubbed to create a seal. The rectum can then by insufflated and laparoscopic graspers are used to grab the object

A more invasive approach includes laparoscopy and laparotomy, where the object is milked towards the rectum for manual removal