**Lipomatous Tumors**

Benign adipocytic tumors can arise from any part of the body and cause symptoms primarily through mass effect. They are usually encapsulated, homogenous without evidence of nodularity or septations, and may contain calcifications or hemorrhage resulting from trauma. Treatment consists of excision beyond the capsule of the tumor. There is some degree of clinical overlap with the potentially malignant form and most common soft tissue sarcoma; liposarcoma. Liposarcomas are defined as tumors greater than 10 cm in size, with thick internal septations and lesions that are generally less than 75% adipose tissue. They represent 45% of retroperitoneal sarcomas. Treatment for liposarcoma is surgical resection with wide margins. Local recurrence is common. Malignant behavior attributed to the amplification of (12q13-15), which leads to the upregulation of MDM2 and CKD4. Tumor-promoting pathways MET, RET, and PI3K/Akt are thought to be activated. For Liposarcomas of the extremities, the goal of care is limb-sparing resection with a gross negative margin. For retroperitoneal liposarcomas, the goal is complete resection. Typically, well-differentiated liposarcomas have a low risk of distant metastases, whereas de-differentiated extremity liposarcoma generally benefits from neoadjuvant radiation therapy.

**Trunk and Extremity Sarcoma**

There is a fine balance between preserving limb function and tumor control. Many types are chemoresistant, and several studies have reported conflicting results regarding the utility of neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy. Several studies have supported a surgical margin of 1 cm regarding adequate resection.

**Desmoid Tumors**

These are rare forms of fibroblastic tumors. Approximately 80% are sporadic, whereas others are related to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Sporadic cases are related to pregnancy and prior trauma. They are 2 to 3 times more common in women than men and are usually diagnosed between the ages of 30 to 40. They can originate in the extremities, intraperitoneal space, abdomen, and/or chest wall. They are usually slow growing but can be quite aggressive. They utilize the WNT signaling pathway. Clinically, they can range from an asymptomatic firm mass to a painful mass resulting in bowel obstructions or ischemia. Radiographically they are usually homogenous and solid in appearance with a distinct or infiltrating boundary. Despite resection, these tumors have a high incidence of recurrence.

**Angiosarcoma**

A malignant tumor arises from the endothelial lining of blood vessels and can arise from essentially any region within the body. Two percent are considered soft tissue sarcomas, and 40% are radiation-induced. They usually occur in the scalp, head, neck (scalp), and viscera and generally occur during the seventh or eighth decade of life. There is usually regional lymphatic nodal involvement. Histologically they can range from well-differentiated to poorly differentiated. Again, therapy is aimed at surgical resection with negative margins. Tumors that are larger than 5 cm and with evidence of epitheliod are considered indicators of poor prognosis. These tumors are often locally advanced and beyond resection at presentation; however, there have been some noted benefits from chemoradiation.

**Retroperitoneal and Visceral Sarcomas**

Retroperitoneal sarcomas represent approximately 15% of all soft tissue sarcomas, with the average tumor size at presentation measuring 15 cm. Average age at presentation is 54 with the equal male-to-female distribution. There are a variety of clinical presentations depending on the size and location of the tumor. Many are asymptomatic and only incidentally discovered. Symptoms can range from abdominal pain, weight loss, early satiety, nausea, emesis, back or flank pain, paresthesias, and weaknesses. CT is the study of choice. Gross resection is the treatment of choice with or without neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemoradiation. The most frequent subtype is liposarcoma. The predominant intraperitoneal subtype is the Gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Despite optimal surgical resection, approximately 70% will relapse.

**Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor (GIST)**

GIST tumors are the most common visceral soft tissue sarcoma. The majority occur sporadically. They originate from the interstitial cells of Cajal within the gastrointestinal myenteric plexus and can occur at any location along the GI tract. The most prevalent location is the stomach, small bowel, and rectum. They function as the pacemaker cells of the bowel. GIST tumors have a marker for CD117 (also known as the KIT gene), which codes for a tyrosine kinase transmembrane receptor called c-kit. Classically a spindle cell neoplasm of smooth muscle origin. Clinically, they can range from asymptomatic to symptomatic with pain, nausea, hematemesis, and gastrointestinal (GI) blood loss. Endoscopically they appear as a smooth submucosal tumors that can impinge on the visceral lumen. Radiographically, it appears well encapsulated with heterogeneous areas of enhancement secondary to patchy necrosis within the tumor. Metastases are common, with common sites being the liver and peritoneal surface. Localized lesions are taken to the operating room for complete excision with negative margins with empiric lymphadenectomy. After resection and neoadjuvant therapy for unresectable or locally advanced disease, adjuvant therapy requires Imatinib (an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor of c-kit).

**Leiomyosarcoma**

This malignant smooth muscle tumor can originate from any part of the body. It is the second most common soft tissue sarcoma subtype. They occur during the sixth and seventh decades. The retroperitoneum and uterus are the most common locations in women, whereas, in males, they originate in other locations. On gross inspection, they are heterogeneous, well-circumscribed tumors with cystic or necrotic central areas. They stain positive for desmin and smooth muscle actin. First-line therapy is surgical resection with negative margins. Adjuvant radiotherapy is thought to improve local control.