The most common joints involved in musculoskeletal amyloidosis include the shoulder and pelvic girdles, elbow, and wrist.

One of the most common presentations of musculoskeletal amyloidosis manifests as a late onset of carpal tunnel syndrome. Amyloid-related carpal tunnel syndrome is typically associated with the senescent type ATTR protein, which reflects systemic involvement, and can be a prognosticator of future myocardial involvement.

The flexor tendons of the hand, wrist, and adjacent synovium become hypertrophied as amyloid is deposited into the myofibrillar tissues and may subsequently infiltrate into surrounding structures. The median nerve may appear compressed on cross-sectional imaging, and bony erosions are common. Paradoxical T2 signal loss of the median nerve may be seen on MRI, which is usually increased in signal in other forms of carpal tunnel syndrome.

Dialysis-related musculoskeletal amyloidosis is seen in approximately 30% of older patients undergoing long-term treatment, where the duration of dialysis dependence and prevalence of amyloidosis appear to be positively correlated.

Anatomic involvement includes the shoulder and hip girdles, as well as the carpal bones. Radiographic imaging may demonstrate lucent osseous lesions with peripheral sclerosis. CT imaging helps evaluate the degree of osseous erosion and the extent of soft tissue calcifications. MRI evaluation of the joints may show low T1 and T2 signals and minimal enhancement. Typical ultrasound appearance includes discontinuous hypertrophy of the tendons and adjacent synovium.