Differential diagnosis includes eye discharge that can be conjunctivitis or congenital lacrimal duct obstruction. Other diagnoses may be ocular foreign body, orbital or preseptal cellulitis, entropion, trichiasis, eye trauma (corneal abrasion following delivery), dacryocystitis, keratitis, subconjunctival hemorrhage (breakage of vessels during delivery), congenital anomalies of nasolacrimal system, corneal epithelial disease, neonatal abstinence and congenital glaucoma

Physical exam should evaluate for periorbital edema and adenopathy. Examine both eyes/eyelids for swelling and edema, check conjunctiva for injection (congestion of blood vessels) and chemosis (conjunctival swelling). Check for ulcerations and the presence of red reflex. A purulent discharge, edema and erythema of the lids, as well as injection of the conjunctiva, are suggestive of bacterial conjunctivitis.

Lab studies include Gram stain and culture to check WBC and bacteria, as well as sensitivity and culture of the bacteria isolated (chocolate agar and Thayer-Martin media for gonorrhea and blood agar for another medium). A Giemsa stain should be done for chlamydial suspicion, however chlamydia is now more commonly diagnosed via nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) which is less expensive and requires less labor than traditional viral cultures. Of note, newborns with suspected C. trachomatis infection should have samples drawn from both the conjunctivae and oropharynx. Because C. trachomatis is an obligate intracellular organism, swabs should not only be taken from eye discharge but should also include conjunctival epithelial cells if possible.

No imaging and other studies are usually needed, but Fluorescein dye disappearance test can be done to rule out nasolacrimal duct obstruction.