The FRC is important because it is related to several factors such as airway and vascular resistance, work of breathing, compliance, oxygen reserve, closing capacity, and V/Q mismatch.

- Reduced lung volumes result in reduced FRC. Low lung volumes result in less alveolar tension pulling the lung airways open, and the airway narrowing results in increased airway resistance.

- Pulmonary vascular resistance is a combination of alveolar and extra-alveolar vessel resistances and is U-shaped. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK554380/ Thus, there are larger resistances at TLC and RV, and the lowest resistance is at the FRC volume.

- At FRC, the work to inflate the lungs is the lowest, as the inward and outward lung compliances are balanced.

- The compliance of the lung depends on the elastic recoil of the lung tissue. Decreases in this result in an increased FRC.

- The FRC results in an oxygen reserve, the residual air volume in the lungs allows for oxygen exchange. This oxygen reserve, and FRC, are important during the induction of anesthesia.

- A reduced FRC can result in shunts and atelectasis. This occurs when the FRC decreases below the closing capacity of the lung; the volume at which the respiratory bronchioles collapse.

The FRC is affected by conditions that affect lung compliance; a combination of the inward elastic recoil of the lung, and outward expansion of the chest wall. These include diseases or conditions with changes in lung tissue compliance (emphysema, and interstitial lung diseases), decreased chest movements (kyphoscoliosis), or decreased thoracic volume (obesity, pregnancy). Other factors affecting FRC include acute changes in positions such as lying supine, age, height, and gender.

**Position**

FRC is altered by the patients’ positioning, with it being greatest when upright and decreasing when supine or prone,

**Age**

As humans age, our pulmonary function also declines due to decreases in respiratory muscle mass, and tissue elasticity.  Loss of elasticity in connective tissue increases the work of breathing; similar to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (but to a lesser extent), the air becomes harder to expel and the lungs do not as readily return to normal size after inspiration. Thus the FRC increases slightly with age.

**Height and Gender**

A tall person had a larger lung volume and thus a greater FRC. Gender also affects FRC. Men tend to have a significantly larger lung volume even when compared to women of the same height and age.

**Pregnancy**

In pregnant women, spirometry remains within normal limits, however structural and volumes/capacities change significantly. The diaphragm relaxes due to hormonal changes), and the growing fetus begins to exert pressure on the thoracic cavity. This causes both the RV and ERV to decrease, which leads to a decreased FRC. Because of the lowered FRC and pressure on the thorax, a pregnant woman is more susceptible to atelectasis.

**Ascites and obesity**

FRC also changes with ascites or obesity. These FRC decreases are due to increased pressure on the diaphragm, and a reduction of thoracic volume. This is one of the causes of shortness of breath.

**Anesthesia**

Anesthetics alter FRC by affecting the tone or relaxation of the respiratory muscles. There is a debate as to the contribution of the rib cage and diaphragm to the decreased FRC.