Treatment for asymptomatic patients includes smoking cessation, antiplatelet therapy, anti-hypertensives, and continual monitoring. Steroids and anticoagulation therapy have shown no role in treatment. Activities that would produce whiplash-like injuries should be avoided. Surgical treatment should be reserved for symptomatic patients or patients who have had no response to hypertension medications.

Surgical options include open surgical dilatation, open access balloon dilatation, or percutaneous transluminal angioplasty. The open surgical dilatation approach involves the use of rigid dilators progressively increasing in size and passed through the carotid artery. Access is similar to carotid endarterectomy; however, more exposure is needed to ensure dilation can be visualized and the extracranial carotid artery can be straightened during the passage of the dilator. This procedure, however, is done without imaging of the luminal surface; therefore, treatment is based on feel as the length of the segment and kinks must be estimated. Open access balloon dilatation is the choice when the disease process extends too far distally for dissection, and there is inadequate manual control of the dilation. This approach also allows for interval arteriography and avoidance of embolization. The last and preferred choice for proximal internal carotid involvement is percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA), which is an endovascular procedure which is best for lesions that demonstrate less kinking and no evidence of aneurysm. It also has fewer complications than open surgery. With this technique, a guide wire is inserted through the catheter which is then advanced. Further advancement of the guide wire then allows for the carotid sheath to be passed over the wire. Once the sheath is in place, it gets inflated.