**Treatment of Acute Decompensated Heart Failure and Pulmonary Edema**

The focus of treatment for patients in heart failure is dependent on the severity of the symptoms and the stage of heart failure. When patients are in acute decompensated heart failure or flash pulmonary edema, the most important focus for therapeutic interventions is the enhancement of hemodynamic status through reduction of vascular congestion and improving preload, afterload, and myocardial contractility.

In flash pulmonary edema, where there is a rapid onset of heart failure, the initial management, and treatment goals are very similar to acute decompensated heart failure. Treatment options for acute decompensated heart failure and flash pulmonary edema are as follows:

- ABC's - As with all patients, it is important to assess airway, breathing, and circulation in the initial evaluation and initiate appropriate management based on patient status.  In decompensated heart failure, patients should be hooked up to cardiorespiratory monitoring, have IV access and oxygen administered if hypoxic or tachypnoeic, ECG performed, and have labs drawn based on clinical suspicion and patient condition.

- Diuretics - most patients presenting in heart failure have a form of volume overload. AHA and ACC guidelines recommend intravenous (IV) loop diuretic administration to treat fluid overload.  IV administration is preferred over oral for diuretics to maximize the bioavailability of the medication and clinical effect.  Furosemide is a common treatment for acute decompensated heart failure and flash-pulmonary edema because of its anti-vasoconstrictor and diuretic effects.

- Vasodilators - Patients with acute decompensated heart failure with HTN and acute pulmonary edema can benefit from treatment with vasodilators. Most vasodilators promote smooth muscle relaxation and vasodilatation to reduce preload and afterload through the cyclic guanine monophosphate pathway.  Vasodilation relieves pulmonary vascular congestion and improves left ventricular preload and afterload. The common vasodilator medications used are Nitroglycerin and Sodium Nitroprusside.

- 
              
- Nitroglycerin can be given transdermal, sublingual, or intravenously depending on patient condition.  In acute decompensation or flash pulmonary edema, nitroglycerin is best given sublingually or intravenously to allow for titration of effect.
              
              
- Sodium nitroprusside is only given intravenously. Patients with renal dysfunction treated with sodium nitroprusside may need to have their cyanide levels monitored. Check with your pharmacist about guidelines for monitoring cyanide levels.

- Ionotropic Medications - Additional treatment options for patients in cardiogenic shock or who have signs of end-organ dysfunction secondary to hypoperfusion.  Inotropes should only be used as a treatment adjunct in acute decompensated heart failure since data from the ADHERE registry suggest increased mortality with use. Dobutamine and MIlrinone are two inotropes that are more commonly used.  Dobutamine is preferable for beta-blocker naive patients, while Milrinone is preferred for patients previously taking oral beta blockers who experience an acute decompensation.

- CPAP/BIPAP - Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) and Bilevel Positive Airway Pressure (BIPAP) are noninvasive methods of respiratory support to treat respiratory insufficiency secondary to pulmonary vascular congestion and pulmonary edema.  The use of CPAP and BIBAP has reduced the need for intubation and mechanical ventilation in heart failure patients with acute respiratory decompensation. In situations where CPAP and BIPAP are ineffective in improving the patient's respiratory status, consider early intubation and mechanical ventilation to help prevent further decompensation and progression of symptoms.

- Coronary revascularization - When performed in appropriately selected patients, revascularization can reduce mortality and morbidity by improving diastolic and systolic dysfunction.  According to the American Heart Association 2013 CHF guidelines, coronary artery revascularization may be indicated as an intervention for heart failure patients with angina, LV dysfunction, and CAD.  Interventional cardiology should be consulted early for patients according to AHA recommendations.

- Admission to inpatient service for further treatment and evaluation.  Patients being treated for flash pulmonary edema should be admitted to the hospital with the level of monitoring and care appropriate for each case.  For select patients with acute decompensated heart failure, it may be possible to treat them at home depending on the severity of symptoms

**The Medical Management of Heart Failure – Risk Factor Modification and Prevention of Acute Decompensation**

While acute decompensated heart failure and flash pulmonary edema can be dramatic and require intensive care and aggressive therapy, the main focus of heart failure management is on helping prevent the progression of the disease and mitigate episodes of acute exacerbation.   The American Heart Association and the New York Heart Association stages of heart failure are what medical practitioners often use to guide the evidence-based treatment of heart failure. Treatment of early stages of chronic heart failure usually focuses on risk factor modification, and as the disease process progresses, it starts to include more aggressive interventions.

- Risk factor modification

- Dietary and lifestyle changes, such as decreased salt intake, reducing obesity and smoking cessation
- Tighter control and management of hypertension, diabetes and dyslipidemia and other chronic diseases that can exacerbate CHF

- More aggressive intervention for those with a higher degree of CHF

- Echocardiography for patients with a higher risk of left ventricular ejection fraction reduction
- Implantable cardiac defibrillator placement when indicated in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy at high risk of sudden death

For further information on the medical management of chronic heart failure, please refer to the American Heart Association and New York Heart Association guidelines.

**Advanced Treatment Strategies for End-Stage Congestive Heart Failure**For select patients with end-stage heart failure, which are refractory to other treatment strategies, the option of mechanical circulatory support and cardiac transplantation should be considered.  Mechanical circulatory support, as for example, a left ventricular assist device, is often used as a bridge therapy until a heart transplant is available. In certain situations, mechanical circulatory support is utilized as destination therapy.

For patients who are not candidates for mechanical circulatory support or cardiac transplantation, palliative care, and continuous inotropic support should be a consideration and discussed with the patient.