To be able to interpret videofluoroscopic swallow studies, it is important to appreciate the stages of a normal swallow. These can be divided into oral preparatory, oral, pharyngeal, and oesophageal stages as follows:

The bolus is placed on the anterior mouth floor or against the hard palate for liquids. Initially, a seal is formed by the soft palate and posterior tongue to prevent liquid from entering the oropharynx. The tongue tip is then raised to the hard palate, propelling the liquid bolus into the pharynx, with the posterior tongue lowering to open access into the oropharynx. Food boluses are manipulated by the tongue backward along the palate while the jaw opens to allow the bolus to enter the pharynx. It arrives at the valleculae for the pharyngeal stage.

With the pharyngeal stage of swallowing, the nasopharynx becomes separated through soft palate elevation- this prevents food regurgitation into the nasopharynx. At the same time, the base of the tongue retracts to manipulate the bolus against the pharyngeal wall. The pharyngeal constrictors contract from superior to inferior, propelling the food bolus downwards towards the esophagus. The pharyngeal stage has adaptations to help protect the airway from aspiration- the epiglottis moves to seal close the laryngeal vestibule, while the vocal folds close together to seal the glottis. At this point, the upper oesophageal sphincter opens by suprahyoid and thyrohyoid muscle contraction to allow entry into the esophagus.

At the oesophageal stage of swallowing, the bolus is propelled through the entire length of the esophagus by peristalsis. There is an initial relaxation of the muscle around the bolus, followed by muscle contraction that tracks the food bolus down past the lower oesophageal sphincter and into the stomach. Note the lower two-thirds of the esophagus is smooth muscle, with the autonomic nervous system controlling peristalsis, which is involuntary.

The swallow is initially assessed in the lateral plane. This is to view the passage of the bolus in its entirety into the esophagus. Nasopharyngeal regurgitation, the elevation of the hyoid bone, tilting and sealing by the epiglottis, residual food in either the pyriform sinuses or valleculae, and abnormal upper oesophageal sphincter opening are all standard endpoints for assessment. An additional benefit of the lateral plane is the ability to assess for the entry/penetration of test boluses into the airway passages (larynx) and to determine at what stage this may occur. The anterior-posterior plane is then examined, which provides the added benefit of determining asymmetry if pathology is present. Videofluoroscopy allows the calculation of the Oral Transit Time and Pharyngeal Transit Time to calculate the Oropharyngeal Swallowing Efficiency. The severity of aspiration (penetration) using the 8-point Penetration-Aspiration Scale (PAS), with 1 meaning the absence of penetration of contrast below the vocal cords.

Poor oral control can be demonstrated in videofluoroscopy by material falling through the lips (e.g., neuropathies), the inability of the subject to form a bolus using their tongue and to subsequently correctly position it in the oral cavity (e.g., stroke), or by a lack of seal formation (posterior tongue not adequately contacting the soft palate) leading to leakage of material and possible laryngeal penetration and aspiration. Poor tongue coordination, or hesitant initiation of swallowing, can show stasis of material within the oral cavity. Failure of soft palate elevation during swallowing subsequently leads to an insufficient palatopharyngeal seal, resulting in nasopharyngeal regurgitation.

Critical findings demonstrated during laryngeal elevation include decreased hyoid bone elevation (it normally elevates to appose the angle of the mandible) and reduced epiglottis movement. The latter suggests impaired glottic protection with a significant risk of material entering the supraglottic region and leading to aspiration. Note that if contrast material enters the laryngeal vestibule, this is termed laryngeal penetration, while contrast entering below the vocal cords is termed aspiration. Material may be seen to remain in the valleculae or piriform sinuses after swallowing (pooling) - this is observed in cerebrovascular accidents and sometimes after radiation therapy

Cricopharyngeal prominence is observed with advanced age, oesophageal motility disorders, Zenker diverticulum, and cricopharyngeal achalasia