Tofacitinib is a Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor FDA-approved in April 2012 indicated for its use in the management of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis (PA), ulcerative colitis (UC), and polyarticular course juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pcJIA). Patients suffering from such ailments require oversight from an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals. The interprofessional team can include a primary care physician (PCP), a rheumatologist, gastroenterologist, mid-level practitioners, nurses, a physical therapist (PT), and a pharmacist. Efficient interprofessional care from the healthcare team of patients suffering from RA, PA, or UC can lead to clinical and symptomatic improvements and a better quality of life. [Level 5]

Continuous communication between the interprofessional team, primarily the PCP and specialist, and their patients is imperative, and thorough education on treatment and disease should be provided. Updates on the latest guidelines on disease management using tofacitinib should be routinely reviewed. The patients should also be advised about the potential adverse effects while receiving treatment and the increased risk of severe infections. The patients should be advised to report any new-onset clinical manifestations. Period follow-ups visits with the PCP and specialist are essential to prevent complications, hospitalization, and mortality.

The interprofessional team should initiate a baseline laboratory workup prior to starting tofacitinib therapy. Patients considering tofacitinib treatment should be checked for active or latent TB, CBC, LFT, and lipid panel primarily and routinely after that. Women of reproductive potential should be counseled on the risk of possible infertility from tofacitinib, and treatment during pregnancy may increase potential risk to the fetus and discontinue breastfeeding as tofacitinib may be excreted in breastmilk. Regular communications and follow-ups between patients and their health providers build reliance and rapport, strengthening medication compliance, further reducing the progression of ailments while enhancing the quality of life.