Miscarriage is the most frequent type of pregnancy loss, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Spontaneous abortion is defined as embryonic or fetal death or passage of the products of conception before 20 weeks gestation, with early miscarriage occurring in the first thirteen weeks. Estimates are that 10% to 25% of all clinically recognized pregnancies will end in miscarriage.

Teratoma is defined as a solid mass or germ cell tumor comprised of a combination of tissues from all three germ layers. Teratoma is often a result of the abnormal persistence (or lack of full regression) of the primitive steak. The most commonly diagnosed fetal teratomas are sacrococcygeal teratoma (Altman types I, II, and III) and cervical (neck) teratoma.

Sirenomelia (or mermaid syndrome) is a congenital abnormality consisting of a total or partial fusion of the lower limbs, often accompanied by urogenital and gastrointestinal malformation.****There are two hypotheses regarding the development of this pathology. The first, the vascular steal theory, surmises that insufficient blood flow to the caudal mesoderm inhibits the formation of the midline structures, thus inhibiting the precise development of the lower limb.

Tethered cord syndrome (TCS) is a rare neurological disorder (related to spina bifida) resulting from congenital abnormalities surrounding gastrulation or injury later in life. Symptoms arise from malformations in tissue attachments that stretch the spinal cord, eventually restricting movement, inducing loss of feeling, or the onset of pain and autonomic symptoms.