As a significant component of the glabellar complex, the corrugator supercilii muscles play an essential role in maintaining the position of the brow. Complete resection of the corrugator supercilii muscles has been a recommendation for forehead rejuvenation. Incomplete corrugator supercilii muscle resection can have harmful consequences, such as forehead asymmetries, skin dimpling, and recurrence of glabellar furrows and frown lines. One previous study suggested the amount of corrugator supercilii muscles resection can differ depending on the surgical technique used, with as much as one-third of the transverse corrugator supercilii muscles head remaining after the corrugator supercilii muscles are removed using transpalpebral methods.

Complete resection of the corrugator supercilii muscles has also been a recommended approach for the treatment of migraine headaches. There have been suggestions that migraine headaches are associated with peripheral nerve trigger points and the supraorbital nerve/supratrochlear nerve.

Patients with thyroid eye disease with upper eyelid retraction often have overactivity of the accessory muscles that play a role in eyelid closure and the glabellar muscles. They may have a staring facial expression with proptosis, upper lid retraction, and a glabellar frown.

Among patients with abnormal Parkinson disease, the “procerus sign” is a clinical sign that is often observed, particularly in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). PSP may suffer misdiagnosis as the more well-known Parkinson disease. The procerus sign involves having vertical wrinkles on the forehead and a staring, astonished look with eyelid retraction and infrequent blinking.