PS and PSA are indicated any time the patient requires an intervention that will cause significant discomfort. The level of sedation needed depends on the amount of pain the patient is likely to experience, and the necessity of the patient remaining still during the procedure. For instance, an orthopedic procedure that requires joint reduction, and thus muscle relaxation will require deeper sedation than a less uncomfortable procedure. Decision-making also has to take into account the vital signs of stability of the patient. For example, a patient who cannot tolerate cessation of breathing or a drop in blood pressure may be better handled using a dissociative agent rather than moderate to deep sedation.

Additionally, a review of the patient's history for chronic diseases (e.g., cardiovascular or respiratory diseases) and their stability, drug history, and allergy are mandatory to assess the risk of harm during the proposed sedation and procedure. The most commonly used system for clinical assessment is the ASA Physical Status (Class) scoring:

- ASA Class 1. Normal healthy patient with no organic, physiologic, or psychiatric disturbance: excludes the very young and very old; healthy with acceptable exercise tolerance.

- ASA Class 2. Patients presenting with mild systemic disease: No functional limitations; has a well-controlled disease involving one body system; controlled hypertension or diabetes without systemic effects, cigarette smoking absent chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD); mild obesity, pregnancy.

- ASA Class 3. Patients with severe systemic disease: Some level of functional limitation; has a controlled disease involving more than one body system or one major system; no immediate danger of death; controlled congestive heart failure (CHF), stable angina, prior heart attack, poorly controlled hypertension, morbid obesity, chronic renal failure; a bronchospastic disease with intermittent symptoms.

- ASA Class 4. Patients with severe systemic disease that represents a constant threat to life: Has at least one severe disease not well controlled or at end-stage; possible risk of death; unstable angina, symptomatic COPD, symptomatic CHF, hepatorenal failure.

- ASA Class 5. Moribund patients not expected to survive without the operation: Not expected to survive over 24 hours without surgery; imminent risk of death; multiorgan failure, sepsis syndrome with hemodynamic instability, hypothermia, poorly controlled coagulopathy.

- ASA Class 6. A patient declared brain-dead whose organs are being harvested for donor purposes.

The addition of “E” to physical status denotes an emergency procedure. The definition of an emergency is as existing when a delay in treatment of the patient would lead to a significant increase in the threat to life or body part.