Ethical principles and patient rights should guide all encounters with patients. Although there is not formal legal guidance in North America, many individual states and provinces have created their own specific patient rights policies.  In the states with no plans, the decision regarding whether or not to use such a system is up to the individual hospital. The failure to observe ethical and legal guidelines can lead to patient dissatisfaction, medical malpractice, and loss of clinical privileges or medical license. Issues that need to be addressed are patient competence, consent, right to refuse treatment, emergency treatment, confidentiality, and continuity of care.

Proper awareness of the ethical principles and the ability to apply them to specific circumstances is relevant to all clinical specialties and settings. Without the appropriate understanding of patient rights, the healthcare team may at times be prone to various tendencies such as a failure to respect patient autonomy. This can be demonstrated in several ways, such as acting in an overly paternalistic manner or making clinical decisions on behalf of the patient and or family. Other ways it can occur include cases in which not all options, risks, or side effects may be appropriately disclosed. Furthermore, there is the ethical question when the provider chooses to leave out certain options, risks, or side effects due to an extremely low likelihood or clinical judgment. While it may be timesaving or be in what the provider believes to be the best interest of the patient, there is the question as to whether the patients are indeed fully informed, or simply informed enough. Examples of this can occur in emergent situations, when there is little time, as well as in end-of-life decisions when the family may not know the extent to which “doing everything” may entail, but it can happen in all settings. While a failure to respect patient autonomy is only one example, other patient rights can be infringed upon if members of the healthcare team are not careful. By clearly and regularly collaborating with the patient regarding their goals of care and engaging in shared decision making, as well as properly understanding the various components of patient rights, such infringements can be minimized.