Treatment depends on non-infectious or infectious etiology. Empiric treatment includes a focus on infection as the most common etiology. Since the most common risk factors involve saliva-induced eczema and the resultant maceration, an effort to protect the labial commissures topical barrier application (petrolatum jelly, emollients, or lip balm) is important, and often sufficient for idiopathic cases of AC.

**Fungicidal Medications**

Fungal infections require topical fungicidal medications applied to the labial commissures, usually 3 times daily for 2 weeks.

- Nystatin 100,000 units/mL ointment topically twice per day (BID)

- Gentian violet solution topically BID to 3 times per day (TID) is effective in children if a purple discoloration is acceptable

- Ketoconazole 2% cream topically

- Clotrimazole 1% cream topically

- Miconazole 2% cream topically (with or without hydrocortisone 1%): Mixed staphylococcal and candidal infections respond best to this treatment because of its inherent gram-positive bacteriostatic activity, thus being used as first-line treatment by some providers

- Iodoquinol 1% cream topically BID to TID, usually combined with hydrocortisone 1% cream

**Topical Antiseptics or Antibiotics**

Bacterial infections require topical antiseptics or antibiotics. Application of the same preparation to the anterior nares (usually 4 to 5 times daily) can prevent recurrent infection when colonization is present.  Treatment course is for 1 to 2 weeks.

- Mupirocin 2% ointment TID to 4 times per day (QID)

- Fusidic acid 2% cream (with or without hydrocortisone 1%) applied QID topically as an antistaphylococcal regimen

**Oral (systemic) Antifungals**

Nystatin is used in mild cases or thrush and those isolated to the oral cavity. Triazoles treat moderate and severe cases of oral candidiasis and any cases extending into the esophagus.  When triazoles are used, they obviate the need for topical antifungals.  However, they are inhibitors of hepatic cytochrome P450 system and may interact with other drugs. Fluconazole has the highest level of evidence.

- Nystatin 5 mL of 100,000 units/mL suspension, swish and swallow QID for 7 to 14 day for oral candidiasis (no oral bioavailability)

- Clotrimazole 1 troche sucked on 5 times per day for 7 to 14 days for mild oropharyngeal candidiasis refractory to nystatin

- Fluconazole 200 mg orally (PO) for 1 day, then 100 mg PO daily for 7 to 14 days (can be increased to 200 mg daily for severe cases or immunosuppression). This is more effective than nystatin in immunocompromised patients.

- Itraconazole 200 mg PO daily for 2 to 4 weeks or 200 mg swish and swallow QID without food for 7 to 14 days

- Posaconazole 100 mg PO BID for 1 day, then 100 mg PO daily for 7 to 14 days but the dose can be increased to 400 mg PO BID for fluconazole/itraconazole-refractory cases

- Voriconazole: Only recommended when treatment with fluconazole and either itraconazole or posaconazole have failed

- Caspofungin 70 mg PO once, then 50 mg PO daily until 2 days after symptoms/lesions resolved

- Amphotericin 30 to 40 g per d until 2 days after symptoms/lesions resolved (40 to 50 g per day for neutropenic patients)

- Further discussion for the systemic treatment of oral candidiasis are beyond the scope of this review

**Oral (Systemic) Antibiotics**

These rarely warranted unless lesions are extensive or treatment failure to topical antibiotics; should warrant culture, sensitivities, and consideration of an alternative diagnosis

**Topical Glucocorticoids**

Topical glucocorticoids are monotherapy in strictly inflammatory processes or add-on therapy to anti-candidal or antibacterial regimens to decrease inflammation, enhance healing of erosions, and prevent relapses.

- Desonide 0.05% ointment topically

- Clotrimazole cream topically BID for 2 weeks

- Hydrocortisone 1% ointment topical BID to TID for 2 weeks (added to iodoquinol 1% cream or fusidic acid 2% cream)

**Nutritional Replacement/Supplementation**

Nutritional replacement/supplementation is necessary in cases of avitaminosis, mineral deficiencies, or general malnutrition. The specifics are beyond this review.

**Dental**

A dentist should refit ill-fitting dentures or other dental apparati to restore facial contour. As the functional reservoir of Candida, treat dentures with an antifungal and cleaned frequently. In chronically debilitated patients, a cannula incorporated into the dentures can channel salivary flow into the oropharynx.

Sometimes, malocclusion persists despite dental realignment or is not a viable option for a patient. Other times, depressions at the commissures exist and are amenable to dermal filler therapy.  Injectable fillers (collagen, hyaluronic acid) or surgical implants can change mouth shape and restore commissural anatomy. This makes saliva less likely to accumulate at the fissures. A practitioner who is well-versed in the administration of fillers should apply these fillers since the purpose is beyond the normal cosmetic application.

**Improved Control of Chronic Medical Conditions that Contribute to AC**

- Blood sugar control in diabetes as HgbA1c directly correlates with the incidence of AC

- Anti-retroviral therapy in HIV/AIDS as immune status indirectly correlated with the incidence of AC

**Elimination of Behavioral Practices that Contribute to AC**

- Tobacco smoking

- Lip licking

**Treatment Failures**

- Failure to identify/eradicate oral candidiasis

- Resistant species of Candida

- Resistant strains of Staphylococcus or Streptococcus

- Failure to remediate underlying modifiable risk factors such as hygienic issues, ill-fitting dentures, behaviors.

- Persistent, unmodifiable risk factors

- Undiagnosed nutritional deficiency

- Undiagnosed systemic inflammatory conditions (Sjogren, IBD)

- Unidentified immunosuppression

- Undiagnosed malignancy

Follow up in 2 weeks recommended.