The etiology of factitious disorder is largely based on speculation. There are no high-quality, large-scale studies demonstrating consistent etiological factors; however, observations have been made based on case reports and small studies. Many experts consider factitious disorder to be largely developmental. It is thought that the behaviors exhibited are maladaptive responses to life events, especially during childhood.

- Patients with factitious disorder are more likely to have suffered a major childhood illness. It appears that for some patients, this early experience with the healthcare system is pivotal in the development of this disorder. One review of 20 cases reported 60% of patients had a history of significant childhood illness.

- Most experts agree that patients with factitious disorder are much more likely to have suffered from a difficult or traumatic childhood.

- There is a strong association among patients with personality disorders and factitious disorder, and many overlapping behavioral traits are evident, further supporting the developmental theory.

There are several proposed mechanisms behind the behavior found in factitious disorder:

- Most obvious is the affection one may derive from the sick role, especially in those who sensed a lack of affection during childhood.

- Seeking and maintaining relationships.

- Enjoying being cared for by others.

- Coping with stressful life events or a lack of identity.

- A sense of accomplishment in duping physicians

Some experts have described factitious disorder as a type of behavioral addiction. Patients with factitious disorder have described an uncontrollable urge to maintain the sick role and, conversely, a desire to overcome their dependence.