**Restrictive lung diseases - fibrosis and interstitial lung disease**: In interstitial lung diseases, the lung and/or chest wall compliance has become decreased. Therefore there is an increased tendency for the lungs to collapse. Because of the restriction on lung expansion, there is also a reduced lung volume (low FVC and TLC). Since at the original FRC, the tendency to collapse is high, the lung-chest wall system seeks a lower FRC to balance the opposing forces. PFTs usually reveal in a high FEV1/FVC ratio. FEV1 is the volume of air forcefully expired in the first second.

Values of 80 percent (0.8) of the average are considered normal. Restrictive lung diseases include fibrosis and interstitial lung diseases (pneumoconiosis, sarcoidosis, etc.). Pulmonary mechanical issues can also lead to a restriction in lung expansion.

Restrictive lung disease can result from mechanical issues with peripheral hypoventilation, including poor muscular effort or structural dysfunction. Conditions like muscular dystrophy, polio, myasthenia gravis, and Guillain-barre syndrome can cause poor muscular effort. Muscular dystrophy reduces the ability of the lung to distend for unknown reasons, which reduces lung compliance. However, although there is an impact, respiratory muscle weakness or tension is not directly related to pulmonary compliance. Scoliosis or morbid obesity can also cause structural limitations.

**Obstructive lung disease**: When there is an obstruction of airflow, the path of air becomes halted earlier than expected at high lung volumes. This condition leads to trapped air in the lungs. Compliance can be normal or increased. PFTs usually reveal a low FEV1/FVC ratio as FEV1 is reduced significantly more than FVC. Again, since at the original FRC, the tendency to collapse is high, the lung-chest wall system seeks a lower FRC to balance the opposing forces. Obstructive lung diseases include asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic bronchitis, and emphysema.

- **Asthmatic**patients present with cough, wheeze, dyspnea, tachypnea, hypoxemia, and mucus plugging. Asthma is characterized by hypersensitive bronchi (a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction). Diagnosis can be made by spirometry and followed by a methacholine challenge.

- **COPD**categorizes into two conditions: chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
- Patients with **chronic bronchitis**are also known as blue bloaters. They present with wheezing, dyspnea, crackles, cyanosis, CO2 retention, and/or secondary polycythemia. There is usually a history of chronic productive cough because of hyperplasia and hypertrophy of glands secreting mucus in the bronchi.
- Patients with **emphysema**are also known as pink puffers. A classic finding in these patients is a barrel-shaped chest, which is apparent on a chest X-ray. DCLO decreases due to the destruction of alveolar walls. The most common risk factor is smoking, which leads to a loss of elastic fibers and increased lung compliance. A common technique used to relieve symptoms is breathing with pursed lips to increase pressure in the airways and prevent collapse.

There are cases of **mixed obstructive and restrictive lung diseases**where there is a premature formation of segments that restrict airflow. Also, there is low lung compliance, which, combined, leads to a decrease in FVC.