While prehospital spinal immobilization has been performed for decades, current data indicate that not every patient needs to be immobilized. Now the National Association of EMS Physicians and the American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma suggest a limited application of spinal immobilization. These latest guidelines indicate that the number of patients who may benefit from immobilization is very small. The committee went on to state that empirical utilization of the spinal backboards during transport should be used with caution as in some cases their potential risks outweigh the benefits. Further, in patients who have sustained penetrating trauma and have no obvious neurological deficit, the use of spinal immobilization is not recommended. The EMS worker must use clinical acumen before deciding to use the spinal board.

Finally, spinal immobilization has been associated with back pain, neck pain, and making it very difficult to perform some procedures including imaging. Spinal immobilization has also been associated with respiratory difficulties, especially when large straps are applied across the chest.

While many EMS organizations have adopted these new guidelines on spinal immobilization, this is not universal. Some EMS systems fear litigation if they do not immobilize patients. Patients who should have spinal immobilization include the following:

- Blunt trauma

- Spinal tenderness or pain

- Patients with an altered level of consciousness

- Neurological deficits

- Obvious anatomic deformity of the spine

- High energy trauma in a patient intoxicated from drugs, alcohol, or a distracting injury.