Diagnostic evaluation for suspected SFN often involves a multitude of tests. While nerve conduction studies and needle EMG demonstrate only large fiber involvement leading to normal results in patients with isolated small fiber involvement, these tests may be useful in evaluating subclinical large nerve fiber involvement and alternative diagnoses, including alternative diagnoses lumbosacral radiculopathy.

Small fibers travel too slowly, and their conduction responses cannot be captured by a nerve conduction study, which is a routine test performed to evaluate large sensory and motor nerve fibers. Therefore, a skin biopsy is often used to assess small sensory nerve fibers in the skin. Skin biopsy is a minimally invasive procedure that may also be used to evaluate intraepidermal nerve fiber density. Skin specimens are typically obtained by a 3 mm punch biopsy at the distal leg and thigh and are then sent for laboratory analysis. SFN may be diagnosed if the intraepidermal nerve fiber density is less than normal. Skin biopsy testing has an 88% sensitivity in the diagnosis of SFN.

An additional test that may be performed is quantitative sudomotor axon reflex testing (QSART), a noninvasive autonomic study used to assess the volume of sweat produced in the limbs in response to acetylcholine. QSART can measure postganglionic sympathetic sudomotor nerve function and may provide a sensitivity of up to 80% in the diagnosis of SFN.

Additional useful diagnostic tests may include tilt-table and cardiovagal testing for patients with palpitations and orthostasis and thermoregulatory sweat testing for patients with abnormal sweating patterns.

The diagnosis of SFN remains difficult as there is not yet an available gold standard test. While some sources have suggested that the presence of at least two abnormal findings, including clinical presentation, quantitative sensory testing (QST), and skin biopsy are the best diagnostic criteria for SFN, other sources have included the inclusion of QSART instead of skin biopsy for diagnosis.

While as many as half of cases of SFN are considered idiopathic, it is important to attempt to find the underlying cause to find a possible treatment.

**First Tier Studies**

- Complete blood cell count to evaluate for hematologic abnormalities

- Complete metabolic panel to assess for renal or hepatic impairment

- Lipid panel to evaluate for hyperlipidemia

- Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and antinuclear antibody to evaluate for inflammatory disease

- Thyroid-stimulating hormone, free T4, and T3 levels to assess for hypothyroidism

- 2-hour oral glucose tolerance test and hemoglobin A1C to evaluate for diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance

- Extractable nuclear antigen testing for Sjögren syndrome A and B antibodies

- Vitamin B12, methylmalonic acid, and homocysteine levels to assess for vitamin B12 deficiency

- Tissue transglutaminase and antigliadin antibodies to evaluate for Celiac disease

- Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus antibodies to evaluate for HIV and hepatitis

**Second Tier Studies**

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme to evaluate for sarcoidosis

- Thiamine (vitamin B1) to evaluate for vitamin B1 deficiency

- Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) to assess for vitamin B6 deficiency

- Copper level to evaluate for copper deficiency

- Serum and urine monoclonal protein analysis, nerve biopsy, and fat pad analysis to evaluate for systemic amyloidosis

- Paraneoplastic autoantibody panel to evaluate for paraneoplastic disease

- Ganglionic acetylcholine receptor antibodies to evaluate for autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy

**Genetic Studies**

- SCN9A and SCN10A genes to evaluate for hereditary small fiber neuropathy

- GLA gene to evaluate for Fabry disease

- Transthyretin gene to evaluate for familial amyloidosis

- ABCA1 gene to evaluate for Tangier disease