There are several options for surgical simulation, namely animal and human cadaver simulation, low fidelity trainers, as well as virtual reality simulation. Animal and cadaver laboratories have high validity in terms of anatomy, haptics, and tissue quality; however, the changing ethics, regulations, and cost have decreased the popularity of this training simulation model.

Simulation assessment can be performed in a variety of ways and can include participant self-assessment, participant assessment of others, facilitator assessment of student, standardized patient assessment, and sensors within the mannequin. Standardized patients are beneficial for learning communication skills than a conventional lecture.

While simulation across the United States in the field of obstetrics and gynecology is widely available, there exists a disparity in the perception in the retention and benefit learned during simulations.

Simulation plays a role in competency-based medical education. Outcome-based education (OBE) ensures that trainees are competent at the end of their training, but defining what 'competent' truly means poses a challenge for this type of evaluation. This type of education relies on discrete and summative assessments, often at the end of a program. It is usually evaluated on a 5-point Likert-scale of normative ranking. On the other hand, competency-based medical education (CBME) - relies on small elements of learning that can be assembled into over-arching competency. Competency-based evaluation relies on longitudinal evaluations over a training program. There are criterion-based to each specific competency, and it often takes place in the clinical setting.