Once a clinician suspects ICVT per the history and physical, urgent neuroimaging is warranted in the initial diagnostic workup. There are no pertinent laboratory examinations that can evaluate for ICVT, and the diagnosis is typically made with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV). If the institution does not have MRI, then cranial computed tomography (CT) with CT venography (CTV) can also be an option.

MRI with gradient-echo T2 susceptibility-weighted sequences with MR venography is considered the most sensitive imaging modality for ICVT. Typically the clot will present as an area of hypointensity within the cortical vein only on MRI. If a clot is present within the sinuses, then a diagnosis of cortical venous thrombosis should be considered. Regarding cortical venous thrombosis, one study recommended that "cord sign" seen on non-contrast-enhanced brain CT can point to the diagnosis of CVT. Cord sign describes a hyperattenuating cord appearance seen within a dural venous sinus.

While laboratory tests alone are insufficient for diagnosis, some tests have significant prognostic value. Patients with ICVT with a high pretest probability of thrombophilia should be evaluated for genetic etiologies. A patient could benefit from a screening for protein C deficiency, protein S deficiency, antithrombin deficiency, G20210 prothrombin gene variant, and factor V Leiden thrombophilia. Evaluation for lupus anticoagulant and antiphospholipid syndrome should also be considered.