Naloxone, a nonselective opioid antagonist, is used to treat the central nervous system and respiratory depression associated with opioid overdose. Nearly forty years ago, the FDA approved naloxone in injectable formulations to be used by trained professionals. Due to the increase in opioid overdoses, there has been an increased momentum to distribute naloxone to individuals using opioids at a higher risk of overdose in the United States. The first program was started in Chicago in the mid-1990s and has since spread to many other cities and states. It is important to note that naloxone may precipitate withdrawal symptoms.

The US FDA has approved three drugs to treat opioid dependence: methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone. Methadone is a long-acting mu agonist used to treat opioid withdrawal symptoms and cravings. Currently, methadone for the maintenance of narcotic addiction or detoxifying a patient is only permitted by licensed treatment programs or methadone clinics. (It can still be prescribed/dispensed for the indication of pain treatment like other opioids.) The abrupt discontinuation of methadone may result in acute withdrawal symptoms; therefore, discontinuation requires slow tapering.

Buprenorphine, a long-acting partial mu agonist and kappa antagonist, reduces cravings and withdrawal symptoms. Clinicians can prescribe it with a Drug Abuse Treatment Act of 2000 waiver. Abrupt discontinuation can also result in withdrawal.

Naltrexone is a mu receptor antagonist which does not require a special license or waiver for clinicians to prescribe it. Before using naltrexone to treat withdrawal or abstinence from opioids, patients must discontinue opioid use to detoxify, a potentially challenging obstacle for some patients. Naltrexone has been successful in treating alcohol, nicotine, and stimulant use disorder.

However, research has revealed that conventional therapies like methadone or buprenorphine and naloxone do not work for all individuals with opioid use disorder, resulting in approximately 50% of patients suffering from relapse following treatment. Novel treatments, including a kappa-opioid receptor and serotonin modulator, as well as a vaccine that recruits the immune system to block opioid entry into the central nervous system, provide promising areas of research.