The differential diagnosis for syncope is broad and includes cardiac arrhythmia, acute blood loss, seizure, orthostasis, dehydration, dissection, subarachnoid hemorrhage, pulmonary embolus, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, trauma (concussion, epidural hematoma), toxins, and many other pathologies. History and physical exam should focus on ruling out life-threatening entities before a diagnosis of vasovagal syncope. Patients should be asked specifically about family and personal history of cardiovascular diseases, the potential for gastrointestinal blood loss, the potential for genitourinary blood loss, and medications that could be complicating the presentation (i.e., antihypertensives, antihistamines, anticholinergics, anticoagulants). Patients with syncope also frequently require a trauma evaluation to assess for injuries sustained during the syncopal event.

Most patients with vasovagal syncope present with a history of a syncopal prodrome. Patients will classically describe a feeling of lightheadedness. Feelings of warmth and nausea are common. Many patients describe tunnel vision, ringing in their ears, and profuse sweating. Patients should return to consciousness spontaneously. During the event, the patient will usually be bradycardic, hypotensive, pale, and diaphoretic. After the event, the patient should have an entirely normal physical exam. Abnormalities on physical exam (such as tongue biting, which suggests seizure, or ongoing pallor, which suggests symptomatic anemia) or atypical history should prompt a more thorough evaluation into the underlying cause of syncope.