**Serum Osmolality**

Changes in serum osmolality can be useful in differentiating the causes of various electrolyte and acid-base balance disorders.

Osmolality (mOsm/kg) = 2 Na (mmol/L) + glucose (mg/dL)/18 + urea (mg/dL)/2.8

The difference between the calculated and measured osmolality is known as the osmol gap (also known as the osmolal or osmolar gap). A normal osmol gap is 2 or less, though according to some sources, it is greater than 10 mOsm/kg in the clinical environment.

An elevated serum osmol gap can be found in the following clinical scenarios/disease states:

- Pseudohyponatremia: A low reported serum sodium concentration (less than 135 mEq/L) in the presence of normal measured serum osmolality. This can be the result of hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia, in which case these molecules make up an increased portion of the serum sample, resulting in a falsely decreased sodium reading. Based on the aforementioned Smithline-Gardner equation, the falsely decreased sodium concentration will decrease the calculated serum osmolality, resulting in an elevated osmol gap when compared to the normal range measured osmolality.

- Exogenous substances: Ingestion of toxic alcohols such as ethanol, methanol, propylene glycol, and acetone can cause elevated osmol gap. The presence of an elevated osmol gap and suspicion of volatile alcohol poisoning often prompts further investigation by a volatile screen.

- Endogenous substances: Metabolic states such as diabetic ketoacidosis or alcoholic ketoacidosis increase the concentration of ketones in the bloodstream, increasing the osmolality within the blood and creating an osmol gap. Lactic acidosis can result in moderate lactic acidosis due to the accumulation of products from the breakdown of glycogen.

The value of change in the osmol gap can also give some insight into the cause of the elevation. For instance, renal failure and ketoacidosis often present with an osmol gap equal to or less than 15 to 20 mOsm/kg, while an osmol gap greater than 20 mOsm/kg often indicates alcohol or acetone accumulation. Lactic acidosis often results in an average osmol gap of approximately 11 mOsm/kg.

**Urine Osmolality**

Urine osmolality is useful in the investigation of various electrolyte disturbances, particularly in the presence of hypo- or hypernatremia.

In patients with low serum osmolality and clinically normal extracellular fluid volume, urine osmolality can distinguish between various etiologies. In these cases, urine osmolality >100 mOsm/kg is indicative of the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), hypothyroidism, or glucocorticoid deficiency. On the other hand, a urine osmolality <100 mOsm/kg is seen in patients with primary polydipsia or Beer drinker's potomania.

**Stool Osmolality**

Measuring stool osmolality can be helpful in the evaluation of patients with diarrhea to differentiate osmotic diarrhea from secretory diarrhea. The stool osmotic gap is defined as the difference between the measured osmolality and a calculated osmolality (2*([fecal Na+] + [fecal K+]).