# Continuing Education Activity

This activity discusses clinical aspects of mitral regurgitation (MR) in terms of etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, management, and treatment guidelines for clinicians, which should help them understand this common disease comprehensively. It reviews the role of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the etiology of mitral regurgitation.
- Outline the clinical bedside assessment of mitral regurgitation.
- Review the most updated guidelines for the surveillance of mitral regurgitation.
- Describe various treatment strategies such as surgical and transcatheter therapies for mitral regurgitation with their relative risks and benefits.

# Introduction

Mitral valve insufficiency or mitral regurgitation (MR) is characterized by the reversal of blood flow from the left ventricle (LV) to the left atrium (LA), typically in the systolic phase of the cardiac cycle. It continues to be a significant issue in cardiovascular health worldwide. Serial advancements in the diagnostic tools, clinical management, and treatment of this valvular lesion have changed the clinical approach over the last several decades. The mitral valve apparatus is a complex but dynamic structure and consists of the mitral annulus, two leaflets, chords, and papillary muscles, which are surrounded by complex anatomy in LA and LV.

# Etiology

Based on the acuity of presentation, mitral regurgitation can be acute or chronic. However, acute MR has a very specific set of etiological reasons such as rupture of the chord/papillary muscle from trauma or ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), or infective endocarditis (IE) leading to leaflet perforation or rupture of the chords.

In the chronic MR, causative mechanisms can be related to the valvular apparatus itself, causing primary (degenerative/organic) MR versus related to structural changes in LV geometry leading to secondary (functional) MR. Most of the intrinsic abnormalities in the valve arising from local/systemic infection, inflammation, excess growth of the tissue, drug or radiation-induced damage, and calcific degeneration lead to primary MR.

In secondary MR, the basic structure of the mitral valve is preserved, but dilatation of LV cavity from various reasons including ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathies, increased annular diameter, tethering of papillary muscle, migration of papillary muscles due to structural remodeling of LV, lead to failure of coaptation of mitral leaflets.

# Epidemiology

mitral regurgitation is one of the commonest valvular heart disease worldwide as well as in North America, affecting greater than 175 million people worldwide and around 5 million people in the United States.

# Pathophysiology

In primary mitral regurgitation, there is a pathological disruption in the integrity of the mitral valve apparatus, causing regurgitation, whereas, in secondary MR, the problem arises due to structural changes in the left ventricle (LV), causing failure of coaptation of mitral leaflets due to annular dilatation.

The popular classification defined by Carpentier has given a surgeon's perspective for the corrective approach towards MR based on the leaflet motion of the valve.

- Type I - normal leaflet motion with normal coaptation (leaflet perforation, cleft)

- Type II - abnormal coaptation with excessive leaflet motion (either due to excess of tissue/excess of motion- mitral valve prolapse)

- Type IIIa - abnormal apposition of leaflets due to restricted leaflet motion both in systole and diastole (mostly from organic leaflet issues such as rheumatic heart disease)

- Type IIIb - abnormal apposition of leaflets due to restricted leaflet motion in systole (from LV remodeling)

**Primary MR**

Myxomatous degeneration with excessive thickening of mitral valve leaflets causes redundant lengthening of leaflets and prolapse in younger patients, and fibroelastic deficiency leading to chordal rupture causes primary MR in the older population. Barlow disease is in the same spectrum as thickened leaflets and redundant motion.

**Secondary MR**

Secondary mitral valve insufficiency is the continuum of the underlying myocardial disease process- either as a result of acute or chronic myocardial ischemia or nonischemic cardiomyopathy. Ischemic MR typically arises from obstructive coronary artery disease. Acute ischemic MR happens due to acute myocardial infarction causing disruption in subvalvular apparatus such as ruptured chords or rupture of a papillary muscle. Chronic ischemic MR is a sequela of altered LV geometry, causing displacement of papillary muscles and functional disintegration of the mitral apparatus.

Ischemic MR being the largest contributor to secondary MR, nonischemic cardiomyopathy from various reasons also leads to remodeling of LV cavity with progressive dilatation, dyssynchronous contractility, alteration in systolic annular movements, and decreased LV function, eventually causing functional MR. The vicious cycle of MR causing LV dilatation, which leads to further annular dilatation, causes progressive worsening of MR.

It is very important to understand the complex exchange of causes and mechanisms of MR for accurate prediction of outcomes after surgical intervention because a significant overlap exists between causes and mechanisms of MR. Another recommended approach to evaluate the mechanism of MR is if the issue is leaflet apposition or leaflet coaptation.

# History and Physical

Presentation of acute mitral regurgitation is typically quite dramatic with sudden clinical and hemodynamic decompensation from discrete etiology such as papillary muscle rupture from myocardial infarction, blunt trauma to the chest, perforation of the mitral leaflet, etc.

The majority of patients suffering from chronic MR are asymptomatic, but serial quantitative assessment and follow-up of a patient with asymptomatic MR have shown a significant impact on the survival and clinical outcome.

# Evaluation

Basic 12 lead electrocardiogram may show sinus rhythm or development of atrial arrhythmias, most prevalent being atrial fibrillation, atrial/ventricular enlargement, evidence of acute or chronic ischemia, and conduction disorders such as bundle branch block(s). Chest X-ray may reveal cardiomegaly, chamber enlargement, signs of heart failure, and serial prognostic data.

Echocardiography, including transthoracic (TTE), transesophageal (TEE), and 3-dimensional (3D) mode, remains the "gold standard" modality of investigation for both diagnoses as well as management of MR.

In acute MR, TTE plays a crucial role in urgent bedside assessment of the underlying mechanism of MR, intracardiac pressures, and ventricular function. Due to the sudden onset of MR, an acute increase in LA pressure leads to pulmonary edema, and hyperdynamic LV function is noted. The murmur can be holosystolic or early systolic or barely audible due to the rapid equalization of pressures in LA and LV. If TTE is suboptimal, TEE provides very specific information, including vegetations or abscess, in case of infective endocarditis.

The severity of MR by qualitative and quantitative measures can be assessed by TTE with various methods of grading as follows:

**1. Color Doppler Method**

- **A. Regurgitant jet area**- The area of LA occupied by the MR jet gives an approximate estimation of the severity of MR, but the correlation is weak. In acute MR, the jet may not appear wide and large due to the rapid equalization of pressures. Also, the MR jet area highly depends on blood pressure, LA enlargement, LV systolic function, and eccentricity. Also, technical limitations in echocardiography itself can cause alterations in the jet area. In general, a central jet that occupies less than 20% of the LA area is considered trace or mild MR, and jet penetrating pulmonary veins is labeled severe MR. Eccentric jets should not be evaluated by these criteria.

- **B. Vena contracta method**- The high velocity, laminar flow at or just downstream of MR jet, is the narrowest portion of MR jet, and severity can be reliable as it is independent of flow rate and driving pressure of MR. Measurement of vena contracts (VC) is done in the plane perpendicular to the commissural lane in multiple images. In general, VC less than 0.3 cm is considered mild, greater than 0.7 cm as severe MR, and between 0.3 to 0.7 cm as moderate MR, but then other parameters need to be considered for confirmation.

- **C. Flow convergence or PISA (proximal isovelocity surface area) method**- Based on a complex hydrodynamic equation, PISA can be estimated on TTE/TEE after adjustment of the Nyquist limit and hemispheric shell of highest velocity and the minimum area is measured. Effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) is calculated from PISA measured by parallel alignment of continuous wave (CW) Doppler signal to MR jet and selection of appropriate aliasing velocity, as large errors can be introduced if aliasing velocity and alignment of CW signal are not accurate. It is a reliable method mostly for central MR jets and circular orifice. By convention, EROA ≥ 0.4 cm is graded as severe MR, 0.20 to 0.39 cm moderate, and less than 0.20 cm mild MR.

**2. Pulsed Doppler Method (Pulsed Wave (PW) method)**

The pulsed Doppler method is based on the principle that, in the absence of significant valvular regurgitant lesion(s) and intracardiac shunt, stroke volume (SV) through any cardiac valve should be the same to maintain a uniform cardiac output. So, to compensate for regurgitant flow volume, SV through the pertinent valve increases proportionately. SV, through any valvular annulus, is calculated by the cross-sectional area of the annulus and velocity-time integral (VTI) of the flow-through that annulus. Except for the tricuspid annulus, all other three valves have near-circular annuli with minor variations. SV is then calculated from these annuli, and SV of normal aortic or pulmonic valve is subtracted from SV of the mitral valve to obtain regurgitant volume (RV). Regurgitant fraction (RF) can be calculated from the ratio of RV to SV through the mitral valve. RV less than 30 ml is mild, and greater than 60 ml is severe. Errors can be introduced with incorrect measurements of the annulus, angulation, and VTI.

**3. Continuous Wave Doppler Method**

Apart from PISA, as mentioned above, the peak velocity of 4 to 6 m/s and the density of the jet have been directly correlated with significant MR. Also, early peaking of maximal systolic velocity, dense Doppler envelope, and triangular jet on CW is suggestive of severe MR in the central jet, but they are not reliable in eccentric jet due to lack of alignment to Doppler signal.

**4. Pulmonary Vein Flow Method**

In normal conditions, the pulmonary venous flow velocity is higher in systole than in diastole. But with progressive MR, the systolic velocity gets blunted, and in severe MR, it gets reversed, which is considered a very specific sign. Sometimes, a reversal of flow selectively occurs in one over other pulmonary veins. Hence, it is recommended to assess the flow in all pulmonary veins. In the presence of elevated LA pressure and atrial fibrillation, the reversal of flow may not be prominent.

Given the advantages and disadvantages of all these quantification techniques, it is recommended to utilize as many parameters as possible during TTE/TEE for a comprehensive assessment of MR. All these methods have provided uniform applicable criteria as well as reproducibility of data for long-term follow-up.

Recent advances in cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) have enhanced the assessment of the mitral valve apparatus.

Left heart catheterization with coronary angiography and right heart catheterization for hemodynamic assessment of MR is usually done after the confirmation of significant MR with noninvasive investigations and patients being considered for surgical/transcatheter interventional treatment. With advanced noninvasive modalities, the use of contrast left ventriculography for assessment of MR has gone down. Nevertheless, MR grade of more than 3 to 4 on ventriculogram portends severe MR. Assessment of coronary anatomy for ischemic MR is very important to determine percutaneous versus surgical intervention. Recent data shows that sensitivity and specificity for the correlation between MR and magnitude of large V wave in right heart catheterization have changed but remain a reliable parameter.

# Treatment / Management

Due to a sudden hemodynamic decompensation, acute MR typically requires urgent surgical or percutaneous intervention.

or cardiogenic shock with a complex challenge of hemodynamic stabilization and eventual corrective intervention. An appropriate combination of inotropic and vasopressor agents and timely intervention of mechanical support devices such as intra-aortic balloon pumps or non-surgical heart pumps are essential cornerstones along with mechanical ventilation in critical conditions.

In cases of severe MR due to acute IE, both MV replacement as well as MV repair in properly preselected patients have shown similar clinical outcomes.

For primary chronic MR, surveillance and timely intervention are key factors for better outcomes. Early surgical intervention has shown better survival rates over conservative medical management in patients with a flail mitral leaflet.

Mitral valve repair remains the preferred method of surgical correction in degenerative MR with a high success rate and less chance of recurrence or a repeat intervention.

For functional MR, the role of surgery is still not very clear, as MR is just one part of the LV disease spectrum, and addressing MR without adequate attention to underlying myocardial disease has not provided therapeutic success.

For evaluation of patients being considered for MV replacement, several factors need to be considered for the choice of metallic versus bioprosthetic valves, such as age, MV anatomy, patients' preference, available surgical expertise, risk of bleeding on long term anticoagulation, access to healthcare, and monitoring of anticoagulation.

Several echocardiographic parameters have been described as predictors of recurrence of ischemic MR after MV repair.

While transcatheter repair has been established as a standard of treatment for severe MR, percutaneous replacement of mitral valve with a bioprosthetic valve for inoperable cases of MR is still under the process of rigorous research and trials with its inherent challenges.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Acute coronary syndrome

- Severe aortic stenosis

- Infective endocarditis

- Cardiogenic shock

- Exacerbation of chronic systolic, diastolic, or combined CHF

- Ventricular septal defect

- Pulmonary embolism

- Blunt chest trauma

- Carcinoid syndrome

- Unstable supraventricular or ventricular arrhythmia

# Staging

Stages of chronic primary mitral regurgitation can be categorized as follows with consideration of hemodynamics, valvular anatomy with echocardiographic features, and symptoms which are typically present only in stage D, i.e., severe symptomatic MR.

A. At risk of MR - mild MVP, mild leaflet thickening, normal coaptation- no MR or small central jet (20% of LA), vena contracta less than 0.3 cm

B. Progressive MR - severe MVP, rheumatic changes as leaflet thickening and loss of central coaptation, history of IE- central MR jet (20% to 40% of LA), mild LA enlargement, normal LV size, and function, normal pulmonary pressure.

C. Asymptomatic severe MR - severe MVP, flail leaflet, rheumatic changes as leaflet thickening and loss of central coaptation, history of IE, radiation-induced thickened leaflets - moderate/severe LA enlargement, LV dilation, pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary artery systolic pressure PASP greater than 50 mmHg), central MR jet (greater than 40% of LA), holosystolic eccentric MR jet, vena contracta ≥0.7 cm, regurgitant volume (RV) ≥60 mL, Regurgitant fraction (RF) ≥50%, ERO ≥0.40 cm

-  C1: LVEF >60% and LVESD <40 mm

-  C2: LVEF ≤60% and LVESD ≥40 mm

(LVEF= LV Ejection Fraction, LVESD= LV End Systolic Dimension)

D. Severe symptomatic MR- severe MVP, flail leaflet, rheumatic changes with leaflet thickening & loss of central coaptation, history of IE, radiation-induced thickened leaflets- moderate/severe LA enlargement, LV dilation, pulmonary hypertension, central MR jet (greater than 40% of LA), holosystolic eccentric MR jet, vena contracta ≥0.7 cm, RV ≥60 mL, RF ≥50%, ERO ≥0.40 cm. Symptoms- impaired exercise tolerance, dyspnea on exertion.

Similarly, stages of chronic secondary MR can be briefly summarized with valve hemodynamics and anatomy as follows; in all the categories, symptoms from coronary artery disease or CHF may be present, but only in the last category symptoms can be attributed to underlying MR.

A. At risk of MR- Normal valve apparatus in a patient with known coronary artery disease- No MR jet or small central jet (<20% of LA), Vena contracta <0.3 cm

B. Progressive MR- Regional wall motion abnormality (RWMA), LV dilation, annular dilatation, mild tethering of leaflets, mild loss of central coaptation- ERO <0.40 cm, RV <60 mL, RF <50%

C. Asymptomatic severe MR- RWMA, annular dilation, severe tethering of leaflets, severe loss of central coaptation- ERO ≥0.40 cm RV ≥60 mL, RF <50%

D. Symptomatic severe MR- RWMA, annular dilation, severe tethering of leaflets, severe loss of central coaptation- ERO ≥0.40 cm RV ≥60 mL, RF <50%.

# Prognosis

Prognosis, in terms of mortality and morbidity, is highly variable. The presence of moderate to severe MR in patients with asymptomatic mitral valve prolapse (MVP) is a significant prognostic factor in long-term cardiovascular health and mortality.

# Complications

Complications of MR itself include progressive CHF with or without symptoms, LV dysfunction, development of atrial fibrillation, and subsequent risk of thromboembolism, right ventricular dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, infective endocarditis. Early complications from the surgery or percutaneous intervention for MR include bleeding, infection at the local incision site, dehiscence of prosthetic material and infective endocarditis, stroke, atrial fibrillation, cardiac tamponade, and death. Late complications after the surgery include the redevelopment of MR requiring repeat surgery, symptomatic CHF, LA/LV enlargement and dysfunction, arrhythmias, and death.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Routine postoperative care with immediate critical care monitoring and subsequent inpatient recovery should be done as per the institutional protocols. Rehabilitative services should be introduced as early as possible for expedited recovery. A postoperative echocardiogram is recommended before discharge and at follow-up on a regular basis.

# Consultations

When the diagnosis of MR is suspected based on symptoms, physical examination, and/or investigation, the patient should be referred to a cardiologist. Based on the severity of MR with structural changes seen on echocardiogram and symptoms, cardiovascular physicians can recommend medical treatment versus surgical intervention. In the latter case, a thorough discussion with the heart valve team, preferably in the experienced center, should be carried out to determine the most appropriate therapeutic approach.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Mitral regurgitation (MR) or mitral valve insufficiency is a very common heart valve disorder. It is defined as the leaking of blood flow from the left ventricle (LV) to the left atrium (LA). Most patients do not have any symptoms, but with the progression of leakiness, they can have shortness of breath, chest pain, exercise intolerance, leg swelling, and many more. Patients should seek medical attention in case of any of these symptoms. Investigations including EKG, echocardiogram, chest x-ray, and advanced tests of imaging can confirm the diagnosis. After confirmation of the diagnosis of clinically significant MR, routine surveillance and regular follow-up should be done under cardiology services. Depending on etiology, symptomatology, results of investigations, and team discussions, the patient should be guided for medical treatment and/or surgical treatment, including open-heart surgery or transcatheter intervention.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

MR remains a very common global valvular heart disease with a rising patient population due to a rapid increase in the aging population.

MV surgery is recommended in symptomatic, severe, primary MR without significant impairment of LV function (LVEF>30%)[Level 1] and with impaired LV function as well (LVEF <30%). [Level 2] In asymptomatic, severe primary MR, with normal EF >60% and normal LV cavity size (LVESD <40 mm), MV surgery is recommended [level 2], with preference to MV repair over replacement when the likelihood of successful repair is high (>95%) and expected mortality is low (<1%). [Level 2] Presence of LV cavity dilatation (LVESD >40 mm) or intermediate decline in systolic function (LVEF=30% to 60%) in asymptomatic severe MR is considered class I recommendation for MV surgery.[Level 1] New-onset atrial fibrillation or the development of pulmonary hypertension (PASP>50mmHg) are also indications for MV surgery.[Level 2] In patients with severe symptomatic secondary MR despite optimal treatment of CAD, HF, and CRT, MV repair can be considered for symptomatic improvement. [Level 2] In symptomatic severe MR with prohibitive surgical risk, a transcatheter repair is recommended when MV anatomy is favorable and patients have a reasonable life expectancy otherwise.