AML is a common hematological malignancy in adults. Despite many advances, the malignancy still carries a poor prognosis. Hence, it is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a hematologist, oncologist. internist, pathologist, and an intensivist. The key is to prevent more harm to the patient, and hence a universal treatment plan must be developed and carried out.

The pharmacist should educate the patient on the chemotherapeutic drugs, their benefits, and their adverse effects.  The oncology nurse is vital for treatment administration and monitoring for potential complications.

The nurse should educate the patient on infection prevention by washing hands, rinsing all fruits and vegetables, avoiding crowds, and seeking help at the first sign of fever.

The radiologist is essential for the placement of long-term venous catheters and other imaging studies. The primary care physician should educate the patient on personal hygiene, hand washing, and immunization. The dietitian should help manage nutrition, and the social worker should ensure that the patient has all the support to complete the treatment.

The only person who should make changes in medications is the oncologist. A conference should be held on a weekly basis, and all concerns attended to at that time. Patients should be provided with a realistic message about survival.

An interprofessional approach to evaluation and management will lead to the best outcomes. [Level 5] Overall, life expectancy has increased slightly, but most patients have a markedly shortened lifespan.