The aim of treatment for an acute attack of hepatic porphyria is to abate the attack as quickly as possible and to provide appropriate supportive care and symptomatic care until the acute attack resolves. Hospitalization is usually required. Therapy requires confirmation that the patient indeed has acute porphyria, based on the finding of elevated urinary porphobilinogen (PBG), either at present or previously. Still, it does not require a diagnosis of the exact type of acute porphyria. In a patient known to have acute porphyria based on prior testing, the presence of an acute attack is largely established clinically.

**Treatment of Acute Attack**

- Intravenous hemin: For patients with an acute attack severe enough to require hospitalization, opioid analgesia, or other intravenous medication, or that is accompanied by nausea and vomiting, motor neuropathy, paresis, seizures, agitation, delirium, psychosis, ileus that prevents oral intake, or hyponatremia, intravenous administration of hemin is recommended.

- Nutrition and hydration: Carbohydrate loading should be used to correct the fasting state and as a temporizing measure while waiting for an available dose of intravenous hemin.

- Hyponatremia: Can be severe in some patients and may require urgent intravenous hypertonic saline administration in symptomatic patients.

- Seizure: Seizures occur in 10% to 20% of cases and can be controlled with a short-acting benzodiazepine, gabapentin, or magnesium. In patients with refractory seizures, anesthesia with propofol is safe.

- Liver transplantation (LT) is reserved for patients with life-threatening acute attacks of AIP or progression of symptoms despite hemin therapy.

**Management of Frequent Attacks**

Though uncommon, frequent attacks may persist for many months or even a few years. This is common in women, with symptoms occurring monthly, 2 to 4 days before menstruation.