The most common symptom of appendicitis is acute abdominal pain. Periumbilical, central, or epigastric abdominal pain usually develops after nonspecific symptoms. Pain then migrates to the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. If nausea develops, it typically occurs after the onset of pain. Dysuria or hematuria can occur due to the proximity of the appendix to the urinary tract. Although anorexia is common, it is not universally present.

Beware that typical findings are the exception and not the rule, particularly in children. The usual history is atypical or vague symptoms such as diffuse abdominal pain, possibly associated with vomiting, and a low-grade fever. The presence of diarrhea may delay the diagnosis if the symptoms are mistaken for gastroenteritis rather than appendicitis.

The clinical presentation depends on the anatomic position of the inflamed appendix:

- The retrocecal appendix can present with back pain or flank pain.

- Pelvic appendix can present with suprapubic pain

- Long appendix can present as a right upper quadrant or left lower quadrant pain.

**Physical Examination**

Tenderness in the right lower quadrant at McBurney’s point (two-third the distance from the umbilicus to the right anterior superior iliac spine). Tenderness in this area is perhaps the most useful clinical finding.

Rebound tenderness and involuntary guarding may suggest peritonitis.

Rovsing's sign is right lower quadrant (RLQ) pain while palpating the left lower quadrant.

Psoas sign is increased RLQ pain with the patient lying on their left side while the provider passively extends the patient's right leg at the hip with both knees extended.

Obturator sign is increased RLQ pain when the patient is supine, and the provider internally and externally rotates the right leg as it is flexed at the hip.

Beware that the presence or absence of any of these findings is not sufficient enough to prove or disprove the diagnosis.

Note that rectal examination does not provide any additional information in the evaluation of appendicitis.

Not a single feature of the history or physical finding can reliably diagnose or exclude the diagnosis of appendicitis.