It is vital to obtain a thorough history to identify the specific cause of non-IPF. Patients often present late in the fifth or sixth decades of life. The presentation is similar in most cases, with nonspecific symptoms of progressive dyspnea and cough. Some patients will present with wheezing, pleuritic chest pain, and hemoptysis.  Symptoms can range from several weeks to years and are often associated with long-term exposure to a specific substance or with autoimmune diseases. In addition to a personal or family history of autoimmune conditions, patients should be questioned about their medication and smoking history, radiation exposure, and occupational exposures to help determine the etiology. The etiologies discussed earlier include long-term inhalation of organic and inorganic substances, drug-induced toxicity, connective tissue diseases, and systemic illnesses. Patients may also present with extra-pulmonary manifestations, which may help narrow the diagnosis (e.g., scleroderma and Raynaud phenomenon in systemic sclerosis).

Physical findings may be normal and can vary between diseases. The following are findings that may be present on a physical exam.

General

- Tachypnea and central cyanosis if hypoxia is present

- Fever may be present in connective tissue diseases or sarcoidosis

Head, ears, eyes, nose, and throat

- Sinusitis as seen in eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss syndrome)

- Ocular manifestations including uveitis and retinal vasculitis may be associated with sarcoidosis

Lungs/thorax

- Fine end-expiratory crackles (velcro rales)

- Wheezing may be auscultated when there is airway involvement (i.e., Churg-Strauss syndrome or hypersensitivity pneumonitis)

Musculoskeletal

- Digital clubbing is a common and a nonspecific finding

- Patients with connective tissue diseases may have proximal muscle weakness seen in polymyositis, Raynaud phenomenon in systemic sclerosis, and other joint abnormalities

- Proximal muscle weakness, arthralgias, and Raynaud phenomenon may also be present in antisynthetase syndrome

Neurological

- Patients with sarcoidosis may present with cranial and/or peripheral neuropathies

- Mononeuritis multiplex in Churg-Strauss syndrome often present with asymmetric neuropathy

Skin

- Skin finding in patients with non-IPF are mostly related to connective tissue or systemic diseases

- Cutaneous vasculitis is seen in eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis

- Scleroderma may present with cutaneous thickening and facial telangiectasias

- Cutaneous thickening with Raynaud phenomenon is more suggestive of systemic sclerosis

- A heliotrope rash is suggestive of dermatomyositis

- Erythema nodosum may be seen in cutaneous sarcoidosis

- Rheumatoid arthritis may also have palpable subcutaneous nodules