The mainstay of treatment in MG involves cholinesterase enzyme inhibitors and immunosuppressive agents. Symptoms that are resistant to primary treatment modalities or those requiring rapid resolution of symptoms (myasthenic crisis), plasmapheresis or intravenous immunoglobulins can be used.

Management strategies in MG are based on the following four principles:

**Symptomatic Treatment:**Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors increases the level of ACh at the NMJ by preventing its enzymatic degradation. Pyridostigmine bromide is preferred over neostigmine because of its longer duration of action. In those with bromide intolerance that leads to gastrointestinal effects, ambenonium chloride can be used. Patients with MuSK MG respond poorly to these drugs and hence may require higher dosages.

**Immunosuppressive Treatment:**These are indicated in patients who remain symptomatic even after pyridostigmine treatment. Glucocorticoids (prednisone, prednisolone, and methylprednisolone) and azathioprine are the first-line immunosuppressive agents used in the treatment of MG. Second-line agents include cyclosporine, methotrexate, mycophenolate, cyclophosphamide, and tacrolimus. These are used when the patient is unresponsive to treatment, has any contraindication to treatment, or intolerability to the use of first-line agents. Recently, various monoclonal antibodies, including rituximab and eculizumab, have been used to treat drug-resistant MG, but data from clinical trials about their efficacy is yet to be documented.

**Intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) / Plasmapheresis:**This is recommended during the perioperative period to stabilize a patient before a procedure. It is also the treatment of choice for the myasthenic crisis due to its rapid onset of action and used in cases that are resistant to immunosuppressive drugs.

**Thymectomy:**This is indicated for the following:

- Any subtypes of MG with evidence of thymoma.

- Non-thymomatous n-AChR MG, especially in patients aged 15 to 50 years, performed 1-2 years of disease onset.

- Seronegative non-thymomatous MG.

However, it is not recommended for the non-thymomatous MuSK MG (since thymic pathology is rare) and non-thymomatous ocular MG without secondary generalization.