A neuronal action potential has three main stages: depolarization, repolarization, and hyperpolarization. The initial depolarization is determined by the cell’s threshold voltage, the membrane potential at which voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav) open to allow an influx of sodium ions. The flow of positive sodium ions into the cell leads to further depolarization of the membrane, thus opening more Nav in a positive-feedback loop. Depolarization in mature neurons lasts approximately 1 msec, at which time the Nav are inactivated and no longer able to flux ions.

Repolarization begins as voltage-gated potassium channels (Kv) open. Although Kv have approximately the same threshold voltage as Na, the kinetics of the potassium channel are much slower. Therefore, after approximately 1 msec, there is an opening of the slower Kv channels that is coincident with the inactivation of the faster Nav channels. The flow of potassium ions out of the cell results in a decrease in membrane potential towards the cell’s resting voltage. When the membrane potential falls below the threshold, both the Nav and the Kv begin to close. However, the Kv have slow kinetics and remain open slightly longer than needed to return the cell to resting membrane voltage. The brief dip in the membrane potential below the normal resting voltage is termed hyperpolarization.

Action potentials propagate a signal along the length of an axon differently in myelinated versus unmyelinated axons. Myelin, a lipid-rich membrane sheath surrounding some axons, insulates against the flow of ions. The myelin sheath is not continuous, but instead, there is axonal exposure at regularly spaced intervals termed the nodes of Ranvier.

The initiation of a neuronal action potential usually occurs at the axon hillock, the most proximal segment of an axon. However, in sensory neurons, the action potential is initiated at the distal terminal of the axon and propagates towards the central nervous system. In these spike initiation zones, a 50-fold increase in Nav receptor density decreases input resistance, thus requiring less excitation to induce an action potential.