The pre-liver transplantation evaluation must address many important aspects and health concerns in liver transplant candidates. This evaluation should include a detailed, comprehensive history and physical examination, laboratory tests, and imaging studies to conduct a full systematic review for patients and manage them accordingly. A comprehensive review is available at the American Association for the Study of Liver disease Practice Guidelines website. Below is a summary.

**Obesity:**Patients should be evaluated for increased BMI as it increases the perioperative risks and reduces survival in liver transplant patients in the long run.

**Coronary Artery Disease:**Perioperative cardiac risk assessment is crucial. All patients should undergo cardiac stress testing, either physical or chemical stress testing. If patients were found to have stenosis, coronary revascularization should be done before liver transplantation.

**Age:**Although the prognosis of transplant in patients older than 70 years is not as good as in younger patients, older age is not a contraindication to liver transplantation in patients without or with controlled comorbidities.

**Pulmonary HTN:**When the mean pulmonary artery pressure (MPAP) is above or equal to 25 mmHg and is associated with portal HTN, the condition is referred to as portopulmonary HTN. Moderate to severe portopulmonary HTN is associated with a higher mortality rate after liver transplantation; the mortality rate can reach 100% if MPAP is above 50 mmHg.

**Hepatopulmonary Syndrome:**It is a syndrome of shortness of breath and hypoxemia in patients with chronic liver disease, especially those with portal HTN. This is due to microvascular dilation of the pulmonary vessels that lead to intrapulmonary shunt.

**Renal Dysfunction:**Patients with renal disease must be diagnosed before liver transplantation, as renal dysfunction significantly increases mortality.

**Cigarette Smoking:**It increases mortality among liver transplant recipients due to cardiac disease. It also increases the risk of hepatic artery thrombosis.

**Extrahepatic Malignancy:**Patients should undergo all age-appropriate screening before undergoing liver transplantation. If they have any increased risk factors for specific cancer, they should undergo further testing for the specific cancer type.

**Infectious Disease:**All infectious diseases should be treated effectively before liver transplantation. Screening serologies in the blood should include viral infections such as hepatitis A and B (to ensure immunity by vaccinations and no active infection), cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), bacterial infections including tuberculosis, syphilis, and fungal infections such asStrongyloides and coccidiomycosis. All live attenuated viral vaccines should be administered prior to liver transplantation as they are contraindicated once immunosuppression is initiated after liver transplantation.

**Nutrition:**Patients should be evaluated by a nutritionist prior to liver transplantation, as it is important to address all nutritional deficiencies related to chronic liver disease and fat malabsorption. Adequate dietary control related to other comorbidities such as DM, HTN, and hyperlipidemia should be stressed.

**Bone Disease:**Densitometry, vitamin D, and calcium levels should be obtained before liver transplantation in all candidates. Osteoporosis is fairly common in all patients with chronic liver disease due to malabsorption of vitamin D and in cases of autoimmune hepatitis due to corticosteroid use.

**Human Immunodeficiency Viral I infection (HIV):**Affected patients can be candidates for liver transplantation only if CD4 counts are above 100 µL and the viral load is undetectable before liver transplantation. HIV is not considered a contraindication to liver transplantation nowadays due to the advent of effective antiretroviral therapy.

**Psychological Evaluation:**It is important to evaluate liver transplantation candidates for any psychiatric disorders that might affect their prognosis, compliance with medication, and medical directives. It is also essential to evaluate the social support systems and caregiver availability, especially in patients with encephalopathy.