# Continuing Education Activity

"Pilon," the French word for pestle, was first used by Etienne Destot in 1911 as an analogy for the mechanical function of the distal tibia on the talus. Fractures of the distal tibial plafond are also termed pilon fractures to describe the high energy axial compression force of the tibia as it acts as a pestle, driving vertically into the talus. These fractures account for approximately 1% to 10% of the lower leg or tibial fractures and are often associated with severe bone comminution and soft tissue compromise. Pilon fractures may also involve metaphyseal extension and can have associated fibular fractures. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of pilon fractures of the tibia and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the most frequent mechanisms of injury resulting in a pilon fracture.
- Review the diagnostic approach for an evaluation and assessment of a patient presenting with a potential pilon fracture, including any indicated imaging studies.
- Outline the treatment options for pilon fractures, depending on patient population and fracture severity grading.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve outcomes with the treatment of pilon tibial fractures.

# Introduction

“Pilon,” the French word for pestle, was first used by Etienne Destot in 1911 as an analogy for the mechanical function of the distal tibia on the talus.

The distal tibia has a quadrilateral cross-sectional shape and together with the fibula, ligaments, and capsule, forms the ankle mortise. This topography is designed to maximize the articular surface area with the dome of the talus and minimize the stress on the ankle joint.

The two most common classification systems used to describe pilon fractures are the Ruedi-Allgower classification and the AO/OTA classification. Type I Ruedi-Allgower fractures are defined as nondisplaced “cleavage fractures” of the tibial plafond.

# Etiology

Pilon fractures most often result from high-energy mechanisms, such as motor vehicle accidents and falls from a height that causes direct axial compression and articular impaction of the tibial plafond.

# Epidemiology

Pilon fractures occur more frequently in males (57% to 65%) compared to females.

# Pathophysiology

The mechanism and degree of injury involved dictate the fracture pattern and the treatment approach to pilon fractures. The impact from an axial compression mechanism drives the articular surface proximally into the metaphysis, with associated metaphyseal comminution. Associated fibular fractures are commonly present.

Open fractures comprise approximately 20% of pilon fractures.

# History and Physical

Patients who sustain high-energy pilon fractures may also present with multi-system trauma and other life-threatening injuries. Initial evaluation and resuscitation should follow the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) guidelines and begin with the ABCs of a primary survey. Once the patient is stabilized, a thorough history and secondary survey are necessary to identify the injury mechanism and other potential injuries. With pilon fractures, careful inspection of the patient’s lower extremities can further provide clues as to the extent of soft tissue insult. High-energy injuries may present with obvious deformities and open wounds; however, lower energy torsional injuries may be more difficult to detect. Inability to bear weight, considerable bruising, swelling, and skin blistering about the ankle should raise clinical suspicion of acute fracture with overlying soft tissue damage. Limb-threatening injuries often present as open fractures with severe soft tissue de-gloving or as crush injuries. The following are the grades as defined by the Tscherne classification for soft tissue injury in closed fractures:

- Grade 0 represents minimal tissue damage associated with simple fracture pattern

- Grade 1 involves superficial abrasion or contusion

- Grade 2 involves deep abrasion of skin or muscle contusion

- Grade 3 presents with extensive skin and muscle damage or crush injury, subcutaneous avulsion, and/or compartment syndrome

The Gustillo-Anderson system is used to classify open pilon fractures.

A detailed neurovascular examination, as well as evaluation of the lower leg compartments for compartment syndrome, is critical in the assessment of pilon fractures. Detailed neurovascular examination involves checking the posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis pulses, evaluating sensation in the tibial, superficial peroneal, deep peroneal, sural, and saphenous nerve distributions, and assessing motor function in active ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion as well as flexion and extension of the great toe. Motor function is expectedly limited due to pain.

# Evaluation

Radiographic evaluation should begin with anteroposterior, lateral, and mortise x-rays views of the ankle. Full-length tibia x-rays should also be obtained to rule out associated fractures and assess the length, alignment, and rotation of the tibia. In patients who had a fall from a height, radiographs of the spine, pelvis, foot and contralateral lower limb may be indicated to evaluate for associated injuries, particularly to the vertebral column or calcaneus. Appropriate laboratory studies, such as metabolic panel, complete blood count, coagulation profile, urinalysis, and toxicology screen may be indicated in the poly-trauma patient.

Definitive surgical planning for pilon fractures often requires advanced imaging with computed tomography (CT). The original Ruedi-Allgower classification was based on plain radiographs.

# Treatment / Management

There are few relative contraindications to operative fixation of pilon fractures. Patients with non-displaced fractures without articular involvement may be treated with cast immobilization and weight-bearing restrictions. A major disadvantage to closed treatment in a cast is difficulty in assessing soft tissue healing. Patients who are non-ambulatory at baseline or not medically fit for surgery may also be treated conservatively. Other contraindications are decided on a case-by-case basis. Early descriptions of pilon fractures demonstrated difficulty in achieving fracture union and high complication rates, leaving patients with persistent pain, deficits in range of motion, and disability. Historically, many surgeons considered pilon fractures “not amenable to surgery.”

Historically, the high rates of wound complications and infections were associated with early open fixation through compromised soft tissue, highlighting the importance of careful soft tissue evaluation and handling, especially in severe pilon fractures. Consequently, the treatment algorithm shifted to a staged procedure, beginning with ankle-spanning external fixation to restore length and alignment of the pilon fracture, followed by definitive internal fixation once the soft tissue swelling subsides.

Advanced imaging can help guide the surgeon on the incisional approach and the selection and positioning of the implants. Various surgical approaches to the ankle may be utilized depending on the location of the fracture fragments (anteromedial, direct anterior, anterolateral, posterolateral, posteromedial and direct medial). Most pilon fractures are addressed through an anterior or anterolateral approach.  Posteromedial and posterolateral approaches may be indicated if fixation of posterior fragments is warranted. If multiple incisions are needed, the width of the skin bridge should be maximized (typically greater than 7 cm) with continued vigilance in respecting the soft tissue envelope, although skin bridges less than 7 cm may be safe in certain patient.

# Prognosis

Despite advances in radiographic imaging, surgical instrumentation, and our understanding of the importance of soft tissue handling, pilon fractures remain challenging to treat. Clinical outcomes correlate with severity of the fracture pattern and the quality of reduction.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A team approach involving the emergency nurse, orthopedic nurse, emergency clinician, and the specialist will result in the best care and positive results for the patient. [Level V]