PHRs are seeing widespread adoption in today's digital age, and physicians must adapt to this new data source. Interpreted correctly, a PHR can provide valuable data points to assess the clinical course before the presentation and provide a level of fidelity that could not be achieved by traditional patient interviews alone. This concept represents a crucial component of shared decision-making by the patient and their physician.

Used correctly, PHRs can improve patient adherence to follow-up, allow patients to better monitor therapeutic goals such as blood pressure or blood glucose thresholds, allow recognition of improvement or worsening of control of existing medical conditions, improve compliance with medication regimens, especially when these regimens are complex – all of which culminate in the achievement of superior management of medical issues.

However, critical analysis is necessary, as many of these devices and applications use one-size-fits-all algorithms that may result in false positives and false negatives in interpreting medical conditions. Patients must be counseled about interpreting and acting on health data in close cooperation with their healthcare provider in order to avoid unwarranted anxiety or concerns over minor normal variations that are interpreted as something more sinister. This is especially of concern in a setting where PHRs are interlinked with EMR/EHR systems that provide patients with real-time test results that are yet to be interpreted and clinically correlated by a clinician. Moreover, PHRs may also contribute to a state of "information overload" "whereby extraneous data in a PHR becomes noise that can garble the signal of pertinent health information in the healthcare setting.

In this setting, the upcoming use of artificial intelligence (AI) in the processing of patient data may serve as a useful adjunct in highlighting true abnormalities and help determine action signals that necessitate healthcare intervention. This can allow healthcare providers to look past the vast mountain of data and detect significant findings from the repository of information within an iindividual'sPHR.