In some rare cases, the gubernaculum may fail to adhere to the uterus. This may cause the ovaries to descend through the inguinal canal into the labia majora. This abnormal position of the ovaries may resemble the testes.

During the reproductive years, pelvic endometriosis may penetrate round ligaments. Endometriosis is defined as the presence of ectopic endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterus. This may lead to severe dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, chronic pelvic pain, and infertility. Pelvic endometriosis can affect the uterosacral ligaments, rectum, vagina, cul-de-sac, and urinary bladder. The pelvic endometriosis may infiltrate the round ligaments of the uterus when it is deep and extensive. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is helpful for the diagnosis of the round ligament lesions. If medical therapy fails, surgery remains the best therapeutic treatment for advanced endometriosis.

Round Ligament Varices (RLV) are conditions where veins become tortuous and twisted.  This condition develops during pregnancy. Venous blood from the round ligament and the inguinal canal is drained into the inferior epigastric vein. During pregnancy, there is an increase of blood volume and cardiac output.  An enlarged gravid uterus increases pressure leading to stagnation of blood in these veins. The increased amount of progesterone contributes to venous dilatation and smooth muscle relaxation. Increased venous return and engorgement of veins and tributaries progress to Round ligament varices (RLV). The patient may present with bilateral asymptomatic inguinal swellings during pregnancy. Ultrasound examination may help diagnose and differentiate Round ligament varices (RLV) from an inguinal hernia. Multiple dilated vessels without bowel contents may be visualized on ultrasound examination. There is conservative management, and close monitoring is recommended throughout pregnancy. After pregnancy, the hormonal effects of progesterone and the pressure of the gravid uterus are relieved, leading to spontaneous resolution during the postpartum recovery period.

**Round Ligament Pain**

The round ligaments of the uterus increase in diameter and length during pregnancy.  During mid-trimester, the round ligaments may cause cramping and pain due to stretching and contractions of the round ligaments. At times, this pain may be sharp and can cause pulling sensations. This pain is considered to be physiological in normal pregnancy. Usually, the pain of the round ligaments is temporary and resolve spontaneously by resting. The round ligaments pain is not considered a symptom of any disease. If pain persists, immediately follow up is recommended to rule out other causes of pain during pregnancy. There is a sharp reduction of hormones levels after delivery. After the postpartum period, the uterine size is reduced to the normal non-pregnant state. The hypertrophic round ligaments of the uterus also shrink to the normal, non-pregnant state. Following postpartum recovery, the round ligaments pain may happen, but it is unlikely to happen because of sudden movements of pelvic organs.

In a non-pregnant female, the round ligaments pain may happen, but it is unlikely. In a non-pregnant female, the round ligament is a firm and flexible structure. Sudden movements of pelvic organs may not cause any symptoms.

Conservative Management

Warm compresses to the area may relieve pain. Acetaminophen is safe to take during pregnancy.

Acetaminophen is the most prescribed analgesic during pregnancy.

Rest during pregnancy is one of the best remedies for the round ligaments Pain.

Sudden active movements are discouraged to prevent worsening of the round ligaments Pain.

Prolonged standing and heavy lifting should be avoided to prevent worsening of the round ligaments Pain.

Daily stretching exercise may be helpful. Bending and flexion of the hip joint may reduce the pulling sensations and discomfort from stretching.

Pregnant patients are encouraged to find pain triggers and to avoid those discovered triggers.