Open rhinoplasty encompasses a uniquely difficult procedure in that many different means may exist for achieving the same objective, all of which have their own nuances which require incorporation into the overall result. The M-arch model, which builds on Anderson’s tripod theory, can be used to help the surgeon understand the dynamic interplay between the maneuvers performed, particularly regarding their effect on tip aesthetics.

The modern approach to open rhinoplasty focuses on cartilage preservation and incremental changes to the cartilage and bony framework.

- Opening the nose: The open approach to the nose involves making a mid-columellar inverted-V incision, placement of which should be where the underlying cartilage is closest to the skin to avoid scar visibility and contracture. With the help of skin hooks and sharp dissection (e.g., Converse scissors), the mid-columellar incision is transitioned to the marginal incisions, taking care to avoid injury to the medial and lateral crura. The soft tissue envelope is further reflected superiorly in a relatively avascular supra-perichondrial plane to expose the upper lateral cartilages (ULC). At this point, dissection over the ULC is transitioned to a sub-perichondrial plane using sharp dissection. A periosteal elevator (e.g., Joseph elevator) is then used elevate the periosteum over the nasal bones up to the nasofrontal angle. The lower lateral cartilages are then separated in the midline to expose the anterior septal angle (ASA) in preparation for septoplasty and/or septal cartilage harvesting.

- Septoplasty: The ASA is sharply exposed, and a sub-mucoperichondrial pocket is created caudally to the nasal spine and posteriorly beyond the septal bony-cartilaginous junction bilaterally. If the surgeon anticipates spreader grafts, the upper lateral cartilages may undergo sharp release from the dorsal septum up to the nasal bones. At this point, septal cartilage may be harvested with attention to leave a 1.5 cm L-strut to preserve adequate structural support. Bony deviations and/or spurs are removed using basic septoplasty principles. Additionally, a “swinging-door” maneuver with excision of redundant inferior-caudal septal cartilage can be performed to correct any existing caudal septal deviations.

- Dorsal hump reduction: A prominent bony hump is addressed using a combination of osteotomes (e.g., Rubin) and rasps. The cartilaginous dorsum is reduced sharply with a scalpel and/or scissors under direct vision, taking care not to violate the upper lateral cartilages (trimmed later, or used as spreader flaps) or nasal mucosa. Note: To obtain a straight dorsum, the hump at the level of the rhinion should be left slightly higher than the rest of the dorsal skeleton, owing to the thin skin overlying this area. Additionally, the surgeon should be aware that nasal dorsal reduction provides an optical illusion of cephalad tip rotation.

- Spreader grafts or flaps: Spreader grafts are placed to reconstruct disrupted dorsal aesthetic lines and address middle vault (internal nasal valve) collapse; this is done typically with previously harvested septal cartilage grafts which get sewn in a sub-mucoperichondrial pocket between the native cartilaginous septum and ULC using a series of horizontal mattress sutures. Alternatively, spreader flaps (auto-spreaders) is an option if adequate ULC height remains after performing the cartilaginous dorsal hump reduction.

- Nasal base stabilization: In theory, stabilizing the nasal base should be performed before nasal tip contouring is carried out. If the projection, rotation, and nasolabial angle do not require modification, a columellar strut (cartilage placed end-to-end with the caudal septum into a pocket between the medial crura) can be used to add support to the tip without altering the tip position. Alternatively, a tongue-in-groove technique or caudal septal extension graft (cartilage placed side-to-side or end-to-end with the septum) may be used to address projection and rotation.

- Nasal tip contouring: the nasal tip remains the most challenging anatomic region to diagnose and treat. Though a detailed review of each available technique is beyond the scope of this paper, the astute rhinoplasty surgeon should be familiar with the various suture-based tip-plasty techniques—transdomal sutures, interdomal sutures, lateral crural mattress sutures, and columella-septal sutures—all of which have their own variations and subtleties. In addition to suture-based techniques, a softened cartilage graft (e.g., CAP tip graft) and/or cartilage perichondrium may be sutured over the domes to add projection or camouflage to the tip.  Other techniques used to address tip/supra-tip shape include the cephalic trim, cephalic turnover flaps, and lateral crural strut grafts,  which are particularly useful in correcting lateral crural convexity or malposition. Cartilage excising techniques (e.g., vertical dome division, lateral crural overlay, and medial crural overlay) provides a powerful tool for contouring the nasal tip as well, though these maneuvers are generally reserved when more conservative techniques are not useful.

- Dorsal augmentation: Upon setting the tip projection/rotation, the surgeon should make refinements to the dorsum. If augmentation is needed, a radix graft using soft tissue (e.g., temporalis fascia) or diced cartilage in fibrin glue may be used to elevate the nasal starting point. If only a small dorsal augmentation is needed, septal cartilage onlay grafts (single or stacked) typically suffice. Performing large augmentations is best with diced cartilage wrapped in either surgical or temporalis fascia (preferable). Of note, if any further dorsal reduction is desired, this can be done using gentle push rasping and/or precise dorsal cartilage excision.

- Alar rim grafts: Small onlay grafts are placed into pockets along the caudal aspect of the marginal incision to create an elevated ridge along the alar margin and prevent alar retraction. Alar rim grafts also increase the nostril length and width, improving the function of the external valve.

- Alar base reduction: Skin confined to the area between the nasal sill and the ala is excised to create desired nostril size and base width. Alar base reductions are typically necessary when a reduction of tip projection creates a widened alar base appearance.

- Osteotomies: Precise cuts in the bone are used to (1) close an open book deformity (caused by a previously excised hump) and (2) straighten deviated nasal bones and (3) narrow the width of the bony dorsum and sidewalls. This can be done with a combination of various osteotomy techniques (e.g., medial, intermediate, and lateral) based on the existing bony abnormality and desired outcome.

- Closure: A septal splint (e.g., trimmed silicone sheet) may be sewn in place, though this is optional as long as a sufficient coapting of the septum was performed. The transcolumellar incision is then closed with either interrupted permanent (6-0 or 7-0 nylon) or fast-absorbing sutures, the latter of which offers similar aesthetic outcomes without the discomfort associated with suture removal. The marginal incisions are closed with interrupted absorbable sutures (5-0 fast).

- Taping and casting: Adhesive flesh-colored tape is gently applied from the nasofrontal angle to the supratip to help reduce postoperative edema. A longer strip gets placed around the infratip lobule, acting as a sling to support the tip in its intended level of rotation. A nasal cast is then applied with a thermoplastic splint material that becomes soft and pliable when exposed to hot water and hardens when it cools. Antibiotic ointment is applied to both nares, and a mustache dressing is placed. Nasal packing, which is typically avoided, may be reserved for cases with excessive bleeding.