The prognosis of urinary retention is fair if recognized early and treated promptly. Acute urinary retention, such as immediately after major surgery, will usually resolve by itself within a few days to weeks. Obstructive causes may not resolve without surgical relief of the obstruction. Immediate issues of bladder overdistension and upper tract deterioration can be managed by either continuous or intermittent catheterization. Resolution of chronic urinary retention is more problematic and depends on the underlying cause, comorbidities, and availability of therapies such as sacral neuromodulation.

In a double-blinded, prospective study of 600 patients, predictive nursing and early drinking water therapy have been shown to reduce the incidence of postpartum urinary retention.

Sacral neuromodulation and percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation are still probably underutilized therapies for chronic female urinary retention. Implantable tibial nerve stimulators may prove to be an important future therapeutic option but require further testing to demonstrate efficacy for female urinary retention.

Intraurethral valve pumps, which are short silicone urethral catheters that contain an internal valve and pump mechanism that is activated by the patient using a remote control, are FDA approved, available, and reasonably effective in selected cases but tend to be costly, uncomfortable, and prone to leaking although future generations of these devices may overcome these limitations.

**Follow-up**

The American Urological Association Guidelines recommend a yearly follow-up examination including a history and physical, and post-void residual determinations are considered minimal. High-risk patients, including those previously diagnosed with renal failure, nephrolithiasis, or hydronephrosis, should also have yearly kidney function studies (creatinine) and renal ultrasonography.