The causes of elevated hemidiaphragm can be divided into three categories: above the diaphragm, at the diaphragm, and below the diaphragm.

**Above the Diaphragm**

The phrenic nerve innervates the diaphragm. Any injury, trauma, or disease affecting the phrenic nerve will lead to weakening or paralysis of the diaphragm, also called diaphragmatic palsy. Damage to the phrenic nerve may originate from the brain, spine, spinal cord, trauma, autoimmune disease, or can be from an unknown cause.

In the brain, a middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke will cause paralysis of the contralateral side, potentially leading to elevated hemidiaphragm on the opposite side of the occlusion of MCA. The phrenic nerve originates from the cervical roots of C3-C5; therefore, injury to the brachial plexus can impair the proper function of the phrenic nerve. Isolated brachial plexus injury is typically seen as a congenital defect and from direct trauma. However, many pathological processes or trauma from the neck down to the subphrenic region may cause weakness in the phrenic nerve that can cause ipsilateral elevated hemidiaphragm. Elevated hemidiaphragm can result from neck surgery, trauma, compression fractures to the cervical spine, bronchial artery embolization, or cervical spondylosis.

Unilateral injury to the phrenic nerve is a common complication of cardiac surgery. The left phrenic nerve is often injured when the heart is cooled during the procedure, and if the phrenic nerve is stretched during surgery. The damage to the left phrenic nerve leads to elevated left hemidiaphragm.

Lung pathologies such as pneumothorax, atelectasis, partial or complete pneumonectomy, and or congenital defects like pulmonary hypoplasia or diaphragmatic eventration may result in elevated hemidiaphragm usually on the ipsilateral side of pathology. In rare cases, chronic coughing in asthmatics has led to a spontaneous diaphragmatic hernia, which caused an elevated right hemidiaphragm.

**Diaphragm**

Congenital defect leading to partial or incomplete muscularization of the diaphragm causing an abnormal contour of the diaphragm in that region is referred to as diaphragmatic eventration. Most of the congenital malformations are in the right hemidiaphragm and, more specifically, in the anteromedial portion. These defective areas are covered with a thin membrane in place of healthy muscle, which can appear as an elevated hemidiaphragm on imaging studies.

Elevated hemidiaphragm can also occur when there is direct injury to the diaphragm from penetrating trauma such as a stab wound.

**Below the Diaphragm**

Liver pathologies are more commonly linked to right elevated hemidiaphragm. Enlarged liver, whether homogenous hepatomegaly or secondary to an abscess or hepatic tumor, can push up the right hemidiaphragm. Distention of the stomach, abdominal tumors, distended abdomen, subphrenic abscess, splenomegaly, or colon malrotation can present as elevated left hemidiaphragm. Elevated hemidiaphragm may occur secondary to pneumoperitoneum from a ruptured stomach or colon where free air becomes trapped under the diaphragm.

In rare cases, the colon wraps above the liver; on radiographic images, this appears as air below the right diaphragm called Chilaiditi sign. Most patients are asymptomatic, but in rare situations, the portion of intestine lopped above the liver can become obstructed, causing Chilaiditi syndrome.