**The combination of hemisensory loss and hemianopia without paralysis is virtually diagnostic of infarction in the PCA territory.**

**Ocular Disturbances**

The most frequent finding in patients with a PCA territory infarct is contralateral hemianopia. The visual defect often presents as a limitation of vision to one side, and patients usually recognize that they must focus extra attention on the hemianopic field. When given pictures or written material, patients with hemianopia due to occipital lobe infarction can see and interpret visual stimuli normally, although it may take somewhat longer to explore the hemianopic visual field. Some patients will be able to accurately report motion or the presence of objects in their hemianopic field but will not be able to identify the nature, location, or color of those objects. When the central portion of the visual field is spared, the term is "macular-sparing"; sparing of this portion of the visual field is due to collateral circulation provided by the MCA. A superior quadrantanopia may also occur if the infarct solely involved the lingual gyrus, the lower portion of the calcarine fissure. Conversely, an inferior quadrantanopia may result if the lesion affects the cuneus on the upper portion of the calcarine fissure.

However, when the full territory of the posterior cerebral arteries is involved, patients may experience visual neglect along with their hemianopia due to the involvement of the non-dominant parietal lobe. Contrarily, if the lesion involves circulation to the dominant parietal cortex, patients may also exhibit alexia without agraphia, in which they would be able to write but unable to read.

**Sensorimotor Abnormalities**

Since the posterior cerebral arteries contribute to the arterial supply of the lateral thalamus, PCA  territory ischemia can result in sensory deficits such as paresthesias in the face, limbs, and trunk. Rarely, occlusion of the proximal portion of the PCA causes hemiplegia, which may be attributable to infarction of the lateral midbrain. Due to the proximal course of the PCA close to the cerebral peduncles, the involvement of the corticospinal tract in the lateral midbrain is responsible for this hemiplegia.

**Left PCA Territory Symptoms and Signs**

Because the left parietal cortex is usually dominant, left PCA infarct would result in alexia without agraphia, anomic aphasia, visual agnosia, anomic aphasia, or transcortical sensory aphasia, and Gerstmann syndrome (acalculia, agraphia, finger agnosia, and right-left disorientation).

**Right PCA Territory Symptoms and Signs**

Because the right parietal cortex is usually not the dominant hemisphere, infarcts in the right PCA territory are often accompanied by prosopagnosia, which is difficulty in recognizing familiar faces. Disorientation to place with an inability to recall routes or to read or visualize the location of places on maps are also common. Patients suffering from right occipitotemporal infarcts also may have difficulty visualizing how a given object or person appears. Dreams may be devoid of visual imagery. Visual neglect may also present, in which a patient ignores the left side of his visual field.

**Specific clinical findings associated with the vascular territory may be summarized below:**

Unilateral PCA Infarct

- Only occipital lobe-->contralateral homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing

- Dominant occipital lobe + the splenium of the corpus callosum-->homonymous hemianopia + alexia without agraphia

- Ventral occipital cortex + infracalcarine--> achromatopsia (contralateral loss of color differentiation) + superior quadrantanopia

- Infracalcarine/Meyer loop/temporal lobe--> superior quadrantanopia

- Supracalcarine/Optic radiation--> Inferior quadrantanopia

Bilateral PCA infarct

- Both occipital lobes--> cortical blindness + Anton syndrome

- Anton syndrome: cortical blindness with denial of blindness, visual hallucinations, and confabulations

PCA-MCA watershed infarct

A watershed infarct occurs in distal branches of large arteries when there is a decrease in perfusion or hypovolemia. An infarct at the PCA-MCA usually leads to ischemia in two regions:

- Bilateral occipitotemporal border zone--> prosopagnosia; an inability to recognize familiar faces and/or interpret facial expression but can identify with speech or unique features such as glasses, tattoos, or piercings, etc.

- Bilateral occipito-parietal border zone--> Balint syndrome; optic ataxia (inability to reach targets with visual guidance), oculomotor apraxia (inability to volitionally direct gaze), and simultagnosia (inability to synthesize objects within a visual field)

- Unilateral left temporal-parietal border zone--> transcortical sensory aphasia; fluent speech and repetition, but impaired comprehension.