Subvalvular aortic stenosis causes clinically significant obstruction to the blood flow ejecting out of the left ventricle resulting in the development of concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, frequently with a septal bulge. This, in turn, results in the further obstruction and hyperdynamic function. In isolated subvalvular aortic stenosis, cardiac output and systolic function are well maintained until severe obstruction develops. The rate of progression of subvalvular aortic stenosis is variable and unpredictable in children, while its progression is slow in adults.

**Aortic Regurgitation**

The deformity in the aortic valves may develop during the course of subvalvular aortic stenosis. The membrane's fibroblastic tissue may encroach onto the aortic valve, and the high-velocity jet of blood flowing through the stenosis traumatizes the aortic valve and partly contributes to the thickening and asymmetrical post stenotic dilatation of the ascending aorta. Sixty-five percent of patients develop aortic regurgitation, which is progressive and persists even after the subvalvular aortic stenosis is surgically removed. Aortic regurgitation is usually mild; however, the severity may raise with an increasing left ventricular outflow tract pressure gradient. Due to aortic regurgitation, the left ventricle, which is already pressure-overloaded, becomes volume overloaded further increasing the left ventricular oxygen demand.

Furthermore, the decrease in aortic diastolic pressure decreases the coronary perfusion. This decrease in coronary perfusion and increase in the left ventricular oxygen demand makes the left ventricular myocardium prone to ischemic injury. Some patients may need aortic valve replacement or repair during the subvalvular aortic stenosis repair.