To make the diagnosis of the opioid-use disorder, the patient must meet the diagnostic criteria via the DSM-5:

The opioid-use disorder is defined as opioid use and the repeated occurrence within 12 months of two or more of eleven problems. The problems include opioid withdrawal with stopping opioid use, giving up essential life events for opioid use, and excessive time using opioids. The individual also has significant impairment or distress as a result of opioid use. Six or more items on the diagnostic criteria indicate a severe condition.

The signs and symptoms of opioid use disorder include drug-seeking behavior, legal or social ramifications due to opioid use, and multiple opioid prescriptions from different clinicians. Furthermore, various medical complications from the use of opioids, opioid cravings, increased opioid usage over time, and symptoms of opioid withdrawal with stopping opioids.

A list of the eleven problems is given below:

- Continued use despite worsening physical or psychological health

- Continued use leading to social and interpersonal consequences

- Decreased social or recreational activities

- Difficulty fulfilling professional duties at school or work

- Excessive time to obtain opioids, or recover from taking them

- More taken than intended

- The individual has cravings

- The individual is unable to decrease the amount used

- Tolerance

- Using despite it being physically dangerous settings

- Withdrawal

A full social history and mental health history should be a part of the history for a patient meeting the criteria of an opioid use disorder. Furthermore, the patient's previous injury history should be recorded.

Opioid withdrawal symptoms include abdominal cramps, craving, agitation, diarrhea, pupil dilation, anxiety, elevated blood pressure, sneezing, sweating, elevated heart rate, tearing, shakiness, muscle pain, rhinorrhea, goosebumps, and insomnia.

Opioid intoxication symptoms include confusion, miosis, hypersomnia, nausea, euphoria, constipation, and decreased pain perception.

For suspected opioid overdose, on a physical exam, there are pinpoint pupils. The patient can be hypothermic or bradycardic, with limited responsiveness or unconsciousness.