Dyshormonogenesis can result in goitrous congenital hypothyroidism. All of the disorders are generally autosomal recessive.

A defect in iodide uptake due to a mutation in the sodium/iodide symporter (NIS) gene can result in hypothyroidism, goiter, and mental impairment. Classically tracer uptake is reduced, and TG increases with low T4 and high TSH in the diagnostic workup.

Thyroid peroxidase mutations can result in congenital hypothyroidism with goiter, given the crucial role of this enzyme in TH biosynthesis.

Pendred syndrome results from mutations in the Pendrin gene resulting in sensorineural deafness, goiter, and thyroid dysfunction in the second decade of life.

Mutations in the TG gene can result in congenital hypothyroidism with low levels of TG.

DUOX2 is crucial for the generation of hydrogen peroxide and can result in congenital hypothyroidism.

Iodotyrosine deiodinase controls the reuse of iodide for thyroid hormone synthesis, and mutations in the DEHALI gene lead to a deficiency in this enzyme. Patients have normal thyroid hormone levels at birth but develop congenital hypothyroidism.

The MCT8 gene is highly expressed in the brain and is responsible for expressing the iodine transporter in the cell membrane that brings iodine into the cell. MCT8-specific thyroid hormone cell-membrane transporter deficiency is X-linked recessive; thus mostly occurs in males and is diagnosed by high serum 3,3’,5-triiodothyronine (T3) concentration and low serum 3,3’,5’ triiodothyronine (reverse T3 or rT3) concentration. Its characteristic presentation shows a severe cognitive deficiency, infantile hypotonia, diminished muscle mass, generalized muscle weakness, spastic quadriplegia that increases in severity, joint contractures, dystonic or athetoid movement with paroxysms, or kinesigenic dyskinesias, and seizures.

A mutation in the BRAF V600E gene is known to be a cause of papillary thyroid cancer. The BRAF gene codes for the protein that is involved in the signaling pathway and cell growth.