VKH is a clinical diagnosis that requires a constellation of symptoms that can be supported with further laboratory and imaging evaluation. Patients undergo a complete history, focusing on the possible number of earlier episodes, meningeal symptoms, a history of eye or orbital pain, and hearing issues. Physical and slit lamp exams can reveal evidence of prior episodes because poliosis or vitiligo indicates that the patient has progressed through the chronic uveitic phase of the disease.

Cerebrospinal fluid testing during the prodromal phase of VKH has shown pleocytosis, which can persist for several weeks after the resolution of symptoms.

Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA), and to a lesser extent fluorescein angiography (FA), is established as the most important test for assessing VKH. ICGA can be used for diagnostic purposes but is also highly valuable for monitoring disease processes and responses to treatment.

During the acute uveitic phase of VKH, ICGA shows focal areas of delayed choroidal perfusion, peripapillary hypercyanescence, late multifocal pinpoint leakage, and pooling in areas of serous retinal detachment.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a less invasive technique and has been utilized to study VKH and as a diagnostic tool. However, ICG angiography appears to be superior to OCT in the monitoring of chronic disease and changes.

Newer technologies like OCT-angiography (OCTA) are being evaluated for their usefulness in diagnosing and managing VKH. OCTA reveals flow void in the choriocapillaris, indicating decreased perfusion, and have been shown to correlate with the pinpoint hypercyanescence noted on ICGA. Additionally, studies of OCTA after initiation of treatment have shown a reduction in the flow void. Further study is needed to establish the role of OCTA in the management of VKH.