As humans spend about one-third of their lives asleep, understanding the physiology and pathophysiology of sleep and sleep cycles becomes clinically significant. Lack of sleep affects our memory and ability to think clearly, and sleep deprivation can lead to neurological dysfunction such as mood swings and hallucinations. Those who do not get enough sleep are at higher risk of developing obesity, DM, and cardiovascular disease.

Sleep difficulties are associated with adverse effects on well-being, functioning, and quality of life. Lack of or altered sleep can disrupt family life, well-being, and the ability to care for children or oneself. With 50 to 70 million Americans chronically suffering from a disorder of sleep and wakefulness, it is clinically significant to understand.

Insomnia is a common condition associated with significant impairment in function and quality of life, psychiatric and physical morbidity, and accidents. As such, effective treatment must be provided in clinical practice. Insomnia is a complaint of difficulty falling or staying asleep, associated with significant distress or impairment in daytime function, and occurs despite an adequate opportunity for sleep. It is a common condition, with an approximate general population point prevalence of 10%. As it is common, it will likely be seen in a clinical setting. Available treatment options include both non-medication treatments, most notably cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for insomnia, and a variety of pharmacologic therapies such as benzodiazepines, melatonin receptor agonists, selective histamine H1 antagonists, antidepressants, antipsychotics, anticonvulsants, and non-selective antihistamines.

Alcohol, benzodiazepines, and barbiturates are associated with decreased REM sleep. Benzodiazepines are a significant class of drugs used for the treatment of insomnia as these tend to increase the arousal threshold in stage N3 and REM sleep. These two stages are already known to have the highest arousal threshold, and benzodiazepines further increase this threshold. They also tend to decrease the overall time spent in stage N3 and REM sleep and thus, can be used for night terrors and sleepwalking as these occur in the N3 and REM sleep phase.