Evaluation of priapism begins with a thorough and complete history and physical examination. If the etiology of priapism cannot be determined based on this information, then penile hemodynamics and intracorporal blood gases should be evaluated. Aspiration of the corpora cavernosa can be completed with laboratory evaluation of acquired blood. For blood cases, a small caliber needle (19 or 21 gauge) may be used. A cavernous blood gas in ischemic priapism will be low, generally with a pH less than 7.0, representing metabolic acidosis. Additionally, pO2 should be less than 30 mmHg, and pCO2 should be greater than 60 mmHg. Alternatively, high-flow non-ischemic priapism reveals more normal arterial blood on aspiration with a pH near 7.4 and pO2/pCO2 levels closer to 90 mm Hg and 40 mm Hg, respectively.

**Aspirated Corporal Blood Gases in Acute Priapism**

- Aspirated corporal blood gas in ischemic priapism: pH = 7 (or <7.2), pO2 < 30 mmHg, and pCO2 > 60 mmHg.

- Aspirated corporal blood gas in non-ischemic priapism: pH = 7.4 (or >7.2), pO2 > 90 mmHg, and pCO2 < 40 mmHg.

Further laboratory testing should be directed toward determining underlying or undiagnosed diseases that may be causing the patient's condition. Lab tests, including complete blood count, reticulocyte counts, hemoglobin electrophoresis, serum lactic dehydrogenase, and urine toxicology, can all be employed to aid in diagnosing priapism. A sickle cell test should be done in all priapism patients at risk for the condition. Drug toxicology testing and blood alcohol levels should be checked as appropriate due to the association of priapism with drug abuse and high alcohol intake.

Penile imaging can be utilized to aid in the diagnosis of ischemic versus non-ischemic causes of priapism. Intracorporal arterial blood flow can be analyzed using color duplex ultrasound, with absent blood flow in the cavernosal arteries suggestive of an ischemic etiology while a normal or increased arterial flow is characteristic of non-ischemic priapism. Abnormal anatomy, including arterial fistulas or pseudoaneurysms, may also be identified on an ultrasound examination.

**Current American Urological Association Guidelines**recommend color duplex Doppler ultrasonography if available, as it can help differentiate ischemic from non-ischemic priapism, can identify fistulas in about 70% of cases, and can be used in lieu of penile blood gas determinations.

Comprehensive blood work should be performed, including a CBC and a reticulocyte count. If sickle cell disease is even remotely a consideration, then hemoglobin S measurements should be done. A type and screen test is recommended in sickle cell anemia as some patients may need a plasma exchange. Blood alcohol and/or toxicology drug screening should also be considered.

**"Sleep-Related Painful Erections"**is a rare condition that is somewhat similar to priapism. It is defined as frequent awakenings due to penile pain during REM sleep from nocturnal erections resulting in severe sleep disruptions. The duration of the erections is insufficient to qualify these episodes as priapism as they typically remain rigid for only 15 to 60 minutes. Daytime, normal sexual activities are completely unaffected. Testosterone levels and libido are also normal, and there is no evidence of hematological disorders, which are common in stuttering priapism. The cause is unknown, although hypertonicity of the pelvic floor muscles has been implicated, and physical therapy appears to be helpful in some cases. The most effective treatment is baclofen.

**Summary of Evaluation of Acute Priapism**

- Comprehensive History and Physical

- Screening test for sickle cell disease, blood alcohol, and drug toxicology testing as appropriate

- Penile blood gases are optional (Low pO2 and high pCO2 are consistent with ischemic priapism)

- Imaging (Optional) to include duplex ultrasound or MRI/MRA