Acute care is prioritized to maintain the airway, prevent aspiration, and prevent maternal injury. The patient should be shifted onto her left side, and once the seizures have concluded, maternal oxygenation is optimized with the supplemental oxygen of 8 to 10 liters per minute administered via a nonrebreathing face mask to treat hypoxemia that occurs from hypoventilation during the seizure activity.

Magnesium sulfate is a treatment of choice to prevent recurrent seizures; however, approximately 10% will have a repeat seizure despite magnesium sulfate therapy. Recurrent seizures require surveillance for rhabdomyolysis, metabolic acidosis, aspiration pneumonia, and neurogenic pulmonary edema. Magnesium sulfate remains superior for recurrent seizure activity (an additional 2 gm bolus can be considered in those already on magnesium sulfate therapy), but intravenous lorazepam 2mg intravenously over 3 to 5 minutes may also be considered. The initial loading bolus of magnesium sulfate is 4 gm to 6 gm intravenously over 15 to 20 minutes with a maintenance dose of 1 gm to 3 gm an hour, depending on renal function. Blood levels of magnesium are monitored every four hours and targeted at four mEq/L to -7 mEq/L or 5 mg/dl to 9 mg/dl. Urine output is closely monitored. Should magnesium sulfate toxicity occur calcium, gluconate 1 gm intravenously can be administered.

Management of severe hypertension is the next focus of patient care. A preferred agent for the treatment of severe hypertension is intravenous labetalol (initial dose of 20 mg and for recalcitrant severe hypertension follow-up dose of 40 mg and 80 mg every 15 minutes). Maintaining systolic blood pressure between 140 mm Hg to 160 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure between 90 mmHg to 105 mmHg are targeted treatment goals.

Fetal bradycardia lasting 3 to 5 minutes is a common finding during and immediately after the seizure and does not indicate emergency cesarean delivery. Stabilization of the mother by stabilizing the seizure activity and correction of maternal hypertension if present and oxygen to treat hypoxemia and hypercarbia is the mainstay of initial supportive therapies are part of fetal intrauterine fetal resuscitation.  However, if the fetal heart rate strip does not improve after 15 minutes of maternal and fetal resuscitative interventions, then a differential diagnosis of occult abruption should be considered, and emergent cesarean delivery may be indicated. Eclampsia represents an absolute contraindication to expectant management. Once the maternal-fetal condition is stabilized, delivery should be accomplished by labor induction. This is a particularly reasonable option after 32 weeks of gestation. It may be an option at early gestations with a favorable Bishop score; however, long induction-delivery intervals are best avoided with a clear end-point for delivery to be concluded within 24 hours.