**Tear Film and Contact Lens Relationship**

The functional integrity of the cornea is maintained primarily by the precorneal tear film. It helps in nourishment, lubrication, and protection of the cornea.

**Contact Lens Fitting Over Cornea**

It is not practically possible to stick or clamp the lens over the corneal surface. The precorneal tear film has the property of surface tension and viscosity, which act as a glue to hold the lens together on the corneal surface.

The cohesive force between the water molecule act as an adhesive force for the lens, and this tear film will act as a plastic sheet to hold the lens close to the corneal surface. A negative force develops between the lens and the cornea; the tear film and air interface form a surface membrane that acts as a reservoir for the lens.

**Visual Considerations**

The lens and the tear film interact to form the tear lens. The tear film facilitates the functioning of the cornea. The refractive index of tear is 1.33, and that of the cornea is 1.37. The back of the tear film fills the corneal surface irregularities and presents a uniform surface for refractive elements. The difference of 0.04 refractive index indicated that contact lenses could correct up to 5D of astigmatism with a residual of 0.5D.

**Effects of Contact Lenses Over the Cornea**

- Prevent tear evaporation and as a barrier to hypertonicity of tears

- Act as a barrier to the delivery of oxygen

- Helps in waste disposal by trapping the waste

- Trauma to corneal epithelial cells

Hard contact lenses cover up to 50 to 80% of the cornea, and as the lens moves over the corneal surface, approximately 70 to 80% lens surface is covered all the time. The covered area of the cornea is dependent on the nutrition from the tear film.

Tear pump-action depends upon:

- Volume of tears

- Blink frequency

- Percentage of tear exchange with each blink