Hyponatremia, hypernatremia, and hypoglycemia may occur in children with dehydration as a result of illness or complication of fluid replacement therapy.

**Hyponatremia**

Although isonatremic dehydration is most common, hyponatremia or hypernatremia can occur. Hyponatremia is defined as a plasma sodium concentration less than 135 mEq/L. It is a common electrolyte abnormality in children receiving IV fluids. It is caused by a deficit of sodium or an excess of free water. In hospitalized children, there is an excessive release of ADH. This may require adjustment of water or sodium replacement. Hyponatremia may occur due to the administration of hypotonic solutions. It has been found with both 0.2% and 0.45% normal saline.

**Fluid Overload**

Generally, kidneys are capable of maintaining euvolemia; however, aggressive fluid administration can cause fluid overload.

**Hypernatremia**

Hypernatremia is a serum sodium level of more than 145 mEq/ L. It suggests water loss over sodium loss. There is a total body sodium deficiency despite elevated sodium concentrations. However, with the administration of isotonic fluids, the risk of hypernatremia is low.

In general, infants are at particular risk because of inadequate water replacement. This typically occurs with diarrhea or poor breastfeeding. In such a situation, the degree of dehydration may be underestimated; fluid shifts from the intracellular to the extracellular compartments. This preserves plasma and interstitial fluid volumes. Beware that the common signs of intravascular dehydration such as tachycardia, or weak pulse occur when severe dehydration is present. Since the intravascular space is relatively maintained, shock may occur late and may be sudden.