**Pulse**

Palpation for the radial artery proximal to the wrist crease and immediately lateral to the tendon of the flexor carpi radialis muscle is a common site for medical professionals to document a patient’s pulse. Additionally, it can be palpated in the anatomical snuffbox as it crosses the lateral aspect of the wrist. The medial aspect of the snuffbox is the tendon of the extensor pollicis longus muscle. The lateral aspects are the tendons of the extensor pollicis brevis and abductor pollicis longus muscles.

**Allen Test/Modified Allen Test**

The Allen test, first described by Edgar Van Nuys Allen in 1929, is a medical test to determine the arterial blood flow to the hand. An alternative method, the modified Allen test, proposed by Irving Wright, is considered superior. The hand receives blood supply from both the radial and ulnar arteries, which forms an anastomosis in the hand. Therefore, if one supply is inadequate, the other can help ensure proper profusion to intrinsic hand muscles. Below is the technique for performing the modified Allen test.

The patient is asked to keep the arm flexed at the wrist. Next, they are asked first to clench their fist tightly or to open and close their hand repeatedly and then clench. The examiner then compresses the radial and ulnar arteries, simultaneously stopping blood flow to the hand. The elbow is then extended fully, avoiding overextension as it may lead to a false positive. The fist is then unclenched, and the hand should appear white. At this point, compression gets released from the ulnar artery, and the examiner observes the hand color. Hand color should return within 10 seconds. The test is repeated, with compression removed from the radial rather than the ulnar artery.

Color is restored promptly in patients with proper arterial supply to the hand. Those with a compromised flow from either artery will have prolonged pallor following the release of arterial compression; this occurs secondary to an occlusion of the artery being released, continually reducing flow.

The modified Allen test is usable as a diagnostic tool to ensure proper arterial blood flow in patients undergoing vascular access or surgery in the hand. These procedures include arterial blood gases, cannulation, catheterization, or radial artery graft selection. In a suitable patient, the radial artery can make an ideal source for a coronary bypass procedure graft due to its size. Before any of these procedures, an Allen test/modified Allen test allows healthcare workers to determine if patients are at risk of developing hand ischemia. The Allen test/modified Allen test can also be used to determine whether ligation of the radial artery can be performed under emergent circumstances. When the radial artery has been nicked or cut, the optimal procedure is to re-anastomose the cut ends. However, under emergent circumstances, when a vascular surgeon is unavailable, one can ligate the cut ends of the artery and perform the Allen test/modified Allen test. The ulnar artery will be intact, so the medial fingers should readily blush (pink up). The issue concerns whether the thumb (princeps pollicis) and index finger (radlialis indicis) are sufficiently open to allow them to receive an adequate retrograde blood flow to permit them to survive. Another option should be sought if the index finger and thumb remain blanched (whitened).

**Arteriolar Constriction in a Cold Environment**

In a cold environment, the arterioles of the arteries supplying the hand contract under the influence of norepinephrine (noradrenaline) and epinephrine (adrenaline). These act on the alpha-one receptors of the arterioles to cause arteriolar constriction. This is a valuable adaptation to prevent excessive heat loss from the fingers and toes. However, in more extreme environments, this process can lead to the loss of fingers and toes due to gangrene from frostbite.

**Fracture of the Scaphoid**

Through its dorsal carpal branch, the radial artery supplies the scaphoid bone, which can be fractured by a fall on the outstretched hand. The loss of bone mass with age makes this fracture more common in senior citizens, who also may have a tendency to fall. If the scaphoid is fractured, it is imperative to diagnose the fracture of the scaphoid and splint the wrist. A complication is that the fracture may not show up on a radiograph for as much as a week to ten days when the bone has degenerated enough for the fracture to be visible. A scaphoid fracture can be diagnosed by putting manual pressure on the scaphoid at the carpometacarpal joint of the thumb in the anatomical snuffbox. Pain will be elicited by this maneuver if the scaphoid is fractured. If the wrist is not splinted in the case of a scaphoid fracture, the fractured portion may lose its blood supply and form a permanent non-union of the fracture. The fractured bone will become avascularized, undergoing degeneration which can be a permanent source of pain and disability.