Vibrio vulnificus is a flagellated halophilic motile gram-negative curved rod. It is a resident of marine environments, such as estuaries, rivers, deltas, shorelines as well as deeper ocean surfaces. V. vulnificus enters the food chain by taking up residence in the stomachs of shellfish (primarily oysters) as well as the intestines of fish. The bacilli then infect human hosts either through the ingestion of this contaminated seafood or via direct wound contact with contaminated water or seafood.

There are three distinctive syndromic presentations of V. vulnificus infections; primary septicemia, primary wound infection, and primary (and limited) gastroenteritis.

Ingestion of the bacilli can result in a primary septicemia syndrome, which can rapidly proceed to dramatic extremity involvement. Gastrointestinal symptoms of watery diarrhea, fever, nausea, and vomiting may precede or follow the septicemia or may be completely absent. The exact portal of entry is unknown but is thought to be the small intestine or colon. Primary sepsis accounts for about 60% of all cases seen. The overall death rate for this presentation is 50%.

Wounds created in a marine environment, e.g., lacerations, punctures, abrasions, envenomation, can quickly be colonized by the bacilli, causing an intense skin reaction, and cellulitis with blistering bullae. Untreated, this may proceed rapidly from skin lesion to necrotizing fasciitis with myonecrosis, and finally to overwhelming sepsis. Primary wound presentation is seen in about 25% of all V. vulnificus cases. The overall mortality rate for wound infection approximates 25% but rises to 54% in patients with underlying hepatic disease.

A limited gastrointestinal presentation, with sudden onset of fever, chills, watery diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting is seen. Sepsis, severe skin disease, or death in this presentation is minimal. However, since similar GI symptoms can precede the primary septicemic form, caution must be advised in assuming GI symptoms are benign. This limited GI presentation is seen in about 10% to 15% of all V. vulnificus cases seen.