There are many ways to perform a laparoscopic adjustable gastric band procedure. The following example employs the pars flaccida technique.

- **Entrance into the abdomen and trocar placement**The surgeon stands between the patient's legs, and the assistant is on the patient's left side. Entrance into the abdomen is done via Veress needle insufflation. An optically-guided 5 mm trocar is placed in the left subcostal margin at the midclavicular line; this is an assistant camera port. The remaining ports are placed under direct visualization. These include two 5 mm trocars at the left and right mid-abdomen in the bilateral midclavicular lines, which are the surgeon's working ports. A 15 mm trocar is placed more laterally at the left subcostal margin in the anterior axillary line, which is the assistant port. A liver retractor is placed in the subxiphoid position. The patient is then placed in the reverse Trendelenburg position.

- **Assessment of the diaphragmatic hiatus**Crural defects and Hiatal hernias should be repaired at the beginning of laparoscopic adjusted gastric band operations. Such defects may not be obvious intraoperatively and not be preoperatively diagnosed. One way to assess them is to place an orogastric calibration tube and inflate the balloon with 15 mL of air or water. A crural repair should be performed if the balloon slips up into the chest past the gastroesophageal junction. Anterior crural repairs can be performed for small non-sliding hernias. This type of repair only requires mobilization of the distal esophagus anteriorly with subsequent suture approximation of the right and left crura. Posterior crural repairs are necessary for larger and sliding hernias. These repairs require full mobilization of the right and left crus and the distal esophagus. While mobilizing the esophagus posteriorly, it is important that the dissection remains superior to the lesser sac, as it must not be entered.

- **Pars flaccida dissection and tunnel creation**The assistant grasps the fat high along the lesser curvature and retracts the stomach to the patient's left side. This exposes the pars flaccida, a clear membrane that covers the caudate lobe and runs between the lesser curvature of the stomach and the liver. The right crus fibers should be visualized and distinguished from the inferior vena cava. This is superior to the left gastric artery and caudal to the gastroesophageal junction. The opening should be wide enough to pass a 5 mm laparoscopic dissector. Care must be taken to stay superior to the lesser sac; entering this space may lead to future complications. A laparoscopic dissector will then be bluntly placed through this opening and passed posterior to the stomach toward the angle of His. The dissector will then traverse the left gastrophrenic ligament at the angle of His with blunt dissection. The angle of His may be incised before this step at the physician's discretion.

- **Introduction and placement of the gastric band**The appropriate band size and brand are determined. The lap band balloon is fully deflated on the back table by aspirating the balloon port of the device. The assistant then introduces the device through the 15 mm trocar with either the tube or suture, depending on the brand. The distal portion of the device is grasped with the dissector located at the angle of His. The band or suture loop is pulled through the posterior esophagogastric tunnel. The gastric band is then locked anteriorly, and its mobility on the stomach is evaluated. The locked band should be able to rotate freely around the superior stomach. Otherwise, it is too tight. In this case, the band must be unbuckled, and the perigastric fat must be excised to thin the tissue around which the gastric band is to be placed.

- **Gastro-gastric plication**2-0 permanent sutures approximate the distal fundus of the stomach to the superiorly-located gastric pouch. These sutures create a protective tunnel for the anterior, left-lateral aspect of the band. This approximation should be without tension and typically requires three sutures in the seromuscular plane. The buckle should not be covered with the imbrication and should be lifted to check for underlying tension. Once satisfactory plication is achieved, the buckle is rotated as far as possible to the right toward the lesser curvature.

- **Access port placement**The free end of the gastric band tubing is grasped and removed via the lateral 15 mm port. All ports, instruments, and retractors are removed from the abdomen with the subsequent release of the pneumoperitoneum. The tubing is trimmed and connected to the injection port with care not to shorten the tubing. Tubing long enough to lie loosely within the peritoneal cavity is required. The port is then secured to the anterior fascia in four quadrants with nonabsorbable sutures.

- **Closure**All wounds are closed with subcuticular absorbable sutures. Sterile dressings are applied.

- **Postoperative care**Patients are typically admitted to the general surgical ward and given a non-carbonated, sugar-free clear liquid diet on the day of surgery. Some surgeons discharge these patients home on the day of surgery. If admitted to the hospital, the patient's diet is advanced to full liquids or purees on postoperative day one. As long as the patient tolerates a diet and maintains hydration, they can be discharged. No solid foods are permissible until at least four weeks postoperatively. Some advocate for a barium swallow before discharge, although it is not required. The band is not initially insufflated with fluid. The first band adjustment is offered four to six weeks postoperatively. The first few port infusions should be done under fluoroscopic guidance. Subsequent monthly appointments for adjustment are made for the first year. During the second postoperative year, the patient should be seen two to three times for adjustments. The amount of fluid instilled during these adjustments should be tapered to allow for a weight loss of 0.5 to 1 kg per week. The patient must be able to swallow water without difficulty before leaving the office.