The palmar interossei are unipennate muscles that originate from the metacarpals of the respective digit to which they are associated. These muscles adduct the first, second, fourth, and fifth digits about a long axis through the third digit. The adduction occurs at the metacarpophalangeal joints. Additionally, the palmar interossei contribute to flexion at the metacarpophalangeal joints and extension at the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints of their respective digits.

When present as an individual entity, the first palmar interossei originates at the medial, palmar surface of the first metacarpal and inserts into the base of the proximal first phalanx as well as into the extensor hood or the first phalanx. The first palmar interosseus is often considered rudimentary, with most anatomy texts deeming it to be often a component of either the adductor pollicis or the flexor pollicis brevis. Recent studies, however, dispute this notion and found that the first palmar interossei, termed the “pollical palmar interosseous,” is present in over 85% of specimens.

The second palmar interosseous originates at the medial surface of the base of the second metacarpal and inserts onto the medial portion of the extensor hood of the first digit as well as the base of the first phalanx.

The third and fourth palmar interossei originate at the lateral aspect of the fourth and fifth metacarpals and insert into the lateral aspect of their respective extensor hood. They additionally insert into the base of their respective proximal phalanx.