When considering the treatment of these fractures, the clinician has a wide range of options. While non-operative treatment is certainly an option for those fractures in an acceptable pattern or alignment, fractures requiring operative fixation have several available options. Most commonly seen are percutaneous wires, intramedullary fixation, and open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) with plate fixation or lag screws is a common approach. The goal of treatment should be to begin early range of motion exercises 2 to 4 weeks postoperatively to avoid hand stiffness and to return to normal activities as soon as possible.

For the decision to pursue non-operative treatment, we must revisit the concept of metacarpal stability. The stability of the metacarpal is determined by both physical and radiographic evaluation focusing on the loss of height, scissoring of the digit, normal digit cascade, multiple fractures, and angulation of the fracture specific to the digit. The clinician should attempt non-operative treatment if the fracture falls within acceptable ranges. However, a reduction is necessary if fractures are outside this range and non-operative treatment is preferred.

In general, reductions of metacarpal fractures, regardless of location, should begin an appropriate anesthetic application with axial traction to disimpact the fracture and dorsal pressure on the hand, as most fractures displace with dorsal angulation; this is especially true for fractures of the metacarpal shaft. For metacarpal neck fractures, flexion of MCP joints to 90 degrees allows for tightening of the MCP ligaments allowing greater control of the distal fragment. Particular attention should be paid to neck fractures in the small finger as these injuries tend to be more and may require fixation.

If the reduction is maintained, patients may be graduated to buddy tapping of the involved digit and begin range of motion exercises until obtaining clinical union. However, even with a pristine reduction, these fractures may displace during treatment and, in doing so, will require fixation in most cases.

For fractures that have either failed non-operative treatment, are open, or are outside the accepted criteria previously mentioned, either closed or open reduction with internal fixation will be the treatment of choice. Height, rotation, and proper angulation must be achieved to restore hand motion and grip strength. Management of open fractures should always begin with the rapid administration of IV antibiotics, tetanus prophylaxis, and early irrigation and debridement.

Metacarpal head fractures are uncommon injuries, but most arise due to direct trauma and require operative fixation when there is a significant defect in the articular surface or instability is detected on the exam.

For metacarpal neck fractures, intramedullary or trans-metacarpal K-wires are the mainstay of treatment to help control angulation and restore height. These fixation options, however, don’t readily control rotation, even with post-operative immobilization. Contralateral hand films can aid careful examination of rotation to ensure proper alignment. A downside to intramedullary K-wire placement is the necessity for a secondary procedure to remove hardware. Other options include intramedullary headless screws, which still present the issue of rotational control postoperatively, but do not necessitate a second procedure for hardware removal.

The most common fracture site in the metacarpal is the shaft, and those with oblique and spiral fracture types have a higher likelihood of rotational deformity, requiring operative fixation. Primary options for fixation of these injuries include intramedullary K-wires, plate and screws, and, more recently, headless intramedullary compression screws. Percutaneous K-wires provide a minimally invasive approach. Intramedullary K-wires allow for length stability and can be supplemented with trans-metacarpal K-wires to achieve rotational stability as well, but are inferior in stability to plates and screws. Plates and screws can be viable in multiple modes for different fracture types for more rigid fixation. For oblique and spiral, lag screws can be applied with neutralization plating, while transverse fractures should have plates used in compression mode. This approach allows for more inherent stability and earlier ROM exercises in the post-operative period with favorable outcomes in ROM and a return to activity.

Metacarpal base fractures can present as both extra and intra-articular injuries. While extra-articular fractures are mostly seen independent of other injuries, intra-articular fractures can present with concomitant carpometacarpal joint dislocation, especially in the ring and small fingers.

Because these vital structures are close to the long finger metacarpal base, open reduction with plate and screw application should be undertaken to preserve them. Again, rigid fixation does provide the option for an early range of motion but risks anatomic structures and may damage fracture fragments. Several studies in the past have found near-equivalent outcomes for non-operative management and surgical treatment. Nearly half of the patients treated with surgical means had residual pain after their procedure, comparable to those treated with reduction and splinting.

The thumb metacarpal deserves special consideration, given the relative lack of interossei and deep intermetacarpal ligament support. Fractures deform dictated by the three muscles providing the deforming forces at the base of the thumb. Despite the thumb tolerating more angulation than other metacarpals due to its higher mobility, an apex dorsal angulation of over 30 degrees often fares poorly with non-operative management. Indications for closed reduction and thumb spica casting include extra-articular fracture, less than 30 degrees of angulation following closed reduction, and non-displaced (or less than 1 mm displacement) of an intra-articular fracture (i.e., Bennet fracture). Intra-articular fractures (Bennett – 2 part and Rolando – 3 part fracture patterns) most commonly require surgical fixation. The joint surface must be reduced to avoid long-term post-traumatic deformity and articular cartilage degeneration.

Open fractures should have treatment with local wound care and antibiotics. Although controversial, healthcare providers are to utilize best judgment practices regarding timely debridement with removal of any dirt/debris and primary versus secondary wound closure in the acute setting. For example, management of fight bite injuries is best with formal surgical irrigation and debridement of the MCP joint, given the high risk of infection with local wound care in the emergency department only. When in doubt, clinicians should consult the hand surgical service on call at the institution.

Post-operative patients require immobilization in the intrinsic plus position, as described previously, to reduce joint capsule contraction. Education to elevate their affected extremity as often as possible is also important, as dependent edema can significantly increase pain and limit range of motion, thus creating a stiff hand. For patients with plate and screw fixation, immobilization should cease at the first post-op visit, and gentle range of motion exercises should commence. For those patients who undergo percutaneous fixation, early ROM can be difficult due to soft tissue adhesions to the K-wire but should require implementation once a clinical union is obtained, commonly at 3 to 6 weeks.