A tonsillar herniation is indicative of an underlying pathology that may include trauma, hemorrhage, tumor, or hydrocephalus. Therefore, treatment is directed at the underlying pathology. Firstly, as with all comatose patients, supportive measures are initiated. These include:

- Airway protection if Glasgow coma scale (GCS) of 8 or less.

- Oxygenation and avoidance of hypoxia (O2 saturations target >90%).

- Adequate ventilation for a target paCO2 of 35-40 mmHg. A short period of hyperventilation with a paCO2 of 30-35 mmHg is only used as a temporizing measure to lower paCO2, causing arterial vasoconstriction and reducing cerebral blood flow. This reduces ICP acutely as a life-saving method and may be especially useful for a patient who is acutely deteriorating with signs of herniation while arranging a CT scan or transfer to the operating room.

- Fluid balance with MAP targets of 60 to 70 mm Hg. Avoidance of hypotension (systolic blood pressure <90mm Hg) as it doubles mortality in TBI.

- Osmotic therapy is another temporizing measure that can be initiated when a patient has acute signs of herniation. Again, this works by lowering the ICP and thus improving brain physiology and increasing the CPP. Typical agents used are mannitol (0.25 - 1 gm/ kg body weight) or hypertonic 3% saline (2-5 mL/kg over 10-20 minutes).

- Normothermia, treatment of sepsis, and adequate nutrition are initiated.

Surgical interventions are based on three broad principles:

- Removal of the lesion causing mass effect such as hematoma or tumor.

- CSF diversion to reduce ICP, such as insertion of an external ventricular drain.

- Decompressive craniectomy to combat the Monroe-Kellie doctrine of a fixed space allows intracranial contents to swell out of the craniectomy site. There is level III evidence for the use of decompressive craniectomy for refractory raised ICP with evidence of herniation.