The management of polymyositis and dermatomyositis is with an interprofessional team because of the complexity of treatment. While the rheumatologist usually performs the initial treatment, the primary care provider and nurse practitioner often handle the patient follow-up. Corticosteroids are the initial therapy and cornerstone in managing both polymyositis and dermatomyositis (PM/DM).

Steroid-sparing therapy like methotrexate and azathioprine (in patients with normal thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) activity) can be used in patients who develop adverse effects to steroids or those having trouble with tapering the steroids. They are also used in patients with inadequate responses to steroids. Side effects of these disease-modifying drugs need to be monitored.

Rituximab, anti-CD 20 monoclonal antibodies, is effective in treating myositis and myositis-related interstitial lung disease. Rituximab is preferred over cyclophosphamide by many clinicians due to its better tolerance and adverse effect profile. Pharmacists review medications for appropriateness, dosage, and interactions. They also provide patient education.

Finally, tailored physical exercise programs and rehabilitation under a physiatrist or physical therapist are shown to improve muscle strength and decrease disability, even in patients with acute inflammatory myopathy. Rehabilitation nurses monitor patient status and inform the team of major changes or issues.

Supportive treatment for PM/DM includes sunlight avoidance, the use of sunscreens in dermatomyositis, and aspiration precautions in patients with oro-pharyngeal myopathy. The outlook for patients with polymyositis and dermatomyositis is guarded.