The pathogenesis of Kleine–Levin syndrome is not wholly understood. Viral and autoimmune processes may also be involved in the pathophysiology of Kleine–Levin syndrome since flu-like symptoms are noted at disease onset.

Possible autoimmune-induced inflammation may cause the hypoperfusion observed on SPECT. However, no changes in serum cytokine levels during Kleine–Levin syndrome episodes were observed compared to between episodes.

Functional neuroimaging has also shown decreased striatal dopamine transporter binding potential in asymptomatic patients with Kleine–Levin syndrome when compared to control patients. Hypermetabolism of cerebral glucose was found within the thalamus and putamen during symptomatic Kleine–Levin syndrome episodes. While, in contrast, relatively lower glucose metabolism was found during symptomatic Kleine–Levin syndrome episodes bilaterally in occipital gyri, in left lingual gyrus, and right angular and middle and superior temporal gyri.

Since derealization often appears in the presentation of Kleine–Levin syndrome, this may suggest underlying parieto-temporal dysfunction. The parieto-temporal junction is involved in the cross-modal association between somatosensory (body knowledge), auditory and visual information. Thus dysfunction and/or hypoperfusion in the junction could possibly lead to derealization.

Hypocretin has been studied closely in regard to Kleine–Levin syndrome since greater than 90% of patients with narcolepsy have reduced cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin concentrations. However, hypocretin levels in the CSF of Kleine–Levin syndrome patients have sometimes been found to be normal, while other times found to be decreased. Hence, analysis of CSF hypocretin levels in Kleine–Levin syndrome needs to be carefully evaluated while recognizing that episodic reductions in Kleine–Levin syndrome may not be as drastic as seen in narcolepsy-cataplexy.