Currently, there is no cure for RTT, and medical management is aimed to provide symptomatic relief for patients through a multidisciplinary approach. Some of the medical concerns that need to be addressed in RTT patients include seizure disorders, behavioral alterations, sleep disorders, breathing irregularities, cardiac dysfunction (prolonged QT interval), gastrointestinal dysfunction and bone fractures. Approximately 60% of patients with RTT suffer from some seizure disorder. Treatment options to alleviate seizures include valproate, lamotrigine, levetiracetam carbamazepine, and AEDs. Behavioral alterations most often anxiety can be best addressed with serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). RTT patients often have difficulty initiating sleep and frequent nighttime awakening, which can be managed with proper sleep hygiene and trazodone once airway obstructions and other causes are ruled out. Breathing irregularities can include, apnea, hyperventilation, and breath holding. Successful management of these irregularities can be difficult. However, precautions should be taken to avoid medications that alter breathing patterns, for example, opioid medications. Cardiac irregularities include a prolonged QT interval. This can be more difficult to manage in patients with RTT compared to the general population. Studies in mice with MECP2 mutations suggest that beta blockers may not be sufficient. Precautions should be taken to avoid medications that would further prolong the QT interval, for example, macrolides. Bone fractures are 4 times more common in RTT patients compared to the general population, and vitamin D levels should be closely monitored and supplemented as required. Digestive problems such as gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and constipation are common in RTT patients and can be managed with calcium carbonate, histamine H2 receptor blockers (avoid cimetidine), and an increase in fiber intake. Other treatment options include physical therapy, speech therapy, occupational therapy, and psychosocial support for families. Management of these conditions can substantially improve the quality of life of RTT patients and should not be overlooked.