Phentermine and extended-release (ER) topiramate have been used separately in various ways. Phentermine was first introduced in 1959 as part of an anti-obesity combination drug. Topiramate was released for commercial use in 1996. Phentermine on its own has been used for short-term treatment of obesity in combination with exercise and caloric restriction. In addition, Topiramate has been used to treat partial-onset or primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, and as a prophylactic treatment of migraine headaches. The United States Food and Drug Administration approved the combination of these two drugs in 2012 to treat obesity. The drugs are to be used in combination with a reduced-calorie diet and exercise program in individuals with an initial body mass index (BMI) over 30 kg/m2 or those with a BMI of over 27 in combination with at least one obesity-related comorbidity. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, methods of administration, important adverse effects, contraindications, toxicity, and monitoring, of topiramate/phentermine so providers can direct patient therapy where they are indicated as part of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanisms of action of topiramate and phentermine.
- Outline the indications for initiating topiramate/phentermine therapy in a weight loss regimen.
- Review the adverse events profile for topiramate/phentermine combination therapy.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to properly use topiramate/phentermine combination therapy to improve patient outcomes as part of a weight-loss regimen.