**Obstructive Lung Disease (OLD)**

Obstructive lung diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, and bronchiectasis, are characterized by airway inflammation, easily collapsible airways, expiratory flow obstruction, and air trapping that results in elevated RV relative to healthy lungs. In obstructive lung disease, factors such as inflammation, bronchoconstriction, excessive mucus, and decreased elastic recoil cause increased airway resistance and lead to earlier small airway closure during expiration. The premature airway closure increases the volume of air retained in the lungs at the end of expiration; this is referred to as air trapping. This trapped air results in pulmonary hyperinflation. Therefore patients with obstructive lung disease have elevated TLC, FRC, and RV (Figure 1C).

Body plethysmography yields a higher FRC in patients with obstructive lung disease than those measured by gas dilution techniques because it includes both well-ventilated and poorly ventilated areas of the lung. RV is generally the first volume to increase in obstructive lung disease and can be a good measure to evaluate early disease states. Additional findings on spirometry for OLD include decreased forced expiratory volume in the first second of expiration (FEV1), decreased forced vital capacity (FVC), and FEV1/FVC ratio <70% because FEV1 decreases more than FVC.

The RV/TLC ratio is used as a measure of resting pulmonary hyperinflation in patients with COPD. An elevated RC/TLC ratio is a significant risk factor for all-cause mortality in COPD patients.

**Restrictive Lung Disease (RLD)**

Restrictive lung diseases are a result of processes that restrict pulmonary expansion. The restriction can be related to intrinsic diseases such as pulmonary fibrosis and sarcoidosis, or extrinsic processes like kyphosis and obesity. In either case, the result is restricted airway expansion that reduces the driving force for airflow into the lungs created by the negative pressure gradient which causes decreased lung volumes and inadequate ventilation. TLC, FRC, and RV will all be decreased in restrictive lung disease. These changes are reflected by the characteristic right shift associated with RLD seen on the flow-volume loop during pulmonary function testing. Findings of spirometry include decreased FEV1 and FVC as seen in OLD, but the decrease in FEV1 and FVC is more uniform, or even more so in FVC, which results in a normal or elevated FEV1/FVC ratio.

The effects of obesity on lung function are a growing concern as the prevalence and severity of obesity increase. Studies have shown that increasing body mass index (BMI) correlates with lower VC, TLC, and RV, but these values remain within normal limits. Significant decreases in FRC and ERV are seen as BMI increases to the extent that FRC approaches RV.****

**Drowning**

An interesting clinical use for residual volume is applied during post-mortem autopsies of drowning victims. The residual volume of air in the lungs can only be removed if it is replaced by another substance. In the case of drowning victims, water will replace the residual air in the lungs. During autopsies, medical examiners can clamp the trachea and submerge the lungs in water. If the lungs sink, no residual air remains, so it is likely the person drowned after inhaling large amounts of water. However, if the lungs float, the residual volume of air remains in the lungs. The residual volume was not replaced by water, so it is likely the person died before entering the water.