The management of patients with OAVS requires an interprofessional approach starting from the first few days of life. Neonatologists and pediatricians confirm the diagnosis of congenital defects and initiate the management at the time of birth.

Following a complete evaluation, management should be tailored to the patient and focus on improving the quality of life. The management team should include a pediatrician, ophthalmologist, oral maxillofacial surgeon, audiologist, otolaryngologist, speech-language pathologist, orthodontist, plastic surgeon, radiologist, neurosurgeon, social worker, psychologist, and a geneticist. Detailed management of all systemic anomalies is outside the scope of this review.

**Management of Ocular Anomalies**

**Upper Eyelid Coloboma**

The upper eyelid coloboma is a surgical emergency and should be repaired within a few days of life to prevent exposure, corneal ulcer, perforation, corneal opacity, and amblyopia.

- Small defect (up to 25% of horizontal lid length): direct apposition

- 25 to 35% defect: Tenzel semicircular flap

- Large (>35% defect): Cutler Beard or Mustarde rotation flap, tarsomarginal grafts, and modified Hughes procedure. The risk of amblyopia due to temporary patching should be kept in mind.

**Limbal Dermoid**

Management of dermoid depends upon the grade (described above) and extent of the lesion as described by Mann et al. Regular follow-up is required for documenting the size of the lesion, visual acuity, ruling out amblyopia, and refraction. Medical management with spectacles is done if small lesion with mild, regular astigmatism and good vision and compliance with spectacles. Indications of surgery include poor vision or noncompliance with spectacles, enlarging lesion encroaching visual axis, amblyopia, chronic ocular surface inflammation, cosmetic reasons, anisometropia, inadequate lid closure, and all grade II and III dermoids. Surgical options include:

- Grade I <50 μm thickness and <1 mm diameter: Simple excision

- Grade I <100 μm thickness and <1 mm diameter: Excision with lamellar keratectomy, amniotic membrane transplant (AMT), limbal stem cell transplant (LSCT)

- Grade II and more profound Grade I: Keratectomy, AMT, LSCT, patch graft or deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty ± AMT

- Grade III: Total anterior segment reconstruction

Surgical excision can be followed by corneal tattooing to improve the cosmetic appearance of the limbal and corneal scar. Jacob et al. described the technique of interface tattooing with SMILE donor lenticule corneal resurfacing after limbal dermoid excision. Following surgical excision, there is a risk of developing pseudopterygium over the bare area. Lang et al. described that the application of mitomycin C 0.02% for 2 minutes over the area after dermoid excision could prevent the occurrence of pseudopterygium.

Lipodermoid, more yellowish due to a deep layer of fat cells, has more extensive involvement, with the superotemporal quadrant being the commonest and often extending inferiorly. However, it rarely causes functional abnormalities like vision impairment, strabismus, or globe restriction. Thus, surgical treatment is mainly required to improve cosmesis and includes simple surgical excision and conjunctivoplasty with or without AMT.