Most commonly, folliculitis is caused by bacterial infection of the superficial or deep hair follicle. However, this condition may also be caused by fungal species, viruses and can even be noninfectious in nature. Several of the causative agents of folliculitis are listed below and include:

Superficial bacterial folliculitis – The most common form of folliculitis, this particular condition is usually caused by the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus. It should be noted that both the methicillin-sensitive and methicillin-resistant forms of this bacteria can cause folliculitis.

Gram-negative bacterial folliculitis - Commonly referred to as “hot tub” folliculitis, this condition results from the bacteria pseudomonas aeruginosa. It typically arises after exposure to contaminated water from either an improperly treated swimming pool or hot tub. Other bacteria that may cause this condition include Klebsiella and Enterobacter. Folliculitis from these bacteria commonly arises after long-term use of oral antibiotics.

Pityrosporum Folliculitis - This particular form of folliculitis is fungal, caused by the Malassezia species of fungi such as Malassezia furfur. Typically found in adolescence secondary to increased activity of their sebaceous glands, and is commonly found in a cape-like distribution over the patient’s shoulders, back, and neck. Clinical suspicion of this condition should arise in patients diagnosed with acne that has failed to respond or even worsened, after antibiotic treatment.

Viral folliculitis - Most commonly caused by herpes virus it could also be caused by Molluscum contagiosum, but this is far rarer. Folliculitis due to herpes virus presents in much the same way as bacterial folliculitis with the exception that papulovesicles and/or plaques are usually present and not pustules. Another key to the diagnosis of this condition is that lesions typically appear in either groups or clusters.

Demodex folliculitis - a type of folliculitis caused by the mite Demodex folliculorum. This particular type of folliculitis is controversial as the Demodex mite normally presents in the pilonidal sebaceous area of the skin. Estimates are that 80 to 90% of all humans may carry this mite.

Eosinophilic folliculitis - This particular brand of folliculitis is found predominantly in those with advanced HIV or those with low CD4 counts.