The genetic mutation affects the cell cycle, especially the G1- S checkpoint. This stimulates the formation of odontogenic cysts or tumors. Studies suggest that mutations in ameloblastin, KRAS, FHIT, and P53 genes are related to the development of odontogenic tumors.

Understanding the etiology of odontogenic tumors went through many phases. Initially, it was thought to be related to trauma, nutritional deficiencies, and chronic irritation from dental caries. This concept changed over time as studies have shown that odontogenic tumors express proteins similar to the developing tooth-like cytokeratin and vimentin.

At the genetic level, a different expression of certain genes has been noticed in odontogenic tumor patients, especially ameloblastoma cases. Some of them are overexpressed, and others are underexpressed compared with the normal level. Examples of the over-expressed genes are c-fos proto-oncogene (FOS), tumor necrosis factor receptor 1A (TNFRSF1A), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A), collagen type VIII alpha 1 (COL8A1), matrix metalloproteinase 12 (macrophage elastase) (MMP-12) and WNT5A and WNT-1. While the under-expressed genes include sonic hedgehog (SHH), cadherin 12 (CDH12), cadherin 13 (CDH13), transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFB1), patch (PTCH), and others.

The molecular pathogenesis of ameloblastoma is now considered to be related to the dysregulation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. Mutation in the BRAF, a protein kinase responsible for activating the MAPK signaling pathway, has been seen in around 63% of ameloblastoma cases.