To understand the pathophysiology of a hypoxic blackout, we will first examine the physiology of diving. The underwater environment has increasingly higher pressures the deeper it is. These pressures are dramatically higher than the land’s atmospheric pressure. For every additional 10 meters of depth, the ambient pressure rises by 1 bar (about 750 mm Hg). As a result of this high-pressure environment, the lungs become compressed (Boyle’s law: P1xV1 = P2xV2), which results in increased pressure within both the thoracic cavity and peripherally. This situation ultimately promotes the central shunting of peripheral blood flow.

With this understanding, we can better understand the physiology of drowning.  After prolonged breath-holding, the oxygen reserve becomes depleted. This lack of oxygenation, along with the inability to successfully carry out respiratory drive, can lead to unconsciousness and possibly death. When a drowning person can no longer keep their airway clear, the water is either spat out or swallowed, either of which can induce laryngospasm and lead to further aspiration, followed by worsening hypoxemia and eventually unconsciousness.

Hyperventilation before breath-holding lowers the arterial partial pressure of CO2 and delays the re-emergence of the stimulus to breathe.

A similar phenomenon called ascent blackout can occur in deep-water diving when the loss of consciousness occurs merely meters below the surface. In breath-hold diving, the risk of hypoxic blackouts is increased during the ascent as arterial oxygen saturation drops to less than the threshold for consciousness. This threshold is 25 to 30 mm Hg.