The quantification of LDH is of clinical interest as a serum concentration of LDH isozymes reflect tissue-specific pathological conditions. Hence, LDH can be used as a marker for diverse tissue injuries owing to its isozyme form, and its ubiquitous presence. Upon tissue damage, the cells release LDH in the bloodstream. Depending upon the type of tissue injury, the enzyme can remain elevated for up to 7 days in the bloodstream. The elevated LDH in serum as a result of organ destruction occurs due to significant cell death that results in loss of cytoplasm. Causes of tissue damage can be diseases such as acute myocardial infarction, anemia, pulmonary embolism, hepatitis, acute renal failure, etc.

LDH increases during effusion in serous body fluids such as pericardial and peritoneal fluids. Hence, it serves to characterize effusion. In cerebrospinal fluid, LDH increases in bacterial meningitis, while it is observed to be normal in viral meningitis. The ratio of fluid LDH compared to the upper limit of normal serum LDH (> 0.6) indicates an inflammatory process, and hence exudate.

There is a marked increase in LDH during intracranial hemorrhage. More than 40 U/L increase above the normal levels is observed in the central nervous system lymphoma, leukemia, and metastatic carcinoma. Elevated levels of more than one isoenzyme may be indicative of more than one cause of tissue damage, e.g., in conditions where pneumonia may also be associated with a heart attack. Very levels of LDH appear to correlate with severe disease or multiple organ failure.

LDH is the only serum biomarker useful for assessing metastatic melanomas.

This enzyme also constitutes a potential therapeutic target for diseases such as malaria and cancer. The LDH isoform expressed by Plasmodium falciparum, the malarial parasite, is a crucial enzyme for the generation of energy in the parasite. Since these malarial parasites lack a tricarboxylic acid cycle for ATP formation, anaerobic glycolysis serves as a source of energy.Plasmodium falciparum LDH would only be directed towards the parasite and would selectively kill the parasite.

Most invasive tumors undergo a metabolic switching (Warburg effect) from oxidative phosphorylation to higher anaerobic glycolysis. This switch occurs through upregulation of the LDH-5 (also called LDH-A), the isoform normally present in muscles and the liver.

Researchers have conducted clinical trials in melanoma patients with low LDH, and treatment with Ipilimumab showed higher efficacy when treatment started with low baseline LDH.

The deficiency of the enzyme LDH is very rare, and not much data is available for its prevalence. This deficiency can result from either the mutations in the LDHA gene or the LDHB gene leading to a deficiency in LDH-A (M- subunit protein) and LDH-B (H-subunit protein) proteins, respectively.

LDHA gene mutation mostly affects skeletal muscles, because skeletal LDH has all M-subunits. However, a lack of a functional subunit reduces the amount of enzyme formed in all other tissues as well. This chemistry results in an ineffective breakdown of glycogen. Hence, LDHA gene deficiency is also called glycogen storage disease XI. The unavailability of sufficient energy, especially to the muscle cells, causes muscle weakness and breakdown of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis).

On the other hand, LDHB gene mutations affect the heart muscle primarily because the heart LDH is made of all four H-subunits. In cardiac muscle, the involuntary muscle movement is fueled by the conversion of lactate to pyruvate through the LDH enzyme. Such conditions lead to a reduced LDH activity in cardiac muscle of patients with LDHB deficiency. Interestingly, no visible phenotype, signs, or symptoms are observed in such patients. Both LDHA and LDHB gene mutations have shown relevance in tumorigenesis.