The optimal management strategy for pregnant women with substance use or SUD begins with comprehensive prenatal care. The next step is counseling and educating them about the consequences of tobacco, alcohol, and drug use related to themself and their unborn child and encouraging them to discontinue or reduce usage. Motivational interviewing and brief intervention rather than a judgmental or punitive approach are more likely to produce positive behavioral change. All women with SUD should be referred to the appropriate provider without delay for comprehensive behavioral and medical treatment.

Treatment of all types of SUD reduces the risk of relapse and improves pregnancy outcomes. ACOG recommends that pregnant women who smoke or use nicotine and tobacco products quit. Babies born to women who abstain by 15 weeks of gestation benefit the most. When behavioral counseling does not result in smoking cessation, varenicline, bupropion, and nicotine replacement can be considered, but these treatments lack safety data for use in pregnancy. Varenicline and bupropion are both FDA category C medications. Nicotine replacement during pregnancy has not been proven to result in long-term smoking cessation.

Patients with alcohol or benzodiazepine use disorder can be managed with detoxification using a diazepam or lorazepam taper.

Medication-assisted treatment is the standard of care for pregnant women with OUD. Although some women choose medically supervised withdrawal, current guidelines recommend treatment with methadone or buprenorphine. There is a higher rate of relapse during pregnancy in women who elect detoxification rather than medication-assisted treatment.

Medication-assisted treatment suppresses cravings and withdrawal symptoms, and patients are less likely to use illicit substances when enrolled in a treatment program. Pregnant women better adhere to prenatal care recommendations and experience fewer complications associated with intravenous drug use, such as overdose and infection. However, many pregnant women with OUD struggle to access medication-assisted treatment compared to their non-pregnant peers, especially those living in rural areas, non-English speakers, and those not covered by health insurance.

The decision to prescribe either buprenorphine or methadone depends on many factors, including the availability of treatment programs and whether the patient prefers daily supervised medication appointments or a prescription to be taken at home.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD.  Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.

**Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome (NOWS)**

Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome (NOWS), previously referred to as neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS), is an expected and manageable condition in newborns with prenatal opioid exposure. Treatment with methadone and buprenorphine during pregnancy can decrease the severity of NOWS. Some studies demonstrate that newborns exposed to prenatal buprenorphine require less medication and have a shorter hospital stay than those exposed to methadone.

Medication-assisted treatment has not been associated with congenital malformations, and studies show minimal to no long-term neurodevelopmental adverse outcomes in exposed infants.

Women who begin medication-assisted treatment before or early in pregnancy are more likely to receive comprehensive prenatal care, follow medical recommendations, and deliver healthier babies. They are also less likely to relapse or acquire sexually transmitted infections. Medication-assisted treatment should be readily available to all pregnant women identified with OUD to improve maternal and infant outcomes.

**Breastfeeding**

Women who breastfeed and "room-in" with their newborns require less pain medication after delivery. Breastfeeding is associated with a decreased severity of NOWS symptoms and a decreased need for pharmacotherapy for affected newborns.

Women with hepatitis C should breastfeed unless they have cracked or bleeding nipples, but it is generally contraindicated for mothers with HIV.

Occasionally, a new mother will feel uncomfortable breastfeeding, especially if she has a history of intimate partner violence. Clinicians should respect and support her decision to nourish her baby with formula.