After total knee replacement, an interprofessional team is necessary to prevent and manage the comorbidities. Many of the patients are frail and/or have cognitive impairment. Hence a dietary consult is necessary. A pain consult is necessary prior to undertaking rehabilitation. However, the type of analgesic selected must allow for pain control and yet, at the same time, prevent sedation. Further, long-term pain control is not recommended as it may mask any fever infection or evidence of vascular compromise. Constipation should be managed as it is very common in this population. The pharmacist should assist the clinician in appropriate pain medication selection and management. The nurse should ensure that the patient has prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis. Finally, the patient should be educated by the orthopedic nurse not to cross the legs, turn the leg inward or bend over to reach objects. The nurse should also assist the clinician in providing close follow up and reporting concerns about complications. The therapist should educate the patient on how to use an assistive device if the gait is unbalanced. Follow up of these patients is required until the patient is independently ambulating.

**Outcomes**

Although the most recent reports still cite that up to 1 in 5 patients remain dissatisfied following TKA, the risks of patient-reported dissatisfaction can be mitigated by selectively operating on patients that have had other potentially relevant clinical pathologies like hip and/or back conditions ruled out as confounding pain generators. Success following TKA results in significant improvements in patient-reported pain and functional outcome scores in the short- and long-term postoperative periods. Although the overall longevity of the TKA prosthesis is influenced by a multitude of patient-related and prosthetic technicality factors, in general, the lifespan is expected for about 15 to 20 years. Clinicians are encouraged to ensure that surgical candidates have first exhausted all nonoperative treatment modalities, as mentioned earlier in this review. As the rates of surgical procedures in the young and elderly populations continue to increase, orthopedic surgeons can expect excellent outcomes in the appropriately indicated patient populations.