Treatment for DKA begins with ABCs and fluid resuscitation. Insulin therapy, usually by continuous infusion, can begin once the patient is stabilized.

- **General resuscitation:**Provide 100% oxygen and consider intubation if needed. Insert a nasogastric tube and urinary catheter for comatose patients. Reliable intravenous (IV) access (preferably two large-bore accesses) should be obtained, one for insulin treatment and the other for blood samples and other medications.

- **Clinical assessment:**Identify any signs of infection or other precipitating causes and treat as indicated.

- Precise **patient weight**is necessary for calculating insulin and other medication dosing.

- **Insulin Therapy:**Regular Insulin should be administered with a continuous drip at a rate of 0.1 unit/kg/hour.no role for insulin bolus in pediatric DKA patients – this is thought to increase the risk of cerebral edema. Consider waiting to initiate insulin infusion until after serum potassium is known, thus preventing critical worsening of hypokalemia.

- The **i****nsulin infusion is stopped**when the following targets are achieved:
- The patient can take orally administered medications
- Blood glucose less than 200 mg/dL
- Serum anion gap closed or BHB less than or equal to 10.4 mg/dL
- Venous pH >7.3 or serum bicarbonate >15 mEq/L

- IV Fluids:  Treats dehydration and also hyperglycemia.

- Initial IV fluid bolus of 10 mL/kg of normal saline or lactated ringers.
- If the patient presents with shock, a second 10 mL/kg IV fluid bolus may be given.

- As mentioned above, hyperglycemia contributes to **pseudohyponatremia.**Therefore sodium should be continuously monitored, and higher concentrations of sodium should be used in IV fluids if sodium levels do not improve or continue to fall with treatment.

- **Potassium replacement**should depend on close observation and interpretation of lab values. If the initial potassium level reveals hyperkalemia, potassium replacement should be held until potassium normalizes, urinary voiding is confirmed to be intact, and there is normal renal function.  Normal initial potassium in an acidotic patient could indicate severely low total body potassium. Patients with normal or low serum potassium require replacement after ruling out renal dysfunction. DKA patients with hypokalemia should have delayed initial insulin infusion; potassium replacement should precede insulin dosing as above.

- **Ketoacidosis**is resolved when the anion gap is normal, serum BHB is ≤10.4 mg/dL, and venous pH is ≥7.3. It is achieved through decreased hepatic production of ketones, enhanced metabolism by insulin, and increased removal by improved rehydration.

- **Lactic acidosis**is also corrected with improved rehydration.

- **Bicarbonate**therapy is generally avoided in children with DKA except in peri-arrest or cardiac arrest patients, life-threatening hyperkalemia, or severe acidosis (pH <6.9 with symptoms).

- High-level **nursing**and frequent clinical assessments are necessary; biochemical blood markers every two hours.

- Once acidosis is resolved, the anion gap has closed, and the patient is improving clinically, then diet can be reintroduced, and insulin can be switched to **subcutaneous injection. Long-acting/baseline insulin**should be administered prior to discontinuation of the infusion.

- **Prevention:**Determine the cause of the acute DKA episode and work closely with the child and caregivers on a regime.