PAF is primarily involved in inflammatory reactions and the activation of thrombotic cascades. It exerts its effects through the receptor present on the target cells, resulting in the production of various inflammatory mediators such as prostaglandins, cytokines, and other inflammatory mediators. It also acts in conjunction with these inflammatory mediators in the inflammatory response. It is also known to affect other systems such as cardiovascular, nervous, and respiratory systems.

Liver: PAF actions on the liver results in increased glycogenolysis. The mechanism of induction of breakdown of glycogen is from the hemodynamic effects of PAF rather than enzymatic regulation.

Lungs: PAF induces the production of leukotrienes D4 and C4 in the lungs. As a result, it leads to fluid loss from the microvasculature, a potentially significant event in the outcome of allergic or inflammatory disease. PAF can also cause massive bronchoconstriction. It is also a sensitive regulator of surfactant secretion in type II alveolar cells.

Brain: Studies on rat brain have shown that the production of PAF increases in response to convulsant stimuli and ischemia through activation of the remodeling pathway. Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is activated by increased intracellular calcium concentration during the ischemic event, and this enzyme carries out the first step of the remodeling pathway. Also, protein kinase C (PKC) is activated due to ischemia and can phosphorylate and activate lysoPAF-acetyltransferase – the second enzyme involved in biosynthesis – fully activating the remodeling pathway. One of the effects of PAF produced within the brain is to accelerate synaptic polyphosphoinositide turnover. It also increases the Na+-Ca2+ exchange in the neurolemma and brain synaptosomes. PAF does not cross BBB, and vascular endothelial cells produce smaller amounts of PAF than aortic endothelial cells resulting in lower PMN adherence to brain endothelial cells. Brain endothelial cells have lower activity of PLA2 and have lower production of prostacyclin (PGI2). PAF and PGI2 have antagonizing activities in many aspects, and their balance is crucial in terms of thrombotic and anti-thrombotic effects, respectively. Therefore, brain endothelial cells have low levels of both PAF and PGI2.

Heart: PAF can have direct or indirect effects on the heart. It can directly modify heart rate and contractility. Indirectly, it can stimulate inflammatory or endothelial cells to produce thromboxane A2 (TXA2), LTs, or TNF-alpha, leading to the same modification. These molecules can cause coronary artery constrictions and can even contribute to arrhythmias.

Kidneys: The primary source of PAF in the body is the kidneys. Anephric patients and animals undergone bilateral nephrectomy have undetectable levels of PAF in the blood. The PAF receptors are expressed in the highest amount in the renal cortex and least in the inner medulla. In the nephron, the glomerulus contains the highest PAF receptors. The renal effects of PAF are challenging to measure in vivo due to its systemic hemodynamic effects. PAF decreases blood pressure, circulating volume, and cardiac output. As a result, it causes a decrease in renal plasma flow, glomerular filtration rate (GFR), and urine flow, along with increased renal vasculature resistance. There is also an increase in sodium and potassium reabsorption along the nephron.

Reproduction: PAF has an essential role in oocyte maturation and successful outcomes of pregnancy. PAF contributes to the maturation of the oocyte. Immature follicles have a low amount of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and interleukin-1 (IL-1). PGE2 and IL-1 inhibit PAH acetylhydrolase. Therefore, fewer amounts of inhibitors result in increased degradation of PAF by the activity of PAF acetylhydrolase in immature follicles. As the follicle matures, PGE2 and IL-1 concentration increase resulting in inhibition of PAF acetylhydrolase and accumulation of PAF. PAF accumulation in the follicular fluid may stimulate the production of progesterone, which causes increased production of the proteolytic enzymes - plasmin and collagenase - for follicular wall connective tissue degradation during ovulation. PAF is also associated with successful outcomes of pregnancy after fertilization. Smooth muscles in the ovary may also contract in response to PAF accumulation resulting in extrusion of the oocyte cumulus cell mass.