EGFR has demonstrated expression on vascular endothelial cells, HeLa cells, conjunctiva cells, vascular and uterine smooth muscle cells, keratinocytes, amniotic cells, placental membranes, HeLa cells and normal skin fibroblasts. It is no surprise that many cancers have been associated with upregulation of EGFR and overexpression has been identified in the majority of solid tumors. Associated cancers include breast, head-and-neck, non-small-cell lung and squamous cell lung cancers, renal cell, ovarian, colon, bladder, pancreatic cancer, and gliomas. While normal cells express 40,000 to 100,000 EGFR receptors, cancer cells may express up to 2,000,000 receptors. Stimulation of overexpressed EGFR receptors may contribute to the pathology of cancer by inducing cancer-cell proliferation while simultaneously blocking apoptosis, by activating invasion and metastasis of hyperproliferative cells and by stimulating tumor-induced neovascularization. The degree of overexpression correlates with tumor progression, resistance to chemotherapy and a poor prognosis. In addition to their role in cancer cells, EGFR overexpression has been implicated in neurodegenerative diseases. In Alzheimer disease, mutations in presenilin 1 (PS1) contribute to the pathophysiology of the disease. PS1 is also involved in the transportation and production of EGFR. Neurites in proximity to the neuritic plaques found in Alzheimer disease show strong EGFR immunoreactivity and excess EGF is known to induce neuronal death. Although the precise mechanism of this relationship is unclear, recent research indicates that there is a role for EGFR overexpression in neurodegenerative disease as well.