The mRNA class of vaccines' rapid evolution and advancements are from the mRNA capabilities to imitate the antigen structure and expression comparable to those occurring during the SARS-CoV-2 infection.

**BNT162b2**

BNT162b2 is a nucleoside-modified messenger RNA (mRNA) expressed in lipid nanoparticles (LNP), encoding the spike (S) protein for the SARS-CoV-2 virus - the main site for neutralizing antibodies.

**mRNA-1273**

The mRNA-1273 vaccine is comprised of a lipid nanoparticle (LNP) encapsulating nucleoside-modified messenger RNA (mRNA), encoding the perfusion stabilized spike (S) protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and an S1-S2 cleavage site, which includes a transmembrane component. The S-2P antigen present on its surface allows entrance into the host cell. This further transfers the RNA into host cells, resulting in the expression of the SARS-CoV-2 S antigens. The immunogenicity and antibody response to SARS-CoV-2 S antigens also confers protection against COVID-19.

**Ad26.COV2.S**

The Ad26.COV2.S exerts its effects by expressing the SARS-CoV-2 S protein to human cells creating an immune response to the SARS-CoV-2 antigen, conferring immunity without dispersal of the virus. Different from the mRNA vaccines (BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273), the Ad26.COV2.S is a recombinant viral vector vaccine. The Ad26.COV2.S recombinant viral vector vaccine bears DNA which forms the S protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, once injected into host cells, provide considerable amounts of the S protein antigen. The immune response to the S protein confers immunity by T-cells and B-cell stimulating antibodies to the S protein, similar to SARS-CoV-2 infection.

**NVX-CoV2373**

This vaccine contains recombinant spike (rS) protein nanoparticles and Matrix-M adjuvant proteins. The rS protein is produced using recombinant DNA technology. Intramuscular injection of the full-length rS protein elicits an immune response to the rS protein, which protects against COVID-19 illness.