The management of glottic stenosis is variable and complicated, and it requires individualized treatment by experts in laryngeal pathologies. The primary concern is to secure the patient’s airway. However, voice and laryngeal function preservation are of nearly equal significance.

Congenital glottic stenosis can often be managed with careful observation or via an endoscopic approach to divide the anterior web. The use of laryngeal stents or tracheostomy might be necessary in severe cases. If there is an antenatal diagnosis of congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS), the neonate’s airway must be secured using ex-utero intrapartum treatment.

In cases of glottic stenosis due to infectious or inflammatory conditions, medical management is the mainstay of treatment. Early diagnosis and treatment of the underlying medical condition can result in improvement of the glottic stenosis and eliminate the need for further surgical management.

There are two primary surgical means to approach acquired glottic stenosis: endoscopic and open procedures. Anterior thin webs are easily manageable with dilatations or laser/blade incisions.

Several medical therapeutic adjuncts are used to support endoscopic treatment of glottic stenosis, including botulinum toxin, steroids, and mitomycin C to be the most effective.

Failure of endoscopic procedures or thicker laryngeal webs requires open surgical techniques. A laryngofissure is necessary with a subsequent open laryngeal repair with dissection of the web. A laryngeal stent or Silastic keel is often used to keep the laryngeal lumen open while the mucosal surfaces are healing. Various grafts have been used to cover the raw area, such as skin grafts, endonasal or buccal mucosa, and perichondrium-cutaneous composite grafts. Rib cartilage grafts can be used to widen the glottis and subglottis.