The novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus spread through respiratory droplets.

Like other RNA viruses, there is a high potential for mutation, and several variants of SARS-CoV-2 have been identified. There are several variants of concern that have been identified, such as the alpha variant (B1.1.7 lineage, United Kingdon (UK) origin), beta variant (B.1351 lineage, South African origin), gamma variant (P.1/B.1.1.28.1 lineage, Brazilian origin), and delta variant (B1.617.2 lineage, Indian origin).

On November 26, 2021, the World Health Organization (WHO) identified the Omicron variant (B.1.1.529) as a variant of concern (VOC). This variant carries a high number of mutations, especially in the main antigenic target of antibodies.

As of January 2023, all previously authorized monoclonal antibodies have lost their EUAs for the treatment of COVID-19 due to the resistance demonstrated by this variant. Tixagevimab plus cilgavimab, the only remaining monoclonal antibody in the arsenal against COVID-19, is still authorized for pre-exposure prophylaxis, but the healthcare authorities have highlighted the reduction in its efficacy against this variant.

The monoclonal antibodies act by neutralizing the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. By binding to the viral spike protein's receptor-binding domain (RBD), these antibodies competitively inhibit ACE2 receptor binding and prevent viral entry into the cell. These antibodies were identified by analyzing convalescent plasma obtained from patients infected with COVID-19.