**Treatment for Retinal Aniseikonia**

**Medical Treatment.**This generally emphasizes treatment of the underlying chorioretinal disorder.

- The most common treatment of aniseikonia, contact lenses, do not treat retinal aniseikonia. Contact lenses can create similar size images on the macula, but if the retina is swollen (as is the case with edema) or stretched (as is the case with high axial myopia), the photoreceptors will be spread out over a larger area, and the image will be registered as being smaller.

- Optical solutions that form different size images on the retina, such as iseikonic lenses or specially designed combinations of contact and spectacle lenses, are hard to come by, expensive, and technically demanding to create.

- Retinal aniseikonia generally presents with a significant amount of asymmetrical (prismatic, pincushion, barrel, oblique) aniseikonia, which can not be treated optically (i.e., with iseikonic lenses or contact lenses).

- Most causes of retinal aniseikonias, such as central serous chorioretinopathy, macula edema, and epiretinal membrane, are unstable. This makes the implementation of an optical treatment plan impractical.

**Optical Treatments for Retinal Aniseikonia**

- Contact lens-spectacle lens combinations. A high minus contact lens can be combined with a high plus spectacle lens to create spectacle magnification that can offset retinal micropsia. This is also called a Galilean-telescopic solution. The opposite holds as well (high plus contact lens/high minus spectacle lens/offset retinal macropsia).

- Iseikonic spectacle lenses, when available, can be a good solution as the size of the image projected on the retina can be changed to adjust for retinal swelling or stretching.

**Treatment of Optical Aniseikonia.**This, on the other hand, has many solutions.

- Reduction of vertex distance. The shorter the vertex distance, the less the spectacle magnification, and while it can not eliminate it, this simple step often reduces the amount of aniseikonia to acceptable levels.

- Contact lens(es). Contact lenses are positioned very close to the entrance pupil of the eye, and even highly divergent lens powers will generate minor amounts of aniseikonia. Therefore, using contact lenses on one or both eyes to fully correct the patient's refractive error is a highly effective way of reducing optical aniseikonia to tolerable levels.

- Contact lens-spectacle lens combinations. Often it is most desirable to the patient to eliminate anisometropia with a contact lens that corrects only the difference between the anisometropic spectacle lenses. Spectacle lenses often provide superior correction for presbyopia and astigmatism, are generally more effective in filtering out different light wavelengths (sunglasses, blue-light blocking lenses), and spectacles provide protection as well. In these cases, only one eye is fit with a contact lens, reducing the cost and risk of contact lens-related infection and inflammation. A special pair of isometropic glasses are then prescribed to be worn in combination with the contact lens.

- Undercorrection of one spectacle lens. When neither surgical intervention, contact lenses, nor iseikonic spectacles are an option, anisometropia may be reduced by under or over-correcting one of the spectacle lenses. While this may cause one eye to see blurry, this may allow for better depth perception.

- Neuroadaptation. There is evidence that rapid neuroadaptation can occur to adjust for the onset and after surgical reversal of aniseikonia.

- Refractive surgery (e.g., LASIK, PRK, RK) is a common way to correct optical aniseikonia.

- Clear lens exchange, also called refractive lens exchange, is when the crystalline lens is surgically removed and replaced with an intraocular lens implant. This procedure is used less often as a solution for aniseikonia, but with the advent of good multifocal intraocular lenses, many surgeons and patients alike feel the benefit outweighs the relatively small risk of complications such as infection and retinal detachment.

- Phakic intraocular lens placement is a procedure where a lens is placed inside the eye without removing the crystalline lens. While some studies reported adequate safety and good results, the potential risk of corneal decompensation as well as retinal detachment, and elevated intraocular pressure are all reasons why this is a less common treatment for aniseikonia as well.

- Secondary IOL placement is the placement of an intraocular lens in an aphakic eye or to replace a deficient lens. Advances in intraocular lens technology, specifically light-adjustable lenses, have allowed for a very precise isometropic refractive endpoint.

- Iseikonic spectacle lenses work by altering the vertex distance, base curve, center thickness, and index of refraction of the spectacle lens material to provide magnification of one lens compared to the other. The formula for total magnification produced by iseikonic lenses (Mt) equals the magnification due to lens shape factor (Ms), which depends on the index of refraction (n), base curve (D1) and thickness (t), and the lens power factor (Mp), which depends on the dioptrical power of the lens (Dv) and the vertex distance in meter (h).

- Mt = Ms x Mp
- Ms = 1/(1-(tD1/n)) 
- Mp = 1/(1-hDv)

- The impact in magnification by alteration of lens variables is as follows:

- Increasing vertex distance (h): increases magnification for plus and minification for minus lenses.
- Steepening the (front) base curve (D1): increases magnification and decreases minification for lenses of all powers.
- Increase lens thickness (t): increases magnification and decreases minification for lenses of all powers.
- Increase lens power (Dv): increases magnification for plus and minification for minus lenses.
- Increase index of refraction (n): decreases magnification and increases minification.

- Since, in optical aniseikonia, due to anisometropia, the lens power (Dv) is fixed, four other variables affect the design of iseikonic lenses: base curve, center thickness, index of refraction, and vertex distance.

- If the difference between the eyes is up to 3 diopters, iseikonic lenses are usually an effective solution. At the maximum correction of 3 diopters, the iseikonic lens would look very different due to a large difference in center thickness and base curve.

Occlusion of one eye is a solution of last resort but may be used to avoid dangerous situations such as driving with diplopia or while waiting for the implementation of other solutions to be implemented.

**Advantages of Contact Lenses for Aniseikonia**

- It is the most effective and convenient way of eliminating optical aniseikonia.

- It can be combined with a spectacle lens to create a magnifier to treat retinal aniseikonia.

- Contact lenses can usually immediately be dispensed from trial lens inventory at the initial visit, and the lens power can be changed easily and quickly in the case of changes of refractive error or aniseikonia, making it a convenient solution for unstable conditions and those that require immediate intervention.

**Disadvantages of Contact Lenses for Aniseikonia**

- Many patients may not be able to wear contact lenses due to allergies, dry eye, or problems handling the lenses.

- Contact lenses alone can not treat retinal aniseikonia.

**Advantages of Iseikonic Lenses**

- It can treat both optical and retinal aniseikonia.

- It can be the only option when surgical intervention or contact lenses are not possible.

**Disadvantages of Iseikonic Lenses**

- It is hard to find a local provider of lenses. The advent of optical vendors of iseikonic lenses on the internet that will assist with the design of the lenses provides hope that this solution will be used more often.

- One lens is usually heavier than the other, creating an unequal distribution of weight.

- One lens is generally thicker than the other. This is cosmetically unattractive and can make frame selection hard.

- The iseikonic lens induces prism and distortion.

- One eye will look larger than the other affecting acceptable cosmesis for the patient.