Setmelanotide has a low potential for pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions related to the cytochrome P450 enzyme, transporters, and plasma protein binding. However, no currently available clinical studies evaluate the risk of patient drug-drug interaction with setmelanotide.

Setmelanotide is contraindicative in pregnancy and should be discontinued during the entire course of the pregnancy unless the benefits outweigh the potential risk to the fetus.

Setmelanotide is not recommended for use while breastfeeding as there is no data available on the presence of setmelanotide or its metabolites in human milk, the effects on the breastfed infant, or the effects on milk production.

Setmelanotide is not recommended in pediatric patients six years of age and less and in geriatric patients 65 years of age and over because there is no clinical data available for the efficacy and safety of the drug for these age groups.

Renal impairment impacts the pharmacokinetics and efficacy of the drug. Hence, setmelanotide is not recommended for patients with moderate to severe renal impairment and is contraindicative in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

The degradation of subcutaneous or intramuscular peptides allows for avoiding hepatic enzymes. Degradation of the subcutaneous peptide at the injection site occurs due to protease or peptidase activity in the interstitial space while degradation in the lymphatic system leads to lower drug bioavailability compared to intravenous administration. However, setmelanotide is not recommended for patients with hepatic impairment as there is no data available for the efficacy and safety of the drug.