The cervix is the lower part of the uterus and is composed of two parts:

- Endocervix. It is the proximal portion of the cervix.

- Ectocervix. It is the distal portion of the cervix that projects into the vagina.

The squamocolumnar junction is the area in the cervix where the columnar and the squamous epithelium meet. The position of the squamocolumnar junction varies with age and hormone levels. The neonatal position of the squamocolumnar junction changes with hormonal influences in utero, at puberty, during pregnancy, and after menopause. At birth and menarche, it is located just within the cervical canal. During reproductive age, the columnar epithelium extends outward onto the ectocervix as the cervix events. This causes the squamocolumnar junction to move outwards as well, thus exposing it to the acidic pH of the vagina. In cervical ectropion, there is eversion of the squamous, columnar junction, as well as the columnar epithelium of the endocervix onto the ectocervix. Over time, the cells basal to the columnar cells proliferate and differentiate into squamous cells, thus replacing the overlying columnar cells.

- Squamous metaplasia. It is a normal and irreversible physiological process in which the columnar epithelium is replaced by squamous epithelium. Low pH, sexual activity, and cervical infections may play a role in this process as well. This process is most pronounced when the progesterone/estrogen ratio is high, like during pregnancy, hormonal contraceptive use, and late fetal life.

- Squamous epithelialization. This is an additional process of cervical remodeling. It is a reactive change due to inflammation or regeneration.

As the above two processes progress, cervical ectropion decreases with age. As a result of these processes, a new squamocolumnar junction is formed. The transformation zone is the dynamic area located on the ectocervix. The transformation zone lies between the original squamocolumnar junction and the current squamocolumnar junction, where the metaplastic squamous epithelium has replaced the columnar epithelium, which is the area of ectropion.

Cervical ectropion is a common finding in pregnancy. The eversion process begins early but is most marked during the second and third trimesters. Reproductive hormones play the most significant role, but in the third trimester, venous obstruction might be one factor for cervical ectropion development. Postpartum, the everted columnar epithelium reverts back into the endocervix due to a decrease in cervical volume.

In postmenopausal women, the squamocolumnar junction is invisible because it recedes into the endocervix.

Cervical ectropion has been associated with infection due to Chlamydia trachomatis.Chlamydia trachomatis has a preference for the glandular epithelium. Also, the areas of ectropion represent an area of low cell-mediated immunity. In these areas, the subpopulation of T lymphocytes, namely, T helper cells, CD8 cells, and CD1 lymphocytes are reduced in number.Chlamydia. Moreover, hormonal contraceptives, mainly the depot medroxyprogesterone acetate, have correlations with both cervical ectropion and chlamydial infection, therefore further enhancing the susceptibility of women with cervical ectropion for chlamydial infection.

Women with cervical ectropion also have a higher susceptibility to infection with Neisseria gonorrheae. The risk of acquiring infection by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is also higher in females with cervical ectropion.