History and physical examination will often direct physicians toward the diagnosis of a cutaneous leiomyoma, but histological examination via biopsy is usually performed to confirm a suspected diagnosis. Additional workup beyond biopsy is generally not indicated for genital leiomyomas or angioleiomyomas. However, further history and workup are indicated in patients with multiple piloleiomyomas due to the strong correlation with HLRCC or Reed syndrome. Some authors even recommend further evaluation in patients with one, isolated, histologically confirmed piloleiomyoma.

Both major and minor clinical diagnostic criteria have been published to aid in the “likely” diagnosis of hereditary leiomyomas and renal cell carcinoma. The only major criterium is the presence of multiple histologically confirmed piloleiomyomas, and the minor criteria include surgical treatment for uterine leiomyomas before age 40, type 2 papillary renal cell carcinoma before age 40, or a first-degree family member who meets one of the previously mentioned criteria. The diagnosis of HLRCC should be strongly considered if a patient displays either the 1 major diagnostic criteria or 2 of the 3 minor criteria. Note that heterozygous fumarate hydratase is not considered as either a major or minor criteria because on rare occasions patients affected with HLRCC may test negative for a fumarate hydratase deficiency. In such scenarios, either the piloleiomyomas or the uterine leiomyomas may be immunohistochemically stained to evaluate for excessive accumulation of fumarate. A fumarate enzyme assay may also be performed to evaluate for fumarate hydratase deficiency, and FH activity less than 60% of normal is indicative of HLRCC.

HLRCC is a relatively novel disease process initially recognized in 2001, and there is limited long-term data regarding the development of renal cell carcinoma among patients with the condition. Patient’s as young as ten years old have been diagnosed with HLRCC associated renal cell carcinoma, which makes screening at a young age essential. Children should be initially screened for fumarate hydratase deficiency between the ages of 8 to 10, and if positive, they should receive an annual MRI to screen and monitor for the development of renal cell carcinoma. The same protocol stands true for adults diagnosed with HLRCC with positive fumarate hydratase mutation. In addition, patients should undergo a complete physical and gynecological exam (if indicated) yearly, along with dermatological examinations biannually. First-degree family members of affected patients should also be appropriately screened for HLRCC with genetic testing for fumarate hydratase deficiency, along with appropriate abdominal or pelvic screening.