**Preoperative Evaluation**

The clinical course and physical exam of patients with single ventricle physiology are highly variable, even among patients with similar cardiac lesions. Some may be completely asymptomatic in the presence of adequate blood flow through a patent ductus arteriosus or atrial/ventricular septal defect. In contrast, others might require intubation, mechanical ventilation, multiple pressor infusions, and sometimes extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).

The preoperative assessment aims to assess and optimize systemic perfusion to minimize end-organ dysfunction secondary to hypoxemia and hypoperfusion. Oxygen saturation of 75 to 80% is indicative of balanced circulation. The presence of crackles or pulmonary edema is reflective of pulmonary hyper circulation. Preoperative echocardiogram and cardiac cath lab data are utilized to access ventricular function, patency and gradient across the shunt, estimation of pulmonary and systemic blood flow, and the presence of aortopulmonary collateral vessels.

Optimal hemoglobin, a hematocrit of roughly 40%, is important to improve peripheral oxygen delivery. As these patients have preload-dependent cardiac output and do not tolerate sudden changes in afterload, it is crucial to minimize fasting hours and continue maintenance fluids whenever possible. Anxiety and pain may invoke an unpredictable rise in pulmonary and systemic resistance and may have a deleterious effect on the compromised ventricular function, so it should be avoided if possible.

**Intraoperative Management**

Patients with a single functioning ventricle poorly tolerate changes in the preload, afterload, myocardial depression, and changes in pulmonary and systemic vascular resistance. They may have balanced circulation from various factors like lower tidal volume, atelectasis, interstitial lung water, and hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, which are altered to varying degrees with induction and intubation. Careful assessment and proper selection of drug and anesthetic techniques are prudent for these challenging steps.

Induction: Higher Fio2 for preoxygenation results in excess PBF, while lower Fio2 for preoxygenation may not allow sufficient apnea time. This may result in hypoxemia and hypercarbia, compromising pulmonary blood flow and oxygenation. Usually, 40 to 60% of oxygen is utilized. Intravenous induction is usually preferred, though inhaled induction is useful in cases where the stress of intravenous access placement could cause significant hemodynamic compromise.

Fentanyl has minimal effect on myocardial contractility and systemic vascular resistance and slightly decreases pulmonary resistance if used in high doses for induction. Ketamine is used in patients with good ventricular function. It increases the SVR while PVR is unaffected. Etomidate also has minimal impact on hemodynamics and can be used for induction.

Propofol significantly decreases the SVR and also depresses the myocardium. A significant reduction in cardiac output can lead to stealing from the pulmonary blood flow.

Invasive blood pressure, central venous pressure, and regional tissue oxygenation monitoring are often used in addition to standard ASA monitoring. Upper extremity arterial lines may not be reliable if the patient has a Blalock-Taussig shunt, causing runoff from the subclavian artery of the shunted side. Similarly, a PDA will cause a discrepancy in monitors placed pre- vs. post-ductal.

The intraoperative goal is to maintain the Sao2 of 70 to 80%, which corresponds to Pao2 of 40 to 50 mm of Hg. Fio2 is adjusted to achieve this target. Both decrease in Fio2 and an increase in Paco2 can be used to decrease pulmonary circulation.

Maintenance of adequate diastolic pressure is important to ensure coronary blood flow. Avoidance of tachycardia helps to decrease the myocardial demand and facilitate delivery.

The increased intrathoracic pressure caused by positive pressure ventilation can have significant hemodynamic consequences for patients with single ventricle physiology. Therefore, the risks and benefits of early extubation should be carefully weighed following each procedure. The hemodynamic consequence of stress from inadequate analgesia or hypoventilation and hypercapnia from residual anesthetic or narcosis should be compared with the benefit of extubation and spontaneous ventilation. Given the minimal effect on the balanced circulation, Fentanyl and dexmedotimine are often used to ease out emergence from anesthesia.