Patients with spinal shock will have hypotension and bradycardia due to autonomic dysregulation and imbalance. The sympathetic tone is lost, leading to decreased vascular resistance and hypotension. An unopposed parasympathetic tone leads to bradycardia. Maintaining adequate perfusion pressure to the spine is crucial in patients with spinal shock to prevent secondary ischemic injury. It is generally recommended to maintain mean arterial blood pressure at 85 to 90 mmHg for the first seven days after an acute SCI.

Judicious fluid management is necessary to avoid fluid overload and edema. Most patients will require inotropic therapy. Studies comparing various inotropic therapies in patients with SCI reported improved spinal cord perfusion with norepinephrine and better side-effect tolerance compared with dopamine or phenylephrine.

All patients require venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis, as untreated SCI patients can develop thromboembolism within 72 hours of admission.

No specific pharmacologic therapy is available to treat patients with SCI and spinal shock. Glucocorticoid treatment has been used; however, data supporting its efficacy is insufficient. The National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study (NASCIS) I study compared the efficacy of low dose versus high dose methylprednisolone in acute spinal cord injury patients presenting within 48 hours. There was no difference in the improvements between high and low-dose groups. Since a true placebo group was absent, it remains ambiguous whether the improvement can be due to steroid use.

The NASCIS II study found no difference in neurologic recovery after 1-year in patients who received methylprednisolone compared to placebo.

The American Association of Neurological Surgeons and Congress of Neurological Surgeons do not recommend using glucocorticoids in acute spinal cord injury.

In the AO Spine guidelines, in patients without significant contraindications, methylprednisolone administration for 24 hours has been recommended within 8 hours of cervical injury. However, the evidence has been reported as weak.

Autonomic dysreflexia can also be seen in patients with SCI above the T6 level. Uninhibited sympathetic responses to noxious stimuli below the level of the injury cause vasoconstriction and hypertension in these patients. A compensatory parasympathetic response produces bradycardia and vasodilation above the level of the lesion. This is seen within the first year of injury but is unlikely to occur in the initial time period (first month of injury).

Orthostatic hypotension due to peripheral vasodilatation is common in the first few months of SCI. Patients with SCI also remain at high risk for pneumonia due to decreased cough reflex and poor secretion clearance. Chest physiotherapy and vaccination should be employed to decrease the risk of this complication. Bowel dysfunction is common after SCI and requires medical therapy to prevent complications. Rectal suppositories are the treatment of choice for managing chronic bowel dysfunction after SCI leading to constipation. Pressure ulcers are also common in patients with SCI and require vigilant pre-emptive skincare. Maintenance of adequate nutritional intake and weight is also crucial in preventing this complication. Pain, depression, and anxiety are common after SCI and should be treated accordingly.

Functional recovery should be the primary goal after the spine has been stabilized. Range-of-motion and resistive exercises, upright positioning, and strengthening exercises should be employed as soon as possible.