In addition to efforts at optimizing engagement in the scenario, much of the process improvement work occurs during the debriefing portion of the session. The purpose of debriefing is to provide a safe, potentially reproducible platform to explore performance gaps. These may be related to the knowledge, skills, attitudes, and behaviors of individuals and teams, or more extensive systemic issues. Simulation leaders have a repertoire of debriefing strategies from which to choose, depending on the goals and objectives of the simulation session.

Simulations for systems integration are designed for the evaluation of work–system coordination as a whole. Systems-focused debriefing strategies use a blended debriefing approach to identify latent safety threats. Systems-focused debriefing strategies such as PEARLS for systems integration, can target any of the following areas: tools (policies), technology (communication equipment), tasks (goal responsibility), environment (equipment locations), people (team composition), organization (role identity), and processes (procedures). During these sessions, each participant is a representative of their professional role within the institution, rather than as an individual employee. Since institutional stakeholders have pre-determined the objectives of the sessions, the debriefing process is focused on elucidating what worked well and what needs improvement from a systems perspective.

Psychological safety refers to a participants’ perception that his or her professional identity will remain intact regardless of the outcome of the simulated experience and is absolutely critical for a simulation activity to be effective. Mutual respect can be cultivated by establishing that individual mistakes are kept confidential and that individuals are not penalized or judged on an personal level. Through facilitated conversations across the organizational hierarchy, participants are allowed to reveal their individual and role-specific expectations, as well as to identify the behaviors required to improve partnerships and collaboration. Relationships can be enhanced based on this platform of inter-professional trust and support. By creating this psychologically safe environment, the simulation program director allows for genuine and optimal engagement by participants in the simulation debriefing process.