Electrodiagnostic studies are safe and generally well tolerated by patients. Iatrogenic side effects are very rare.  In nerve conduction studies, transdermal electrical stimulation is used, producing a theoretical risk for electrical complications.  Needle EMG carries the potential complications of any needle insertion, including infection, hemorrhage, tissue injury, and pneumothorax.

- **Electrical complications.**The electrical current that is applied to stimulate the nerve may pose a risk for some patients. To prevent potential electric injury during an electrodiagnostic study, modern equipment has built-in electrical insulation. It is essential to regularly maintain equipment, use ground electrodes and grounded outlets. Nerve conduction studies are shown to be safe in patients with peripheral and central intravenous lines, modern implantable pacemakers, and defibrillators with bipolar leads.

- **Pneumothorax.**The most dangerous iatrogenic complication of needle EMG is pneumothorax. Even though this complication is rare, the examination of particular muscles - serratus anterior, diaphragm, thoracic, and lower cervical paraspinal muscles, rhomboid, and suprascapular muscles - carries increased risk. The best strategy is to avoid sampling these muscles on routine studies.

- **Hemorrhage.**Bleeding complications during needle EMG are extremely rare.

- **Infections.**Since the use of disposable needles, this potential complication has not been reported. Clean technique and reasonable caution are recommended for the procedure.  Infected areas of skin should be avoided.