**FDA-approved Indications**

**Hypertension**

- Initial therapy for patients with normal renal function.

- In patients with impaired renal function, captopril should be reserved for those patients that have developed unacceptable side effects or failed to respond to other drug therapy.

- Effective alone and in combination with other antihypertensive agents.

**Left Ventricular Dysfunction after Myocardial Infarction**

- Improves survival following myocardial infarction in clinically stable patients with left ventricular ejection fraction less than 40% and reduces the incidence of hospitalization.

- It prevents remodeling and reduces cardiovascular mortality in patients with heart failure.

**Diabetic Nephropathy**

- Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) in developed countries. It is due to microvessel disease and can occur in Type I diabetes mellitus and diabetes mellitus type 2. Early treatment can prevent or slow the onset of diabetic nephropathy.

- Hyperglycemia leads to the production of reactive oxygen species and leads to the production of advanced glycation end products (AGE) and cytokines (IL-6, MCP-1, TGF-beta, VEGF), which cause inflammation and fibrosis, leading to increased vascular permeability and albuminuria. Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules, glomerular basement membrane thickening, and glomerular sclerosis are the pathological manifestations seen in diabetic nephropathy. The duration of diabetes, poor glycemic control, uncontrolled hypertension, obesity, smoking, and hyperlipidemia are major risk factors for developing diabetic nephropathy (DN).

- It can be diagnosed by constant albuminuria on two or more occasions separated by three months. Persistent albuminuria is defined as greater than 300 mg over 24 hours or greater than 200 micrograms per minute, while moderately increased albuminuria is when the urine albumin is 30 to 300 mg over 24 hours and is a sign of early diabetic nephropathy. Other important criteria to diagnose include elevated blood pressure, the decline in GFR, and persistent albuminuria (greater than 300 mg/d) on at least two occasions 3 to 6 months apart.

- Treatment of diabetic nephropathy (proteinuria greater than 500 mg per day) in patients with type I insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and retinopathy.

- Decreases the rate of progression of renal insufficiency by controlling blood pressure. With chronic renal failure, ACE inhibitor or ARBs needs to be dose adjusted for patients with renal impairment.

- Treatment involves smoking cessation, good glycemic control, good blood pressure control (130/80 or less in diabetic patients), inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system with ARBs or ACE inhibitors.

- An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, captopril, is FDA-approved to treat diabetic nephropathy. Enalapril is not FDA-approved to treat diabetic nephropathy.

**Off-labeled Uses**

**Acute Hypertensive Crisis**

- Maybe given sublingually, but the therapeutic advantage has not been demonstrated over oral administration.

- Consider alternative therapy if blood pressure does not normalize within 20 to 30 minutes.

**Raynaud Phenomenon**

- Clinically, it is characterized by discoloration of the fingers due to stressors like cold or emotion. Raynaud disease is when this phenomenon occurs without any underlying condition, while Raynaud syndrome occurs due to an underlying condition. This disease most commonly affects females with an age of onset less than 30 years old. Fingers are more commonly affected than toes. Some common risk factors include family history, history of autoimmune diseases, and exposure to beta-blockers

- This occurs due to the vasospasm of blood vessels to the skin, which causes impaired vasodilation and vasoconstriction. Most patients have all three phases with white (suggesting ischemic process), blue (indicating hypoxia and cyanosis), and pink (indicating reperfusion), while some have only a few phases. Patients can also present with ulcers and gangrene due to reduced perfusion.

- It is diagnosed clinically, and a cold stimulation test can be used to precipitate an attack. Labs are needed only if another condition is suspected. Treatment involves avoiding cold and smoking cessation. Medical management consists of the use of dihydropyridine-type calcium channel blockers (nifedipine, nimodipine), phosphodiesterase inhibitors, and some studies have highlighted that captopril decreases the frequency and the severity of ischaemic attacks in patients with Raynaud disease but not in patients with scleroderma. However, more definitive studies are needed to elucidate its effects.

- A clinical trial evaluated patients for up to three months; additional studies are necessary to determine full effectiveness.