Serum amylase is primarily used to support the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis despite its low specificity. If the patient has severe epigastric pain that can be reproduced on palpation during a physical examination and has a serum amylase elevated to three times the upper limit of normal or higher, a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis can be made without further imaging. Serum lipase can also be collected, though the co-ordering of both tests has not been shown to increase diagnostic sensitivity and specificity.

If abdominal pain is associated with an elevated serum amylase but less than three times the upper limit of normal, additional imaging with computed tomography (CT scan) with contrast can be made. Additional laboratory workup such as complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), calcium, albumin, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and direct and total bilirubin can also be obtained to guide the diagnosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogram (MRCP) can also be used to elucidate pancreatic pathologies and may reveal pancreatic pseudocysts or ascites.

Amylase levels can also be obtained after an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram (ERCP) due to its value in predicting postprocedure pancreatitis.

In patients with isolated amylase elevation without the presence of any other symptoms, the diagnosis of macroamylasemia should be considered. Macroamylasemia occurs in settings of inflammatory states, including celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and monoclonal gammopathy. In the inflammatory state, amylase is bound to macromolecules such as immunoglobins and polysaccharides to form large complexes. These complexes are too large to be excreted by the kidney and result in isolated hyperamylasemia. Macroamylasemia is diagnosed using the amylase-to-creatinine clearance ratio (ACCR). ACCR is reduced to a ratio of less than one in macroamylasemia due to poor filtration of the large macroamylase complexes. The formula is as follows:

ACCR = [amylase (urine) x creatinine (serum) x 100]/[amylase (serum) x creatinine (urine)]

For patients with isolated hyperamylasemia negative for macroamylasemia or abdominal pain with no other specific signs or symptoms to suggest alternative diagnoses, no further evaluation is needed.

A lipase-to-amylase ratio is not a reliable indicator of alcoholic pancreatitis. However, if it is more than 2 it could suggest alcoholic pancreatitis.

In the cases of pancreatoduodenectomy, a postoperative serum amylase level less than 130 IU/l on day 0 allows early and reliable categorization of patients being at the least risk for the development of postoperative pancreatic fistula. This could be taken as an indicator to identify patients appropriate for early removal of surgical drains.