The normal structure and functions of peripheral nerves depend upon the close anatomical and physiological interaction between Schwann cells and axons. Axons determine survival, proliferation, and differentiation of Schwann cells. These cells in turn play an important role in regulating ion channels and maintenance, survival, and regeneration of axons. Abnormalities in genes that regulate myelin assembly and axonal transport lead to primary demyelination and axonopathy respectively. CMTs may occur due to any one of the following molecular and cellular mechanisms:

- Myelin assembly: genes involved in myelin compaction (MPZ), gap junctions formation (GJB1), the interaction of Schwann cells with the extracellular matrix as well as in regulating cell spreading, cell migration and apoptosis (PMP22)

- Cytoskeletal structure: genes involved in actin polymerization (INF2), membrane-protein interactions to stabilize the myelin sheath (PRX), intermediate filaments (NEFL), cell signaling (FGD4), axonal transport (DYNC1H1)

- Endosomal sorting and cell signaling: genes regulating vesicular transport, membrane trafficking, transport of intracellular organelles and cell signaling (LITAF, MTMR2, SBF1, SBF2, SH3TC2, NDRG1, FIG4, RAB7A, TFG, DNM2, SIMPLE)

- Proteasome and protein aggregation: genes regulating microtubules (HSPB1, HSPB8), cell adhesion (LRSAM1), ubiquitin ligase (TRIM2)

- Mitochondria: genes regulating mitochondrial dynamics, structure, and the function of the respiratory chain (MFN2, GDAP1, MT-ATP6, PDK3)

- Others: genes regulating cell fusion-fission apparatus (DNM2), calcium homeostasis (TRPV4) glucose metabolism (HK1), transcription (EGR2, HINT1, PRPS1, AARS, GARS, MARS, KARS, YARS)

Because of the close functional interaction, demyelinating neuropathies eventually lead to functional axonopathies and clinically manifest secondary axonal degeneration.

**Classification of CMTs**

CMTs have varied ages at onset: neonatal or ‘congenital’, infantile, or late-onset.

- HMSN I: demyelinating subtype

- HMSN II: axonal subtype

- HMSN III: Dejerine Sottas disease

- HMSN IV: Refsum disease

- HMSN V: with pyramidal signs

- HMSN VI: with optic atrophy

- HMSN VII: with retinitis pigmentosa

Later the classification was changed based on the mode of inheritance and clinical features as CMT1 (A, B, C...), CMT2 (A, B, C.. ), CMT3, CMTX (1,2,3..) and CMT4, etc. However, due to overlapping phenotype and genotype and advances in molecular testing, the classification has undergone changes over the years e.g. demyelinating CMT or CMT1 is autosomal dominantly inherited, recessively inherited demyelinating CMTs are named as CMT4, while recessively inherited axonal CMTs are designated as AR-CMT2. There exists a lack of consensus in the nosological terms provided by different experts.

There is significant phenotypic heterogeneity with certain mutations e.g. variations in MPZ, GDAP1, and NEFL can cause both the demyelinating and axonal CMTs. Similarly, patients with mutations in MFN2, MPZ, GDAP1, and EGR2 may have CMTs with autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance. Thus with expanding knowledge, it is proper to classify CMTs based on the molecular genetic abnormality and not by electrophysiological or pathological observations. A revised classification that incorporates the phenotype, electrophysiology, mode of inheritance, and the causal gene is gaining ground.