A fibroadenoma is a well-circumscribed, non-encapsulated lesion with pushing borders that does not infiltrate the adjacent breast parenchyma.  They are characterized by a cellular proliferation of stroma and glands (benign breast ducts).  The ratio between stroma to glands is relatively constant throughout the entire lesion.

The stroma is uniform, hypovascular, and composed of spindle-shaped cells with bland oval to elongated nuclei.  There is no stromal cell pleomorphism present. Smooth muscle, cartilage, and bone may be identified in the stroma. Stromal mitosis, although rare, can be seen, especially in fibroadenomas of younger women, and does not indicate malignancy. In older women, the stroma can be hyalinized.

The glands in a fibroadenoma consist of the normal bi-cell layer in breast ducts.  The inner glandular layer is composed of cuboidal to columnar-shaped cells with uniform nuclei.  The inner cell layer is supported by an outer myoepithelial cell layer.  The myoepithelial layer is intact throughout the entire lesion designating the benign nature of a fibroadenoma.  Benign alterations such as usual ductal hyperplasia, apocrine metaplasia, squamous metaplasia, cystic changes, and sclerosing adenosis can involve the epithelium. Calcifications can also be in the glands. In pregnancy, the epithelium may show lactation changes.

There are two histological growth patterns in fibroadenomas, the intracanalicular pattern and the pericanalicular pattern. The stroma compresses and distorts the glands into cleft-like spaces in the intracanalicular pattern.  The stroma surrounds the glands, without distorting them, and the glands maintain their open lumens in the pericanalicular pattern.

Histological variants of fibroadenomas exist. A myxoid fibroadenoma has prominent blue-tinged myxoid changes in the stroma. Although uncommon, some patients with myxoid fibroadenomas can have Carney complex (an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by endocrine tumors, myxomas, skin hyperpigmentation, and blue nevi, among others).

Despite the patterns and histological variants of fibroadenomas, this does not change the benign nature of the lesion. Rarely, atypical ductal hyperplasia, atypical lobular hyperplasia, ductal carcinoma in situ, lobular carcinoma in situ, and invasive carcinomas can involve a fibroadenoma. These patients are treated according to their high-risk, pre-cancer, or cancerous lesions.