# Continuing Education Activity

Shallow water blackout is a loss of consciousness caused by cerebral hypoxia towards the end of a breath-hold dive in shallow water. It is typically caused by hyperventilating just before a dive, which lowers the carbon dioxide (CO2) level and delays the diver's urge to breathe. This activity reviews the role of the healthcare team in the prevention and treatment of this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of shallow water blackout risk factors and emergencies.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of patients with shallow water blackout.
- Review the management options available for shallow water blackout.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to prevent and treat shallow water blackout emergencies.

# Introduction

The term shallow water backout has been commonly used as a term for drowning, particularly when preceded by hyperventilation. Other terms used to describe this syndrome include: “underwater blackout,” “underwater blackout syndrome,” “sudden underwater blackout syndrome (SUBS),” “breath-holding blackout,” and “free-diver blackout.” Shallow water blackout means unconsciousness in water typically less than 15 feet (5 m) either due to equipment failure or prolonged breath-holding. This language can be misleading as drowning can occur at depths greater than 5 m as well.  The American Red Cross, YMCA, and U.S.A. swimming have since redefined the term as a hypoxic blackout. Hypoxic blackout is defined as “the loss of consciousness in the underwater swimmer or diver, during an apnea submersion preceded by hyperventilation, where alternative causes of unconsciousness have been excluded.”  Shallow water blackout has the potential to affect anyone in the water, even fit and experienced swimmers.

# Etiology

The underlying cause of hypoxic blackouts is usually multifactorial. It generally stems from poor situational awareness, inadequate safety measures, and poor technique. The average person can hold their breath for between 30 to 90 seconds.

Additionally, hypoxic blackout directly links to hyperventilating or taking a series of short breaths before going underwater.

# Epidemiology

In the United States, there are about 4000 drowning deaths annually.

Interestingly, however, the rates of fatalities following prolonged breath-holding, preceded by a period of hyperventilation, have not fallen. Shallow water blackout most commonly involves males under the age of 40 and has a high fatality rate. Of note, in a CDC case series, 13 of the 16 dangerous breath-holding cases identified in New York were males.

# Pathophysiology

To understand the pathophysiology of a hypoxic blackout, we will first examine the physiology of diving. The underwater environment has increasingly higher pressures the deeper it is. These pressures are dramatically higher than the land’s atmospheric pressure. For every additional 10 meters of depth, the ambient pressure rises by 1 bar (about 750 mm Hg). As a result of this high-pressure environment, the lungs become compressed (Boyle’s law: P1xV1 = P2xV2), which results in increased pressure within both the thoracic cavity and peripherally. This situation ultimately promotes the central shunting of peripheral blood flow.

With this understanding, we can better understand the physiology of drowning.  After prolonged breath-holding, the oxygen reserve becomes depleted. This lack of oxygenation, along with the inability to successfully carry out respiratory drive, can lead to unconsciousness and possibly death. When a drowning person can no longer keep their airway clear, the water is either spat out or swallowed, either of which can induce laryngospasm and lead to further aspiration, followed by worsening hypoxemia and eventually unconsciousness.

Hyperventilation before breath-holding lowers the arterial partial pressure of CO2 and delays the re-emergence of the stimulus to breathe.

A similar phenomenon called ascent blackout can occur in deep-water diving when the loss of consciousness occurs merely meters below the surface. In breath-hold diving, the risk of hypoxic blackouts is increased during the ascent as arterial oxygen saturation drops to less than the threshold for consciousness. This threshold is 25 to 30 mm Hg.

# History and Physical

The assessment of a patient who is found unconscious in the water requires rapid intervention.  Remove the person from the water and get them safely on shore or in the boat. The most critical step is mouth-to-mouth ventilation, which should begin as soon as the patient’s airway can open, and the rescuer is safe. Prompt initiation of rescue breathing is associated with an increased likelihood of survival.

The physical exam will also be brief. Once the patient is out of the water, rapidly assess the patient’s level of consciousness as you initiate evaluation with the BLS/ACLS protocol using CAB: circulation, airway, and breathing. The resuscitation efforts should start even as one examines the patient.

# Evaluation

There will not be sufficient time for more detailed evaluation or studies in the setting of a water emergency. Proceed with resuscitation efforts.

# Treatment / Management

Respond promptly to restore oxygenation, ventilation, and perfusion as quickly as possible.

If no pulse is present, initiate CPR for five cycles (about 2 min), starting with chest compressions, 30 compressions, then two rescue breaths in the cycle. Initiate advanced life support early, which includes advanced airway and use of an automated AED as equipment availability permits. Regurgitation of stomach contents is the most common complication during drowning resuscitation.

# Differential Diagnosis

The unexpected demise of a swimmer can have multiple causes. When evaluating a patient who has lost consciousness in the water, it is crucial to consider all possible causes to intervene effectively. Hypoxic blackout (unconsciousness due to hypoxia) is one of the most common underlying causes of morbidity and mortality in the water. Other differentials to consider are preexistent organic cardiac disease (coronary artery disease or cardiomyopathy), preexistent cardiac arrhythmias, and epilepsy.

# Prognosis

The outcome of a hypoxic blackout is multifactorial. The most significant factor is the duration of hypoxia.

# Complications

If a patient is successfully resuscitated after a hypoxic blackout, there are four main complications with which to be concerned.

Respiratory complications are the most common following a drowning event. Patients are usually managed on a ventilator for about 48 hours. This period allows for surfactant regeneration as surfactant is often destroyed and washed out by the presence of water in the alveoli.

Pneumonia is not commonly a result of aspirated water during a drowning event.

Pulmonary edema should improve within 3 to 4 days following a drowning incident. If there are new or persistent pulmonary infiltrates in the setting of fever and sustained or worsening leukocytosis, this is a sign of developing pneumonia, and antibiotic treatment should be initiated.

With this in mind, a low threshold for initiating empiric antimicrobials is reasonable in patients who have evidence of systemic toxicity or hemodynamic instability without a clear source.

Cardiac complications can also arise after drowning incidents. Decreased cardiac output is common immediately after a severe drowning event.

Prolonged hypoxia can lead to cerebral hypoxia and long-term cerebral tissue damage. Most late-term morbidity and mortality are of neurological etiology. The key to prevent this is aggressive oxygenation during and after resuscitation. Patients who remain unresponsive after successful CPR should undergo frequent neurological function reevaluation.

Lastly, metabolic acidosis occurs in 70% of hospital patients following drowning.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The most effective way to reduce drowning incidence is to prevent it. 80 to 90% of all drownings are preventable.

Additionally, at public pools or other locations with lifeguards, prevention requires prompt lifeguard recognition and response to dangerous and/or emergent situations such as hyperventilation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The key to preventing hypoxic blackout is prevention through education and correction of risky behaviors; this begins with the general public, especially those who swim or supervise swimmers. Such individuals include parents, teachers, public community health nurses, swim coaches, SCUBA diving instructors, and military trainers.  Secondly, during a resuscitation effort, it requires a rapid response that ideally has one resuscitation leader to delegate tasks to others, which will optimize efficiency and efficacy. If resuscitation is successful, patient care relies on an interprofessional team comprised of emergency medical services (EMS) personnel, emergency medical personnel, and intensive care staff to treat the aftermath of a drowning incident. Prehospital and flight nurses are often involved in care. If neurological deficits remain, the patient will require neurological rehabilitation. Specialty care nurses in neuroscience and rehabilitation care for these patients and coordinate care by allied health personnel. [Level 5]