Currently, neither the histopathology nor the MIB-1 index appears to predict the natural history, likelihood of recurrence, or metastases.

Patients should be followed postoperatively with serial magnetic resonance imaging to monitor for tumor recurrence, even if a gross total resection was accomplished because even then, recurrence rates of 10% to 19% have been reported.

Despite the good results with surgery, tumor recurrence and dissemination may occur. Local recurrence and metastases have been related to the clinical history of less than 1 year, the extent of resection, atypical histology, and lesions extending into the substance of the spinal cord.

Myxopapillary ependymomas are considered benign tumors of the central nervous system with long-term survival rates and a tendency for local recurrence. However, an aggressive course has occasionally been described, leading to cerebrospinal fluid dissemination and even systemic metastases.

Despite its well-differentiated appearance, it occasionally shows aggressive behavior. Local progression is common and systemic metastases have also been described with the lungs being the organs most commonly affected. Systemic dissemination is more common in cases of a primary extraspinal location.

The estimated 10-year overall survival has been reported to be 92.4% with a 10-year progression-free survival of 61.2%.

The 5-year overall survival rate of patients with myxopapillary ependymoma is excellent and varies from 90% to 100%.

Patients who undergo gross total resection of intradural myxopapillary ependymomas have a good prognosis, with a mean survival time of 19 years.

Although rarely encountered in children, myxopapillary ependymomas have a more aggressive clinical course with an increased risk of recurrence and dissemination when compared to the adult population. The reason for this more aggressive course in children is unclear.