Patients should be informed that the causative agent of pityriasis versicolor is a commensal fungal inhabitant of the normal skin flora, and therefore the disease is not considered to be contagious. In addition, pityriasis versicolor does not lead to either permanent scarring or pigmentary disorders. However, in many cases, disease recurrence may occur despite effective treatment.

Pityriasis versicolor may be treated effectively with topical and/or systemic agents.

Topical medications are considered the first-line therapy for pityriasis versicolor. Topical treatments are divided into nonspecific antifungal agents (sulfur plus salicylic acid,  selenium sulfide 2.5%, and zinc-pyrithione) that primarily remove dead tissue and prevent further invasion, and specific antifungal drugs, that have fungicidal or fungistatic effects. Antifungal agents include imidazole (clotrimazole 1%, ketoconazole 2%, econazole, isoconazole, miconazole), ciclopirox olamine 1% , and allylamine (terbinafine 1%). Galenic forms such as sprays or foaming solutions in shampoo are preferable to creams because creams are oilier and more difficult to apply, especially in widespread areas. Ketoconazole is the most common topical treatment used to treat pityriasis versicolor. It can be applied as a  cream (twice daily for 15 days) or in a foaming solution (single dose).

Oral medications are viewed as a second-line of treatment for pityriasis versicolor in the event of widespread, severe, recalcitrant or recurrent cases. Systemic therapies include itraconazole (200 mg daily for seven days) and fluconazole (150 to 300 mg weekly dose for 2 to 4 weeks) that are preferred to oral ketoconazole which is no longer approved due to its potential hepatotoxic sides effects. Oral terbinafine is not effective in the treatment of pityriasis versicolor.

In cases of recurrent pityriasis versicolor, maintenance therapy may be necessary. Topical prophylactic treatment can be used. However, systemic antifungal agents are preferred since they are less time-consuming and ensure better compliance. Many studies have been conducted to identify the best prophylactic regimen.