In the United States, the first Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine received approval in 1985 as a pure polysaccharide CPS vaccine, demonstrating ineffectiveness due to the young age at which this vaccine must be administered and was soon replaced by conjugated forms of the vaccine. The conjugated vaccines conferred longer and more robust protection against invasive Haemophilus type b infections leading to exclusive use of the conjugated form of Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccines in the USA.

Recommendations are that all infants receive the Hib vaccine. The FDA recommends one of two vaccine schedules for parents to choose from; both involve the first dose of the vaccine at two months of age. The earliest the first dose can be as early as six weeks of age. The schedules vary based on the brand of the vaccine.

Other at-risk populations recommended to receive at least one booster of the Hib vaccine, depending on age and previous Hib vaccination status, include:

- Chemotherapy

- Hematopoietic stem cell transplant

- Anatomic or functional asplenia

- Elective splenectomy

- HIV infection

- Immunoglobulin or early component complement deficiency

Research has shown that preterm and low-weight infants benefit from the same Hib vaccination schedule as at-term and average-weight infants when using the hexavalent vaccine specifically.

Maternal immunization during the third trimester is not currently an FDA recommendation but has been studied in the USA and was shown to increase serum and cord blood antibody titers. Vaccination at this time was shown to be safe and did not harm the infants’ immune response to the vaccine, compared to infants whose mothers did not receive the vaccine.