The facial nerve exits the brain stem from its ventrolateral surface at the cerebellopontine angle. It consists of two parts: a proper facial nerve and the intermediate nerve. The proper facial nerve contains only a motor component and a very small general somatic afferent component, whereas the intermediate nerve carries sensory and parasympathetic visceromotor components.

The facial nerve anatomy can be divided based on its relation to the cranium and the temporal bone into intracranial, intratemporal, and extratemporal parts.

**Intracranial Part**

The upper motor neuron (UMN) of the facial nerve is located in the primary motor cortex of the frontal lobe. UMN axons descend ipsilaterally as the corticobulbar tract via the genu of the internal capsule and reach the facial nucleus in the pontine tegmentum. The facial nucleus is divided into a dorsal and ventral region. It contains the cell bodies of the facial nerve lower motor neurons (LMN). The dorsal region supplies innervation of the muscles of the upper face, whereas neurons in the ventral region innervate muscles of the lower face. The dorsal aspect of the facial nucleus receives input from both the left and right cerebral hemispheres. This results in both hemispheres having control over the muscles of the upper face. The ventral aspect of the facial nucleus receives mainly contralateral inputs. As a result, the left hemisphere partially controls the upper left and right side of the face partially and fully the lower right side of the face.

The intermediate nerve carries descending parasympathetic GVE fibers from the superior salivatory nucleus and ascending GVA, GSA, and SVA fibers from the geniculate ganglion.

**The Intratemporal Part**

The intratemporal part of the facial nerve begins when the facial nerve, together with the intermediate nerve, passes through the internal auditory meatus of the temporal bone to enter the facial canal within the petrous part of the temporal bone. After synapsing on the geniculate ganglion, the facial nerve gives rise to the first branch; the greater petrosal nerve, which carries visceromotor parasympathetic fibers (GVE) to the lacrimal gland and GVA from the nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses and part of the soft palate. The greater petrosal nerve joins the deep petrosal nerve which carries sympathetic postganglionic fibers from the superior cervical ganglion. Together they form the nerve of the pterygoid canal that innervates the pterygopalatine ganglion in the pterygopalatine fossa.

The second branch of the facial nerve running in the facial canal is the nerve to stapedius muscle, which provides motor (SVE) innervation to the stapedius muscle of the inner ear.

The chorda tympani nerve is the last branch of the facial nerve within the facial canal and at the same time, the terminal extension of the intermediate nerve. It runs through the ossicles in the middle ear and exits the tympanic cavity at the petrotympanic fissure where it joins the lingual nerve, which is itself a branch of the trigeminal nerve. The chorda tympani nerve carries two kinds of fibers: parasympathetic  GVE to the submandibular ganglion and SVA fibers from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. Fibers from the submandibular ganglion later innervate the submandibular and sublingual glands.

**The Extratemporal Part**

The extratemporal part of the facial nerve begins when the facial nerve leaves the cranium through the stylomastoid foramen. As the facial nerve exits, it gives GSA fibers to the pinna of the ear and external auditory meatus and SVE fibers to the posterior belly of digastric, stylohyoid, the superior and inferior auricular, and occipitalis muscles. Thereafter, the facial nerve divides at the end of the posterior edge of the parotid gland into the terminal branches. Usually, five branches can be identified:

- The temporal branch – innervating the frontalis and orbicularis oculi muscles and the muscles in the upper part of the face.

- The zygomatic branch – innervating the middle part of the face

- The buccal branch – innervating the cheek muscles, including the buccinator muscle

- The mandibular branch – innervating muscles of the lower part of the face

- The cervical branch – innervating the muscles below the chin and, among others, the platysma muscle