The two ICs lie rostral to the trochlear nerve and just caudal to the superior colliculi. Their location is on the dorsal surface of the rostral midbrain, ventral to the lateral lemniscus. Each set of colliculi resembles two symmetrical bumps. The two sets of colliculi (superior and inferior) comprise the quadrigeminal cistern, part of the tectum or “roof” of the midbrain.

Glutamatergic cells in layers V and VI of the auditory cortex project principally to the ipsilateral IC, with the majority of cortical input coming from layer V. This cortical input, allows for top-down modulation of IC response to frequency, intensity, duration, and location of auditory stimuli, and may play a role in discrimination of multiple different sound sources.

There are three regions of the IC: the central nucleus, the dorsal cortex, and the external cortex. The dorsal and external cortices are the major sites of non-auditory input to the IC, discussed below.

Not only does the IC allow for sound localization by integrating the input from both ears, but it also receives many non-auditory inputs. Some cells in IC respond to contralateral visual field stimuli, sending and receiving information from the superior colliculi. While their purpose is unknown, the theory is that they help map physical space with both modalities of information. The auditory and visual inputs regarding where a sound originated are also joined by somatosensory inputs from the spinal cord and cranial nerves, which researchers hypothesize aid one’s ability to orient the body toward the source of the sound. When an unexpected or loud sound occurs, the IC helps to mediate the ensuing startle response. Additionally, the IC is more active when perceiving communication by a member of the same species, indicating a special interest in salient environmental noises.