Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is a fungal infection of the lung secondary to a hypersensitivity reaction to antigens of Aspergillus fumigatus. This disease process is uncommon; however, routine screening is necessary for asthmatic and cystic fibrosis patients. The interprofessional approach of pulmonologists, infectious diseases, primary care physicians, pharmacists, and other healthcare professionals is essential to educate and improve patient outcomes. [Level V] A focused history and physical examination along with appropriate imaging with a high-resolution chest tomography of the chest are critical to establish an early diagnosis and initiate early treatment to prevent the development of bronchiectasis or pulmonary fibrosis. As targeted immunotherapy is evolving, there may be new treatment options in the near future.

The nurse place an important role in monitoring the patient for progression or worsening symptoms that must be reported back to the interprofessional team leader. As drug therapy and monitoring are complex in these patients, a pharmacist should evaluate for drug-drug interactions and coordinate drug therapy, assisting in monitoring for compliance and side effects and reporting to the clinical team leader if untoward complications arise. The nurse practitioner, a physician assistant, must coordinate care and patient and family education together so that they are aware of the need to monitor treatment, follow up regularly, and return for reassessment if unexpected complications occur. This disease is challenging to treat, and only through coordinated interprofessional care will the best outcomes be achieved. [Level V]