Cerebral circulation mainly comprises the arterial system, which forms the circle of Willis.

Occlusion or blockage of the small penetrating arteries causes small lacunar strokes. Their size varies from 3 mm to 20 mm in dimension. However, only 17% of lacunar strokes are less than 10 mm in size.

Small arterial occlusion is the fundamental pathogenesis for lacunar strokes. The primary underlying pathophysiological process is lipohyalinosis and micro-atheroma formation.

In lipohyalinosis, the media of small vessels thickens, followed by fibrinoid deposition and hypertrophy of smooth muscle and other connective tissue elements. This arterial pathology is caused by hypertension, diabetes, and other risk factors, including hyperlipidemia and hyperhomocysteinemia. Such segmental arteriolar disorganization causes a significant reduction in the luminal diameter of small arteries (less than 200 μm in diameter) and causes hypoperfusion to subcortical areas.

Microatheroma is an atheromatous arterial lesion within the brain parenchyma. They cause occlusion or stenosis of a deep penetrating brain artery. Histologically, microatheroma is identical to large-vessel atheroma. Microatheroma has the subintimal deposition of lipids and proliferation of fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, and lipid-laden macrophages. Microatheroma is generally located in the proximal region near the origin of the parent artery.

Other mechanisms can cause small vessel arteriopathy, which can cause subcortical strokes. Sometimes arterial media may get foreign deposits, as in amyloid angiopathy and genetic conditions like cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL).

APOE gene is responsible for making apolipoprotein; it helps transport cholesterol across different tissues and cells. APOE represents three alleles, e2, e3, and e4. The APOE e4 allele may confer some risk of developing small vessel pathology. There is evidence that APOE e4 carriers are at increased risk for atherosclerosis. APOE is responsible for clearing beta-amyloid from the brain; e4 may be less efficient, causing atherosclerosis.

Deep penetrating branch occlusion via direct emboli or thrombus from a cardiac or large artery source, micro atheroma involving the lenticulostriate branch, or macroatheroma caused by parent artery occlusion can also cause a lacunar stroke.

Other rare postulated reasons for small cerebral infarcts include embolism, vasculitis, infections, and vasospasm, which are not proven by autopsy.