# Continuing Education Activity

The white dot syndromes constitute a group of inflammatory chorioretinopathies in which the common defining clinical feature is the presence of multiple, discrete, white lesions located at the deeper levels of the retina and choroid. Though several of the white dot syndromes are associated with a viral prodrome, an etiology is lacking for these conditions. Typically seen in young, otherwise healthy adults, the white dot syndromes most often present with symptoms of photopsia, floaters, decreased night vision, blurred vision, and visual field loss. In general, these conditions are acute in onset, and many, though not all, are transient without long-term visual consequence. Though the white dot syndromes share many similar clinical features, including the tell-tale chorioretinal lesions, several distinct clinical features and diagnostic testing findings allow for additional characterization. This activity outlines the white dot syndromes to include a discussion of etiologies, epidemiology, pertinent history and examination findings, options for evaluation, and the interprofessional healthcare team's role in managing patients with these conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the typical clinical features of the white dot syndromes.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of a patient with a presumptive white dot syndrome. 
- Review the management options available for white dot syndromes.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the management of white dot syndromes and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

The white dot syndromes constitute a group of inflammatory chorioretinopathies. The common, defining clinical feature is the presence of multiple, discrete, white lesions located at the deeper levels of the retina choroid.

# Etiology

The etiology of the white dot syndromes remains unknown. Several entities are associated with a viral prodrome, suggesting a potential viral or infectious etiology. Similar to most autoimmune conditions, an unknown trigger is thought to precipitate an inflammatory or autoimmune process in the posterior eye.

# Epidemiology

With a few exceptions (birdshot chorioretinopathy, serpiginous choroiditis), white dot syndromes present in young, otherwise healthy, adults below the age of 50.

# History and Physical

Historical features most consistent with a white dot syndrome include the relatively acute onset of visual symptoms, including visual field loss or scotoma, flashes of light or photopsia, blurred vision, and floaters.

# Evaluation

Laboratory testing in patients with a white dot syndrome is generally most useful in excluding alternative etiologies on the differential diagnosis.

# Treatment / Management

Many of the white dot syndromes are benign and self-limited, negating the need for treatment. A few white dot syndromes are persistent and progressive, with significant visual consequences if untreated (MCP, serpiginous choroiditis, and birdshot chorioretinopathy). Treatment in these conditions initially involves using local or systemic corticosteroids with a transition to steroid-sparing systemic immunotherapy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Both infectious and noninfectious entities are included in the differential diagnosis of the white dot syndromes. The noninfectious processes include sarcoidosis, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome, sympathetic ophthalmia, and intraocular lymphoma.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for most white dot syndromes (ARPE, MEWDS, APMPPE, AZOOR) is good, with most patients experiencing a benign and self-limited course with an eventual return to or near baseline vision.

# Complications

Extraocular complications of white dot syndromes are rare. Patients may present with a viral prodrome that is typically self-limiting. In patients with APMPPE, symptoms of a viral prodrome may include meningeal features.

Associated ocular complications include those inherent to chorioretinopathy, such as cystoid macular edema (CME) and choroidal neovascularization (CNV). The development of choroidal neovascular membranes is a prominent complication seen in patients with PIC, with estimates of 40% to 75% in some cases series.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As stated previously, most white dot syndromes are self-limiting, and therefore no treatment is generally necessary. The clinician may want to closely monitor the condition for a month using dilated funduscopic examinations.

# Pearls and Other Issues

A detailed review of individual white dot syndromes is beyond the scope of this article. The following pearls highlight several key distinguishing clinical features of several of the white dot syndromes.

- Multiple evanescent white dot syndrome (MEWDS): young patients (age 20 to 50 years), women > men, often viral prodrome, typically unilateral, good visual prognosis, small white dots in the outer retina, “wreath-like” pattern of hyperfluorescence on FA

- Acute retinal pigment epitheliitis (ARPE): young patients (age 10 to 30 years), women = men, most often unilateral, small hyperpigmented lesions, excellent visual prognosis

- Acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy (APMPPE): young patients (age 20 to 30 years), women = men, typically bilateral, flat gray or white placoid lesions at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and inner choroid, good visual prognosis

- Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR): young patients, often myopic, women > men, typically bilateral (though asymmetric), initially normal-appearing fundus followed by zonal RPE atrophy and pigmentary changes, no clear benefit from treatment, good visual prognosis, though may progress or recur

- Multifocal choroiditis and panuveitis (MCP): young to middle-age patients (age 20 to 60 years), women > men, bilateral, presence of anterior chamber and vitreous inflammation along with multiple yellow-white chorioretinal lesions with subsequent atrophy and scarring, complicated by CME and CNV, poor visual prognosis, treatment generally required

- Birdshot chorioretinopathy: middle-aged patients (age 40 to 60 years), women > men, bilateral, difficulty with night vision, multiple cream-colored lesions in a birdshot style, radiating pattern nasally predominant, associated vitritis, CME, and retinal vasculitis, highly correlated with the presence of HLA-A29, “quenching” on FA, guarded visual prognosis, treatment generally required

- Serpiginous choroiditis: middle-aged patients (age 30 to 60 years), men > women, bilateral (asymmetric), the geographic pattern of chorioretinal scarring, guarded to poor prognosis, treatment may require alkylating agents

- Punctate inner choroidopathy (PIC): young patients (under 40 years of age), women > men, bilateral, small punctate gray or yellow lesions in the posterior pole evolve to atrophic scars, absence of vitritis, associated with CNV, good visual prognosis though more guarded with the development of CNV

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Thankfully, many white dot syndromes are self-limited and do not require treatment. Still, exceptions exist, and, in these circumstances, treatment often involves the use of systemic immunosuppressive therapy. Coordination of care between an ophthalmologist specializing in chorioretinal disease and a rheumatologist is often needed for optimal care. Consideration should be given to case conferences or joint clinics to facilitate such coordination.

The views expressed are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy of the Department of the Army, the Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government.