Management for hiatal hernias depends on the type of hernia and severity of symptoms. Initial management of a patient presenting with typical symptoms of GERD in an outpatient setting includes a double dose of a proton pump inhibitor (PPI). This can be both therapeutic and diagnostic in that persistent symptoms often require a more extensive evaluation. Since the advent of PPIs, the indication for surgical therapy has changed. Patients with evidence of severe esophageal injury such as ulcer, stricture, or Barrett's mucosa should be considered for surgical treatment. Other patients, such as those with a long duration of symptoms or those with incomplete resolution of symptoms while on medical therapy, should also be considered for surgical intervention. With advancements in minimally invasive techniques for the treatment of GERD, the cost of surgery has decreased. Patients who have more than 8 years of life expectancy and are in need of lifelong therapy because of a mechanically defective LES, surgical therapy may be considered the treatment of choice.

Paraesophageal hernias can present with a gastric volvulus due to the laxity of the stomach's peritoneal attachments and subsequent rotation of the gastric fundus. This is considered a surgical emergency. Current recommendations are for operative repair of all symptomatic paraesophageal hernias as well as completely asymptomatic large hernias in patients less than 60 years old and otherwise healthy.

Nissen fundoplication (360-degree wrap): This involves completely wrapping the GEJ using the fundus of the stomach. This is usually done with a 52 french bougie in place to ensure appropriate approximation without the wrap being too tight. The initial steps involve dissection of the short gastric vessels off the greater curvature of the stomach to mobilize the fundus. The phrenoesophageal membrane over the left crus is fully dissected, and the crural fibers are identified. For the right crural dissection, the lesser omentum must be opened, and the right phrenoesophageal membrane mobilized. It is important to preserve the anterior and posterior vagi during this dissection. A Penrose drain is typically placed around the esophagus to assist in mobilization and creation of the wrap. The wrap is created over a length of 2.5 to 3 cm using 3-4 interrupted permanent sutures. Once the wrap is complete, the 52 french bougie is removed, and the wrap is anchored to the esophagus and hiatus. This helps prevent herniation and slippage.

Partial fundoplication (Dor and Toupet): When esophageal motility is poor, a partial fundoplication is typically the procedure of choice. The two most common partial fundoplications are the Dor procedure, which is an anterior wrap, and the Toupet procedure, which is a posterior wrap.  As opposed to the complete 360-degree wrap performed with a Nissen, these two procedures involve creating a 180 to 250-degree wrap. The thought is that a partial wrap will help prevent obstruction in the esophagus when motility is a concern.

Dor procedure: This is performed by folding the fundus over the anterior aspect of the esophagus and then anchoring it to the hiatus and esophagus as is done in the 360-degree wrap. This wrap has been limitedly used for the treatment of GERD and is more commonly used to treat patients with achalasia who have undergone an anterior myotomy.

Toupet procedure: The entire esophageal dissection for this procedure is the same as that of a Nissen, with mobilization of the esophagus. As opposed to the Nissen, this procedure creates a 220 to 250-degree wrap around the posterior aspect of the esophagus and is the procedure of choice if motility is a concern.