Mild, uncomplicated paraphimosis may be reduced manually, usually without the need for sedation or analgesia. More difficult or complicated cases may require local anesthesia with a dorsal penile block, systemic analgesia, or procedural sedation.

Several methods of reduction are available and can be classified into manual reduction or surgical repair.

**Manual, non-surgical reduction of the paraphimosis**is possible with or without compression methods, using osmotic agents and puncture-aspiration techniques.

Manual reduction of paraphimosis can often be facilitated by simple compression of the glans and the swollen, edematous foreskin for several minutes before attempting the reduction. This allows the edematous swelling of the retracted foreskin to diminish before attempting repositioning of the foreskin to its usual position. One simple method involves manually compressing the edematous foreskin while pulling slowly upward on the phallus.

Manual reduction can also be attempted by placing both thumbs over the glans with both index and long fingers surrounding the trapped foreskin. Then slow, steady pressure is applied to advance the phimotic portion of the foreskin outwards slowly, back over the glans. This can be facilitated with a little lubricant. Excessive lubricant should be avoided as it may make the skin too slippery for reliable grasping.

Another compression technique involves tightly wrapping the swollen portion of the penis from the glans towards the base with a 1-inch or 2-inch elastic bandage. A gauze pad should be applied first around the edematous foreskin. The compression bandage can remain for 10 to 20 minutes to minimize the edema. Then apply one of the manual reduction methods described above.

Ice packs or surgical gloves filled with ice and applied to edematous areas have been described as possibly useful in conjunction with other methods to reduce the paraphimotic swelling.  However, since the main issue in paraphimosis is distal penile vascular compromise from a constricting fibrous band of the phimotic foreskin, many experts recommend against using ice in these situations as it may further compromise arterial inflow to the possibly ischemic portion of the penis.

Another possible compressive treatment method involves cutting the thumb from a surgical glove to make a "sleeve" and emptying a tube of EMLA cream (2.5% lidocaine and 2.5% prilocaine; AstraZeneca, London, UK) or similar into the sleeve. This is then placed over the penis and left for approximately 30 minutes. This allows for local anesthesia and softening of affected skin to aid in foreskin reduction.  However, while it does provide some analgesic relief, it may make the skin a little more slippery and harder to manipulate.

Reducing the penile edema from paraphimosis can also be achieved by directly injecting hyaluronidase into the edematous foreskin.  This has been effective, particularly in children and infants, in resolving the edema, allowing for an easier manual reduction of the paraphimosis. The hyaluronidase increases the diffusion of trapped fluid within the tissue planes of the malpositioned foreskin, which reduces the swelling and edema.

Osmotic methods involve applying substances with a high solute concentration on the external skin surfaces of the edematous tissue. This would tend to draw water along an osmotic gradient and thereby reduce the edema. For example, a generous topical application of granulated sugar to the affected glans and foreskin has been shown to be effective in helping reduce edema from paraphimosis.

Gauze soaked in 20% mannitol solution has also been used as an osmotic agent to reduce the edema from paraphimosis. The gauze is left in place for 30 to 45 minutes. It has been reported to completely eradicate the troublesome edema allowing for easy resolution of the paraphimosis with manual techniques, as described above. This technique is relatively painless and is well suited for children.

In many cases, no additional local anesthetic or analgesia is needed, but if the paraphimosis is long-standing, extremely painful, or severe, then a formal penile anesthetic block can be used. A dorsal penile block is performed using a 25-gauge or 27-gauge needle, infiltrating approximately 2.5 mL of 1% lidocaine without epinephrine into the base of the penis at the junction of the penis and suprapubic skin at the 10 o'clock position, off the midline to avoid the superficial dorsal vein. Another 2.5 mL is injected at the 2 o'clock position. Inject the lidocaine just deep to Buck's fascia, approximately 3 mm to 5 mm beneath the skin, ensuring negative blood aspiration before injecting. Ultrasound guidance has been shown to be effective in helping to identify landmarks for this procedure.

Puncture and aspiration methods are more invasive and should be reserved for cases refractory to other less-invasive techniques. The puncture technique involves puncturing the edematous foreskin several times with a hypodermic needle followed by manual expression of edematous fluid through the puncture holes. Experienced emergency practitioners can consider penile corporal aspiration of blood.

**Surgical treatment of the paraphimosis**will be required if the previously described manual reduction methods are unsuccessful. Prepare the penis and prepuce with a povidone-iodine or similar antiseptic solution. This can be achieved after the previously-described penile block. One method involves applying two straight hemostats to grab the dorsum of the constricting foreskin at the 12 o'clock position. This is followed by making a 1 cm to 2 cm longitudinal incision of the constricting band of edematous foreskin between the hemostats, which allows for passage over the glans. The incised foreskin is not reapproximated after reduction, but the edges are oversown with a 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable suture. This will leave the phimotic portion of the foreskin widely separate and open to prevent recurrences.

Ischemia leading to necrosis and gangrene of the glans and distal urethra can occur.  Management of such a severe complication of paraphimosis is typically partial penectomy, resection of the glans and/or excision of the necrotic penile tissue. Recently, conservative management of a case of necrosis of the glans from paraphimosis in a 25 year old was described with suprapubic tube drainage and careful surgical debridement which provided a reasonably good result without penile amputation.

**An elective circumcision or dorsal slit procedure is strongly recommended in all patients who have had a significant paraphimosis due to the very great risk of a recurrence.**