# Continuing Education Activity

Ketoconazole is a drug used in the management and treatment of fungal infections. It is in the imidazole antifungal class of medications. This activity describes the indications, actions, and contraindications of ketoconazole as a valuable agent in treating fungal infections. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors pertinent to members of the interprofessional team in the treatment of patients with fungal infection.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of ketoconazole.
- Describe the adverse effects of ketoconazole.
- Review the appropriate monitoring of ketoconazole.
- Summarize some interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance ketoconazole and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Ketoconazole has approval for use in the treatment of fungal infections of the skin and systemic fungal infections.

The use of this drug requires a careful risk-benefit analysis when selecting ketoconazole as the treatment of fungal infections. Clinicians should avoid using ketoconazole in the treatment of onychomycosis, cutaneous dermatophyte, and candida infections.

# Mechanism of Action

Ketoconazole works as an antifungal agent by inhibiting the cytochrome P450 14α-demethylase enzyme. This enzyme is responsible for inhibiting the biosynthesis of triglycerides and phospholipids by fungi.

Ketoconazole inhibits the activity of the enzyme 21-hydroxylase. This enzyme is essential for synthesizing mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, such as cortisol, in the adrenal cortex.

# Administration

Ketoconazole is available in tablet form and as a topical agent in creams, foams, and shampoos.

Topical ketoconazole is only for external use. It should not be ingested or used intravaginally. The eyes and mucous membranes should also be avoided. Patients should apply the cream and gel only to the affected area and the areas immediately surrounding it. The foam should be applied directly to the infected area to avoid melting in the hands. Handwashing is necessary after the application of the cream and gel to prevent any adverse reactions from the medication. The shampoo application should be slathered onto the scalp and rinsed thoroughly.

# Adverse Effects

Systemic ketoconazole administration most commonly causes gastrointestinal side effects.

Hypersensitivity reactions have also been reported, such as anaphylaxis and urticaria. High-dose ketoconazole has been shown to cause an increase in long bone fragility and lead to fracture. Other side effects include alcohol intolerance, decreased platelet count, epistaxis, fatigue, hot flash, hyperlipidemia, insomnia, myalgia, nervousness, paresthesia, and peripheral edema. Topical ketoconazole can cause dermatological reactions, including pruritis, stinging, and dryness at the application site. There are also reports of dry hair, dry scalp, and oily hair when using ketoconazole-containing shampoo. Less common adverse effects include abnormal hair texture, alopecia, angioedema, contact dermatitis, eye irritation, headache, hypersensitivity reaction, impetigo, and pyogenic granuloma.

# Contraindications

Ketoconazole is contraindicated in patients with acute or chronic liver disease due to its association with hepatotoxicity, which can be fatal. It is contraindicated in adrenal insufficiency because high doses of ketoconazole inhibit adrenocortical function.

Ketoconazole is contraindicated in patients taking benzodiazepines because it can increase plasma concentrations and lead to sedation. Ketoconazole should never be administered to patients on antiarrhythmic drugs, cisapride, pimozide, quinidine, and ranolazine because it can cause QT prolongation and torsade de pointes.

# Monitoring

Due to its hepatoxic effects, patients taking oral ketoconazole should have their hepatic function monitored, which is through hepatic function tests such as aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin time (PT).

Hepatic function tests should take place at baseline, frequently during ketoconazole therapy, and after therapy has ceased. Period calcium and phosphorous levels are recommended for patients on long-term therapy with ketoconazole. The adrenal function also requires monitoring during treatment with ketoconazole. This monitoring is possible by measuring blood levels of sodium, potassium, cortisol, and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).

# Toxicity

The Food and Drug Administration warns that oral dosing of ketoconazole can lead to hepatotoxicity and adrenal insufficiency and that ketoconazole-associated hepatotoxicity is common. There are many off-label uses for ketoconazole. Therefore, careful selection of ketoconazole as a treatment is necessary due to serious hepatoxic side effects.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing the administration and usage of ketoconazole requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including nurses, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and several physicians in different specialties. Since the usage of ketoconazole can result in adverse effects such as hepatotoxicity and adrenal insufficiency, it is important to monitor liver and adrenal function in patients considered for ketoconazole treatment. This monitoring requires that each member of the healthcare team monitor patient for signs of acute liver failure not only with laboratory evidence but also clinically by recognizing the signs of liver dysfunction. In addition, since there are off-label and over-the-counter uses of ketoconazole, it is important to educate patients about the adverse effects of this drug and the proper use of the medication. Therefore, the interprofessional model for patient care when using ketoconazole therapy is crucial to driving optimal patient outcomes while reducing the potential for adverse effects. [Level 5]