Patients with LADA may present with symptoms of polyuria, polydipsia, nocturia, fatigue, visual changes, tingling in the feet, and weight loss or may be asymptomatic.

A personal or family history of autoimmune disease should raise suspicion that a patient with hyperglycemia has LADA or T1DM.

A history of low-birth-weight is a strong risk factor for both LADA and T2DM.

A history of smoking, alcohol consumption, the number of sweetened beverages are risk factors.

The amount and type of physical activity and exercise should be sought and recorded to quantitate the risk of LADA.

The blood pressure must be accurately measured.

Several diagnostic tools have been proposed to identify patients with LADA.

A diagnostic screening tool with three criteria was used to identify LADA in diabetic patients older than 50 years of age:

- A low or normal BMI.

- A fasting blood glucose 270 mg/dl or higher, HbA1C 10% or greater despite good compliance.

- Loss of weight despite a diet constant in calorie content.

This tool is said to detect three-fourths of patients with LADA.

Another investigator developed a clinical risk score:

- Age less than 50 years.

- Symptomatic hyperglycemia.

- BMI of less than 25 kg/m2.

- A personal or family history of autoimmune disease

Two or more criteria when positive yielded a sensitivity of 90 percent and specificity of 71 percent while less than 2 criteria virtually excluded LADA.

Although the above algorithms have been described and validated in some studies, it must be mentioned that the phenotypes of LADA may resemble T1DM or T2DM and therefore exhibit a normal or high BMI, respectively, with the latter having higher blood pressure and triglycerides albeit midway between T1DM and T2DM.

Some patients with LADA may have features of the MetS. Two phenotypes have been described based on GADA titers. LADA1 with ICA and high GADA titers and a T1DM phenotype and LADA2 with lower GADA titers, single antibody, and a T2DM phenotype.

Patients with LADA are usually ketosis resistant at first diagnosis.