- Patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms should quit smoking to reduce the risk of enlargement.

- Medical optimization of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and other atherosclerotic risk factors should be assessed.

- Moderate exercise does not cause a rupture of AAA expansion.

- The Society for Vascular Surgery Guidelines recommends ultrasound screening for all men and women 65 years or older who have smoked or have a family history of AAA(20).

- Surveillance Guidelines for AAA per the Society for Vascular Surgery using duplex US are the following:

- 3-year intervals for patients with an AAA between 3.0 and 3.9 cm
- 12-month intervals for patients with an AAA of 4.0 to 4.9 cm in diameter.
- 6-month intervals for patients with an AAA between 5.0 and 5.4 cm in diameter

- Those patients with an initial aortic diameter <3 cm has a low risk of rupture. At this time, there are no recommendations for surveillance; however, it should be noted that gradual expansion in these patients has been noted over time.

- Patients presenting with symptomatic AAA should be considered for urgent repair.

- Asymptomatic patients with AAA demonstrating an aortic diameter > 5.4 cm or those with the rapid expansion of small AAA should be evaluated for repair.

- The goal of AAA repair is to increase survival. Consideration of quality of life after the repair is essential, particularly in those with shortened life expectancy due to medical comorbidities or cancer.

- Endovascular repair may offer fewer complications and better quality of life in those at high risk for open repair up to 1-year post-intervention.

**Factors that increase the operative risk for abdominal aortic aneurysm repair include:**

- Severe heart disease.

- Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

- Poor renal function

- Comorbidities such as stroke, diabetes, hypertension, and advanced age can increase open surgical risk. If the aortic anatomy permits, these individuals should be considered for endovascular stenting of the aneurysm.

**Infrarenal Aortic Aneurysm Repair**

Consideration for repair is appropriate for all symptomatic aneurysms. Aortic anatomy and device availability can dictate the approach. Open aneurysm repair had been the gold standard but carried increased risk and potential complications, which may be acceptable in a younger, good surgical-risk patient. This is still a more durable procedure. Endovascular repair is now an established technique for repairing an abdominal aortic aneurysm. This minimally invasive procedure can also be offered but has better outcomes and durability when the anatomy meets device-specific recommendations. This is the preferred approach in rupture cases and patients with multiple risk factors or shortened life expectancy. Intervention or surgical treatment risks versus benefits of repair in patients at increased risk for open surgery should be considered, and no intervention may be appropriate in some cases.

Patients should be well informed regarding their options, risks of repair, and potential postoperative complications. Endovascular repair requires life-long follow-up with imaging as early or late endoleaks may develop, causing aortic sac pressurization and rupture. Secondary interventions may be necessary, the majority of which are minimally invasive. Still, there is a small chance that an open conversation with the stent-graft removal may be required when these secondary endovascular interventions fail.