The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is an excellent resource for antimicrobial stewardship, including best practices in all healthcare settings, methods for developing and improving antimicrobial stewardship, and developing a culture for safety during prescribing. One tool for use by prescribers of antibiotics is their 'Four Moments of Antibiotic Decision Making.'

Moment 1 is considering the question if the patient has an infection and does it require antibiotics. Prescribers tend to order antibiotics to the hospitalized patient in response to abnormal clinical signs or lab results (for example- isolated fever or leukocytosis). This moment asks prescribers to pause, rethink and analyze all relevant information to determine the likelihood of any infectious process. At present, COVID 19 pandemic sets as a perfect example of antibiotics prescribed without any bacterial infection.

Moment 2 is to think about what cultures should be obtained and the best empiric treatment. This moment focuses on the need for culture data when appropriate before administering the antibiotics. When no specific data is available, there is a tendency for prolonged broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. The second part of Moment 2 ensures timely administration of empirical therapy based on severity and likely source of infection. For example, patients are at low risk of MRSA for urinary tract infections. Therefore they would not benefit from IV vancomycin. Local antibiotics guidelines should be developed for common inpatient infections- this aids in enacting Moment 2.

Moment 3 is the question of, after a day or so of antibiotics being used, should the regimen be stopped, narrowed, or changed from IV to oral treatment.  This process should be ongoing.  For instance, most patients with community-acquired pneumonia become stable with normal vital signs by day three and are at an excellent time to switch to oral medications. Antibiotics time-outs should be used to address Moment 3. Nurses and pharmacists are excellent resources to prompt clinicians regarding further plans about antibiotics. At the same time, clinicians should also document their decision regarding the choice of antimicrobial therapy, indication, duration, and dosing. IT department can also help by regularly updating the electronic health records system with prompts to review orders, set up antimicrobial time-outs, etc. This way, clinicians are prompted with indication, duration, dosing, route of therapy.

Moment 4 considers how long the antibiotic should be continued for the treatment of the patient's infection. There has been an increasing number of studies that support a shorter duration of therapy than previously prescribed. Local and national antibiotics guidelines help to uniform the duration of antimicrobial therapy prescription.

Antimicrobial stewardship is a coordinated effort between interprofessional teams, including clinicians/prescribers, nursing staff, pharmacists, microbiologists, infection prevention teams, and patient safety teams. Targeted goals and multidisciplinary approach interventions result in excellent clinical, economic outcomes.