**Acamprosate.**Acamprosate is a GABA-B modulator that increases the release of GABA from presynaptic neurons, inhibits VDCCs, and decreases NMDA activation; acamprosate can be used for patients with alcohol use disorder to maintain abstinence.

**Baclofen.**Baclofen is a hydrophilic GABA-B agonist that is thought to hyperpolarize anterior horn motor neurons in the spinal cord, resulting in decreased hyperreflexia and clonus.

**Barbiturates and benzodiazepines.**Barbiturates such as phenobarbital are GABA-A agonists currently in use for epilepsy and general anesthesia. For anxiolysis, they have been largely replaced by benzodiazepines, which have much lower overdose toxicity than barbiturates.

**Gabapentin and pregabalin.**Gabapentin and pregabalin are antiepileptic derivatives of GABA that does not interact with GABA receptors, but rather VDCCs containing the alpha-2-delta-1 subunit that leads to reduced neurotransmitter release and attenuation of neuronal excitation.

**Flumazenil.**Flumazenil is a competitive inhibitor of GABA-A receptors that can be used to treat severe benzodiazepine overdose. Its use is contraindicated if the overdose is unknown or mixed, there is tolerance to benzodiazepine or an underlying seizure disorder, or there is a risk of the prolonged QRS interval. Supportive care is otherwise indicated for benzodiazepine overdose.

**Propofol and other anesthetics.**Propofol is a GABA-A agonist favored over benzodiazepines in sedation and almost all surgical anesthesia for their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles. Compared to benzodiazepines, propofol has a rapid psychomotor recovery. Other GABA-A agonists such as volatile anesthetics (isoflurane, nitric oxide) and etomidate are also used for anesthesia or sedation.

**Valproate.**Valproate is an antiepileptic drug thought to either increase pre-synaptic GABA levels by inhibiting GABA-T activity or enhancing the synthesis and release of GABA as well as modulating NMDA receptors. It is widely used to treat generalized and partial seizures in both adults and children.