In Wilson disease, there is a faulty copper excretory mechanism, causing copper to accumulate in the liver and spill into the blood where it begins to accumulate in other organs and tissues like subthalamus, putamen, and cortex of the brain, kidneys, and cornea. Copper is a transition metal, and excess copper levels lead to the formation of a toxic hydroxyl group and increase oxidative stress in the cells. This oxidative stress damages the cells and leads to the clinical manifestation, namely liver failure, behavioral problems, movement disorders, and Kayser-Fleischer rings in the cornea.

Copper is needed by the body, predominantly as a cofactor for some enzymes such as ceruloplasmin, cytochrome c oxidase, dopamine beta-hydroxylase, superoxide dismutase, and tyrosinase. Copper enters the body through the digestive tract with the help of a transporter protein in the cells of the small bowel, copper membrane transporter 1 (Ctr1; SLC31A1). This transporter helps to carry copper inside the cells where part of the copper is bound to metallothionein and part is carried by ATOX1 to an organelle known as the trans-Golgi network. In response to rising copper levels, an enzyme called ATP7A releases copper into the portal vein to the liver. Liver cells carry the CMT1 protein and metallothionein, and then ATOX1 binds it inside the cell. Once here, ATP7B links the copper to ceruloplasmin and releases it into the bloodstream, removing the excess copper by secreting it into bile. Both functions of ATP7B are dysfunctional in Wilson disease. Copper accumulates in the liver, and ceruloplasmin is secreted in a form that lacks copper and is rapidly degraded in the bloodstream.

When the copper level in the liver overwhelms the proteins that normally bind it, it results in oxidative damage through a process known as Fenton chemistry. This damage results in chronic active hepatitis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis. The liver releases copper into the bloodstream that is not bound to ceruloplasmin. This free copper precipitates throughout the body, particularly in the kidneys, eyes, and brain. In the brain, copper is deposited in the basal ganglia, putamen, and globus pallidus (i.e., lenticular nucleus); these areas participate in the coordination of movement and neurocognitive processes such as stimulating mood regulation. Damage to these areas produces the neuropsychiatric symptoms seen in Wilson disease.