Motor tics are sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic stereotyped motor movements, generally preceded by an urge. They can affect any part of the body but are by far most common in the face, head, and neck region. Vocal tics include any tic that produces noise: sniffing, grunting, humming, clicking, yelling words repetitively. Coprolalia, shouting expletives or other obscenities, affects less than 10% of patients with GTS.

**Criteria for Tourette Disorder**

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Ed. (DSM-5)

- Multiple motor tics and one or more vocal tics have been present at some time during the illness, although not necessarily concurrently

- The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year since the onset of the first tic

- Onset is before age 18

- The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition

The DSM-5 also lists criteria for persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, which includes all criteria for GTS except that the child has only had either motor or vocal tics, not both. Provisional tic disorder meets all criteria for GTS except that the tics have not lasted longer than a year. There is no clear pathophysiological difference between these 3 disorders.

The typical age of tic onset is 4 to 6 years old, with symptoms peaking around 10 to 12 years of age. Simple motor tics are typically diagnosed early, while more complex tics tend to develop later. The individual tics have a rapid onset, occurring multiple times daily. They escalate over the next several days to weeks. Then, they plateau for a variable amount of time, weeks to years, before gradually tapering to a stop. For each patient, different tics can persist for a variable amount of time, and often there is overlap with multiple different types of tics occurring concurrently.

Most patients report a premonitory urge, which they usually describe as a vague sense that they need to perform the movement, followed by a sense of relief after the tic. About 20% of patients report a sensory component with the urge, usually as itching, tingling, or aching. Patients consistently report that this premonitory urge is the factor that is most bothersome in Tourette syndrome. Younger children do not report this urge as frequently as older children for reasons that are not clearly understood. The movements themselves are involuntary in the sense that they are mostly subconscious and a patient cannot typically make them stop completely, but they are under voluntary influence. Most patients report the ability to suppress their tics for varying lengths of time. However, this active suppression can take a tremendous amount of focus and energy. Patients report that suppressing tics causes the premonitory urge to build to a level that can be quite distressing. Some patients are hesitant to attempt to suppress tics because it can lead to worsening tics or a sense that they lose control of their tics. We call this phenomenon “purging.” Parents often report that children have very frequent motor and vocal tics upon arrival home from school, but when they confer with the child’s teacher, they have not been having a problem at school. This is an adaptive coping strategy children learn, and parents should be encouraged to make the home a safe place for a child to freely release the tics.

Children with Tourette syndrome have high rates of comorbid neurobehavioral disorders. ADHD or OCD is seen in most patients. Children with GTS often experience a lot of anxiety, sleep abnormalities, poor impulse control, or other behavioral disorders. These comorbid neurobehavioral disorders often cause more psychosocial impairment for the child than the severity of the tics.

Echophenomenon is present in over half of children with GTS. Echolalia refers to repeating words, while echopraxia is repeating movements. This is prevalent in Tourette syndrome patients who have comorbid OCD. This can become a problem when dealing with authority figures, like teachers or police officers, who do not understand GTS.