A leak can be detrimental to brain blood supply and function and can increase the risk of direct trauma to brain parenchyma due to loss of fluid cushion. Chronic and untreated CSF leaks can cause low-pressure headaches, neck pain, ringing in the ear, and, occasionally, loss of smell or taste. Open communication of the subarachnoid space with CSF leak also presents a pathway for life-threatening CNS infection, including meningitis.

The most serious potential complication of CSF leak is meningitis. This risk appears to be highest in the preoperative period for those with confirmed CSF rhinorrhea, with those sustaining traumatic injuries having the highest risk of around 30%. Meningitis was found in 18.2% of trauma patients and a third of patients undergoing sphenoid, skull base, and calvaria operations. However, the risk of meningitis remains at 19% in those with persistent CSF leaks, and such persons remain at risk until successful operative closure.

A recent study shows abducens nerve palsy as a potential complication of skull-base surgery for CSF treatment. Calvarian surgery has a more challenging clinical presentation, including headache, meningitis with fever, and conscious disturbance.

Patients who had undergone lumbar puncture or spinal surgery did not express having meningitis. While skull-base surgery, calvaria surgery, and a lumbar puncture did not have such MRI results, trauma, and spinal surgery had more CSF accumulation imaging findings than these other procedures. Regarding the course of care, all groups experienced conservative treatment with similar success rates and lengths of time.

While surgery or trauma-associated CSF leak tended to favor surgical treatment, CSF leak related to lumbar puncture typically used blood patches as the most sophisticated therapy repair. Brain abscess (0.9%), subdural hematoma (0.3%), and smell disorders (0.6%) are so described as complications.