During the interpretation of ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy studies, ventilation and perfusion imaging are used in conjunction.

**Three types of defects can be found:**

- Matched- ventilation and perfusion defects are concordant with each other. This occurs when the perfusion defect is in correspondence with the ventilatory abnormality.

- Mismatched- defect in perfusion with either normal or near-normal ventilation. Mismatched defects can be seen in pulmonary embolism, veno-occlusive disease, tumor obstructing an artery, or radiation therapy.

- Reverse mismatched- defect in ventilation with either normal or less severe corresponding perfusion defect.

Defect size can be calculated as:

**1. Large more than 75% of the segment**

**2. Moderate 25 to 75% of the segment**

**3. Small less than 25% of the segment**

Various criteria have been proposed to categorize the likelihood of PE.

- Original PIOPED criteria

- Modified PIOPED II criteria

- Perfusion-only modified PIOPED criteria

- Perfusion-only PISAPED criteria

**Currently, the most commonly used criteria are:**

- Modified PIOPED II (prospective investigation of pulmonary embolism diagnosis)

- PISAPED (the prospective investigative study of acute pulmonary embolism diagnosis)

The original PIOPED (prospective investigation of pulmonary embolism diagnosis) study classifies V/Q scan into high probability, intermediate probability, low probability, and indeterminate scan.

**1. High Probability Scan:**

- More than two large mismatched V/Q segmental defects.

**2. Intermediate Probability Scan:**

- Two moderate or one large mismatched V/Q defect - difficult to categorize as high or low.

**3. Low Probability Scan:**

- Non-segmental perfusion defects.

- Perfusion defect is substantially less than a chest X-ray defect.

- Matched V/Q defects, negative chest X-ray, and any number of small perfusion defects.

Modified PIOPED II criteria- Classifies V/Q scan as non-diagnostic, normal, very low probability, and high probability.

**High Probability**

- Two or more large mismatched segmental or segmental equivalent defects are present.

- One segmental equivalent means a defect of more than 75% of a segment, and half segmental equivalent means a defect of 25 to 75%

**Very Low Probability**

- 1-3 small segmental defects

- Non-segmental perfusion defect

- Perfusion defect smaller than X-ray chest lesion

- Two or more matched defects with normal chest X-Ray

- Single matched defect in the mid or upper lung

- Solitary large pleural effusion

- Stripe sign (presence of peripheral perfusion in a defect)

**Non-diagnostic**

- All other findings

Normal: Diffuse homogeneous radiotracer activity on both perfusion and ventilation scans

PISAPED criteria are classified based on the following scan findings:

It is simple and eliminates nondiagnostic readings. It combines only the perfusion part of the V/Q scan with Chest X-Ray

**PE Present**

- One or more wedge-shaped perfusion defects

**PE Absent**

- No perfusion defects

- Non-wedge shaped perfusion defect

- Shape defects caused by the mediastinum, diaphragm, or an enlarged heart

**Right-to-Left Shunt Study Interpretation**

Presence of quantum mottling (QM), a randomly distributed clump of radioactivity present in soft tissues of the brain, trunk, or limbs. In addition to that, the fraction of the right-left shunt is calculated using (extra-pulmonary/total body ratio) of the injectable agent.

Rule of V/Q scan in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)- It is used to assess both early ventilation and perfusion defect in COPD in addition to the extent of the disease.

Risk stratification of PE should be performed using a combination of pre-test probability by Well score and V/Q scan results. Data is suggestive that in the case of high clinical suspicion and high probability V/Q scan - the risk of PE increases to 96%. In low/intermediate or high clinical suspicion and normal or near-normal probability V/Q scan- the risk of PE is less than 10%. In low to intermediate clinical probability and high probability V/Q scans - the risk of PE is still more than 50%.