At around the second week of life, the embryo starts to grow and fold upon itself. During this time, there are specific events controlled by growth factors that are occurring that include cellular differentiation, multiplication, migration, and deposition of cells at different sites. Several of these events coincide with the formation of the abdominal wall, and it is at this point that certain abdominal wall defects occur.

The embryo comprised of the ectoderm is a flat structure within the umbilical ring; it will become the surface epithelium and the endoderm, which will become the inner epithelium of the organs in the digestive tract.

As the embryo changes shape, the mesoblast layer starts to form and plays a vital role in the development of the basic abdominal wall structures. At about 3 to 4 weeks, the abdominal and thoracic cavities are distinct, and the folding of the embryo starts to develop along two perpendicular axes but in four directions: caudal, cranial, and laterally on each side. The cranial fold will contain the embryonic derivatives that eventually will come from the epigastric and thoracic walls. The caudal fold will lead to the development of the bladder, hindgut, and hypogastrium. The lateral folds will lead to the development of the lateral abdominal walls and midgut.

The ectoderm will remain in continuity with the amnion and ultimately will form the umbilical ring around a yolk sac which is quickly dissolving. The umbilical ring contains the umbilical vessels, allantois, vitelline duct, extraembryonic coelom, and associated vitelline vessels.

The next stage is the development of the abdominal wall at 6 to 10 weeks. As the midgut grows rapidly, it is at this stage that congenital defects of the abdominal wall appear.

In the presence of normal development, there is a rotation of the midgut which returns to the abdominal cavity around weeks 10 to 12. If the abdominal wall development is not proper, the intestinal contents will remain herniated inside the umbilical cord. By the twelfth week, there is the obliteration of the extraembryonic space and the intestine returns to the abdominal cavity. At the same time, the vitelline duct, allantois, and other vessels are obliterated, leaving just two umbilical arteries and one umbilical vein covered by amnion.