Anthropometric measurements have utility in assessing physical fitness data for a wide variety of the population, from children to elite athletes to the elderly. One study of Australian volleyball players revealed that anthropometric data improves with increases in playing level.

The lengths of extremities are related to chronic diseases as well. A literature review shows that those with a shorter upper leg length (ULL) have a higher prevalence of metabolic syndrome.

While anthropometric data in the adult population is helpful to define obesity, it is also used extensively in the pediatric population to determine nutritional status. By measuring the height for age, weight for age, and weight for height, over time, anthropometric measurements can help identify inadequate growth patterns that warrant further evaluation.

Head circumference is another anthropometric measurement routinely used in children. This measurement is important to diagnose microcephaly, which has well-documented complications. BMI calculations and z-scores can help identify obesity and malnutrition in children, leading to early identification and treatment.

Mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) can help to define the severity of malnutrition. MUAC also has utility to assess nutritional status in the pregnant population as one study showed MUAC is the anthropometric measurement of choice in pregnancy.

Although technology may eventually advance to replace anthropometry on some level, one study found that the anthropometric measures of waist and hip circumferences are superior to ultrasound to assess regional adiposity.