Relative contraindications to lung isolation can be broadly categorized as factors related to DLT placement and patient factors.

**Factors Related to DLT**

- **Difficult airway:**Placement and positioning of a DLT in a patient with a difficult airway may be challenging or impossible. Repeated forceful attempts to intubate will increase the likelihood of airway injury. More significantly, loss of the airway during attempted placement of a DLT in a patient with a difficult airway may contribute to dangerous levels of hypoxia.

- **Tracheostomy or stoma:**Placement of a DLT through a tracheostomy or stoma may lead to excessive risk of iatrogenic injury.

- **Intraluminal tumors of the trachea or proximal bronchi:**Damage to intraluminal tumors by the placement of a DLT can lead to potential bleeding, tumor embolization, or DLT occlusion.

**Patient Factors**

OLV should only be used in patients who can tolerate its resulting alterations in cardiopulmonary physiology. Several patient factors increase the chance of severe hypoxia during OLV, which, if persistent, will require reinitiating ventilation to both lungs.

- Patients with lung disease resulting in hypoxia during two-lung ventilation with a FiO of 100% are unlikely to be able to tolerate significant periods of OLV.

- Hypoxia is also more likely in patients who have had a previous contralateral lobectomy resulting in a greater than 25% decrease in lung function on that side.

- Morbid obesity may be associated with an increased risk of hypoxia during OLV.

- OLV should be used with caution in those with known pulmonary hypertension.

Surgery on the right lung, which is larger than the left, may also be associated with an increased risk of hypoxia during OLV, but in patients with relatively healthy lungs, surgery on the right lung is tolerated without significant or prolonged periods of hypoxia.