Lightning can harm an individual through several mechanisms.  These include the effect of electric current on/through body tissues, burns due to conversion of electrical to thermal energy, mechanical trauma through a variety of mechanisms; including being thrown due a transmitted shockwave or direct strike from a bolt, flying debris from an object nearby due to shockwave or direct strike, fall secondary to being struck or due to muscle contraction.

Sudden death following a lightning strike is due to simultaneous cardiac and respiratory arrest and is more common with direct strikes. Typically, patients will have an asystolic arrest due to an immediate and simultaneous depolarization of all myocardial cells. Ventricular dysrhythmias are also possible, but much less common.  Spontaneous return of sinus rhythm, typically sinus bradycardia, and the return of spontaneous circulation will often precede the recovery of the respiratory system. A second cardiac arrest due to continued paralysis of the medullary respiratory center may occur if treatment is not promptly initiated.

Lightning may also cause damage to the central and peripheral nervous system. Lightning has been found to induce intracranial hemorrhage in some individuals, mostly in the basal ganglia and brainstem. It can also cause damage to other locations within the central nervous system and damage to the peripheral nervous system due to direct damage to nerve cells. Keraunoparalysis may also occur, in which a temporary paralysis due to vascular spasm and sympathetic nervous system instability occurs. This is most common in the lower extremities, is typically temporary, and resolves without treatment.

Burns ranging from superficial to full thickness are also associated with lightning strikes, superficial burns being much more common.  Linear burns are typically partial thickness and occur when sweat is vaporized as lighting travels over the skin. Punctate burns are clustered circular burns due to current passing out from deep tissue as it exits the body.  Full thickness burns are rare, occurring in less than 5% of injuries, and most commonly occur when objects such as synthetic fabric or metal is heated to a high degree and melts to or then directly burns the skin.

Blunt injury is not uncommon and can occur either due to a person being thrown due to massive instantaneous contraction from the current passage through the body or by an explosive or implosive force as the air surrounding the bolt is superheated and then rapidly cooled resulting in a sudden and powerful shock wave.  This shock wave can cause concussive injury and has been associated with tympanic membrane rupture, organ contusions, and pneumothorax.  This can also result in multiple forms of trauma from fall or being struck by other objects creating the possibility for a myriad of injuries including a skull fracture, cervical spine injury, and internal bleeding to name a few.

Ocular injury from current, blunt or blast trauma, vasoconstriction, or heat are also common.  Cataracts, most often bilateral, are the most common but other injuries such as hyphema, vitreous hemorrhage, and optic nerve injury can also occur.  Many victims struck by lightning will also have an injury to the audio-vestibular system due to either blast trauma or electrical injury. A ruptured tympanic membrane is common and found in 50-80% of those struck by lightning. Sensorineural deafness is often both transient and common with others experiencing tinnitus, vertigo, or facial nerve paralysis/injury.