A diabetes healthcare team may include the medical provider, nurse, diabetes educator, dietician, social worker, and psychologist; However, not all specialties are always available, convenient, or covered by insurance. Contact between the child and family and medical team between in-office visits is frequent, at least initially, while treatment is adjusted and the family learns the daily management tasks of caring for a child with diabetes. The patient and family make long-term day to day treatment decisions.

Insulin delivery is by multiple daily injections (MDI) or an insulin pump to simulate endogenous insulin physiology. Multiple daily injections include basal insulin once or twice daily, and bolus insulin typically is given at meals three or more times daily and is based on carbohydrate content and current blood glucose. Insulin pumps deliver rapid-acting insulin only and provide a basal rate of insulin that is either programmed or automatically adjusted based on continuous glucose monitor input in some pumps, and mealtime insulin is typically calculated based on mealtime inputs of carbohydrate and current blood glucose.

The provider will also screen for associated disorders (e.g., thyroid disease, celiac disease, dyslipidemia), ensure screening for complications of chronic hyperglycemia (e.g., retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy), and ongoing healthcare maintenance such as influenza vaccine. A detailed description of diabetes care is documented in the American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes publication which is updated each January in the journal Diabetes Care.

Strategies should be established to allow the parent to achieve the best glycemic management. Behavior intervention has been found to help with medication compliance and improve outcomes.

The parent should be educated about hypoglycemia, the signs, and its management.

A recent study revealed that probiotic supplementation before age 3 in infants with type 1 diabetes led to a reduction in the development of pancreatic islet cell autoimmunity.

A dietary consult is an essential component of diabetes management. Current consensus recommends the following:

Carbohydrates should provide 50-55% of the daily energy intake, but simple carbohydrates like sucrose should not make up more than 10% of the total.

Fats should provide about 30% of the daily energy intake

Protein should provide 10-15% of the daily energy intake.