Achilles tendinopathy (AT) is a multi-factorial disease, which causes considerable morbidity by limiting exercise in athletes and non-athletes alike. The evidence recommends conservative or physical therapies as first-line treatment of AT; however, despite an increasing volume of research, there is still a lack of high-quality studies that test its effectiveness.

- Inspection and clinical examination supplemented by ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are essential to achieving the correct diagnosis. A high interrelation between hypervascularization and tendinopathy of the Achilles tendon was found using Doppler ultrasound [Level 1], but these outcomes were not reproducible.

- There is evidence to support the use of eccentric exercises by providing short-term benefits over brace for persistent Achilles tendinopathy.

- Soft tissue treatment plus eccentric exercise appears to be a beneficial treatment program that clinicians should recommend to patients with insertional AT.

- Surgery for insertional Achilles tendinopathy can lead to good functional outcomes and satisfactory return to sports when the tailoring of surgical care matches the degree of tendon involvement.

- Evidence for the effectiveness of traditional needle acupuncture may be beneficial for Achilles tendinopathy.

- Articles comparing minimally invasive techniques to open procedures reported on an average success rate of 83.6 % and 78.9% respectively (p = 0.987). The complication rate was 5.3 % with minimally invasive techniques and 10.5 % for open procedures.

- In conclusion, endoscopic and minimally invasive procedures may prove to be the future of surgical treatment of middle Achilles tendinopathy.

- There is no unequivocal evidence to advise any pharmacological treatment (comprising injection of a substance or local application) as the best advisable non-operative option for Achilles tendinopathy as an alternative to the most commonly used eccentric loading rehabilitation program. However, the combination of different medications administered with physical therapy may prove beneficial. There is a need for more long-term investigations.

- Local infiltrations of autologous plasma,