# Continuing Education Activity

Flibanserin is the first FDA-approved drug identified for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD) in premenopausal women. The diagnosis cannot be attributed to relationship issues, psychiatric or medical conditions, or effects of medication or drug use to qualify as an indication for flibanserin therapy. This CME/CE activity will highlight the indications, contraindications, and mechanism of action of flibanserin. In addition, administration, monitoring, and toxicity will be addressed. This activity will support the healthcare team outcomes and proper management of patients with HSDD taking flibanserin.

**Objectives:**
-  Determine the indications and contraindications for the use of flibanserin.
- Understand the mechanism of action of flibanserin.
- Recognize adverse effects of flibanserin use and suggested monitoring strategies.
- Review the medication interactions that can occur with flibanserin.

# Indications

Sexual dysfunction in the United States has been reported in approximately fifty percent of women. Among the many causes of sexual dysfunction in women, hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD) is the most commonly identified cause. Hypoactive sexual desire disorder is defined by limited or absent sexual fantasy and desire which causes interpersonal strain or heightened distress and has been present for at least six months.

The diagnosis cannot be attributed to relationship issues, psychiatric or medical conditions, or effects of medication or drug use. Specific physiologic etiologies for HSDD are not precisely known; however, it is postulated that it is influenced by neurotransmitters and hormones.

Study participants had a mean age of 36, a mean relationship duration of 11 years, and a mean duration of HSDD of 5 years. Clinical trial results showed statistical significance with efficacy in endpoint measurements using the Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) and satisfying sexual events (SSE). The FSFI addressed two questions, (1) "Over the past four weeks, how often did you feel sexual desire or interest?" and (2)"Over the past four weeks, how would you rate your level of sexual desire or interest?". The SSE gathered patient responses for the question, "Indicate your most intense level of sexual desire." In both endpoint measurements, values were calculated with a scale from 1 to 5 (almost never or never to almost always or always) or 0-3 (no desire to strong desire), respectively. All three clinical trials had an additional endpoint of "How often did you feel: Bothered by low sexual desire?" which was measured on a scale of 0-4 (never to always) within a 7-day timeframe. Results of this endpoint were comparable to that of FSFI, suggesting improvement in sexual satisfaction with a mean change from baseline at week 24 of approximately 0.7 for FSFI and -0.7 for the additional endpoint.

# Mechanism of Action

Serotonin (also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT)) is a neurotransmitter and hormone that has been well-studied for its activity in mood regulation and other peripheral physiologic functions.

Positive regulation of libido occurs by the presence of dopamine in the synapse as well as other microcircuits at sites where the action of estrogen, norepinephrine, and testosterone take place. Negative regulation of libido occurs by microcircuits at sites where the action of serotonin and prolactin take place. This suggests that an imbalance of these microcircuits can lead to the development of HSDD, highlighting decreased amounts of DA and NE and increased amounts of 5HT.

Flibanserin acts by targeting specific central serotonin postsynaptic receptors with agonistic and antagonistic effects on 5HT1A and 5HT2A, respectively.

The activity of flibanserin on 5HT1A and 5HT2A receptors results in an increase of norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) and a decrease of serotonin in the prefrontal cortex extracellularly.

# Administration

Flibanserin is administered as a once-daily 100 mg oral tablet taken at bedtime.

It is essential to be aware of what other medications the patient is currently taking, paying particular attention to any moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as azole antifungals and protease inhibitors.

Using of these medications is contraindicated in combination with flibanserin. If a patient is taking a moderate or strong CYP3A4 and would like to begin flibanserin, it is imperative to wait two weeks from the last dose before beginning flibanserin.

If the patient needs to discontinue flibanserin and will be beginning a moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, they may begin two days after the last dose of flibanserin.

Healthcare providers should also be cautious when prescribing flibanserin with potent CYP2C19 inhibitors. These medications, in combination with flibanserin, have been linked to increased adverse reactions, likely due to presumed increased levels of flibanserin.

If patients take digoxin or sirolimus, increased drug concentrations should be monitored due to flibanserin's ability to inhibit p-glycoprotein.

Another consideration for administering flibanserin is if the patient is a poor CYP2C19 poor metabolizer. Poor CYP2C19 metabolizers will be exposed to higher levels of flibanserin, thus increasing their risk for the adverse events of hypotension, syncope, and CNS depression.

Alteration of the dose for patients who are poor metabolizers is not recommended. Due to multiple drug interactions and significant side effects, FDA approval of flibanserin required strict precautions and the initiation of a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) program that requires both physician prescribers and pharmacists to complete a certification to be allowed to prescribe and distribute the medication.

Contraindications:

Due to the increased risk of hypotension and syncope, flibanserin is contraindicated to be used in combination with alcohol and patients with hepatic impairment.

Flibanserin is contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding, as its effects are not known in these populations.

# Adverse Effects

The most commonly reported adverse effects of flibanserin have an incidence of over 2%. These include, in order of most to least reported, dizziness, somnolence, nausea, fatigue, insomnia, and dry mouth.

CNS depression, hypotension, and syncope may occur if flibanserin is taken in the daytime. Thus nighttime administration is recommended.

# Contraindications

Flibanserin use is contraindicated in combination with alcohol or strong or moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors and patients with hepatic impairment due to the increased risk of hypotension and syncope.

Medications that are not contraindicated but should be used cautiously in combination with flibanserin include strong CYP2C19 inhibitors, other CNS depressants, weak CYP3A4 inhibitors, CYP3A4 inducers, and digoxin.

# Monitoring

As a centrally acting drug, flibanserin frequently causes somnolence. Therefore it is recommended to be taken at bedtime. Additionally, using flibanserin with centrally acting depressants like benzodiazepines, opioids, and sedating antihistamines should be monitored cautiously due to the increased risk of depression in the central nervous system (CNS).

Flibanserin has a half-life of approximately 11 hours; therefore, CNS depression is more likely to occur in the early morning when administered at bedtime.

# Toxicity

Animal studies have found that female rats developed mammary tumors when exposed to flibanserin within a two-year time frame and at doses exceeding recommendations by 3 to 10 times. Clinical significance as it relates to human studies has not been determined, but it has been included in package labeling as a warning.

With the narrow therapeutic window of flibanserin, patients should not exceed the recommended daily dosage of 100mg. It has been found that doses that exceed 250 mg may be intolerable and further exacerbate the effects noted above. Currently, there are no known antidotes to reverse the effects of flibanserin toxicity.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Flibanserin is a new pharmacologic agent for treating premenopausal women with acquired, generalized hypoactive sexual desire disorder. When using a new medication, it is imperative to educate clinicians, patients, and other interprofessional healthcare team members regarding its use, indications, and possible adverse events to improve healthcare outcomes and limit adverse outcomes.

Interprofessional team members should be aware of the contraindications and possible drug interactions that can be associated with flibanserin use. Patients should be educated on abstaining from alcohol use and other depressants during treatment with flibanserin. Furthermore, patients should be advised on possible medication adverse events, as discussed above. Additionally, a thorough medication review should be performed by members of the healthcare team to identify any of the medications discussed above that may interact with flibanserin.

Patient education should also include the importance of bedtime dosing to prevent hypotension and syncope. The lack of long-term trials and data warrants continued monitoring of patients taking flibanserin and continued medical education for professionals and patients alike to recognize any new data and evidence regarding long-term treatment outcomes and potential adverse events.

It is also imperative that the healthcare team recognize barriers to prescribing flibanserin to ensure the patient receives the most optimal and individualized treatment for HSDD. Some of these barriers include the high cost, possible medication interactions, and adverse effects specific to the individual. The availability of flibanserin, along with non-pharmacologic therapies, will enhance the treatment options for premenopausal women that are affected by hypoactive sexual desire disorder.