As with many medical conditions, the first approach should be to get a good history from the patient, family, friends, and medical records. Finding out the timing of the onset of anisocoria occurred is very helpful, as a longstanding anisocoria is much less likely to represent a dangerous medical condition. Looking at an old picture of the patient can help show that the anisocoria may be chronic. Next, a thorough history of the medications the patient takes needs to be made, especially eye drops that have been put in the patient's eye. A history of a recent visit to an eye doctor is also very helpful since the anisocoria could be caused by eye drops given during the visit. A history of eye trauma and eye surgery must also be elicited from the patient, as these can be the cause of anisocoria. Other conditions to ask about include uveitis, iris coloboma, corectopia, neovascularization of the iris, or iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome.

Once a thorough history has been taken, the abnormal pupil needs to be identified. To do this, both pupil sizes should be measured with the room lights on brightly and then again with the room lights dim. Having the room lights completely off may not be practical since the pupils need to be visible for measurement. To measure the pupil, a small ruler may be used. There are also near cards that have pupil sizes on them for comparison. While measuring the pupils, the patient should focus on a distant object. This is to avoid miosis (pupillary constriction) while the patient is accommodating at a near target. After the pupils have been measured, the practitioner should identify whether the anisocoria is greater in light or darker conditions.

Anisocoria greater in the light indicates the large pupil is the abnormal pupil due to poor pupillary constriction. Anisocoria greater in the dark indicates the small pupil to be abnormal due to poor pupillary dilation. A small amount of anisocoria that is equal in both light and dark conditions most likely represents physiologic anisocoria.

Other important aspects of the physical exam include assessing visual acuity at both distance and near. Worse near visual acuity in the eye with a larger pupil is more likely to indicate pharmacologic dilation from a cycloplegic medication. The swinging flashlight test should be performed to assess for a relative afferent pupillary defect.