The population of the elderly (people more than 65 years old) is around 50 million as per the United States Census Bureau in 2019, and the number is further rising globally. Multiple chronic conditions accrue with the rising age. These chronic conditions lead to decreased quality of life, impaired functional ability, increased physical and psychological stress, increased hospitalizations, and total cost of care, including morbidity and mortality. These patients with a multitude of chronic conditions may require multiple medication regimens. This further compounds the complexity, and it gets challenging for both the health care providers and the patients to manage the conditions.

Understanding the clear benefits and potential harms should be reviewed carefully before considering medications in this age group. The complexity of health conditions in young populations requiring multiple medications also has risen significantly. Polypharmacy is defined as more than ten medications during hospital admission, or more than five medications at discharge used appropriately based on current evidence-based medicine or the use of inappropriate medications and medications without any clinical benefit.

However, numerical definitions for polypharmacy are variable. So, the safety, appropriateness of therapy, and duplication should also be incorporated into the definition of polypharmacy. Polypharmacy also encompasses over-the-counter and herbal medications. Here, we discuss the possible strategies to identify polypharmacy, high-risk medications in the elderly, identify the barriers, and use various tools or resources to mitigate them in the elderly age group.