The simplest incisional biopsy technique is the shave technique. A scalpel or a hand-held blade is used to scoop a skin sample of desired thickness. This method is best for superficial processes or for diagnosing non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSC), although NMSC may show more aggressive histologic changes deeper in the skin and may even be missed by very superficial biopsy. The skin is first cleaned and locally anesthetized, and then the skin is stretched with the non-dominant hand while one uses the scalpel or flexible blade to obtain the tissue specimen. Alternatively, the skin may be squeezed while performing a shave biopsy if the deeper tissue is desired and if a more depressed wound is acceptable.

Scissors may be used to obtain incisional biopsies, particularly for small, pedunculated lesions like skin tags or in areas of thin, redundant skin such as the eyelids or axillae. In this method, the base of the lesion is locally anesthetized and cleaned, and then the lesion is snipped at its base while very gently grasping the lesion with forceps. Hemostasis can often be obtained with topical aluminum chloride or with electrocoagulation. It is often useful to paint the pedunculated lesion with aluminum chloride before snipping. In most instances, no additional hemostasis is necessary.

The punch biopsy is another incisional method in which a cylindrical blade is used to obtain a specimen that contains a fuller thickness of the skin. Since it provides greater depth, a punch biopsy is often the best choice for diagnosing inflammatory skin conditions. This method can also be used for the excision of small skin lesions. Disposable punches are sharper and provide better tissue specimens than reusable punches, which are rarely used today. Punch specimens are particularly useful in diagnosing inflammatory dermatoses or in conditions in which the pathology is likely to involve deeper aspects of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. They are also useful in larger pigmented lesions in which excisional biopsy may not be deemed practical. In such cases, one may perform several punch biopsies throughout the larger lesion to get a better sampling. Punches are available in varying diameters, with the most commonly used sizes ranging from 2 mm to 6 mm. The size is chosen to obtain adequate tissue for histologic evaluation while sparing the patient as much disfigurement as possible. Particularly on the face, one may choose a smaller punch. When performing this procedure, it is best to stretch the skin perpendicular to the relaxed skin tension lines with one hand, while the biopsy punch is rotated back and forth with the other hand. When the punch specimen is obtained, and then the skin is released, this results in an elliptical defect. When performing this type of biopsy, the punch is rotated while applying pressure down into the skin. One should be aware of the underlying anatomy and avoid cutting into vital underlying structures with the punch. The punch specimen is gently lifted with forceps or a skin hook, being very careful not to crush the tissue, and the base is severed with fine scissors. The small defect may be closed with simple suturing or allowed to heal secondarily. Some physicians place a bit of cellulose or collagen foam in the biopsy defect to provide an extra measure of hemostasis postoperatively.

Another incisional biopsy technique is the wedge biopsy. This usually involves taking a narrow ellipse of tissue from a larger skin neoplasm. The long axis of the biopsy is generally oriented in a radial fashion and includes a cross-section from the center of the lesion and extends into a portion of normal-appearing skin. If performed with sufficient depth this method can be especially useful in the diagnosis of keratoacanthoma, in which the cross-sectional architecture of the lesion is characteristic. This method can also provide a great deal of information in suspected melanoma when an excisional biopsy is not practical.

Excisional biopsy is preferred in small lesions or in suspected malignant melanoma, when practical.

Hemostasis may be obtained with chemical styptic agents such as aluminum chloride or Monsel's ferric subsulfate solution in small or superficial biopsy wounds. Alternately, one may use collagen or cellulose sponges to control bleeding, in addition to a pressure bandage. Hemostasis in punch sites can often be obtained with one or a few simple sutures. The absorbable suture material may be used to save the patient a trip back for suture removal. Excisional biopsy sites often require electrocoagulation before the placement of a pressure dressing. If an excisional biopsy site is to be sutured, chemical anticoagulant agents should be avoided. After suturing, the site should be cleaned and sterile petrolatum is applied. A non-stick dressing is applied along with cotton or fluffed gauze to apply pressure, and this pressure dressing is secured with paper or hypoallergenic stretch fabric tape. Tape strips should run perpendicular to the incision line to tension is decreased on sutures.

Finally, it is important to know what to biopsy. In some cases in which a skin eruption has different appearances, it may be necessary to sample a few representative areas. Blistering conditions may call for biopsy of both lesional and perilesional skin and may require different transport media, particularly if direct immunofluorescence, tissue culture, or fungal culture are planned. If in doubt, it is always a good idea to check with the dermatopathologist before the biopsy to be sure that proper equipment and media are present at the time of the biopsy. Also, providing the pathologist with pertinent clinical information increases the likelihood of obtaining information that will be helpful to the patient.