The diagnosis and management of brainstem stroke bring a considerable burden to the healthcare system, the patient, the family members, and the society at large. The slow increase in the global burden of stroke has been steadily increasing.

The enhancement must start with proper patient education about the risk factors and how they can be modified. A simple community educational approach about smoking cessation, a healthy diet, an active lifestyle, regular health screening for diabetes mellitus and hypertension, drug addiction cessation, and rehabilitation can be undertaken. A decentralized model where a community-level assessment of primary and secondary prevention of non-communicable disease can result in a reduction in the incidence of stroke.

Acute management of stroke in a peripheral setting must be managed with skilled individuals; however, a complete and robust interdisciplinary team of neurologists, physicians, psychiatrists, nurses, physiotherapists, and other paramedical staff is necessary for the best patient outcome. A trained first responder who can immediately stabilize the patient and prevent the deterioration is critical. Usage of the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale or the Modified Rankin Scale or other standardized models and scales help clinicians with their decision.

Constant root-cause analysis, frequent updates to local hospital protocol, and continued medical education should be implemented. The usage of telemedicine, teleradiology, and a rapid communication system can allow the various interprofessional to deploy rapidly and prevent long term complications. Examination of the patient must be done as a team, where each member can be delegated with certain aspects of evaluation and management. A multi-disciplinary approach has shown to prevent at least 80% of subsequent strokes.

Post-stroke rehabilitation care must include inputs from the clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, to obtain the best outcome for the patient. A healthy support system of dieticians and therapists, along with adequate domiciliary support, must be provided.