**Ocular Surface Reconstruction**

A symblepharon is an abnormal adhesion between the palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva, potentially resulting from a large number of etiologies like chemical injury, ocular cicatricial pemphigoid, burns, recurrent pterygium, and Steven Jhonson syndrome. A bare conjunctival surface predisposes to the development of symblepharon. Symblephron can limit extra-ocular movements and can also be sight-threatening. Amniotic membrane graft can be used in patients with mild symblepharon. The mucous membrane graft(MMG) prevents the recurrence of symblepharon by providing epithelial basement membrane support for the growing cells.

**Contracted Socket**

A healthy socket with well-formed fornices is essential for a well-fitting prosthesis. A contracted socket can result after enucleation or evisceration due to excessive tissue loss during the surgery, inflammation, and radiation. MMG acts as a physiological substitute for the reconstruction of the contracted socket. MMG, along with fornix formation sutures, is indicated in patients with a moderately contracted socket with surface area loss. A large number of studies have shown good results with MMG in patients with anophthalmia.

**Post-enucleation Socket Syndrome**

The post-enucleation socket is not a contracted socket per se. It is a sunken, depressed, and posteriorly rotated socket, as described by Ton Smit and Leo Koornneef.

**Orbital Implant Exposure After Enucleation or Evisceration**

Full-thickness buccal mucous membrane grafts have been used together with the underlying submucosal fat to repair hydroxyapatite orbital implant exposure.

**Lid Margin Abnormalities**

Steven Johnson syndrome, ocular cicatricial pemphigoid, toxic epidermal necrolysis, trachoma, congenital ichthyosis, and chemical burns cause shortening of the fornices and posterior lamella. This leads to cicatricial entropion,  trichiasis, and keratinization of the lid margin, which can further result in corneal epithelium damage and persistent epithelial defects due to the repeated blinking and eventual blindness.  Reconstruction aims to correct the cicatricial entropion, correct the eyelid margin keratinization, and trichiasis, together with any lagophthalmos. Eyelid margin keratinization in patients with cicatricial entropion was first treated with removing the lid margin keratin and grafting with MMGs by McCord and Chen.

Trachoma, caused by Chlamydia trachomatis, is the third leading cause of blindness worldwide (after cataract and glaucoma) and the commonest cause of blindness by infection. The chronic immune response elicited by the infection causes severe scarring, most commonly of the upper tarsal plate. The resulting entropion and trichiasis cause corneal scarring and eventual blindness. Surgical repair of the cicatricial entropion can prevent blindness. Surgical intervention may include tarsal rotation, tarsal repositioning, posterior lamellar lengthening with an interpositional mucous membrane or tarsal graft, anterior lamellar repositioning, eyelid margin split, eversion, and use of an interpositional mucous membrane graft.

Distichiasis can also be treated with resection of the portion of the tarsus containing the abnormal row of lashes and replacing it with a mucous membrane graft. However, in doing so, there is a risk of injuring the openings of the meibomian glands as the abnormal row of lashes is posterior to the normal row of lashes and in close proximity to the meibomian gland orifices.

With eyelid margin repairs, the mucous membrane graft replaces keratinized epithelium, mechanically prevents the contact of keratinized surfaces and trichiasis to the ocular surface, or lengthen contracted tissues.

**Eyelid Reconstruction**

Buccal mucosa was used to reconstruct the lower eyelid by van der Meulen in 1982.

**Ocular Surface Reconstruction**

Severe symblepharon necessitates excision of scar tissue, creating raw surfaces on the tarsus and loss of conjunctiva in the fornices and bulbar surfaces, often with pannus formation because of loss of limbal stem cells. In these advanced cases, the amniotic membrane may be used to resurface the bulbar conjunctiva, but mucous membrane grafts are needed to reconstruct the fornices and coverage over the tarsus. Mitomycin C may be used intraoperatively to reduce the formation of secondary scarring. Kheirkhah et obtained deep fornices without motility restrictions in 84% of their 32 cases.

Ocular resurfacing with mucous membrane grafts is often needed when implanting osteo-odonto-keratoprosthesis.

In the presence of total limbal stem cell deficiency where allogeneic limbal stem cells are not available or have failed, the use of mucous membrane grafts to the limbal region has been shown to improve corneal clarity. It may allow re-epithelialization of the cornea when combined with a vascular pedicle in the form of a tenonplasty. Similar repair of intractable sclerocorneal melts has been performed with mucous membrane grafts.

**Pterygium**

Although early studies used mucosal grafts for primary pterygium resection and repair, these are now reserved for advanced recurrences with insufficient donor conjunctiva. With the use of glued conjunctival autografts, the recurrence rate of pterygia has been reduced dramatically. In cases of severe recurrence with motility problems and a lack of sufficient donor conjunctiva, split-thickness buccal grafts give a reasonable cosmetic outcome.

**Mucous Membrane Grafts as a Corneal Cover**

When an eye does not have a useful vision but requires a cosmetic scleral shell to be fitted, a Gundersen flap is traditionally used. This reduces the sensitivity of the cornea, thereby allowing cosmetic scleral she'll wear. Mucous membrane graft has also been used as an alternative to Gunderson's flap in patients with phthisis bulbi and micro-ophthalmos with the sensitive cornea, thus aiding in the fitting of a scleral shell.

**Glaucoma Surgery**

Glaucoma aqueous drainage devices may suffer from erosion of the overlying conjunctiva leading to exposure of the tube or plate. Free autologous conjunctival flaps and grafts are always the initial approach but may fail if there is surrounding scar tissue with secondary contracture. The amniotic membrane only acts as a substrate for healing and is usually inadequate for actual coverage of the device. Mucous membrane grafts involve minimal cost, are easily obtained, and achieve easy vascularization while avoiding local contracture in the presence of conjunctival scarring. Lamellar corneal patch grafts can be covered by a buccal mucous membrane which is secured to the recipient conjunctiva.

**Retina Surgery**

Atrophy of tissues overlying scleral explants placed for retinal detachment surgery may cause wound dehiscence and scleral exposure. Because of the risk of increased retinal detachment with the removal of the external explant, attempts may be made to retain the explant with coverage using a banked scleral patch graft and an overlying mucous membrane graft as a conjunctival substitute.

**Lacrimal Drainage Surgery**

Conjunctivodacryocystorhinostomy (CDCR) is the creation of a passage from the conjunctiva to the nasal mucosa and the placement of a Jones tube, but without an epithelial lining. Therefore, if the Jones tube falls out or is buried, the passage fails to function. Several surgeons have used mucous membrane grafts to ensure there is a mucosal lining when performing CDCR: this negates the possibility of closure if the tube migrates or falls out.

**Severe Dry Eyes**

Murube del-Castillo in 1998 was the first to describe transplantation of minor salivary glands with the mucosa to the eyelids in patients with severe aqueous tear deficiency where all other treatments had failed.

Complications tend to be minor with partial ptosis, eyelid thickening, and increased mucus discharge. Repeat labial grafting was successful in patients with Steven-Johnson syndrome and pemphigoid disease during follow-up. Labial minor salivary gland transplantation into the conjunctival fornix in patients with a preoperative Schirmer test of zero was found to increase Schirmer test reading by 74% and improve corneal transparency, corneal neovascularization, and visual acuity. In the foreign body sensation, photophobia and pain were noted in more than 50% of patients. Murube's contribution to the management of severely dry eyes is a major one that is as yet not utilized widely.