**Myofascial Continuum**

When talking about skeletal muscle, one should think not of a single district but a myofascial continuum. The gastrocnemius muscle tension is transmitted not only to the foot but to the knee, hip, and lumbar area, thanks to its fascial connections: the latter is the anatomical links with other tendons (insertion and origin) and the fascia covering muscles. A shortened gastrocnemius muscle could cause dysfunctions in the physiological movements of the hip, decreasing its anteversion.

When the muscle contracts, the first tissue that receives the tension produced is the connective tissue of the muscle stroma. The tension travels along the axis of the fibers through the epimysium, up to the tendon (if the muscle has a fusiform morphology), with a longitudinal pattern. If the muscle is pennate, like the gastrocnemius, the force produced follows the interfilament inside the Z line of the sarcomeres, up to the sarcolemma, the extracellular matrix, and the epimysium (and hence the tendon); the vector has a transverse trajectory, and only later, follows the longitudinal structures of the epimysium.

In the first case, with the fusiform muscles, the speed of arrival of the expressed force is rapid but less effective, while in the second case, with the pennate muscles, the arrival of force to the tendons is slower but with values of tension expressed more wide. For example, the biceps brachii is faster but weaker than the deltoid muscle, just as the gastrocnemius muscle is stronger than the soleus muscle, which is faster but less powerful.

The calcaneal tendon is the widest and longest tendon in the human body.

**Muscular Phenotypes**

Another important difference between the gastrocnemius muscle and the soleus muscle is that the first muscle has a majority of anaerobic or white fibers, while the latter is rich in aerobic or red fibers.