A brain abscess can lead to elevated intracranial pressure and has significant morbidity and mortality. Management can be divided into medical and surgical approaches.

Medical management can be considered for deep-seated, small abscesses (less than 2 cm), cases of coexisting meningitis, and few other selected cases. Usually, a combination of both medical and surgical approaches is considered.

CT and MRI brain guides in management by localizing the abscess and delineating details including dimensions and a number of abscesses.  Usually, large abscesses (more than 2 cm) are considered for aspiration or excision based on the surgical skills of the operator. The approach for multiple abscesses includes a long course (4 to 8 weeks) of high-dose antibiotics with or without aspirations, based on weekly CT scanning.

The selection of an antibiotic regimen should be wisely made based on microorganisms isolated from blood or CSF. Certain antibiotics are unable to cross the blood-brain barrier and are not useful in treating brain abscess; these antibiotics include first-generation cephalosporins, Aminoglycosides, and tetracyclines.

Specific antibiotic regimens according to microorganisms:

- Gram-positive bacteria including streptococci: third-generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefotaxime, ceftriaxone) or penicillin G are effective

- Staph aureus, staph epidermis is usually seen in association with penetrating brain trauma and or neurosurgical procedure. It should be covered with vancomycin. It is also effective for Clostridium species. In cases of vancomycin resistance, linezolid, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or daptomycin can be considered.

- Fungal infections including Candida, Cryptococcus needs to be treated with Amphotericin B

- Aspergillus and Pseudallescheria boydii. Voriconazole can be considered

- Toxoplasma gondii infection is treated with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine, can be combined with HAART in cases of HIV.

Steroids can be considered in select cases, especially to reduce the mass effect and improve antibiotic penetration and cerebral edema.

The surgical approach has a pivotal role in the management of brain abscesses. The choice of the procedure depends on operator skills and preference. Approaches include ultrasound, or CT-guided needle aspirations via the stereotactic procedure, bur hole, and craniotomy for loculated multiple abscesses. Intravenous or intrathecal agents against specific microorganisms are considered with surgical therapy.