There are both in-vivo and in-vitro objective testing that can help with the diagnosis of Type I hypersensitivity.

**In-Vitro Testing
**

Upon presentation, the following in-vitro laboratory markers can be ordered and used to help diagnose anaphylaxis:

- Serum tryptase, which is released by mast cells in an hour post-activation, elevated levels can indicate an increased risk of anaphylaxis.

- Eosinophil count can be increased in atopic disorders.

- Total IgE may also be elevated in atopic disorders; however, it should not be used as a definitive test for diagnosis, as normal levels may also be seen with other types of hypersensitivities.

- Allergen-specific IgE assays are preferable to in-vivo skin testing, as they can help identify food allergens or other antigens that are causing a reaction.

- Histamine levels may be collected; however, the assays are not reliable, and the levels are short-lived.

- Flow cytometric basophil activation test (BAT) can help diagnose immediate hypersensitivity to certain medications (I.e., beta-lactams, muscle relaxants, etc.). The BAT can identify markers present on the surfaces of drug-allergen activated basophils.

**In-Vivo Testing
**

In-vivo measurement can be useful to identify food allergies, venom allergy, allergic rhinitis, allergic asthma, penicillin, and other drug allergies. It involves performing a skin test in an outpatient setting that introduces small amounts of the allergen into the skin to observe for an allergic response. A positive skin reaction is represented by a wheal-and-flare response within 15-20 minutes of allergen exposure. The more invasive the testing is, the lower the incidence of false-negative, but the greater the risk of anaphylaxis. Of note, there are various methods of skin testing. These include skin prick test, scratch test, and the intradermal test.

Other in-vivo tests that may be performed in an outpatient setting are:

- The gold standard test is a drug provocation test (DPT), which is a controlled administration used as the last line to confirm hypersensitivity to a certain medication. This requires a risk-vs-benefit stratification as it can pose a safety risk and potentially induce anaphylaxis.

- Spirometry or pulmonary function tests can be used to assess asthma.

- Inhalation challenges with specific allergen and histamine, mannitol, and methacholine are used to assess airway hypersensitivity.

- Eosinophil count from nasal smear or induced sputum can be collected as well to confirm hypersensitivity.