Initial evaluation for AUB-O begins with a general evaluation for AUB. If history or physical exam suggests a particular pathology, targeted testing can take place right away. At a minimum, all patients should have a blood or urine pregnancy test and complete blood count (CBC). The CBC is especially important if the patient complains of heavy menses, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, dizziness, fatigue, or pica as these symptoms could suggest anemia or thrombocytopenia.

Once pregnancy is ruled out, and anemia is either ruled out or discovered and treated, attention can focus on the history, physical exam, and family history for clues as to the etiology of the bleeding. Appropriate testing for some concerning history elements:

- Thyroid dysfunction: Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)

- Prolactinemia: Serum prolactin

- PCOS: 17-OH-progesterone, total and free testosterone, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH)

- Coagulopathy: CBC, prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen test, factor VIII level, platelet aggregation studies

Treatment of patients with positive findings on workup should target the specific pathology. For patients with no concerning findings or positive tests, it is reasonable to initiate medical management.

**Age-based Considerations**

Menarche to 18 years:

- Concern for endometrial hyperplasia is low in this age group. However, the persistence of anovulatory cycles for more than two years without an identified cause warrants evaluation with endometrial biopsy.

- Half of the girls with bleeding disorders present with heavy menstrual bleeding. It is appropriate to screen for blood dyscrasias in this age group.

- Consider other pathologies that may cause platelet dysfunction resulting in excessive bleeding to include: leukemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, and hypersplenism.

19 to 39 years:

- 6% to 10% of women in this population have hyperandrogenic chronic anovulation (e.g., PCOS).

- Patients who do not respond to medical therapy should have an endometrial biopsy performed.

40 years to Menopause:

- Endometrial biopsy is warranted as first-line testing for age over 45 years or in cases with concerning personal or family history.

**Acute AUB**

In cases of acute AUB, where there is a discrete episode of bleeding requiring immediate medical attention, the clinician should first stabilize the patient, then undergo an assessment with transvaginal ultrasonography to assess for uterine pathology and sonohysterography to evaluate for endometrial pathology.

**Imaging**

Imaging may be used as a first-line evaluation tool if warranted by history or symptoms. It can also be used secondarily in patients who fail medical management. The most common modalities are hysteroscopy, transvaginal ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and saline infusion sonohysterography.