Work-up initially includes magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and orbit. Boire et al. found that about 80% of patients have radiographical progression on MRI.

On MRI, gliomas will demonstrate slightly prolonged T1 relaxation times, and the image of the tumor will be isointense or slightly hypointense compared to the normal optic nerve. T2-weighted images will show a hyperintense image with prolonged T2 relaxation time.

CT will show enlargement of the optic nerve and/or chiasm. When contrast is used, the enhancement will be mild to moderate and overall less than that seen with optic nerve sheath meningiomas. The optic nerve will show a fusiform swelling, but rounded and exophytic changes may also be seen. Calcification in optic pathway gliomas is uncommon but may be seen.

Genetic testing for neurofibromatosis is always warranted. A biopsy is typically unnecessary because the diagnosis can be made based on imaging and clinical examination. However, new molecularly targeted therapies may make genetic testing of the neoplasm increasingly useful.

**Distinguishing Optic Nerve Gliomas and Meningiomas on CT and MRI Scans**

Both optic nerve gliomas and meningiomas can show a diffuse enlargement of the optic nerve, and both may also show a globular or fusiform enlargement of the optic nerve. However, meningiomas will show "tram-tracks," which are caused by the thickened and denser optic nerve sheath in meningiomas (Fig 3), resulting in a central lucency, which is the residual optic nerve. Calcification is seen in 20 to 50% of meningiomas but very rarely in gliomas. There is an increased signal intensity with meningiomas compared to the normal nerve on MRI on both T1- and T2-weighted sequences. Optic nerve gliomas will show an isointense or slightly hypointense signal on T1 but hyperintense on T2 sequences.