The goal of EoE treatment is to control the symptoms by decreasing the number of eosinophils in the esophagus and, subsequently, reducing the esophageal inflammation. Management consists of dietary, pharmacological, and endoscopic treatment.

**Dietary Treatment**

Patients with a history of atopy to food generally respond well to dietary therapy. The approach to dietary therapy is to avoid the specific food if present. If no specific allergenic food or agent is present, a trial of the six food elimination diet (SFED) can be pursued. The six most common allergenic food that should be avoided in EoE patients are cow's milk, wheat, peanut/tree nut, egg, soy, and seafood/shellfish. Alternative options to SFED is elemental diet, which is an amino acid based diet. Patient on elemental diet sometimes require gastrostomy tube placement for adequate caloric intake. Research has shown that elemental diet is superior to SFED or modified SFED (avoidance of food detected by allergic skin test plus SFED). It is also recommended, although the evidence is low, that the clinical response should be measured based on esophageal symptom control and endoscopically with esophageal biopsy to ascertain that the numbers of eosinophils have decreased or not. Upper endoscopy with esophageal biopsy should be done whenever food is reintroduced or removed from the dietary regimen to assess the success of therapy.

**Pharmacological Treatment**

In patients diagnosed with EoE, trial of PPI 20 mg to 40 mg oral daily or twice daily as a first line therapy is a reasonable option. Those who respond to PPI therapy with symptomatic improvement, endoscopy with esophageal biopsy should be repeated. If no eosinophils present in repeat biopsy, the diagnosis is either acid mediated GERD with eosinophilia or non GERD PPI responsive EoE with unknown mechanism. If both symptoms and eosinophils persists after treatment with PPI, the diagnosis is immune mediated EoE.  In case of immune mediated EoE, the American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) highly recommend to use topical (swallowed not inhaled) steroids for total 8 weeks. Oral suspension of fluticasone 880-1760 mcg per day  or budesonide 1 mg to 2 mg per day is available options in the United States.  Patients who do not respond to topical steroid, systemic steroid, Prednisone 2 mg per Kg per day (maximum 60 mg per day), may be used.  Patients who initially respond but symptom recur, longer duration of topical steroid or systemic steroid may be used in addition to elemental diet or SFED.

**Endoscopic Management**

Patients who present with food impaction, flexible upper endoscopy is recommended to remove impacted food. Dilation is deferred in EoE until patients are adequately treated with pharmacological or dietary therapy, and the result of a response to therapy is available.The goals of therapy for treating EoE is to improve the patient’s symptoms as well as a reduction in the eosinophils on biopsy. The initial treatment is started after failure to improve after 2 months of PPI therapy to make the diagnosis of EoE.

Patient with persistent symptoms of dysphagia even after treatment with dietary elimination and medical therapy, endoscopic dilation is performed. Esophageal strictures and rings can be safely dilated in EoE. It is recommended to use a graduated balloon catheter for gradual dilation. The patient should be informed that after dilation they might experience chest pain and in addition risk of esophageal perforation and bleeding.

Due to the strong association of EoE with allergies, it is also suggested that all patients with diagnosed EoE undergo evaluation by an allergist or immunologist.