**Primary Congenital Glaucoma**

Examining under anesthesia (EUA) is an important technique for evaluating pediatric patients suspected of having the disease. The corneal diameter, intraocular pressure, direct gonioscopy, pachymetry, fundus examination, and axial length are a few important tools in the armamentarium of ophthalmologists to evaluate glaucoma. Serial retinoscopy on each visit ensures early detection of progressive myopia, which is a surrogate marker of disease progression.

**Axenfeld-Rieger Anomaly (AXRA)**

For suspected Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, meticulous anterior segment examination, including gonioscopy, is essential to look for prominent anteriorly displaced Schwalbe's line and iris features.

**Peters Anomaly**

Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) and ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) are important tools for evaluating and decision-making in cases with Peters anomaly. In severe Type I peters anomaly, the posterior segment is evaluated with an ultrasound B-scan.

**Aniridia**

For aniridia, a meticulous clinical evaluation is needed to identify the exact cause of decreased vision [including Aniridia-associated keratopathy, cataract, foveal hypoplasia, and optic nerve head hypoplasia].

Depending upon the cause, the prognosis can be labeled. Pre-operative evaluation for cataract surgery is difficult in these patients due to nystagmus, polar cataract, and poor ocular surface.

**CHED**

In CHED, anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) is used to assess corneal thickness. Examination under anesthesia (EUA) is done to measure intraocular pressure (IOP) and distinguish it from congenital glaucoma. It may have been associated with glaucoma also. CHED is associated with hearing loss in Harboyan syndrome.

**Sclerocornea**

Examination under anesthesia (EUA), ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM), and ASOCT are essential tools for evaluating sclerocornea. There is a high risk of glaucoma, so close follow-up is needed.

**Congenital Iris Ectropion**

Congenital iris ectropion needs to be evaluated for glaucoma.