**Examination of Trigeminal Nerve Reflexes**

As the trigeminal nerve supplies sensory and motor innervation to a plethora of features, clinical examination of CN V should evaluate the response of each structure. The integrity of these modalities may be examined through the evaluation of trigeminal nerve reflexes such as the corneal and jaw jerk reflexes. The presence of the reflex represents the natural response of a normally functioning CN V tract. The absence of or variation in the strength of the reflex assists in localizing the lesion and assessing the severity of the abnormality within the CN V tract.

**Sensory Examination**

Nociception and light touch are the principal sensory modalities tested during the assessment of CN V sensory reflexes. Light touch testing traditionally uses the cotton wisp touch test. A wisp of cotton lightly touches an area of exposed skin not innervated by CN V. This serves as a reference point, assuming that there are no sensory deficits in that area. The examiner instructs the patient to close their eyes and say "yes" each time they feel a touch. Once the patient has closed their eyes, the examiner proceeds to lightly touch areas of the skin innervated by CN V. This test is performed bilaterally to determine if a deficit is unilateral or bilateral. In the assessment of nociception, the examiner performs similar steps to the cotton wisp touch test, replacing the cotton wisp with a sharp neurotip.

**Corneal Reflex**

The corneal reflex is the involuntary bilateral blinking of the eyelids stimulated by tactile, painful, or thermal stimulation of the cornea. In the context of this reflex, the ophthalmic nerve acts as the afferent limb detecting the stimuli while the facial nerve is the efferent limb, responding with the contraction of the orbicularis oculi muscle.

The blink reflex subdivides into two stages: early and late. Early-stage reflexes involve A-beta fibers, which initiate the movement of the eyelid on the ipsilateral side. Late-stage reflexes are largely modulated by the secondary motor system and stimulate the facial nerves bilaterally such that both eyes blink. The absence of such a reflex is indicative of damage to the trigeminal/ophthalmic nerve or the facial nerve. Damage can occur within the central or peripheral nervous system at any point. Peripheral damage causes ipsilateral reflex deficits, while central damage tends to be associated with bilateral deficits.

The corneal blink reflex is also under the influence of the presence of disorders and environmental factors that alter the anatomy of the trigeminal nerve within the cornea. Glaucoma is a disorder that increases the intraocular pressure within the eye, causing the trigeminal nerves to bend. The bends within the nerve correlate with a decreased corneal blink reflex sensitivity and increased ocular pathology. Diabetes also contributes to a reduced late-phase corneal reflex sensitivity from the decreased density of nerve branches and plexuses secondary to diabetic peripheral neuropathy.

**Jaw Jerk Reflex**

The jaw jerk reflex is a stretch reflex used to assess the integrity of the upper motor neurons projecting into the trigeminal motor nucleus. The examiner places a finger between the patient’s lower lip and chin while the mouth is slightly open, and then taps the finger at a downward angle. The masseter muscles will jerk the mandible upwards in response. This reflex is normally slight or absent, but those with upper motor neuron lesions demonstrate an exaggerated jaw jerk reflex.

**Lacrimal Reflex**

Within the lacrimal reflex arc, irritation of the cornea and conjunctiva stimulate the production of tears. The ciliary fibers of the nasociliary branch of V1 in the trigeminal nerve act as the afferent limb of the reflex arc. The facial nerve (CN VII) and the superior salivary nucleus make up the central nervous system (CNS) component of the reflex arc. Preganglionic parasympathetic secretomotor fibers travel parallel to the lacrimal branch of V1 and the zygomatic branch of V2. A lesion to any component within the reflex arc may contribute to an abnormal reflex or watering of the eyes without an appropriate stimulus.

**Motor Examination**

Motor examination of the trigeminal nerve involves testing the superficial muscles of mastication: the temporalis and master muscles. This assessment occurs through palpation of the masseter and temporalis while the patient clenches their teeth, which allows the examiner to assess muscle mass. The strength of the muscles may be further assessed by placing the fingers of the examining hand beneath the chin and asking the patient to open the mouth and resist closure. Evaluation of the function of the motor nucleus is possible by asking the patient to open their mouth and deviate the jaw from left to right. Unintentional jaw deviation toward one side indicates a lesion to the trigeminal nerve nuclei innervating the pterygoid muscle on the affected side.