Due to its narrow therapeutic index, mercaptopurine requires continuous monitoring for toxicity in patients due to enzyme activity levels and interactions with other medications. This medication is listed in the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP), where it is among a list of drugs classified as having a heightened risk of causing significant patient harm when used in error. Because 6MP is a maintenance treatment for inflammatory disorders and leukemia with other disease-modifying agents or chemotherapy, adjustments may be needed frequently or intermittently throughout the time of administration.

Most, if. not all, of the diseases that require mercaptopurine therapy are chronic conditions requiring long-term treatment. Pharmacists need to ensure that dosage levels are appropriately administered based on side effects and contraindications. The patients will require both inpatient and at-home care throughout the course of their treatment. Also, to ensure the efficacy of the treatment, patient compliance will need to be taken into account because this is a slow-acting medication. This level of monitoring requires the actions of an interprofessional team, with coordinated activity and communication between specialists, general practitioners, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, and care staff involved in the patient's care. There is also a long-term risk of secondary leukemia or malignancies occurring with mercaptopurine therapy, which will require follow-up and screening among patients undergoing such treatment.