The diagnosis includes visualization of fungal elements suggestive of Paracoccidioides species by direct microscopy and/or culture specimens, biopsy and histopathology, as well as serologic testing.

Microscopic visualization: Direct examination with potassium hydroxide (KOH) is positive in about 90% of the cases with a suppurative skin lesion and in sputum samples or biopsy material from affected sites. It will reveal spherical thick-walled yeast cells of variable size, with peripheral buds protruding from a central cell (pilot's wheel).

Culture: Sabouraud dextrose agar is the ideal fungal media to recover Paracoccidiodes. However, due to the slow yield, the fungi will grow in 20 to 30 days, its utility in diagnosis remains low.

Histologic findings: Methenamine silver stain or periodic acid Schiff stain are used to identify fungal elements in tissue samples. Histopathologic findings reveal epithelioid and giant cells, along with cellular infiltrates of polymorphonuclear leukocytes, monocytes, and macrophages surrounding the multiple budding yeasts.

Blood tests: These are useful for diagnosis and for monitoring response to therapy.P. lutzii, this technique may give negative results as there are no validated serological techniques for the diagnosis of infection with P. lutzii.Histoplasma capsulatum and Aspergillus.

Skin testing: Can be positive in a healthy individual from endemic areas. This is not a useful test for the diagnosis of active disease, and the sensitivity is limited in severely ill patients.

General laboratory abnormalities noted in children with acute PCM include anemia (90%), hypergammaglobulinemia (89%), eosinophilia (76%), hypoalbuminemia (73%), hyperbilirubinemia (44%), and mildly elevated transaminases (20%).