'Hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy)' is associated with a broad-based peak or band in the gamma region on Serum protein electrophoresis.

When hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy) is identified on serum protein electrophoresis, no further investigation is usually recommended in whom the cause is immediately evident in the clinical context.

However, the following diagnostic studies can be done to identify the underlying disorder.

- Complete blood count and peripheral blood film

- ESR and C-reactive protein

- Liver enzymes (i.e., AST, ALT, ALP, and GGT)

- ANA, ANCA, complement C3, complement C4, and DAT

- Hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, Epstein-Barr virus, human herpesvirus-8 serologies, and HIV serologies

- Imaging for liver disease, lymphadenopathy, and malignancy

- Bone marrow biopsy if lymphoma or hematological disorder suspected

- SPEP, UPEP, and quantitative immunoglobulin

- Quantitative immunoglobulins (i.e., IgM, IgG, IgA)

- lgG subclasses

- Cytokine profile (IL-5, IL-6, and soluble IL-2 receptor)

- Genetic testing for immunodeficiency syndromes

Though all the five classes of immunoglobulin heavy chain isotypes can be increased in polyclonal gammopathy, a relative increase of specific subtypes can help narrow the possible differentials. Impaired B cell immunoglobulin class switching is associated with a polyclonal increase in IgM concentration.

Acute infection and hyper-IgM syndrome also result in elevated serum IgM concentration.

Liver cirrhosis is usually associated with a polyclonal increase in IgA concentration. Polyclonal increases in IgA levels are also seen in IgA vasculitis (Henoch Schoenlein purpura), IgA nephropathy, autoimmune diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, celiac disease, and systemic lupus erythematosus), and AIDS (Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome).

Most cases of hyper-IgD syndromes also have elevated IgA levels (commonly associated with MVK mutation).

Increased serum IgE level is associated with atopic disease, lymphoma, hyper-IgE syndrome (commonly associated with STAT3 mutations), and various allergic conditions.

An increased IgG concentration is associated with liver disease, autoimmune disease, vasculitis, infection, hematological disease, IgG4-related disease, immunodeficiency, and iatrogenic (from intravenous immunoglobulin administration).****