Abrasions are usually simple in nature and frequently small in size. The first step in treatment is to irrigate the area with water or saline. These abrasions usually heal by first intention and do not leave any scarring. However, the involvement of a large surface area can lead to healing by secondary intention, resulting in scar formation. This is particularly seen in individuals susceptible to keloid hyperplasia, and corticosteroid steroid intralesional therapy may be considered to prevent keloid formation in these patients.

Abrasions are usually simple, minor injuries that do not require much medical intervention. A sponsored study showed that wet healing, using polyurethane and hydrocolloid plasters, is found to be more efficient and effective in wound healing.

Due to the loss of the epidermis, the outermost layer of protection of the body, abrasions are particularly susceptible to Clostridium tetani and Staphylococcus aureus infection, particularly in sports injuries. Tetanus toxoid status should always be updated if needed. Abrasions should be cleansed and dressed, protecting the area from reinjury. Debridement may be required, especially if dirt or other contaminants are found embedded. Prevention of infection is the primary objective of any medical intervention. Antibiotic ointments may be applied after confirming the allergy history. A dressing may be necessary, depending on the area and depth of the injury. Systemic antibiotics may be indicated in some patients. However, the emergence of antibiotic resistance in many organisms should ensure strict follow-up to evaluate compliance and adherence to the full protocol. Injuries may also need to be swabbed and sent for culture and sensitivity.

Facial abrasions are considered more serious as these have a higher risk of cicatrization and should be cleaned, debrided, and dressed daily. Dressings may require skin adhesives like the combination of gum mastic, styrax, alcohol, and methyl salicylate or tincture of benzoin.