**Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)**is a functional condition with a poorly understood pathophysiology. Patients typically complain of abdominal pain that improves with defecation, changes in stool frequency, and altered stool consistency. Although it presents similarly, IBS does not have the accompanying deficiencies seen in BLS.

**Celiac disease**is an autoimmune pathology marked by blunting of the duodenal villi. Symptoms include chronic diarrhea, bloating, weight loss, and vitamin B12 deficiency. Although comparable to blind loop syndrome, celiac disease has distinguished tissue transglutaminase antibodies elicited in response to gluten consumption.

**Tropical sprue**is a malabsorptive illness with a suspected infectious etiology - as in BLS, patients present with diarrhea or steatorrhea and a vitamin B12 deficiency. However, Tropical Sprue has a unique geographical distribution and distinctive mucosal histology.

**Whipple disease**is another malabsorptive illness resulting in weight loss, diarrhea, steatorrhea, and other non-specific symptoms of indigestion. On physical exam, patients may present with altered mental status, arthralgias, and lymphadenopathy. A mucosal biopsy exhibitingT. whipplei establishes a definitive diagnosis.

**Pancreatic insufficiency**is a disorder where the pancreatic exocrine function is impaired. People with a history of pancreatitis may present with steatorrhea, weight loss, and fat-soluble deficiencies. A D-xylose test can help to differentiate Pancreatic Insufficiency from blind loop syndrome by assessing the integrity of the gastrointestinal mucosa.

**Crohn disease**is an inflammatory bowel pathology characterized by non-caseating granulomas and transmural inflammation. It commonly involves the terminal ileum, resulting in watery diarrhea, steatorrhea, and vitamin B12 deficiency. In contrast to BLS, Crohn disease can also exhibit extra-intestinal manifestations, including uveitis and erythema nodosum. A colorectal biopsy is required to confirm this diagnosis.