SEP monitoring is employed intraoperatively to identify, and ideally, avoid impending permanent damage to neurologic structures. SEP waveforms change in response to many different factors, some of which can cause permanent damage.

Anesthetic agents have varying effects on SEPs, which should be kept in mind by anesthesia providers. The anesthetic plan for intraoperative neuromonitoring should be one that will interfere the least with the consistency of recorded waveforms.

- Volatile anesthetics cause a dose-dependent decrease in SEP amplitude and an increase in latency.

- Barbiturates decrease the amplitude and increase the latency of SEPs, though they do not prevent SEPs from being recorded.

- Benzodiazepines have a variable, but in general, mild effects on SEPs. They cause decreases in amplitude and increases in latency.

- Opioids do not cause significant changes in SEPs, though small reductions in amplitude and increases in latency can present.

- Propofol can increase SEP latency and decrease amplitude, though these changes stabilize over time and do not preclude SEPs from being recorded.

- Etomidate has varying effects on SEPs depending on the site of generation; it causes the increased amplitude of cortical SEPs but decreased amplitude in subcortical SEPs.

- Ketamine, similar to etomidate, increases the amplitude of cortical SEPs.

- Alpha-2 agonists such as clonidine and dexmedetomidine do not affect SEPs and are considered good agents to use when intraoperative neuromonitoring is needed.

- Neuromuscular blocking agents have no direct effect on SEPs.

Generally, an inferred total intravenous anesthetic (TIVA) is desirable when using SEPs intraoperatively when reviewing the above effects of various anesthetics on SEPs, which are most changed by inhaled agents. If TIVA is the chosen anesthetic plan, additional monitoring to assess the depth of anesthesia could be a consideration.

Many surgical factors can alter SEPs, though the most time-sensitive of these are ischemia, surgical manipulation of structures, cautery, and dissection. Ischemia could result from pressure, retraction, clipped vessels, etc.

Various physiologic parameters influence SEPs. Examples of these include hypothermia, changes in PaCO2, decreases in PaO2, and decreases in arterial blood pressure. Hypothermia increases the latency of SEPs and has an inconsistent effect on SEP amplitude.

Management of critical SEP changes requires excellent communication amongst the surgical team and timely response to avoid any neurologic injuries. The anesthesia provider should review the patient's vital signs, paying close attention to MAP, SpO2, FiO2, and temperature. They should also review the medications the patient has received and any recent changes to the anesthetic management that may contribute to the SEP changes. The surgeon should pause and review the surgical site and any recent changes to it; this could include newly placed clips on the vasculature, retractors, or overly-aggressive dissection close to a neural structure. Ideally, quick identification of the cause(s) of changes will lead to action to address the problem and the return of the SEP signal to baseline.