**Uterine Anomalies**The uterus develops from Mullerian ducts. The cervix and upper third of the vagina also develop from the Mullerian ducts.

- Type 1: Uterine hypoplasia or agenesis- nondevelopment of the uterus/aplasia

- Type 2: Unicornuate uterus – a single, small uterine cavity which extends towards one side of the pelvis; this can have a rudimentary communicating or noncommunicating horn

- Type 3: Uterine Didelphus- 2 uterine cavities along with two cervices and longitudinal septa in the vaginal canal. No communication between the uterine cavities.

- Type 4: Bicornuate uterus - complete or partial. Two symmetric horns. A complete bicornuate uterus has a septum extending from the fundus to the internal os. The fundal contour is concave, measuring greater than 1cm in depth. There is communication between the uterine cavities.

- Type 5: Septate uterus - two uterine cavities but convex/flat contour of the fundus or shallow concavity less than 1 cm in depth.

- Type 6: Arcuate uterus - usually a mild form of a bicornuate uterus. Mild superior indentation.

- Type 7: DES drug-related

**Imaging of common benign conditions of the non-pregnant uterus:**

**Fibroids**

Fibroids are almost ubiquitous. A third of all hysterectomies in the United States of America result from fibroids. These are benign neoplasms due to the proliferation of both smooth muscles and fibroblasts. Fibroids can be heterogeneous in appearance. Based on the location within the uterus, they can be:

- Submucosal

- Intramural

- Subserosal

- Parasitic- these are fibroids that lose connection with the uterine body.

On ultrasound, these are usually well-circumscribed lesions. Some of them can be calcified, which produces extensive shadowing. Assessment of fibroids on MRI is essential for preoperative planning, both for surgery and uterine artery embolization (UAE), which is a less invasive method for treating fibroids. The size, volume, and location of the fibroids need to be noted. Fibroids are usually hypo or isointense on T2 weighted sequences. Fibroids that enhance on post-contrast images are nonnecrotic or viable fibroids and have a better prognosis following UAE. Necrotic or degenerated fibroids do not enhance. Subserosal fibroids are less likely to undergo necrosis and decrease in size following UAE as compared to submucosal fibroids.**Adenomyosis**

The presence of ectopic endometrial tissue within the myometrium is adenomyosis. Ultrasound and MRI are both useful for evaluating adenomyosis. On ultrasound findings suggestive of adenomyosis include heterogeneous myometrium- this is nonspecific but is indicative of adenomyosis. This finding is termed pencil shadowing and is due to the proliferation of endometrial glands within the myometrium.MRI is a slightly more sensitive study for evaluating adenomyosis. Features on MRI suggestive of adenomyosis include:

- Thickening of the junctional zone beyond 12 mm

- Presence of tiny T2 bright foci within the myometrium indicating endometrial glands growing into the myometrium

- Focal adenomyosis, which presents as foci of ill-defined decreased T2 signal within the myometrium

These can be differentiated from fibroids due to their ill-defined margins compared to the well-defined borders of a fibroid. MRI is also helpful to evaluate the ovaries. Patients with adenomyosis frequently have endometriomas in the ovaries. The association of endometriomas and adenomyosis varies from 10 to 80%. Endometriomas are well-defined lesions in the ovaries with increased T1 signal and the presence of T2 shading. The presence of endometrial tissue outside the uterus is called endometriosis. Deep endometriosis is the term given to the presence of endometrial tissue deep to the peritoneal surface. This condition can involve anywhere within the peritoneal cavity, including the cervix, vagina, serosal implants in the bowel wall, urinary bladder, and rectum. The signal intensity of endometriosis lesions can be variable. However, most of the lesions show the presence of T1 hyperintensity suggestive of hemorrhage.**Endometrial Polyps**Hyperplasia and overgrowth of the endometrial stroma producing a polypoidal appearance with a vascular stalk. On ultrasound, these are seen as rounded, slightly hyperechoic lesions within the endometrial canal and can be sessile or pedunculated. A vascular stalk is usually present.

In conclusion, the uterus can be imaged using multiple modalities. However, ultrasound and MRI are the most commonly used modalities in uterine imaging.