Beyond the clinical evaluation from history and physical, a duplex ultrasound (US) is a non-invasive and inexpensive way to confirm the diagnosis of AVF, given that the AVF is superficial. The duplex US will demonstrate low resistance flow in the feeding artery. At the anastomosis or fistula, turbulence and high-velocity flow are demonstrated. Thickened walls and high-velocity flow will be seen in the dilated draining veins or venous plexus of the AVF. A pseudoaneurysm, venous aneurysm, or a dilated feeding artery may also be demonstrated on the ultrasound exam.

Computed tomography angiography (CTA) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) both show early contrast filling in the arterial phase in the involved vein. While MRA may not be an option in trauma or post-trauma patient due to residual metal, CTA is reliable, non-invasive, and accessible as an initial diagnostic test. Disadvantages of CTA include streak artifact from metallic objects (which can be an issue in penetrating trauma), motion artifact, and reliance on contrast timing in the fistula.

Selective angiography is the gold standard and has shown better accuracy over CTA. It is the most invasive evaluation of an AVF but provides the exact point of arteriovenous communication surrounding vascular anatomy, flow dynamics, and mechanism for treatment.

Patients presenting in need of vascular access for ESRD need to be evaluated for optimal placement of an AVF. Given the preference of the upper extremity, non-dominant over dominant, forearm over the upper arm, all patients should be evaluated with a duplex ultrasound scan, including patients presenting for evaluation of an existing AVF. Criteria have been developed for optimal results and primary patency rates. Clinical exam, in addition to vein mapping, has been shown to decrease primary failure rates and decrease negative surgical exploration in first attempts to create AVFs.

Blood gas analysis in an AVF shows a higher oxygen content in the venous side of the blood distal to the fistula as opposed to normal venous blood. A flow-directed balloon catheter (Swan-Ganz catheter) can assess hemodynamics and reveal increased cardiac output and decreased peripheral vascular resistance. Extremely large AVFs may present with thrombocytopenia due to constant turbulence and trapping of platelets.