The blood supply of the calf muscles is derived from the popliteal artery, which divides into the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. The fibular (or peroneal) artery originates from the posterior tibial artery. The posterior tibial artery accompanies the tibial nerve and enters the plantar aspect of the foot through the tarsal tunnel. The anterior tibial artery runs anteriorly between the tibia and fibula through a gap in the interosseous membrane. It extends down the entire length of the leg and into the foot becoming the dorsalis pedis artery.

The venous supply of the calf can be divided into the superficial and deep veins. The superficial veins consist of the greater saphenous vein and the small saphenous vein. The deep veins include the popliteal vein, the anterior tibial vein, the posterior tibial vein, and the fibular vein. The greater saphenous vein is the longest vein in the body and runs the entire length of the lower extremity. Cardiothoracic surgeons commonly use this vein during coronary artery bypass grafting. The small saphenous vein is actually a relatively large vein that runs along the posterior aspect of the calf and passes between the heads of the gastrocnemius muscle and usually drains into the popliteal vein. The popliteal vein is formed when the anterior and posterior tibial veins merge. The popliteal vein becomes the femoral vein as it extends into the femoral region. The anterior tibial veins drain the knee joint, ankle joint, tibiofibular joint, and part of the anterior leg. The posterior tibial vein gets blood from the lateral and medial plantar veins and drains the posterior muscles of the lower leg and the plantar surface of the foot. The fibular veins, also known as the peroneal veins, transport blood from the lateral compartment of the leg and drain into the posterior tibial vein.