**Slit Lamp Parts**

There are three essential parts of a slit lamp

- Observation system

- Illumination system

- Mechanical support system

**Observation System/ Microscope**

The observation system is a compound microscope system with two optical components: the objective and the eyepiece. This helps in getting an enlarged image of the near object. The slit lamp is designed to have a long working distance, which is the distance between the patient eye and the microscope objective.

**Objective Lenses**

It has two plano-convex lenses with the convexities close together, giving a total power of +22D.

**Eyepiece Lenses**

It has a power of +10 D. To provide good stereopsis, the tubes converge at 10 to 15 degrees**.**

**Prisms**

There are a pair of prisms. The primary function of prisms is to reinvert the image produced by the objective and the eyepiece.

**Magnification System**

The magnification of modern slit lamps varies from 6X to 40X. These slit lamps use the following systems to produce a magnified image.

**Czapskiascope with Rotating Objective**

This is an ancient and frequently used technique for obtaining different magnifications. The objectives are different and are placed in the turret type of arrangement that allows them to be reasonably rapidly changed during the examination. This is employed in the Haag-StrBauschthe, Bausch and Lomb, and Thorpe types of slit lamps.

**Littman Galilean Telescopic Principle**

The Galilean magnification telescope was developed by Litmann (1950); it is an entirely different optical system positioned between the objective and the eyepiece and does not require any change in both. The telescope provides a good range of magnification of a factor of 5 through a current arrangement within the microscope body. This is called the Galilean system because it utilizes the Galilean telescope to change the magnification. The telescope has two components a positive lens and a negative lens. This fits within the standard slit lamp microscope, a relay lens (R), and the prism erector (P). The Zeiss slit lamp, the Rodenstock, and the American optical slit lamps used the Littman Galilean telescopic principle.

**Zoom System**

A few slit lamps are equipped with a zoom system that helps in a variable degree of modification. The Nikon slit lamps contain an objective zoom system and offer a range of magnifications of 7 to 35X.

**Illumination System**

The Gullstrand illumination system provides a bright, diffusely illuminated, fine focussed slit of light at the eye. It is composed of the following components.

**Light Source**

The light source is a Nernst lamp, followed by Nitra lamps, arc lamps, mercury vapor lamps, and halogen lamps. It gives illumination of 2x10 to 4x10 lux.

**Condenser Lenses**

These are two plano-convex lenses with the convex surface in opposition.

**Slit and Diaphragms**

The height and width can be changed based on the two knobs provided for this purpose. Moreover, two stenopaeic slits are 2 mm and 0.5 mm to provide a conical light beam. There is also a facility to rotate the slit from the vertical meridian and tilt the projection system from the horizontal axis. This assists in examining the fundus and the angle of the anterior chamber.

**Filters**

The illumination beam is provided with different kinds of filters. The cobalt blue and red-free filters are provided in most models.

**Projection Lenses**

These lenses help in forming the image at the slit of the eye. The diameter of the lenses is small. These lenses have two advantages: first, they help in keeping the aberration of the lenses down, which forms a good quality image, and second, it helps in increasing the depth of the focus of the slit and improving the optical section of the eye.

**Reflecting Mirrors or Prisms**

These form the last part of the reflecting mirror. The illumination system of the slit lamp has to pass from one area of the microscope to the other. To make this possible, the projection system is set along a vertical axis, with the mirror or prism reflecting the light along the vertical axis. The narrow prism or mirror, whenever necessary, such as while examining the fundus, the illumination axis can be made to coincide with the viewing axis.

**Optics of the Illumination System**

The Koeller illumination system has been incorporated into the slit lamps. Optically it is similar to a 35 mm slide projection except for the variable aperture slit, and the lens has a much shorter focal length. The filament light source and the condenser lens, or the projection lens, form the image of the slit in the patient's eye.

**Mechanical Support System**

The various features of mechanical support system can be

**Joystick**

Microscope movement and the illumination system movement near or far from the eye and from side to side are usually achieved with the joystick arrangement.

**Up and Down Movement**

The up-and-down movement can be obtained through a screw device that helps move the illumination and viewing system up and down compared to the chin rest.

**Patient Support System**

It has a mobile vertical chin rest, and the table height is adjustable to accommodate patients of all sizes.

**Fixation Target**

The fixation target facilitates the examination under the majority of difficult scenarios.

**Mechanical Coupling System**

This system supports and helps in coupling the microscopic system and the illumination assembly along the central axis of rotation that overlaps with their focal planes. This arrangement helps by providing light at the target where the microscope is focused. It also ensures microscope should rotate along the axis without a change of focus.

The coupling of the microscope and the illumination system has the advantage while employing the slit lamp for regular examination of the eye's anterior segment. However, when gonioscope or fundus lenses are used, this can be of a significant disadvantage since the slit and the microscope optic does not reach an appropriate focal point under these conditions, the observer suffers either the suboptimal quality of images or needs to refocus the eyepieces for obtaining a good quality image.