**Step 1**

Management of anaerobic infection depends on the site of infection, the host, and presence or absence of abscess. As a general rule, an abscess should always be drained, and the culture sent for aerobic and anaerobic culture. Also, surgical debridement of necrotic tissue in clostridium necrotizing fasciitis is crucial in treatment.

**Step 2**

After obtaining appropriate cultures, the child should be placed on empiric antibiotics with activity against anaerobes.  The following are the choices:

Metronidazole: Has excellent activity against Gram-negatives such as Bacteroides fragilis. Its activity against Gram positives is good, although less reliable. Metronidazole has excellent bioavailability (100%), and it penetrates well into the tissue, including the central nervous system and abdominal cavity. Metronidazole gives a metallic taste in the mouth, which is frequently cited as the reason for discontinuation.

Clindamycin is active against many anaerobes. The resistance of clindamycin to Bacteroides fragilis is increasing, and it is less reliable as compared to metronidazole, penicillin/beta-lactamase inhibitor, or a carbapenem. Clindamycin, whether administered IV or orally, penetrates well into the tissue, including abscesses, bones, joints. Clindamycin, however, does not enter the central nervous system.

Penicillin/beta-lactamase inhibitor combination: Penicillin alone is active against anaerobes that do not produce beta-lactamase, such as Clostridium perfringens.  However, most gram-negative anaerobes produce beta-lactamase and combination penicillins such as oral amoxicillin/clavulanate or intravenous (IV)/intramuscular (IM) ampicillin/sulbactam, ticarcillin/clavulanate, and piperacillin/tazobactam.

Second-generation cephalosporin: Regarding cephalosporins, the second-generation cephalosporins of cefoxitin, cefotetan, and cefmetazole are more active against Bacteroides fragilis. However, given increasing resistance, they are not recommended as empiric treatment. It is commonly used in surgical prophylaxis.

Carbapenems: Have excellent activity against anaerobes as well as aerobes involved in intra-abdominal and other sites such as CNS. Meropenem is slightly more active than imipenem against gram-negative bacteria.

Quinolones: Have good oral absorption and tissue penetration. However, resistance is increasing, and they should be reserved for children with beta-lactam allergy. Quinolones with activity against anaerobes include levofloxacin and moxifloxacin.