The standardized patient program director should utilize the SOBP developed by ASPE to assist the educators in pursuing and assuring continuous improvement in training and education. Case development, domain two of ASPE’s SOBP, suggests that it is the development and design of the simulation materials and the evaluator training that are the critical aspects of any SP-based activity.

SP simulation cases have multiple components depending on who is going to use the case and are best developed by utilizing best practice guidelines relevant to the profession, including those outlined by the International Nursing Association for Clinical Simulation and Learning (INACSL) Standards of Best Practice for Simulation. Using INACSL standards of outcomes and objectives will ensure that the case aligns with the measurable learning objectives. Expertise by the SP educator is critical in the development of evaluation tools, the teaching of case-related materials used by the SPs, the logistical design of the cases, and the overall implementation.

Case components and preparation are the two principles that guide SP case development. The standardized patient program director should ensure the simulation case has objectives and goals that are clear and can be assessed. As SP cases may support both large-scale mass casualty scenarios and intensive inter-professional simulation training activities, SP training and case review are paramount to ensure successful implementation.

The simulation design must be written to ensure it is repeatable and meets the intended purpose. Information for the SP must include the backstory and situation, demeanor and affect, signs and symptoms, history, and performance cues. Guidelines about debriefing and feedback state that this portion of the simulation exercise should be case-specific and provide instructions to learners, with a time-frame that allows discussion of all relevant portions of the activity and learner performance. SP components for learner evaluation can include rating scales or checklists as instruments to measure performance. Protocols for the SP rating of learners should be part of their training.

In preparing the material, subject matter experts are to be identified and engaged to assist in the creation of case content. The standardized patient program director must ensure that the individuals represented are respected to avoid stereotyping, or bias on marginalized populations and the cases are based on authentic problems.