Sucralfate acts locally with negligible absorption making it relatively safe. The most common side effect is constipation seen in 1 to 10% of patients. Hyperglycemia is also reported in diabetic patients using sucralfate. Some of the other negligible side effects are nausea, vomiting, flatulence, headache, dry mouth, pruritis, skin rash, gastric bezoar formation, aluminum intoxication, hypophosphatemia. Inadvertent IV use of sucralfate has caused fatal complications such as pulmonary emboli and cerebral edema.

Long-term users of sucralfate are shown to retain negligible levels of aluminum, except when a patient has renal insufficiency. Uremia causes increased absorption of aluminum from the gut, and the quantity of aluminum absorbed is similar to that of aluminum hydroxide. Sucralfate should be used with caution in patients with end-stage renal disease or avoided altogether to prevent aluminum intoxication.

Sucralfate has several drug interactions and can decrease the serum concentrations of digoxin, levothyroxine, furosemide, quinolones, oral phosphate supplements, warfarin, antiretrovirals like raltegravir, bisphosphonates, among others. Sucralfate administration should have at least a 2-hour gap from the administration of these medications. Multivitamins can increase the serum concentration of sucralfate and aluminum. A few medications like antacids administered within 15 minutes of sucralfate can reduce its efficacy by decreasing the binding ability of sucralfate to gastric ulcers.