Malar rash may occur in several systemic and local diseases.

Common causes of malar rash are as follows:

- Erysipelas

- Cellulitis

- Systemic lupus erythematosus

- Rosacea

- Pellagra

- Dermatomyositis

**Erysipelas**

Erysipelas is a type of skin infection that involves superficial lymphatics and upper dermis. The classic manifestation includes a painful, rapidly progressive, well-circumscribed, erythematous, shiny plaque accompanied by perifollicular edema and swelling (peau d’orange). Clinical presentations include acute onset of systemic symptoms, including fever, chills, and malaise.

**Cellulitis**

Cellulitis is a skin infection that involves subcutaneous fat and deeper dermis. It is different from erysipelas in that it is less well-demarcated with little or no edema, and does not usually have systemic symptoms. In the presence of systemic symptoms, the course of the disease is more indolent.

**Lupus or SLE**

The systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease that involves multiple organs in which the immune system produces numerous auto-antibodies that attack different tissues such as kidneys, joints, skin, brain, and heart. It can vary from mild rashes and arthritis to debilitating fever, joint pain fatigue, or severe organ damage and life-threatening disease.

**Rosacea**

Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory acneiform disease that involves facial area, especially in the middle age. Rosacea is considered as the most common cause of the malar rash. It usually occurs in fair-skin patients and involves the cheeks, chin, nose, forehead, eyelids, and nose. Classic findings include erythema, telangiectasia, and pustules or papules with no comedones. The rash of rosacea may be accompanied by episodes of flushing triggered by hot drinks, stress, or alcohol. Genetic factors and extrinsic factors are involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. Rosacea never causes systemic illness.

**Pellagra**

Pellagra is a systemic disease that results from a cellular niacin deficiency. It is defined by 4 “D’s”: dermatitis, dementia, diarrhea, and death. Dermatitis related to pellagra is a bilateral symmetric eruption on sun-exposed areas of the skin. During the acute phase, it may be painful to touch and eventually can become so striking clinically. In the absence of characteristic cutaneous manifestations, making the diagnosis of pellagra would be difficult.

**Dermatomyositis**

Dermatomyositis (DM) is an idiopathic inflammatory myopathy that affecting individuals of all ages. DM has multiple classic skin manifestations, of which poikiloderma is the most important. Poikiloderma is characterized by a tetrad of hyperpigmentation, hypopigmentation, epidermal atrophy, and telangiectasias. Poikiloderma may be seen in various dermatologic disorders and is not specific to DM, but it has a typical distribution on the sun-exposed areas of the skin, including face and eyelids, elbows, knees, knuckles, chest, and back. The poikiloderma in DM is more violaceous in color in contrast to the poikiloderma in SLE.