Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin stored in the liver and adipose tissue. It is available from exogenous sources and synthesized endogenously by the human body. The Endocrine Society clinical practice guidelines suggest that the daily requirement of vitamin D for adults aged 19 to 50 years is 600 IU/d. For those aged 50 to 70, the daily requirement is at least 600 IU/d. For those older than 70, the daily requirement is at least 800 IU/d. The maximum suggested daily requirement is 4000 IU/d for everyone older than 8 years.

Vitamin D is metabolically inactive and requires a series of metabolic transformations to become its active form. This includes forms acquired from external sources or through endogenous synthesis.

Endogenously, the skin converts 7-dehydrocholesterol (provitamin D3) to cholecalciferol (vitamin D3). This reaction is catalyzed by ultraviolet B irradiation. Vitamin D3 (from dietary sources and sunlight exposure) is carried by vitamin D-binding protein (VDBP) in the serum. Vitamin D3 is subsequently converted to 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 [25(OH)D] in the liver by the enzyme vitamin D-25-hydroxylase. After formation, 25(OH)D is transported to the kidneys via VDBP. In the proximal convoluted tubules, it is converted by 25(OH)D-1-α-hydroxylase into calcitriol, also known as 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D]. The final product, 1,25(OH)2D, is then transported to the rest of the body via VDBP, where it serves primarily to regulate calcium metabolism.

Vitamin D is primarily stored in the liver. There is a negative feedback regulation of the enzyme vitamin D-25-hydroxylase in the liver; however, it is not enough to prevent toxicity. Ingesting high doses of vitamin D leads to its storage in the liver and adipose tissue, causing saturation of the vitamin D-binding receptors. This increases the concentration of many other vitamin D metabolites, especially 25(OH)D.

In hypervitaminosis D, the concentrations of vitamin D metabolites, such as 25(OH)D; 24,25(OH)2D; 25,26(OH)2D; and 25(OH)D-26,23-lactone, increase significantly.