**Medical Treatment**

It spread rapidly and highly invasive, so, needs aggressive therapy. Yet, definitive therapy and a sequential plan of management are unavailable. A comprehensive clinical trial is required to confirm the unambiguous therapy and define optimal management strategies. Amphotericin B should be administered straight away when suspected. 4 to 6 weeks of Amphotericin B therapy is required to eradicate the disease. Amphotericin B is the consistently effective antifungal; however, the exact ideal dose is not defined yet. The contemporary study used a daily dose of 50mg, which is tolerated by all patients. Some study recommends 1mg/kg/day dose of amphotericin B. Amphotericin B can be mixed with distilled water to achieve a concentration of 5mg/ml. It is started with 5mg/day doubling daily until 1mg/day is achieved.

Liposomal amphotericin B is endorsed due to its less toxicity as compared to the high nephrotoxicity of amphotericin B alone. Therefore liposomal form allows foe higher doses; however, due to lack of accessibility of this formulation and expensive, it is not always used everywhere and compelled to use plain amphotericin B.

**Surgical Treatment**

Surgical removal of the fungal ball is indicated after drug therapy. But some studies defined immediate surgical debridement after diagnosis followed by slow intravenous administration of amphotericin B.

Extensive palate ulceration and oroantral fistula formation may necessitate complete maxillectomy, and just swelling with minimal bone erosion need only partial maxillectomy. Proper clearance of involved tissue needs (>1 cm) excision of healthy tissue is required to eradicate the disease. Orbital exenteration is needed in cases of severe orbital involvement. In cases of uninvolved orbital contents, orbital floor preservation is achieved. Intracranial involvement necessitates craniotomy and debridement. Endoscopic sinus surgery and topical administration of antifungal in the debrided area is also useful. Endoscopic sinus surgery has been possible due to advances in technology such as the availability of microsurgical instruments for precise surgery at specific sinuses or sites, especially to remove the obstruction at sinus Ostia which improves ventilation and endoscopes for better illumination and visualization. Prevention of progressive invasion by restricting at earlier sinusitis phases by understanding pathophysiology and recurrence through ventilation and drainage has better.

**Alternative and Subsidiary Treatment**

Hyperbaric oxygen provides sufficient oxygen to neutrophils to kill fungi, and rifampicin are the adjuncts to systemic amphotericin B. Rapid reversal of underlying cause and immunosuppression is inevitable. Treatment of underlying cause is best appreciated if managed after consultation of respective specialty. For example, diabetic ketoacidosis should be treated with insulin and oral hypoglycemic agents after consulting physicians. Steroids and chemotherapeutic immunosuppressants should be discontinued immediately or minimize dose. Immunity can be heightened by administering granulocyte colony-stimulating factors, which increases the production of leukocytes.