Treatment of rectus hematomas depends on the severity of symptoms, size, the stability of the hematoma, and the underlying pathology. The goal of the treatment is to relieve or minimize symptoms, prevent complications, and address the underlying condition. Proper patient's condition assessment, volume replacement, and correction of any coagulation abnormalities are important initial measures that should be performed before considering more aggressive steps.

If the hematoma is enlarging and or causing significant blood loss, intervention should be taken to stop the bleeding. Interventional radiology localizing and embolizing the bleeding vessel is the appropriate first modality of treatment to use. In most cases, this is successful and sufficient to stop the bleeding, especially with the confined space and the pressure created that counteracts the flow of bleeding.

In a few cases of ongoing bleeding that is not amenable to radiologic intervention or if the service is not available, surgical control of the bleeding and evacuation of the hematoma is necessary. Controlling the bleeding is achieved by ligating the bleeding vessel (epigastric vessel) surgically.

In most cases, bleeding stops after enough pressure build-up inside the rectus sheath. The size of the developed hematoma varies according to the size and pressure of the bleeding vessel, expandability of the rectus space, and the presence and severity of coagulation abnormalities. Once the bleeding stops and the hematoma size stabilizes, treatment is usually directed on the relief of the symptoms. There is no urgency in evacuating the hematoma. In fact, maintaining the pressure inside the hematoma at the initial phase is important to prevent rebleeding. Large hematomas can be drained percutaneously after stabilization and recovery from the acute phase. Small hematomas can be left to be reabsorbed spontaneously to avoid unnecessary intervention.

Patients with rectus sheath hematoma can be treated as outpatients as long as the hemodynamic status is stable and there is no change in the hematocrit. Patients on anticoagulation therapy should be admitted to ensure that the hematoma is not expanding.