Cell Surface Receptors

Many hydrophilic endocrine hormones act as ligands for G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR). These receptors characteristically have seven alpha-helical transmembrane domains, an N-terminus facing the extracellular space, and linkage to an intracellular trimeric G protein, consisting of alpha, beta, and gamma subunits. GPCRs allow for the signal of a ligand to be amplified many times over via intracellular second messenger systems. Once a ligand binds the extracellular domain of the GPCR, a there is the induction of a conformational change that releases the G protein into the cytoplasm. The subsequent second messenger system depends on whether the alpha subunit of the G protein is a G or G subtype. G subunits exchange a GDP molecule for GTP, causing it to dissociate from the trimeric complex. The alpha subunit then binds to the enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which converts ATP to cyclic AMP (cAMP). Two cAMP molecules then bind and activate protein kinase A (PKA). PKA is a kinase that specifically phosphorylates serine and threonine AA residues

The next major cell surface receptor is the insulin/IGF receptor, which has intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. It is composed of alpha and beta chains and exists as either hetero or homodimers depending on how these chains combine. Signal transduction initiates when insulin or IGF binds the IR domain of the receptor, leading to a conformational change that causes autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues. Phosphorylation leads to recruitment of “adapter” proteins, names insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins and the SH2-B protein. These recruited proteins induce further downstream signaling of multiple pathways, including the MEK-MAPK pathway

The tyrosine kinase-associated receptors also warrant mention. Like insulin/IGF receptors, they transduce signals via tyrosine kinases. Instead, a ligand causes conformational changes in the receptor that lead to activation of associated intracellular tyrosine kinases. The method by which these receptors activate tyrosine kinases is variable, though the JAK/STAT pathway is a typical example. In the JAK/STAT pathway, binding of the hormone leads causes receptor dimerization. These dimers activate Janus kinase (JAK) which reciprocally phosphorylates the receptor. STAT proteins then bind to these phosphate groups and subsequently dimerize with each other. The STAT dimers relocate to the nucleus and modulate gene transcription. Hormones that act as ligands for tyrosine kinase-associated receptors include GH, prolactin, and insulin.

Intracellular Receptors

All steroid hormone receptors act as transcription factors. Their general structure is a 6-domain single polypeptide chain consisting of regions “A” through “F.” The A and B domains exist near the amino terminus and are variable. The C domain is highly conserved across steroid receptor types, containing two zinc fingers that allow for binding within the DNA double helix at sites known as hormone response elements (HRE). The C region has small variances in the AA sequence to allow for differential transcriptional activity. The D domain is a hinge region, while the E domain is where steroid hormones bind to the receptor. The F domain is the carboxy-terminal, where a heat shock protein (HSP) is bound while the receptor is deactivated.   When the steroid ligand binds to the E domain, the HSP gets released from the F domain. The F domain is now freely available for dimerization with an identical receptor; this homodimer transports to the nucleus, binds to an HRE, and modulates transcription.

Like the steroid hormone receptors, the TH receptors also act as transcription factors. There are four types of TH receptors derived from alternative splicing of two different genes. They are single polypeptides with three functional domains: 1) a transcription factor-associated domain at the N-terminus, 2) a DNA binding domain with zinc fingers, and 3) a ligand-binding domain at the C-terminus. Unlike steroid hormone receptors, the predominant thyroid hormone receptor, TR-alpha1, exists in the nuclear envelope regardless of whether it is bound to a ligand. When highly active T transports across the target cell membrane, it binds the receptor, which then relocates to an HRE either as a monomer, homodimer, or as a heterodimer with the retinoid X receptor. The retinoid X heterodimer has the most transcriptional activity.