Determining the extent of the injury is crucial in addressing the fluid needs of a burn patient. Therefore, the TBSA affected by the injury is calculated first, but only partial-thickness and full-thickness burns are included; all superficial burns are excluded.

The rule of nines is the most commonly used and quickest method to determine TBSA (Figure 1). The head and circumferential upper extremities are each 9 percent. The anterior and posterior trunks and circumferential lower extremities are each 18 percent. The Lund and Browder Chart should be used for children as this method considers the differences in body proportions with age variations. Moreover, the Lund and Browder approach uses small body area percentages overall, which is why this method is deemed more accurate in determining TBSA.

The rule of palms is a quick and easy approach for estimating TBSA utilizing the patient's palm with the fingers abducted as one percent of their TBSA. This technique is appropriate for smaller TBSA burns.

After the TBSA is calculated and the patient's body weight is determined, the Parkland formula can be implemented to estimate the total fluid requirements for critically burned patients in the first 24 hours after the time of injury and not from the time of evaluation by a provider. The formula recommends 4 mL per kilogram of body weight in adults and 3 mL per kilogram in children per TBSA of crystalloid solution over the first 24 hours of care. In treating burn injury patients, half of the total fluid volume must be administered within the first 8 hours after the burn, with the remaining volume given over the next 16 hours.

Lactated Ringer solution is the preferred choice of resuscitative crystalloid solution as it effectively treats both hypovolemia and extracellular sodium deficits caused by burn injury. The crystalloid is isotonic, closer in plasma composition than normal saline solution, inexpensive, readily available, and easily stored. Normal saline is typically avoided in large quantities as a resuscitative fluid option in burn patients, as administration can lead to hyperchloremic acidosis.

Urine output is the most reliable indicator of adequate fluid resuscitation in significant burn patients. Once intravenous access is established and fluids are initiated, a Foley catheter must be inserted to assess urine output accurately. The fluid rate should be adjusted to maintain urine output between 0.5 and 1 mL/kg/h in adults and between 1.0 and 1.5 mL/kg/h in children. Other clinical measures such as heart rate, blood pressure via arterial monitoring, capillary refill time, and mental status can be used to evaluate adequate organ perfusion. If patients with acceptable volume status and urine output remain hypotensive, they may require vasopressors or inotropic agents to improve cardiac output and maintain systemic perfusion pressures.

Though adequate fluid resuscitation is essential during the initial 24 hours after injury, burn patients must remain adequately hydrated throughout their recovery. After 24 hours, the fluid should be switched from Lactated Ringer solution to 5% dextrose in half normal saline (D5½NS) and administered at a maintenance rate using the 4-2-1 rule as a guide. Recent practice guidelines for burn resuscitation consider the supplementation of colloid-containing fluid ranging from the first 8 hours to the first 24 hours post-burn, as it has been shown to decrease overall fluid requirements.