Two pro-alpha-1 chains and one pro-alpha-2 chain make up type I collagen, which forms the main protein of the extracellular membrane of skin, bones, tendons, etc., and create a rigid, triple helix structure. Each alpha chain consists of an amino-terminal pro-peptide and carboxyl-terminal pro-peptide, and a central pro-peptide consisting of 338 repeats of glycine. Glycine is the smallest residue that can occupy the axial position of the triple helix.

At least 90% of OI patients have a genetic defect resulting in quantitative and qualitative (or both) abnormalities in type I collagen molecules. This disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or spontaneous mutation pattern.

**Defects Involving Type 1 Collagen Molecules**

Frameshift mutations (involving premature stop codon in the affected allele) can result in a quantitative decrease in the amount of structurally normal type 1 collagen. When patients are heterozygous for this condition, they may secrete half the normal amount of type 1 collagen [haplo-insufficiency; as seen in type IA OI in Sillence Classification].

Substitutions at the carboxy end of the peptide are potentially more serious owing to cross-linking of the triple helix beginning at the carboxy terminus of polypeptide chains. These patients with mutations of glycine residues affecting the quality of collagen chains (commonly identified defects in Sillence types II, III, and IV types) develop more severe skeletal manifestations than patients with haploinsufficiency defects.

**Other Mutations**

Apart from type I collagen mutations, other genetic mutations producing autosomal recessive types of OI (types VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XI) have also been described. These mutations may involve components that encode collagen 3-hydroxylation complex, which helps assemble the triple helix. These recessive mutational types account for less than 5% of the cases of OI collectively.