- Chronic lung diseases are a common cause of pulmonary hypertension but it almost never increases the pulmonary artery pressure more than 50 mm Hg and in most cases only causes mild pulmonary hypertension. Therefore, evaluate for other causes if pressure is markedly increased and goes beyond 50 mm Hg.

- Evaluate for collagen vascular diseases as interstitial lung disease (ILD) coexists with many of them such as CREST syndrome, scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sjogren syndrome, dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and rheumatoid arthritis.

- Some patients with obstructive sleep apnea may have mild pulmonary hypertension. Alveolar hypoventilation may occur due to deformities in the thoracic vertebra, neuromuscular diseases such as paralysis of the diaphragm or weak respiratory muscles, trauma to the phrenic nerve, all of these can lead to pulmonary hypertension. Supplemental oxygen and intermittent PPV is helpful.

- Thyroid disease is a risk factor for both chronic thromboembolism and idiopathic.

- Progressive dyspnea and clinical features of pulmonary hypertension in sarcoidosis patients is an indication for a thorough evaluation. Sarcoidosis causes severe chronic fibrocystic changes in the lung and can affect the cardiovascular system directly. These changes can lead to pulmonary hypertension. Severe pulmonary hypertension in sarcoidosis is due to the direct involvement of pulmonary vessels. Intravenous epoprostenol has shown a favorable response in many such patients.

- Schistosomiasis is rare in the United States of America, but it is the most common cause of pulmonary hypertension worldwide. The ova in the lungs can be due to the embolization from the liver which causes the inflammatory changes in pulmonary vasculature that leads to chronic changes. Pulmonary hypertension in schistosomiasis occurs in addition to portal hypertension and hepatosplenic disease. Parasite ova in the stools or urine of patients with symptoms confirms the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension due to schistosomiasis. The therapy for pulmonary hypertension due to schistosomiasis is unknown.