The implant placement should be restoration driven to fulfill the patient’s goals. The prosthesis should be designed first, similar to the architect designing a building before making the foundation. Only after the prosthesis is created can the abutments, implant bodies, and available bone requirements be determined to support the specifically predetermined restoration.

The patient is medically evaluated for cardiovascular diseases (hypertension, congestive heart failure, subacute bacterial endocarditis, etc.), endocrine disorders (diabetes mellitus, thyroid disorders, etc.), pregnancy, blood disorders, and bone diseases, etc.

Comprehensive and accurate radiographic assessment provides all necessary surgical and prosthetic information required for the success of the venture. Various types of imaging modalities are used for dental implant imaging:

- Periapical radiography

- Panoramic radiography

- Occlusal radiography

- Cephalometric radiography

- Computed tomography (medical CT and    cone beam CT)

- Interactive CT

CBCT has a great role in dental applications.

Surgical preparation in a standard sterile fashion is recommended for all implant procedures. The goal is to minimize mechanical and thermal injuries to the bone. Osteotomies should be completed under copious cool saline using sharp and new osteotomy drills at high torque and slow speed. Incremental drill sequence should be followed. During an osteotomy, the bone temperature should not exceed 47 degrees to avoid irreversible changes. Bone necrosis and failure of integration can occur when the temperature exceeds 47 degrees C. D1 bone presents the highest risk of overheating.