The IM injection should be performed at a 90-degree angle to a large muscle's belly. Insertion of the needle should be perpendicular to the patient's body. Make sure to stabilize the limb that will be inoculated. Place the appropriate needle on the syringe that has the prepared vaccination in it. Hold the syringe needle approximately one inch in the air the injection, then inject the site using a quick, smooth motion. Once inserted into the muscle, use stable pressure on the needle's plunger (the top portion of the syringe that can be pushed up and down) to inject the vaccine into the patient. Plunger aspiration after insertion is no longer recommended as injection sites are not near large blood vessels, and this technique increases vaccination associated discomfort.

For subcutaneous injections, a 5/8" length needle that is 22 to 25 gauge is necessary. In contrast to intramuscular injection, the syringe contents should be injected into the skin's fatty layers, such as the anterior lateral thigh for children ages 1 to 12 months. Alternatively, inject into the fatty tissue layer area over the triceps muscle, the posterior portion of the upper arms, bilaterally in anyone above 12 months of age.

Gently pinch the skin above any of the previously mentioned areas after it has been cleaned properly. Hold the needle at a 45-degree angle, approximately one inch from the pinched skin where the patient is inoculated. Insert the needle into the tissue layer underneath the skin, pressing down on the syringe's plunger firmly and slowly to empty the contents into the subcutaneous layer. Remove the needle from the inoculation site and place it into a sharps bin.

For oral and intranasal vaccinations, follow the manufacturer's guides on their respective labels for instructions on how to administer.