The prototypical beta-lactam antibiotic, penicillin G, is a simple beta-lactam ring with few R groups. It impairs the function of the bacterial cell wall at the penicillin-binding protein (PBP), leading to the destruction of the organism. The synthesis of beta-lactamases can induce bacterial resistance to this antibiotic. These enzymes hydrolyze penicillin at its beta-lactam ring. Variations of penicillins like cephalosporins or carbapenems have a similar mechanism of action at the PBP but can shield their beta-lactam ring from beta-lactamases with R groups on the adjacent thiazolidine ring without hindering the beta-lactam function. Bacterial beta-lactamases have evolved to circumvent the carbapenem R group shield rendering the antibiotic susceptible to degradation. Carbapenemases are beta-lactamases active against carbapenem antibiotics.

Pathogenic bacteria have gained the ability to circumvent carbapenem hydrolysis through intrinsic and acquired mechanisms. These mechanisms include enzymatic inactivation, porin selectivity, and efflux pumps. The earliest instances of carbapenem resistance appeared in bacteria with intrinsic resistance. These bacteria are typically opportunistic pathogens or environmental organisms that rarely cause infection. Aeromonas hydrophilia, Serratia marcescens, and Enterobacter cloacae were some of the first environmental organisms discovered to cause carbapenem resistance infections

Because Gram-negative bacteria have a cell wall and cell membrane, they are better able to control what molecules pass through their outer membrane. This wall/membrane means bulky carbapenem molecules require transport into the bacterial intermembrane space via porin channels to break down the PBP. Thus, porin channels may act as a filter preventing carbapenems from reaching their site of action. Efflux pumps work at this space to remove the irregular or hostile molecules and antibiotics, further regulating the intramembrane environment. The majority of non-cpCRE resistance mechanisms act at this space to prevent degradation of the cell’s defenses without the production of a carbapenem specific beta-lactamase.Pseudomonas has intrinsic resistance to ertapenem, and the likely reason is due to the lack of a porin that will let the large ertapenem molecule into the intermembrane space. In some strains, Pseudomonas aeruginosa uses a combination of increased efflux pump expression with down-regulation of OprD porin, leading to increased imipenem resistance. OprD porin resistance to imipenem has also appeared in Enterobacter aerogenes and Klebsiella spp.