At its root, hypocarbia is induced by either a decrease in CO2 production or an increase in CO2 loss.

- PaCO2 = 0.863 x VCO2/ VA

and

- VA = VE – VD

and

- VE = RR x TV

and

- TV = RR x dead-space volume

Where VCO2 is the metabolic production of CO2, VA is alveolar ventilation, VE is minute ventilation, VD is dead space ventilation, RR is the respiratory rate, and TV is tidal volume.

Through these relationships, one can conclude that respiratory rate and tidal volume are the two components of ventilation that are physiologically or artificially controlled to moderate CO2 elimination. Subsequently, the etiologies that induce hypocarbia are any disease that increases ventilation rate or tidal volume. More commonly, the increased respiratory rate is the culprit. A wide variety of illnesses may induce this.

In almost every scenario, hypocarbia is synonymous with respiratory alkalosis as they are both induced by a process involving hyperventilation. These include:

- Central causes

- Hypoxemic causes

- Pulmonary causes

- Iatrogenic causes

Central sources are head injury, stroke, hyperthyroidism, anxiety-hyperventilation, pain, fear, stress, drugs, medications such as salicylates, and various toxins.

Hypoxic stimulation leads to hyperventilation in an attempt to correct hypoxia at the expense of CO2 loss.

Pulmonary causes include pulmonary embolisms, pneumothorax, pneumonia, and acute asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations.

Iatrogenic causes are primarily due to hyperventilation in intubated patients on mechanical ventilation.