**The National Human Trafficking Hotline: Reported Cases**

When exploring the epidemiology of human trafficking, one must first examine data collection, results, and the organizations that provide this service. The US Department of HHS funds the National Human Trafficking Hotline, operated by Polaris, a nongovernmental organization. The National Human Trafficking Hotline's data collection gathers invaluable information to assist training programs and victims domestically and abroad. For example, 2017 data collection indicates that California, Texas, and Florida rank the highest in reported cases and referrals.

To date, the hotline has answered more than 100,000 calls; 7,000 were from potential victims of human trafficking. According to Polaris hotline statistics for the United States, more than 30,000 cases of trafficking in persons and more than 8,000 tips to law enforcement were identified since 2007. The National Human Trafficking Hotline is a 24-hour, confidential, multilingual hotline covering more than 200 languages for victims, survivors, and witnesses of human trafficking.

- The hotline number is 1-888-373-7888.

- Text "HELP" to 233733.

- Live chat at humantraffickinghotline.org.

- Email help@humantraffickinghotline.org.

**Childhood Statistics/Cases**

Another resource for reporting cases and gaining information as it relates to the trafficking of minors is the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC). In 2016, The NCMEC estimated that one in six endangered runaways were likely victims of sex trafficking. Sex traffickers target children as young as nine, with the average age between 11 and 14. Labor trafficking ages vary. The Global Estimates of Modern Slavery by the ILO, WFF, and IOM reported that of the 4.8 million sexually exploited in 2016, 20% were children.

- To report sexually exploited or abused minors, call the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children’s (NCMEC) hotline at 1-800-THE-LOST, 1-800-843-5678.

- In the case of an immediate emergency, call the local police department or emergency access number.

- Child protective surfaces and local law enforcement will assist healthcare providers in local reporting requirements for minors involved in a possible abuse situation. Ages of sexual consent may vary from state to state. Thus, the need to consult local agencies.

**Global Repository of Data**

The International Organization for Migration (IOM) in partnership with Polaris and the UN Migration Agency has launched a Counter-Trafficking Data Collaborative (CTDC) with a global repository of data on trafficking in persons. Victim identities are protected and the information gathered assists in bridging gaps in publicly available data. Essential components of the CTDC's role to combat the war on human trafficking are data collection efforts and providing public access to the data. The first of its kind, this global repository of data combines data from the IOM records of more than 45,000 human trafficking cases and more than 31,000 cases from Polaris. This collaborative data tracking system fosters a data-rich environment and transcends borders and individual agency operational challenges. This comprehensive, international database is a positive byproduct of this partnership. See the

**Global Report on Trafficking in Persons**

Each year, thousands of individuals fall victim to national and international trafficking. Almost no country is exempt from human trafficking infractions or being the originating, transient, or destination country. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Global Report on Trafficking in Persons further explores the bond between trafficker and victim and the trafficking origin.

The 2016 UNODC Global Report on Trafficking in Persons shines a light on the trafficker's profile and relationship with the one who is trafficked. Traffickers and their victims tend to originate from the same geographical area, speak the same language, and share the same ethnic background. These commonalities foster a level of trust between the trafficker and the victim. The trafficker exploits this relationship for financial benefit. Traffickers rarely travel abroad to recruit, instead focusing on domestic recruitment.

Globally, local trafficking is on the rise. A trafficker will go to a destination country to exploit the victim. Countries most vulnerable to trafficking are those with high levels of organized crime and those ravaged by conflicts. From 2012 to 2014, more than 500 different trafficking flows were detected, and countries in Western and Southern Europe identified victims of various citizenships. The 2016 UNODC Global Report on Trafficking in Persons reports 79% of classified trafficked individuals globally are women and children and documented a clear link between migration and human trafficking. The movement of migrants and refugees is the most substantial reported migration since World War II, with an estimated 244 million international migrants worldwide.

Forced migration resulting from refugees fleeing war-torn areas makes women and children especially vulnerable to exploitation by traffickers. The movement of Syrians escaping the war is one such example. Children face exploitation as "child soldiers." Armed guards abduct individuals on migratory routes and exploit them as slaves for forced labor or sex. In September 2015, world leaders adopted the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda and embraced the war against trafficking in persons on a global front. This plan called for all forms of violence against women and girls to cease.

According to the 2016 UNODC Global Trafficking in Persons Report, no country is immune from trafficking in persons, and over 500 migratory flows of trafficking were detectable. Sub-Saharan African and East Asian victims are trafficked to numerous global destinations. Affluent areas, such as Western and Southern Europe, North America, and the Middle East, have victims from all parts of the world. In Southeast Asia, forced marriages are on the rise. Central America, the Caribbean, and South America frequently report cases of girls becoming victims of sexual exploitation. Trafficking in fishing villages for forced labor is a problem in parts of the world, such as Ghana and Taiwan. Organ retrieval as a form of trafficking is less frequent but exists in some parts of the world.

The UNODC 2016 study also reports a change in the victim profile over the past decade. The number of male victims is increasing. The total number of forced labor victims increased between 2012 and 2014, with 63% being men. Another alarming fact from this report is that female participation increased. Of 6800 persons convicted of human trafficking during 2012-2014, 60% were male. Young girls are recruited and controlled by older women. More couples are actively involved in trafficking. Posing as "stable couples" allows traffickers to seem more genuine and trustworthy while actively recruiting and exploiting victims as a team. Former victims become active participants in recruitment, some to reduce their debt bondage and end their sexual exploitation. Others who willingly participate in the abuse use tactics of power and control. If trafficked persons are engaged in criminal activity, they are less likely to cooperate with police, thus allowing the trafficker even more control.

According to the UNODC, the average number of trafficker convictions was low, with five victims per convicted offender. North America had the highest number of convictions compared to the rest of the world. The United States reported 150 to 200 convictions annually, while Europe reported the highest number of trafficking victims.