**Oral Candidiasis**

Candida albicans cause around 95% of oral candidiasis infections.

Non-albicans species include C. glabrata, C. tropicalis, C. parapsilosis, C. dubliniensis, C. guilliermondii, C. krusei, and C. kefyr. C. Besides C. Albicans, C. glabrata and C. dubliniensis are most commonly isolated from oral lesions in HIV patients.Candida auris is an emerging multidrug-resistant strain causing outbreaks in healthcare settings, especially in post-COVID-19 patients.

**Aspergillosis**

Aspergillosis is caused by Aspergillus species, saprophytes that grow on dead and decaying matter. Aspergillus fumigatus is the most common cause of invasive disease since the size of their conidia favors penetration into alveoli.Aspergillus flavus can cause infections limited to the paranasal sinuses.

**Mucormycosis**

Mucormycosis/Zygomycosis is caused by Zygomycetes, including Rhizopus, Mucor, Absidia, and Rhizomucor species. Rhizopus accounts for 90% of rhinocerebral mucormycosis,Rhizopus oryzae, Rhizopus microsporus, and Absidia corymbifera are the commonly isolated species in patients with mucormycosis.

**Histoplasmosis**

Histoplasmosis is caused by Histoplasma capsulatum, a dimorphic environmental fungus that thrives in soil contaminated with bat or bird excreta.H. capsulatum var. capsulatum, known as Darling’s disease, small form histoplasmosis, or American histoplasmosis; and the infection caused by H. capsulatum var. duboisii, referred to as large form histoplasmosis or African histoplasmosis.

**Blastomycosis**

Blastomycosis is caused by Blastomyces dermatitidis, a spore-forming dimorphic fungus.Blastomyces dermatitidis live in acidic, moist, and sandy soil. Blastomyces helicus and Blastomyces percursus are the other species recognized in blastomycosis.

**Cryptococcosis**

Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii, Cryptococcus neoformans var. neoformans, Cryptococcus gattii, Cryptococcus bacillisporus, Cryptococcus deuterogattii, Cryptococcus tetragattii, and Cryptococcus decagattii are the Cryptococcus species known to be pathogenic. Cryptococcus neoformans is found in the excreta of birds like pigeons, environmental scavengers like amebas, and in tree hollows.

**Paracoccidiomycosis**

Paracoccidiomycosis or South American Blastomycosis can be caused by Paracoccidioides brasiliensis complex, which comprises P. brasiliensis, P. americana, P. restrepiensis, and P. venezuelensis or Paracoccidiodes lutzii.

**Geotrichosis**

Geotrichosis is a rare opportunistic fungal infection caused by Geotrichum candidum. Species like Geotrichum capitatum, and Geotrichum clavatum can affect the lungs.