Alcohol and drug use is a significant problem in the healthcare profession. It is thought that as much as 15% of all health professionals are impaired or recovering from alcohol or drug use. Accurate statistics of the exact number of individuals afflicted are unknown but are believed to be similar to or exceed the rate of impairment in the general population.

It is clear that alcohol and substance use disorders are a significant problem in health care. Diseases related to alcohol and drugs are one of the leading causes of preventable disability and death. While it is ubiquitous, it may be beyond the ability of the health professional to control. Genetic factors are thought to play a role in up to 50% of individuals with substance use disorder.

- Alcohol and substance use contributes to injuries, missed work, decreased productivity, social harm, liability, and increased health costs. Because of the extensive risks to individuals and institutions, it is beneficial to assist employees in managing alcohol and substance use.

- Use and diversion of drugs are seen throughout the healthcare profession, but they are most prevalent in individuals who work in anesthesiology, emergency, intensive care, or pharmacy. Some health professionals may also engage in binge drinking, regular heavy drinking, and illicit drug use.

- When a health professional also develops a mental health issue such as depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, or severe personality disorder, the risk of impairment due to self-medication and treatment increases significantly.

- The rate of drug use by healthcare providers is thought to be as much as five times higher than the reference rate for nonmedical professionals. Specialties that are high stress have the highest incidence of substance use problems. For example, emergency physicians experience substance use at a higher rate than most other physicians.

Substance use among doctors, nurses, and allied health professionals are related to a variety of factors; for example, personality traits that lead individuals to select high-stress positions in medicine, such as high achievement, obsessiveness, and a high work ethic also may influence an individual to chose stimulants to maintain what they believe is a higher level of performance. Health professionals also have relatively direct access to prescription drugs, making it easier to obtain addicting medications. Health professionals tend to use benzodiazepines and opiates more than illicit street drugs, most likely due to the ease of access. Due to long hours, stress, and increasingly widespread workforce shortages in health care, substance use in healthcare providers is expected to increase.