The pre-op evaluation should focus on which muscle groups are affected, the recent course of the disease, current pharmacologic therapy, and any comorbid conditions. Those with pulmonary or bulbar involvement are at increased risk for aspiration, and premedication with a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), histamine-2 (H2)-blocker, or prokinetic agent (i.e., metoclopramide) can be helpful. Avoidance of calcium channel blockers and magnesium is beneficial to help muscle contraction integrity. The mainstay of treatment is acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (primarily pyridostigmine) to help increase acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ).

Patients should be instructed to continue their MG medication through the preoperative period. Postoperatively, the regimen should be re-started, especially for more generalized and severe diseases, as they are more likely to decline if treatment is withheld. If needed, the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor can be given parenterally, though these ought to be lowered to 1/30th the oral dose. Of note, excessive administration of these medications can lead to a cholinergic crisis marked by increased weakness with expected muscarinic effects of miosis, lacrimation, salivation, bradycardia, urination, and defecation. If in doubt about the etiology of such an episode, one can use an edrophonium test (Tensilon test) to help differentiate between a myasthenic vs. cholinergic crisis.

In a myasthenic crisis, strength will increase following the administration of edrophonium. If the Tensilon test is contraindicated, an ice-pack test can also be performed.

The Levinthal scoring system involves a set of weighted risk factors that predict the increased likelihood for postoperative mechanical ventilation for patients with MG. This system was developed on patients undergoing transcervical thymectomy. However, these risk factors are now widely accepted for use in patients with MG undergoing other procedures requiring general anesthesia with paralysis. These factors can help serve as a guide for the clinician to focus on during the perioperative period.

Risk factors associated with an increased likelihood for postoperative mechanical ventilation include a duration of disease greater than 6 years, co-existing pulmonary disease, pyridostigmine dose exceeding 750mg per day, and a preoperative vital capacity of less than 2.9L. More recent studies have demonstrated that a history of prior myasthenic crisis and the presence of anti-ACh antibodies were positive indicators of the need for postoperative mechanical ventilation.

Lambert-Eaton (LE) myasthenic syndrome is often mentioned in conjunction with MG, but it is its own distinct entity with a pathophysiology that differs from MG. The weakness associated with LE is due to antibodies directed against presynaptic calcium channels at the NMJ. Patients often show an improvement in muscle strength with repeated use, reflexes can be decreased, and males are more commonly affected than females. Proximal muscles are affected more in LE myasthenic syndrome than in MG. It is associated with small-cell lung cancer, and patients are often resistant to non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers.