There are no absolute contraindications against using epinephrine. Some relative contraindications include hypersensitivity to sympathomimetic drugs, closed-angle glaucoma, anesthesia with halothane. Another unique contraindication to be aware of is catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.

Select circumstances indicate the need for additional assessment before using epinephrine, as discussed below.

**Pregnancy**

Epinephrine is considered a pregnancy Category C medication under the old FDA categorization system. There are no well-controlled studies in humans, although animal studies have shown a teratogenic risk during organogenesis. It is capable of crossing the placenta. Epinephrine use requires caution when maternal blood pressure is 130/80 mm Hg and greater.

**Labor and Delivery**

Due to its effect on beta-2 adrenergic receptors causing tocolysis, epinephrine opposes the actions of oxytocin on the uterus and may delay labor. It also requires caution during anaphylaxis-induced hypotension in pregnancy as it may lead to uterine vasoconstriction, thus decreasing oxygen delivery to the fetus.

**Breastfeeding**

More clinical studies are needed to determine if epinephrine is excreted through breast milk.

**Pediatrics**

Epinephrine is effective at a dilution of between 1 to 100,000 and 1 to 400,000 for mydriasis induction and maintenance in pediatric intraocular surgeries.

**Geriatrics**

Due to the expected decrease in renal, hepatic, and cardiac function of geriatric patients, epinephrine should be started at the lower end of the dosing regime and titrated appropriately for clinical effect.

**Location**

Several locations should be avoided when injecting epinephrine, specifically the digits, nose, penis, and toes, as these areas are more prone to ischemia. Avoid using epinephrine in tissues supplied by end arteries.