The difficulty in making the diagnosis of NBS is that it is often confused with opioid-induced constipation and several other GI disorders. The key difference that distinguishes NBS from other GI disorders is that the abdominal pain worsens with continued or increased opioid use. Some of the GI disorders that should be considered in the differential include the following:

- IBS: Abdominal pain, flatulence, bloating, diarrhea/constipation, mucus in stools

- Gastritis: burning pain in mid epigastrium, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, bloating, belching, and weight loss

- Chronic pancreatitis: persistent or intermittent mid-epigastric pain that may radiate to the back, bulky, foul-smelling stools, greasy stools, and weight loss

- Biliary colic: intermittent pain, nausea and vomiting, often worsened with fatty foods

- Gallstones: RUQ pain, nausea, vomiting but there may be pain relief with opioids

- Peptic ulcer disease: mid-epigastric pain that is worse on an empty stomach and decreased pain with a meal. Melena may be seen

- Partial bowel obstruction

- Mesenteric ischemia

- Renal stones

- Ovarian cyst

- Endometriosis

- Uterine leiomyoma

In patients in whom NBS is suspected one should try and ascertain a history of chronic or high dose opioid use. In addition, one should ask about the intensity of pain with increasing dose of the opioid.

Acute opioid withdrawal must also be included in the differential because it can also present with hyperalgesia, rhinorrhea, yawning, restless, abdominal cramps, sweating, and diarrhea. In individuals with chronic opioid use, tolerance usually develops leading to the need for higher doses of the medication to obtain the same therapeutic effect thus making it more difficult to make a diagnosis of NBS.

NBS is underdiagnosed for several reasons. Since Opioids can affect the gastrointestinal system in many ways, the abdominal pain may be attributed to any number of causes. Plus, there is not too much literature on the topic, and hence many healthcare workers are unaware of it.

Finally, because the list of ailments that cause abdominal pain is enormous, it is a time-consuming process to determine the actual cause. Since, in most cases, the pain is not surgical, many patients are worked up as outpatients and often get lost to follow up.