Tularemia is best managed by an interprofessional team. Todate there is no proven agent to treat this infection. Currently, most sources recommend treatment with intravenous (IV) gentamicin for seven to 14 days, depending on the severity of illness. Fluoroquinolones, such as ciprofloxacin, may also play a role in mild disease although data supporting this approach in the more virulent type A tularemia infections in the United States is limited. It has been more widely used with success in Europe, where the less virulent strain of tularemia is more common. Caution should be used in the use of tetracyclines in the treatment of tularemia, as these agents are bacteriostatic and associated with a high rate of relapse after discontinuation of treatment of tularemia. In some cases, incision and drainage of affected lymph nodes may also be needed.

Tularemia is also considered a potential bioweapon given its high rate of infection with very small inoculating doses. In this setting, inhalational exposure, and thus pneumonic tularemia, would be the most likely presentation. A vaccine for tularemia is not routinely available, but studies are ongoing to develop effective preventative measures. Avoidance of exposures by using insect repellant, minimizing handling of carcasses with bare hands and avoiding ingestion of potentially contaminated game or water can decrease the chance of infection. Currently, there is no recommendation for antibiotic prophylaxis for tularemia after tick bites in endemic areas.