**European and American Osteosarcoma Study (EURAMOS)**

The European and American osteosarcoma study is a collaborative trial with the involvement of four study groups, who have come together with an aim to improve treatment outcomes in the study population. Patients aged less than 40 years, with or without metastasis and high-grade osteosarcoma, were enrolled in this trial and received standard chemotherapy in the form of methotrexate, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in the adjuvant setting. Good response to treatment was defined as the presence of viable tumor less than 10%.

The addition of pegylated interferon-alpha 2 b, in addition to standard chemotherapy in the good response group, was studied. The addition of pegylated interferon-alpha 2 b did not affect the disease-free survival or the overall survival.

Ifosfamide and etoposide (IE) were used in addition to the standard chemotherapy protocol in those with a poor histological response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy at resection. The addition of IE failed to demonstrate an improvement in DFS or OS. Standard therapy with the MAC regimen has been advised as the chemotherapeutic regimen of choice in high-grade osteosarcoma.

**INTERGROUP 0133 Study**

The Intergroup 0133 study is a phase III randomized control trial with a two by two factorial study design, which was designed to study the effect of the addition of ifosfamide to the existing standardized chemotherapy, and assess whether the addition of mifamurtide had any impact on the survival in patients with newly diagnosed osteosarcoma. The addition of ifosfamide to the standard regimen did not lead to an improvement in EFS. The study showed that the addition of mifamurtide improved overall survival, but there was no change in EFS when added to standard chemotherapy. However, this difference is OS was later noted to be statistically insignificant.