Salivary gland malignancies make up 0.5 to 1.2% of all cancers and 5% of head and neck cancers.

Salivary gland tumors in children are more likely to be malignant. Malignant tumors in children under 10 years old tend to be of a higher grade with poorer prognosis.

The parotid gland harbors 60 to 75% of all salivary gland tumors.

The submandibular gland harbors 10-15% of all salivary gland tumors with an equal distribution of benign and malignant neoplasms.

In the minor salivary glands, as many as 50% of tumors are malignant, most often located in the palate.

Epidemiology of Specific Salivary Gland Malignancies

- Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) is the most common salivary gland malignancy in adults and children.

- Adenoid cystic carcinoma (AdCC) accounts for about 10% of all salivary gland neoplasms and 30% of all minor salivary gland tumors. It has a predilection for patients in the 5th to 6th decade with no difference in gender, although it tends to be more common in the submandibular gland in women.

- Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC) is located in the parotid gland in more than 80% of all cases, submandibular glands in 4%, and intraoral minor salivary glands in 17%. Bilateral parotid involvement is seen in 3-5% of cases.

- Carcinoma Ex-Pleomorphic Adenoma (CExPA) accounts for 5% to 15% of all salivary gland malignancies and can arise in up to 25% of untreated pleomorphic adenoma.

- Polymorphous Low-Grade Adenocarcinoma (PLGA) occurs almost exclusively in the minor salivary glands with rare reports in the major salivary glands.

- Salivary Duct Carcinoma (SDC) accounts for 7 to 10% of all salivary gland tumors and is often found in the parotid in older men in the 6th to 7th decades.

- Primary Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) has a predilection for men and is usually found in the parotid. They are thought to be rare due to the infrequent occurrence of squamous metaplasia of ductal epithelium that is thought to be responsible for the malignant transformation.

- Primary melanoma of the salivary gland is extremely rare and accounts for 0.68% of malignant parotid neoplasms.

- Primary Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) of the salivary gland accounts for less than 10% of malignant salivary gland tumors.