- Thrombocytopenia

- Decreased platelet count impairs primary hemostasis. Sepsis, drug reactions, hematologic malignancies, autoimmune conditions, and vitamin deficiencies are among the non-inherited causes. Spontaneous bleeding is not generally a problem seen until counts fall beneath 30,000.

- Von Willebrand Disease (vWD)

- Von Willebrand disease is an inherited deficiency in the quantity or function of the platelet aggregation protein Von Willebrand factor. Rather than bleeding time,  modern workup includes complete blood count, factor VIII levels, ristocetin cofactor activity, and GP-Ib binding assay.

- Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC)

- DIC is a symptom of other severe disease processes like sepsis, burns, trauma, pregnancy, and malignancy. The coagulopathy is consumptive from the formation of blood clots throughout the peripheral vasculature. Thrombocytopenia with low fibrinogen and a high INR are the classic laboratory abnormalities.

- Glanzmann’s 

- Glanzmann's thrombasthenia is an autosomal recessive inherited defect in the fibrinogen binding receptor glycoprotein IIb/IIIa.

- Bernard-Soulier Disease

- Bernard-Soulier Syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive genetic defect in glycoprotein Ib causing giant platelets with perceived thrombocytopenia. Platelet transfusion is the treatment of choice.

- Platelet Function Inhibiting Medications (aspirin, clopidogrel, ticagrelor, etc.)

- Aspirin and other novel antiplatelet agents inhibit platelet aggregation and secretion overall inhibiting their function.