The PENG Block is performed only under ultrasound guidance with the low-frequency probe. We distinguish two techniques according to the authors:

**Out-of-plane Technique**

After adequate premedication, the patient is placed in the supine position, and hip extended. After sterile preparation, an injection of 3 ml of 2% lidocaine at the insertion site using a hyperechoic needle (designed for regional anesthesia) is performed under ultrasound guidance with the low-frequency probe suitable for this type of block. At the level of the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS), The probe is placed parallel to the inguinal fold, and scanning is performed with a gradual movement of the probe head. When the lower anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS) is seen, the probe is rotated slightly median until a continuous hyperechoic shadow of the upper pubic ramus is visible. This maneuver allows us to identify The psoas muscle with a prominent tendon just above the pubic ramus. The target is located in the plane between these two structures. The pubic ramus should be aligned in the center of the image to target the pubic ramus just inside the AIIS. A 100 mm nerve block needle can be introduced, and 20 mL with a local anesthetic is administered using the ultrasound-guided out-of-plane technique.

**In-plane Technique**

The low-frequency curvilinear transducer is placed in the transverse plane over the anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS) and moved inferiorly to visualize the pubic ramus. The femoral artery and iliopubic eminence are visualized, and then, using an in-plane technique, a 100 mm nerve block needle is advanced from lateral to medial through the skin wheal at a 30-degree to 45-degree angle toward the ultrasound beam, and 20 mL of local anesthetic is deposited between the psoas tendon anteriorly and pubic ramus posteriorly.