Aminocaproic acid is a lysine analog that binds competitively to plasminogen, blocking plasminogen from binding to fibrin and the subsequent conversion to plasmin.

Fibrinolysis serves as a physiologic component of hemostasis functioning to limit clot formation. The critical event for clot formation is fibrin formation following vascular injury, tissue factor binding to factor VIIa, and activation of the X-ase complex for hemostatic activation and thrombin generation. Thrombin stimulates the endothelial release of tissue plasminogen activator and increases vascular flow, kinins, and other factors that will release tissue plasminogen activator. Plasmin release follows the formation of a plasminogen-tissue plasminogen activator complex that assembles on fibrin and binds to lysine sites on fibrin clots. Once assembled, the tissue plasminogen activator cleaves plasminogen to its active form plasmin. Other mechanisms can also generate plasmin, including urokinase, contact activation, and kallikrein-mediated protease activation. Fibrinolysis is inhibited by plasminogen activator inhibitors (plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 and 2) and thrombin binding to thrombomodulin to release and activate thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor.

Aminocaproic acid given by the mouth is rapidly absorbed, almost entirely from the gastrointestinal tract. After the oral administration of 100 mg/kg of aminocaproic acid, the peak plasma drug concentration is 0.3 mg/mL, about 2 to 3 hours after ingestion. At 4 hours, it decreased to a concentration of 0.16 mg/mL. Approximately 10% of the administered oral dose is excreted in the urine within an hour, and 25% of the given dose excretion occurs within 3 hours. The 24-hour urinary recovery following oral administration is 64%.

Intravenous administration of 10 g or 100 mg/kg of aminocaproic acid produces an initial serum concentration of about 1.5 mg/mL, which falls to 0.035 mg/mL within 3 to 4 hours. It is excreted primarily via the kidneys. The biological half-life of aminocaproic acid is approximately 77 minutes. According to reports, about 70% of the dose given intravenously was excreted in the urine within 24 hours.