Treatment of Hodgkin lymphoma largely depends on the histologic characteristics, the stage of the disease, and the presence or absence of prognostic factors. The goal of treatment for patients with Hodgkin lymphoma is to cure the disease with control of short and long-term complications. There are several different staging systems for Hodgkin lymphoma, and the Cotswolds modified Ann Arbor classification is commonly used. The International Prognostic Factors Project on Advanced Hodgkin's lymphoma identified 7 variables for patients with advanced disease:

- Age older than 45 years

- Stage-IV disease

- Male gender

- WBC greater than 15,000/mL

- Lymphocyte less than 600/mL

- Albumin less than 4.0 g/dL

- Hemoglobin less than 10.5 g/dL

Risk stratification categorizes patients as low risk or high risk for recurrence. The response to therapy is determined by PET scan and is used to optimize therapy. The initial treatment of Hodgkin lymphoma depends on subgroup treatment. There are three treatment subgroups: patients with the early-stage disease with favorable prognostic factors, patients with the limited-stage disease who have unfavorable prognostic factors, and those with advanced-stage disease. Patients who are in early-stage (stage I to IIA) with favorable prognostic features are treated with short duration of chemotherapy, typically two cycles of ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine) followed by restricted involved-field radiation therapy (IFRT).

Patients who are in limited-stage disease but with unfavorable features such as bulky mediastinal disease, elevated ESR, and extra-nodal extension are treated with a longer course of chemotherapy (4 to 6 cycles) followed by a higher dose of IFRT. Patients with advanced-stage (stage IIB to IV) are risk-stratified by a different scoring system, the International Prognostic Score (IPS). Depending on IPS, different chemotherapy regimens (for example, escalated BEACOPP and Stanford V) can be used, but the standard of care is ABVD for most patients.

Radiation, in general, is not beneficial in these patients. Despite the high cure rate with initial therapy, approximately 10% of patients with Hodgkin lymphoma are refractory to initial treatment, and up to 30% of patients will relapse after achieving an initial complete remission. High-dose chemotherapy, followed by an autologous stem cell transplant is the standard of care for the majority of patients who are refractory or relapse post-initial therapy. For patients who fail autologous transplantation treatment options include: brentuximab vedotin, PD-1 blockade, non-myeloablative allogeneic transplantation, or clinical trials. Future directions in the management of Hodgkin lymphoma will include the incorporation of frontline therapeutics that have shown efficacy in refractory/relapses disease setting as well as other possible novel therapeutics.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is done in refractory or relapsed patients.