As per product labeling, there is no known antidote for overdosage of a dopamine agonist. If signs of CNS stimulation are present, a neuroleptic agent may be indicated; the efficacy of such drugs in reversing the effects of overdosage has not been evaluated. Management of overdose may require supportive measures and gastric lavage, intravenous fluids, and EKG monitoring.

A case report has been published in the literature describing attempted suicide with various medications. However, the overdose manifestations were more suggestive of pramipexole toxicity than that of other drugs. A 59-year-old male was brought to the hospital 5 hours after ingesting 3 mg pramipexole, 2250 mg venlafaxine SR, and 360 mg mirtazapine. His vitals were stable, and his neurological examination, including muscle tone and power, was normal. He was mildly agitated and had visual hallucinations. Nine hours later, he developed severe myoclonus to the extent he feared falling from bed. He consistently reported spiders crawling in the room and an alien man sitting on a chair next to him. He had some degree of urinary retention, was jittery and hypervigilant, and could not move due to postural dizziness. His routine blood reports were normal, with mild elevation in lactate. The serum concentration of pramipexole was significantly elevated at 34.2 ng/ml, around five times the upper limit of the therapeutic range. It decreased progressively, and the patient was then discharged after his symptoms subsided.

The combination of the above symptoms was very suggestive of pramipexole toxicity. The patient did not meet the Hunter Serotonin Toxicity Criteria, eliminating venlafaxine toxicity. Moreover, mirtazapine overdose is known to cause hypersomnolence. The patient received no specific antidote. Only 5 mg of diazepam was given to control his agitation.