Three volar Interossei adduct the second, fourth, and fifth digits about an axis formed by the third digit. These muscles originate on the metacarpal of the digit being adducted and insert into their respective proximal phalangeal base and extensor hood. Adduction occurring along this third digit axis means that the volar interosseous muscle of the second digit is located on its ulnar border, while the interossei of the fourth and fifth digits reside on their radial borders.

Four dorsal interossei work to abduct the second, third, and fourth digits while assisting with flexion of the MCPs, extension of the PIPs, and extension of the DIPs. The first dorsal interosseous muscle originates from the first and second metacarpals, inserting to the radial base of the proximal phalanx of the second digit as well as its extensor hood. The second dorsal interosseous muscle originates from the second and third metacarpals, inserting to the radial base of the proximal phalanx of the third digit as well as its extensor hood. The third dorsal interosseous muscle originates from the third and fourth metacarpals, inserting to the ulnar base of the proximal phalanx of the third digit as well as its extensor hood. The fourth dorsal interosseous muscle originates from the fourth and fifth metacarpals, inserting to the ulnar base of the proximal phalanx of the fourth digit as well as its extensor hood.

Abductor pollicis longus (APL) originates in the forearm, at the midshaft of the radial border of ulna and the ulnar border of radius, as well as the interosseous membrane. It inserts to the radial side of the base of the first metacarpal in addition to the trapezium and opponens pollicis fascia.

Abductor pollicis brevis (APB) originates at the trapezium and scaphoid and inserts to the lateral base of the proximal phalanx of the first digit. This muscle acts in first digit abduction in addition to MCP flexion.

Extensor pollicis longus (EPL) originates at the radial border of ulna and interosseous membrane, distal to the origin of APL. EPL inserts to the base of the distal phalanx and acts to extend the interphalangeal joint.

Extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) originates at the ulnar border of the radius and interosseous membrane at the level of EPL. It inserts to the base of the proximal phalanx of the first digit and aids in the first digit extension at the MCP.

Opponens pollicis acts to pronate the first metacarpal. It originates at the trapezium and inserts to the anterolateral aspect of the first metacarpal.

Flexor carpi radialis (FCR) originates at the medial humeral epicondyle and inserts to trapezium, second metacarpal, and third metacarpal.  FCR acts to flex and radially deviate the wrist.

Flexor pollicis brevis (FPB) has a deep and superficial head. The deep head originates at the second metacarpal, while the superficial head originates at the transverse carpal ligament and trapezium. These insert to the lateral base of the proximal phalanx of the first digit and act to flex the MCP.

Flexor pollicis longus (FPL) is the primary flexor of the first digit, originating from the volar interosseous membrane and radius.  It inserts to the base of the distal phalanx.

The Adductor pollicis has two heads, an oblique and transverse.  The oblique head originates at the capitate, second, and third metacarpals. The transverse head originates at the distal half of the third metacarpal shaft.  These both insert to the medial base of the thumb proximal phalanx and act to adduct the first digit.

Abductor digiti minimi (ADM) acts to abduct the fifth digit and has been found to originate at the pisiform, piso-hamate ligament, and flexor carpi ulnaris.  It inserts to the ulnar aspect of the proximal phalangeal base and extensor apparatus of the fifth digit.

Flexor digiti minimi (FDM) originates from the hamate, pisiform, and flexor retinaculum. Distally, it fuses with ADM to insert to the proximal phalangeal base of the fifth digit, leading to its action of MCP flexion.

Extensor carpi ulnaris originates at the lateral humeral epicondyle and inserts to the dorsal base of the fifth metacarpal, acting in wrist extension and ulnar deviation.

Flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) has a broad origination from the medial epicondyle of the humerus and coronoid process of the ulna to the volar aspect of the radial shaft. It then inserts to the middle phalangeal bases of the second through fifth digits. This acts primarily in PIP flexion.

Flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) originates from the volar-medial aspect of the ulna and interosseous membrane and inserts at the distal phalangeal bases of second through fifth digits. This performs DIP flexion.

Extensor digitorum communis (central slip and terminal tendons) originates at the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and inserts at the dorsal aspect of the distal phalangeal base of the second through fifth digits. There is significant anatomic variation in the accessory slips and insertions of this muscle, but the classic teaching is that there is an insertion to the middle phalanx and MCP in addition to this consistently present terminal insertion.