To decrease the risk of infection, a full sterile technique should be employed. This includes a head cap, face mask, sterile gown and gloves, and use of a full-size sterile drape, covering the insertion site and distal exit site. A skin prep of either chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine should be used to thoroughly clean and sterilize the skin. A local anesthetic is used to numb the site of venous cannulation as well as the path the tunneler will take along the subcutaneous tissues, and, if used, at the site of the skin pocket for the subcutaneous port. While the landmarks described above can be used for venous cannulation, ultrasound, with a sterile cover, is recommended for identification and cannulation of the vein. X-ray with or without fluoroscopy is also necessary to confirm the final placement of the catheter tip within the cavoatrial junction. Most tunneled catheters come as a complete kit containing an introducer needle, which has a special radiopaque tip to enable visualization on ultrasound, multiple syringes, a guide-wire, a dilator, and a peel-a-way sheath, as well as a catheter and tunneling device. A suture is needed to close the venous access site and, in the case of HD catheters, secure the catheter to the skin at the exit site. An absorbable suture is typically used to close the skin over the subcutaneous port site. Sterile saline is needed to prime the catheter before placement as well as to aspirate and flush the catheter once placed. Heparinized saline can also be used to flush the catheter. A sterile dressing of either gauze or a transparent, semipermeable dressing can be used to cover the exit site of HD catheters. Skin glue can be used to cover the incision overlying the subcutaneous ports.