The known adverse effects of nicotine include:

- Gastrointestinal Symptoms: abdominal pain, dyspepsia, hiccups, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting

- Central Nervous System: headache

- Cardiovascular System: palpitations, hypertension

- Neuropsychiatric: depression, back pain, dizziness, nervousness, drooling, shakiness, cold sweats, hypertension, increased heart rate, and vivid dreams

- Oral/nasal mucosa absorbing NRTs, nose and mouth ulcers, and irritation have been reported. Other side effects include excess salivation and swelling of the lips, throat, and tongue.

- Transdermal patches have caused some people skin rash or irritation. Topical hydrocortisone 1% cream or ointment is indicated for some patients to relieve skin irritation.

- Nicotine gums-associated hiccoughs, gastrointestinal disturbances, and jaw pain have been reported.

- Sore throat, coughing, dry lips, and mouth ulcers are adverse drug reactions associated with sublingual tablets. The nasal spray has adverse drug reactions such as a runny nose and nasal irritation.

Patients should inform their clinician immediately if any of the above side effects occur. In addition, the clinician should counsel the patient that any form of nicotine is addictive and that there is a potential for psychological and physical dependence on NRT (although far less than smoking tobacco). Hence patients should adhere strictly to the regimen prescribed by the clinician.

**Drug Interactions:**Nicotine also has drug interactions with adenosine, cimetidine, and varenicline. Adenosine may increase the chronotropic effect of nicotine. Cimetidine may cause an increase in the serum concentration of nicotine and cause toxicity. Varenicline coadministered with NRT can increase the risk of sleep disturbances, nausea, and cutaneous adverse drug reactions such as localized erythema, itching, and worsening of preexisting acne.