There is a generalized understanding of predisposition among patients to specific forms of aspergillus mediated disease. Individuals with atopy or predisposition to hypersensitivity are more prone to have obstructive bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Immunocompromised patients more often are the ones to get invasive aspergillus infections, while mycetoma is more common in immunocompetent patients with preexisting lung disease. However, the overlap between these predisposition categories exists. Patients with mycetoma can develop a hypersensitivity response akin to allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA).

Depending upon host immune response, constitution, and the propensity of fungal invasion of parenchyma, clinical symptoms can be variable. A subset of patients may be asymptomatic with an incidental diagnosis of an aspergilloma.

However, hemoptysis is the most common clinical presentation reported anywhere between 54% to 87.5% in various case series.

**Extrapulmonary Asperigilloma**

While fungal endocarditis accounts for less than 2% of all causes of endocarditis, aspergillus accounts for 20 to 25% of all cases of fungal endocarditis. Invasive aspergillus disease involving heart valves and chambers is even rarer.

There are case reports of aspergilloma of the heart almost uniquely in leukemia patients on chemotherapy or post stem cell transplant. They usually carry an ominous prognosis with death reported in all but one case within days to weeks of diagnosis. A transthoracic echocardiogram is a valuable diagnostic tool. Fungal vegetations on valves appear bulkier and more mobile and are prone to embolic complications, particularly to the brain. A combination of antifungal therapy with valve replacement is the recommended therapeutic approach. If a patient survives, lifelong antifungal treatment post-surgical valve replacement is advocated.

**Central Nervous System Aspergilloma**

Translocation of organisms through the vascular channels of nasal sinuses or pulmonary vasculature leads to single or multiple cerebral abscess formation. Additionally, aspergillus also exhibits a tendency to invade the intima of arteries and veins, causing necrotizing arteritis, thrombosis, and hemorrhage. The anterior and middle cerebral arterial distributions are most commonly involved.

In CNS aspergilloma, the initial presentation is with focal neurological deficits affecting the circulation territory involved. With progression, patients may have features of meningitis or symptoms of raised intracranial pressure. Rarely intra-aortic thrombosis leads to mycotic aneurysms where clinical manifestations are similar to acute subarachnoid hemorrhage. Common presenting symptoms are acute or subacute headache, vomiting, hemiparesis, cranial nerve deficits, convulsions, and sensory impairment of varying degrees. Patients are often afebrile or have a low-grade fever, and the disease may have an indolent course over months.