Early operative treatment is recommended to provide the best possibility for the brain to expand and produce a normal configuration of the skull. Surgery goals are to remove the bony ridge of the metopic suture, advance both orbits and the frontal bones, achieve a rounder forehead contour, and prevent psychosocial impact and neurodevelopmental delay.

**Endoscopic Surgery**

This technique is best used before 3 to 4 months of age due to the skull's pliability. A small incision is made behind the hairline towards the metopic suture. A subgaleal plane is developed from the anterior fontanelle to the nasofrontal suture. A single bur hole is made, and a 30-degree endoscope is used to dissect the dura and the overlying stenosed suture. An osteotomy is made between the anterior fontanelle and the nasion using scissors.

**Open Surgery**

Open surgery is usually performed before the age of 1 year (9 to 12 months). A less radical procedure is used for cases where the main goal is to remove the midline bony ridge, and there is no need for orbital rim advancement. Drilling of the prominent metopic suture suffices. If there is a temporalis hollow, the temporalis muscle can be partially split and moved to a more anterior position. A zigzag or wavy coronal incision is used to preserve the superficial temporal arteries to maintain a robust blood supply. Dissection of the scalp flaps is done above the periosteal plane to reduce bleeding.

Open surgery requires a larger incision and is usually associated with longer operative time and hospitalization. Blood transfusions are almost always needed. All these drawbacks increased overall healthcare costs. In those cases where cranial reconstruction is required, a bifrontal craniotomy is performed to reconstruct the anterior cranial vault, including the lateral portions of the sphenoid wings, to allow brain expansion. The bifrontal bone flap undergoes radial osteotomies to reshape the bone. The midline ridge requires shaping with the drill. To perform the fronto-orbital advancement, the periosteum above the supraorbital rim is open before the bilateral orbital rim osteotomy and advancement are performed. Orbital osteotomies are performed using a reciprocating bone saw. A free supraorbital bone is created and reshaped to a more convex configuration, especially along the superolateral orbital rim. This is done with several closed wedge osteotomies along the free supraorbital bone bar. If the hypoteloric deformity is severe, an interposition split-thickness cranial bone graft is added. The orbital rim is moved forward, and fixation plates are placed to maintain the advancement.

Alternatively, absorbable sutures can be used. Using sutures and avoiding plates and screws reduces surgery costs and allows natural reshaping.

An alternative approach when reconstructing the orbits is to remodel the orbital rim in situ to preserve the attachment to the zygoma and incline the cephalic portion of the supraorbital rim anteriorly. The fixation is done using resorbable fixation plates. The orbital rim will advance with brain growth. Another alternative approach is the in situ bandeau approach, where the supraorbital bandeau is not separated at its central point at the nasion to maintain its blood supply.

Lille’s technique: Involves resection of the metopic suture followed by the construction of a large frontal panel that is stabilized with absorbable plates. This is accompanied by fronto-orbital advancement, parietal craniectomies, and pterional resection. This technique facilitates the optimization of cranial expansion and permits future cranial growth.

Di Rocco technique: This helps to control bleeding over the glabella and ophryon. It follows the principle of direct visualization of emissary metopic veins and the superior sagittal sinus, thereby having better control of hemostasis before removing the last piece of the frontal bone. This is achieved by manipulating the design of the frontal craniotomy so that a triangle of bone based above the glabella at the site of the osteotomy of the bandeau is conserved.

Method of “hypercorrection” proposed by Bennett et al.: This technique helps to attain a better cosmetic result and to reduce relapse and the need for revision surgery. The method involves a fronto-orbital advancement of 2.5 to 3.5 cm and concomitant hyperexpansion of the bitemporal projection. Despite this, some patients may need additional corrections; lateral orbital recession and bitemporal constriction have rarely been reported following this procedure.

**Conservative Management**

If the deformity is mild or there is only a bony ridge without hypotelorism, a more conservative approach can be used; however, the child should be followed for a minimum of 12 months of age to assess and corroborate adequate cranial growth. Clinical evaluations and family discussions regarding neuropsychological development are engaged during this time.