Initial evaluation of the shoulder typically starts with x-rays to rule out osseous pathology. In the chronic setting, degenerative changes within the shoulder may be present, and while testing of the superior labrum may be positive, it may not be the main cause of their symptoms. Typically, an MR arthrogram (MRA) is performed to evaluate the shoulder labrum. SLAP tear type is determined by the anatomical location of the tear as well as the severity of its extension. A paralabral cyst found on MRI is a diagnostic clue for a SLAP tear. Suprascapular nerve compression from a paralabral cyst may occur. Depending on location, it can lead to combined supraspinatus and infraspinatus weakness (suprascapular notch) or isolated infraspinatus atrophy (spinoglenoid notch).

While MRA has a sensitivity and specificity of 82% to 100% and 71% to 98%, respectively, there are normal anatomic variants that can be confused with a SLAP tear. A sublabral recess or foramen can be misread as a labral tear. These are identified by smooth rather than rough edges, specific anatomic locations, and orientation medially rather than into the lateral substance of the labrum.

Snyder et al. first described the classification of SLAP tears in 1990. Additional subtypes for type II tears, as well as additional tear patterns, were described in subsequent years.

- Type I – Fraying of the superior labrum with intact biceps anchor

- Type II – Fraying of the superior labrum with detached biceps anchor

- A) anterior
- B) posterior
- C) combined anterior and posterior

- Type III – Bucket handle tear of the superior labrum with intact biceps anchor

- Type IV – Bucket handle tear of the superior labrum with detached biceps anchor (remains attached to the torn labrum)

- Type V – Type II + Bankart lesion

- Type VI – Type II + unstable flap either anteriorly or posteriorly

- Type VII – Type II + anterior extension inferior to the MGHL

- Type VIII – Type II + posterior labrum extension

- Type IX – Circumferential labrum tear

- Type X – Type II + reverse Bankart lesion