Cochlear implantation success is inherently dependent on a dedicated interprofessional team. The team may include pediatricians, family physicians, geneticists, otolaryngologists, otologists, neurotologists, audiologists, speech-language pathologists, school administrators, counselors, etc. All members serve different roles in patient care, which may be determined by the age of the patient, the age at diagnosis, and prelingual or postlingual deafness, to name a few of the variables. The goal of effective patient outcomes is to identify hearing loss as soon as possible with evaluation by an otolaryngologist and audiologist. Currently, 43 states in the USA have established newborn hearing screening programs (Early Hearing and Detection and Intervention). These programs have facilitated earlier diagnosis and management of congenital hearing loss**.**At this stage, the severity and best modality for treatment can commence without delay. In infants and children, this may facilitate evaluation by a geneticist who may determine the etiology of hearing impairment and associated abnormalities that require medical attention. In some scenarios such as an enlarged vestibular aqueduct, this thorough evaluation may prevent hearing loss, and allow for preventative measures. In adults, early recognition is beneficial to determine the etiology and provide appropriate management to enable patients to return work and reinstate their quality of life.

Once patients are candidates for cochlear implants, the otolaryngologist and audiologist team manage this portion of care. The otolaryngologist will perform the surgery to insert the cochlear implant. To maximum benefit from the device otolaryngology, audiology, speech-language pathologists, specialty-trained ENT nursing, and many other team members are then involved in the aftercare to make sure the device functions to its maximum potential and concerns are reported to the clinician managing the case. In prelingually deaf patients the goal is to develop speech and maximum communication. For postlingually deaf patients, the goal is to reinstate communication to a functional level. Communication between team members is essential in the identification, diagnosis, management, and continued surveillance of these individuals.