In grades 2 to 4, the aortic injury requires repair of the defect. The surgical treatment of aortic transection has been radically changed with the introduction of the aortic stent graft. In 2005 the FDA approved the first thoracic stent-graft device. Many products have been placed with “off-label” use, but more products have become available to the surgeon with time. The endovascular repair of the injured thoracic aorta has now nearly replaced the former open repair. Occasionally, patient anatomy may prohibit the use of endovascular technology. Factors include a lack of a proximal landing zone and poor femoral artery access sites. Femoral artery size that is less than 7 mm in size results in increased access site complications.

Prompt repair of the aortic injury is ideal. Additional injuries may supersede the aortic injury and require more expeditious treatment. As soon as the patient is clinically fit, endovascular or open repair should be planned. Some data suggest the value of delayed repair with a decreased overall mortality compared to early repair, though at the cost of increased complications and ICU and hospital length of stay.

The technique for endovascular repair begins with transporting the patient to a hybrid endovascular suite operating room if available. These clinical settings allow the use of a fixed angiography imager with the full capabilities of an operating room, should open repair or other operative exploration become necessary. After positioning the patient in the supine position and administration of anesthesia, the abdomen and bilateral groins are prepped. Access of the bilateral common femoral arteries is gained by the Seldinger technique and confirmed by imaging. A wire and catheter are advanced to the aortic root, and an aortogram is obtained. After the injury is identified, a stent-graft device is selected and advanced into position over a wire. Often, due to the curve of the arch, it is necessary to cover the ostium of the left subclavian artery to achieve adequate apposition at the graft landing zone. This is necessary for approximately 40% of patients.

Open repair is achieved via left posterolateral thoracotomy. The patient is positioned in the lateral position and flexed. If possible, single lung ventilation can facilitate improved visualization of the aorta. The aorta and arch are exposed. A clamp is applied distal to the left subclavian and distal to the extent of the injury. A tube graft is elected and sewed into place proximally and distally. Care is taken to incorporate the adventitia into the repair, as this contributes to most of the strength of the aortic wall. Because this technique requires interruption of flow to the distal aorta, often cardiac bypass is necessary. Left heart bypass is achieved by cannulation of the left inferior pulmonary vein and the distal thoracic aorta. This allows for continued perfusion of the aorta, and subsequently, the viscera, spinal cord, and lower extremities. If a proximal clamp cannot be placed, full cardiopulmonary bypass may be necessary. This is achieved by the cannulation of the femoral artery and vein. It is important to consider that bypass requires systemic anticoagulation, which may not be possible in patients with polytrauma. After the repair is complete, the clamps are removed while the patient is mildly hypothermic at 32 to 34 C.