The differential diagnosis of a woman who sustains complete cardiovascular collapse during or close to the time of delivery and then subsequently develops major hemorrhage should include:

- Pulmonary embolism (PE)

- Peripartum cardiomyopathy

- Septic shock

- Myocardial infarction

- Venous air embolism

- Eclampsia

- Anaphylaxis

- Cephalad spread of spinal anesthetic

Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) mimics pulmonary embolus to a degree, but an ongoing coagulopathy is not seen in PE. Postpartum cardiomyopathy would likely have significant ST-T wave changes on electrocardiography, with left-sided congestive heart failure symptoms predominating. Bedside echocardiography (TEE or TTE) should easily be able to make this differential with the classic right ventricular dilatation and overload pattern and septal bowing into the left ventricle seen in AFE.

Septic shock should show the classic systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) picture with elevated or depressed body temperature and is unlikely to present with sudden cardiovascular collapse. Myocardial infarction, unless antecedent to the cardiac arrest, would show typical ST-T wave changes and elevation of serial cardiac enzymes. Bedside echocardiography would show characteristic ventricular wall motion abnormalities of myocardial infarction. Venous air embolism usually presents with wheezing, gasping, and chest pain before the cardiovascular collapse. Eclampsia would be suggested by hypertension, edema, proteinuria, headaches, or seizures before the collapse. Anaphylaxis should have premonitory symptoms of wheezing, dyspnea, rash, urticaria, and a period of hypotension before cardiovascular decompensation. Cephalad distribution of spinal anesthetic would present with an elevated sensory level, weakness of the upper extremities, difficulty in speaking, dysphagia, and bradycardia.