# Continuing Education Activity

Triplane ankle fractures are distal tibia physeal fractures that occur in children from 10 to 17 years of age. The physis ossifies in a predictable order, and transitional ankle fractures occur in this period of incomplete physeal closure. Treatment depends on the quality of the reduction of the articular surface with patients with under 2 mm of displacement managed nonoperatively and those with over 2 mm displacement managed with closed versus open reduction and internal fixation. This activity outlines the evaluation and treatment of triplane ankle fractures and reviews the healthcare team's role in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of triplane ankle fractures.
- Review the pathophysiology of triplane ankle fractures.
- Identify imaging findings associated with triplane ankle fractures.
- Explain the interprofessional team's importance in diagnosing and managing the triplane ankle fractures and providing the best possible care and education of the patient.

# Introduction

Growth plate or physeal fractures are common injuries in skeletally immature children and adolescents. Most fractures in skeletally immature individuals involve the physis as this cartilaginous growth center is the weakest part of the bone and, therefore, more susceptible to injury. Triplane ankle fractures are complex traumatic Salter-Harris IV fractures involving the metaphysis, physis, and epiphysis. The term “triplane” refers to the different orientations of the fracture lines in the distal tibia and represents a frequent diagnostic challenge. The epiphysis is fractured in the sagittal plane and is visible on the anteroposterior (AP) radiograph. The posterior aspect of the metaphysis is fractured in the coronal plane and appreciated on the lateral radiograph. The physis becomes separated in the axial plane. Treatment is closed reduction or surgical fixation depending on the degree of fracture displacement and articular step-off. The prognosis is excellent, given the triplane ankle fracture is identified and appropriately treated.

# Etiology

Triplane ankle fractures occur secondary to ankle trauma in an adolescent during a transitional period of partial physeal closure. Similar to Tillaux fractures (transitional Salter-Harris III ankle fracture), a supination-external rotational force is often the reported mechanism.

# Epidemiology

Ankle injuries are common in children and rank second only to injuries to the hand and wrist in those aged 10 to 15 years.

# Pathophysiology

Skeletal growth typically continues until 16 years in males and 14 years in females.

# History and Physical

Adolescents typically report a twisting injury often during a sporting activity with resulting ankle pain and inability to bear weight. The most common injury mechanism is supination and external rotation, while the uncommon medial triplane fracture occurs with an adduction force.

# Evaluation

Triplane ankle fractures are often under-appreciated with plain radiographs as each view typically only reveals a single fracture line. AP, mortise, and lateral views are essential. The AP view reveals the sagittal fracture line in the epiphysis (Salter-Harris III), and the lateral view demonstrating the coronal fracture line in the posterior metaphysis (Salter-Harris II). The mortise radiograph is the best way to appreciate articular displacement on plain films. Computed tomography (CT) is a vital tool for assessing the exact fracture pattern, degree of displacement, and articular step-off. Jones et al. demonstrated that all surgeons surveyed changed the starting point and trajectory of planned screw fixation after reviewing the CT scan versus relying on plain radiographs in a series of triplane ankle fractures.

# Treatment / Management

The treatment of triplane ankle fractures depends on the amount of fracture fragment displacement and degree of articular step-off visualized on CT. Nondisplaced and minimally displaced (less than 2 mm) injuries can effectively undergo management with long leg cast immobilization.

Surgery is reserved for triplane fractures with over 2 mm of displacement or injuries that lost reduction during attempted nonoperative management. Fixation is typically achieved with one or two screws placed parallel to the physis. Screw placement can be in the metaphysis, epiphysis, or both depending on the fracture pattern. Screw types utilized for fixation vary widely no evidence suggesting the superiority of cannulated versus non-cannulated or fully threaded versus partially threaded screw fixation in triplane ankle fractures. Congruity of the articular surface must be restored to optimize outcomes.

Several clinicians' preferred technique includes percutaneous reduction via small incisions and fixation with one or two non-cannulated partially threaded 3.5 mm screws placed parallel to the physis. The epiphyseal fracture is usually amenable to anterolateral to posteromedial placed screws, while the metaphyseal fragment usually gets captured with direct anterior to posterior based screws. Care is also necessary to ensure all screw threads are past the fracture if using partially threaded screws. [Level 5]

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnoses of adolescent ankle pain include sprain, Tillaux fracture, triplane fracture, syndesmosis injury, ankle dislocation, subtalar dislocation, calcaneal fracture, talus fracture, malignancy, and infection.

# Staging

Triplane ankle fractures are classified based on the number of parts as well as the pattern.

**Classification by Parts**

- **2-part**
- Part 1: anterolateral and posterior epiphysis
- Part 2: anteromedial epiphysis

- **3-part**
- Anterolateral epiphysis
- Posterior epiphysis
- Anteromedial epiphysis

- **4-part**
- Comminuted

**Classification by Pattern**

- **Lateral**
- Most common
- Epiphyseal fracture: sagittal plane
- Physeal fracture: axial plane
- Metaphyseal fracture: coronal plane

- **Medial**
- Epiphyseal fracture: coronal plane
- Physeal fracture: axial plane
- Metaphyseal fracture: sagittal plane

- **Intramalleolar**
- Type I: intraarticular, involving weight-bearing surface
- Type II: intraarticular, not involving weight-bearing surface
- Type III: extraarticular

# Prognosis

Appropriately identified and treated triplane ankle fractures have an excellent prognosis. Physeal damage or premature closure occurs in 7% to 21% of cases.

# Complications

Complications during nonoperative management include loss of reduction requiring operative fixation, nonunion, malunion, and persistent pain. Surgical adverse events are rare and include bleeding, infection, nonunion, painful hardware, and transient neuropathy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

A provider should not assume a pediatric ankle injury is simply a ligamentous sprain. The ligamentous stabilizers of the ankle are stronger than the physis making physeal fracture much more common. For appropriately aged patients, scrutinize orthogonal radiographic views in patients with apparent distal tibia Salter-Harris II or III fractures to avoid missing a more significant Salter-Harris IV triplane ankle fracture.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Treatment strategies of triplane ankle fractures depend on the residual displacement following reduction. Post-reduction CT scans should be obtained to assess the quality of reduction and articular step-off. Ertl et al. demonstrated that in a series of 23 triplane ankle fractures managed nonoperatively at a single institution, residual articular displacement of more than 2 mm results in poor outcomes if managed nonoperatively.

Triplanar ankle fractures require an interprofessional team approach. The primary care practitioner should immediately enlist an orthopedist for evaluation and eventual treatment. Following any procedure or with non-operative management, an orthopedic specialty-trained nurse is invaluable. They can assist during surgery, provide post-surgical care, and help with conservative, non-operative management, monitor progress, and coordinate with physical therapy when necessary, serving as a coordination point between the treating clinician and other providers. This type of interprofessional collaboration will result in better outcomes and improved patient care. [Level 5]