Treatment depends upon the type of disease from which the patient is suffering.

- **Epithelial keratitis**
- **Topical:**Acyclovir 3% ointment and ganciclovir 0.15% gel, each administered five times daily. Trifluridine can also be used up to nine times a day. 99% of cases resolve by two weeks on this treatment.****
- **Debridement:**The corneal surface is anesthetized, and then wiped with a sterile cellulose sponge 2 mm beyond the edge of the ulcer to achieve virus-free margins. This technique can be employed for dendritic but not geographical ulcers.
- **Oral antivirals:**Immunodeficient patients or patients who respond poorly to topical therapy benefit from this method.
- **Skin lesions:**Acyclovir cream five times daily may be used, as for cold sores.
- **Interferon monotherapy:**A combination of nucleoside antiviral with interferon speeds up healing.
- **IOP control:**Prostaglandin derivatives should be avoided as they promote viral activity and inflammation in general.
- **Topical steroids:**These are avoided unless significant disciform keratitis is also present.

- **Disciform keratitis:**
- **Starting treatment:**Initially, topical steroids with antiviral cover, both used four times daily. The frequency of both is reduced in parallel over the next 4 weeks as improvement occurs.
- **Subsequently:**Prednisolone 0.5% (or other weaker steroids) once daily is considered a safe dose. Antivirals should be stopped altogether at this point. Periodic attempts should be made to stop steroid treatment as well.
- **Active epithelial ulceration:**Steroid treatment should be reduced to a minimum when an epithelial disease is also present. The antiviral cover should be made more aggressive.
- **Topical ciclosporin:**This may be useful, particularly in the presence of epithelial disease.

- 
**Neurotrophic keratitis:**

It is the same as that of persistent epithelial defects. The use of steroids should remain at a bare minimum.

- 
**Necrotizing keratitis:**

The treatment is broadly similar to that of disciform keratitis, but much aggressive antiviral therapy may be beneficial.

- 
**Keratoplasty:**

Keratoplasty is the last resort when the disease causes irreversible corneal damage. However, recurrence of the disease of rejection threatens the survival of grafts.

- 
**Prophylaxis:**

Prophylaxis should merits consideration in patients with frequent recurrences or those with bilateral disease. Acyclovir 400 mg twice daily is standard, but if necessary, a higher dose is an option. Oral valaciclovir or famciclovir are alternatives to acyclovir. Prophylaxis reduces the rate of recurrence by about 50%.