The most common adverse effect of insulin glargine is hypoglycemia. Special attention is necessary for insulin usage in fasting patients who have recently changed their diets or have had recent activity changes, such as beginning a workout program. Hypoglycemia characteristically demonstrates autonomic symptoms, including diaphoresis, nausea, palpitations, tremors, anxiety, lethargy, and decreased concentration, among others. With severe hypoglycemia, unconsciousness, seizures, coma, and death may occur. Adverse effects may also include allergic reactions to the diluent, site injection reactions or infection, and lipodystrophy at the injection site. Insulin glargine may also cause pain upon injection at the site due to the acidity of the diluent.

It is also essential to be aware of medications administered concurrently with insulin glargine. Certain medications can increase the risk of hypoglycemia when given concomitantly with insulin. Certain medications may also diminish the effectiveness of insulin glargine, causing hyperglycemia or masking symptoms of hypoglycemia. The risk of hypoglycemia may increase with the coadministration of antidiabetic drugs, other insulins, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, disopyramide, fibrates, fluoxetine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, pentoxifylline, pramlintide, propoxyphene, salicylates, sulfonamide antibiotics, and somatostatin analogs. The effectiveness of insulin glargine may diminish when administered with atypical antipsychotics, corticosteroids, danazol, diuretics, estrogens, isoniazid, niacin, phenothiazines protease inhibitors, somatotropin, sympathomimetic agents, and thyroid hormone replacements.

Another concern regarding drug interactions includes the possibility of medications such as beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine, masking symptoms of hypoglycemia. Lastly, thiazolidinediones have an increased risk of causing dose-related fluid retention when administered with insulin.