Most of the NHL spread hematogenously, whereas Hodgkin lymphoma disseminates via the lymphatic spread. Due to the hematogenous spread, most present with advanced disease (stage III or IV). A whole-body lymphoid survey should be performed, including the head, neck, cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, mesenteric, femoral, and inguinal lymph nodes. An abdominal examination should be performed to evaluate for enlarged liver and spleen. DLBCL commonly presents with enlarged lymph nodes or rapidly growing mass along with B symptoms, which include fever, night sweats, and weight loss. The B symptoms can be seen in 30% of the patients. Bone marrow involvement is more common in indolent disease and can be seen in up to 50% of the cases.

About 50% of the patients have extranodal involvement. The involvement of the stomach or gastrointestinal tract is the most common primary extranodal site, followed by the involvement of the skin. Renal involvement can be secondary to bulky disease or lymphadenopathy, causing a ureteral obstruction or due to tumor lysis syndrome. Extralymphatic involvement is seen in aggressive NHL. DLBCL can also present with symptoms suggestive of superior vena cava syndrome, compression of the airways. The symptoms can be related to the infiltrated organ if the disease spreads beyond the lymphatics in so-called extranodal disease. The extranodal disease can manifest in the skin, bones, spinal cord, testicles, among other locations. A variety of paraneoplastic syndromes may also be associated with B cell lymphomas.

The presentation of B cell lymphomas varies based on if the subtype behaves aggressively or is more indolent. The aggressive B-cell lymphomas, such as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and Burkitt’s lymphoma, typically present with a rapidly growing mass. Epidural spinal cord compression can be the manifestation of NHL or can happen at the time of relapse.