**History**

Clinicians should first consider the presentation of the patient with a history of SCI and note the time that elapsed between the present clinical evaluation and the original index injury. As mentioned earlier, the first 2 weeks after the SCI represents the most vulnerable time period for rapid decreases in BMD levels.

As part of a comprehensive history, the clinician should also consider predisposing conditions and the patient’s age; these could potentially compound conditions of already compromised BMD levels. For example, elderly patients presenting 2 weeks after an SCI were likely previously diagnosed with osteoporosis or osteopenia before the injury. In effect, these patients are at the highest risk of developing spontaneous fractures without an appreciable underlying mechanism.

Other pearls for history taking include the following

- History of fragility fractures (e.g., hip fractures, vertebral compression fractures)

- Predisposing chronic medical conditions (e.g., eating disorders, asthma, malignancy, inflammatory conditions, endocrinopathies, malnutrition states)

- Medication use (e.g., anti-seizure medications, chronic steroid use, proton-pump inhibitors, methotrexate)

- History of early menopause or current post-menopausal status for female patients

- History of anti-osteoporosis medication treatment(s)

A comprehensive history includes eliciting potential risk factors attributable to secondary bone loss. A thorough social history also should be obtained with attention to smoking history and chronic alcohol consumption. The physician should note the patient’s presenting overall nutritional status as well as any ongoing or previous calcium and/or vitamin D supplementation. A family history of osteoporosis also should be noted. The patient should be asked about any prior fractures, with focus given to low-energy ground-level fall mechanisms and any fractures after the age of 40.

**Physical Exam**

Patients with SCI will present with varying clinical pictures, depending on the level of the injury. The clinician should note the specific injury type and classification. Descriptive categories include:

- Paraplegia

- SCI causing dysfunction from the trunk/pelvic regions to the lower extremities
- Patients have spared upper extremity function which preserves varying levels of independent mobility

- Tetraplegia

- 
              
- SCI injuries at the level of the cervical spine, leading to dysfunction of the upper extremities, trunk/pelvic regions, and lower extremities
              
              
- Patients are particularly susceptible to progressive losses in BMD as well as spontaneous VCFs without an apparent mechanism

- Complete SCI

- 
              
- Patient is diagnosed with a complete SCI in the acute setting after resolution of the spinal shock state (i.e., after the return of the patient’s bulbocavernosus reflex)
              
              
- Patients have no spared motor or sensory function below the defined level of injury (i.e., American Spinal Injury Association [ASIA] A injuries)

- Incomplete SCI

- 
              
- Injuries are subdivided into syndromes of clinical manifestation based on the anatomic area of injury to the spinal cord
              
              
- All of these syndromes demonstrate some preserved motor or sensory function below the defined level of injury
              
              
- Syndromes include the following:
              
              
- 
                  
- Anterior cord 
                  
                  
- Posterior cord 
                  
                  
- Central cord 
                  
                  
- Cauda equina 
                  
                  
- Conus medullaris 
                  
                  
- Brown-Sequard

In addition to documenting a comprehensive motor and sensory exam, careful palpation and heightened clinical suspicion for spontaneous/occult fractures are critical. The most common location for spontaneous fractures is in the sublesion regions, especially the lower extremity long bones.

Much attention should be given to the patient sustaining a fragility fracture, and early follow-up with an appropriate practitioner is highly encouraged to initiate treatment. Unfortunately, osteoporosis follow-up rates, even after fragility fractures have occurred, remain relatively low. Automated follow-up systems and fracture liaison services are two increasingly popular strategies to help improve on the historically reported and strikingly low follow-up rates of 1% to 10%.