Clinical presentation of Aspergillus-related infections manifests on a large spectrum. There are two important variables: underlying immune status and underlying pulmonary disease.

This spectrum can range from acute bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, chronic pulmonary aspergillosis, bronchitis, acute community-acquired, chronic cavitary nodules/aspergilloma to invasive disease in those severely immunocompromised.

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, most commonly found in patients with underlying asthma/cystic fibrosis, presents as asthma (shortness of breath with associated wheezing) with recurrent exacerbations which could in some cases be complicated by systemic symptoms such as fever, malaise, bronchial obstruction, or brown mucous plugs. This can be associated with allergic fungal rhinosinusitis characterized by common symptoms of sinusitis but associated with dark-colored nasal discharge.

Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis presents as a progressive course over months of fatigue, malaise, fever, night sweats, shortness of breath, weight loss, cough, hemoptysis, and sputum production. Its presentation also ranges from a spectrum of aspergilloma, aspergillus nodule, chronic cavitary aspergillosis, chronic fibrosing aspergillosis, and subacute invasive pulmonary aspergillosis formerly known as chronic necrotizing aspergillosis.

Of note, subacute invasive aspergillosis is present in patients with evidence of immunosuppression, however, whereas invasive presentations have a short progression of 4 weeks, subacute presentation progresses over the course of 1 to 3 months.

Invasive aspergillosis is commonly seen in states of severe immunosuppression such as organ transplanted patients, AIDS, prolonged neutropenia, advanced cancer, prolonged use of steroids. It most frequently presents as a pulmonary infection after airway inoculation of conidia, however gastrointestinal and skin forms are also seen. Suspicion for pulmonary aspergillosis in the setting of the comorbidities mentioned above should arise if any of the following present: fever, shortness of breath, hemoptysis, cough, pleuritic chest pain. Tracheobronchitis is commonly seen in organ transplant patients. Rhinocerebral aspergillosis is seen in the setting of hematological malignancies in neutropenic patients. Disseminated infection correlates with poor prognosis, and it can be seen affecting organs such as the brain, (brain abscesses and infarction), eye (endophthalmitis), skin (cutaneous aspergillosis), liver, heart (endocarditis), and kidneys.