Initially approved in 2012, vismodegib is the first FDA-approved pharmacologic agent that targets the Hedgehog signaling pathway (Sonic Hedgehog, SHH), a pathway involved in many basal cell carcinomas. Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC), accounting for over one-half of all NMSC diagnoses. BCC affects over 3.3 million people a year in the United States. Approximately 40% of patients diagnosed with BCC will develop another BCC within five years of the initial diagnosis. Management is primarily with surgical intervention, except in some cases that utilize topical therapy. Not all patients are suitable candidates for surgery or topical therapy due to locally advanced or metastatic basal cell carcinoma; this is when vismodegib has a place in therapy.

Vismodegib indications include the following:

- Metastatic basal cell carcinoma

- Locally advanced basal cell carcinoma that has recurred following surgery

- Patients who are not candidates for surgery

- Patients who are not candidates for radiation therapy

Vismodegib first received approval after the results of the ERIVANCE study, which showed results of treating locally or advanced metastatic basal cell carcinoma in situations where simple excision would not result in a cure. The ERIVANCE study showed a response rate of 45% in those that had locally advanced disease. In patients with metastatic basal cell carcinoma, an independently assessed response rate was 30%. A systematic review showed that patients with locally advanced basal cell carcinoma had a complete response rate in the range of 0% to 54.1%, with a weighted average of 31.1%. Partial response rates for patients with locally advanced disease were between 25.5% and 66.7%, with a weighted average of 33.6%. A partial response indicated a greater than 30% reduction in total tumor size, and a complete response rate indicated that no residual basal cell carcinoma tumor was present within subsequent biopsies.

Recently, researchers studied vismodegib as neoadjuvant therapy. In an open-label clinical trial of 15 patients using vismodegib as a neoadjuvant treatment before surgery in high-risk basal cell carcinoma, there was a decrease in the final surgical defect size by 34.8% with no recurrence, and no skipped areas were present in the resectioned tumor blocks. The study was small, and only 11 patients completed therapy with vismodegib. However, future studies may examine this topic further.