# Continuing Education Activity

The management of hearing loss is challenging and complex. To achieve good outcomes, the goals and objectives of hearing loss management must be defined. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of hearing loss and highlights the role of the interprofessional team to address it, and it specifically highlights the role of teams in caring for patients afflicted with hearing loss.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiologies of hearing loss.
- Describe potential complications associated with hearing loss.
- Describe the teamwork necessary to successfully treat patients with hearing loss.
- Explain why careful planning and discussion with other professionals involved in the management of the patient affected by hearing loss will lower the associated morbidity and improve patient outcomes.

# Introduction

Hearing loss is an extremely common medical condition, progressing in incidence and severity with age.

# Etiology

Normal hearing function involves sound waves arriving at the auricle, passing through the external auditory canal (EAC), causing a vibration of the tympanic membrane.

Hearing loss can be conductive, sensorineural, or mixed.

Sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) usually results from problematic transmission of the stimuli at or after the cochlea.

Hearing loss that involves problematic transmission before and after the cochlea is called mixed hearing loss.

There are multiple reasons for hearing impairment. In the pediatric population, genetic causes are the most common, accounting for more than 50% of hearing loss. Genetic causes involve various syndromes that have hearing loss as one of their features; however, there is an entire entity of non-syndromic genetic hearing loss, wherein patients suffer hearing loss while the rest of their function is normal.

Age-related hearing loss involves a gradual reduction of the hearing capacity of the individual and poor speech discrimination scores, most noticeable initially in noisy environments, which is likely related to age-related degeneration of the cochlea in various sites, particularly the hair cells.

# Epidemiology

Hearing loss affects approximately 0.5 to 1% of children in the United States and can be profound, mild, or moderate.

# Pathophysiology

Hearing loss is a condition that occurs when the sound transmission from the outer ear to the brain suffers a disruption. The disruption can happen at any stage, either before or after the cochlea, and the hearing loss is conductive or sensorineural, respectively. If both sites, pre and post the cochlea, are affected, then the hearing loss is characterized as mixed.

# History and Physical

The history in pediatric cases is critical for early diagnosis of hearing loss. This history involves questions regarding the prenatal history of the child, their delivery, and the first days of life, as well as the postnatal history up until the moment of the symptom presentation, as well as a family history of hearing loss. A child with hearing loss may present with non-reaction to sounds, behavioral problems, speech issues, language delay, or even school failure, as well as mispronouncing words. Family history, especially if there is a member with early hearing loss, also has great value in suspecting hearing loss.

Adult history acquisition is more straightforward and involves questions regarding the onset of symptoms, the severity, the presence of vertigo, neurological symptoms, infections, and other conditions that could be related to hearing loss. Past medical history, as well as family history, along with work and noise exposure, are also important. In this way, there is a differentiation between the causes of hearing loss, and the clinician can proceed to the appropriate investigations.

Physical examination involves a full otolaryngology examination, with otoscopy bilaterally (including pneumatic otoscopy) to rule out any obvious conductive hearing loss.

# Evaluation

An accurate hearing evaluation is possible for the population of all ages, though there are specific limitations that are age- or cognition-related regarding formal audiometric evaluation that may complicate the picture. According to the American Academy of Pediatrics as well as the Joint Committee on Infant Hearing, all infants should undergo a hearing evaluation to rule out any hearing impairment at birth or by the age of one month.

Hearing loss evaluation can differ according to the age of the child. BAER (brainstem audio-evoked response) test is the method for early diagnosis of hearing loss in newborns and infants. Otoacoustic emissions are also an option in newborns, and it is an easy, inexpensive technique, but they are less reliable than BAER tests. Finally, audiometry works with older children, aged 4 to 5 and older, who can respond to sound stimuli according to instructions. There are age-specific audiometric tests that can be performed. Young, pre-lingual children can be conditioned to respond to play stimuli that can assess whether they can hear. This method of testing is not ear-specific and can only confirm they have at least one ear that can hear at a given test level. This is important because as long as there is one ear that hears at a normal level, normal language development can be expected. Tympanograms and audiograms are of value in adults and children but provide information only regarding the mobility of the tympanic membrane.

# Treatment / Management

Management of conductive hearing loss focuses on the treatment of the underlying disease. Conservative methods such as removal of the foreign body, microsuction of the cerumen, or discharge in the ear canal are necessary if the ear canal is blocked

Conservative treatment of sensorineural hearing involves the use of assistive listening devices and amplification. Hearing aids are devices designed to improve audition up to 40 to 60 dB with good results. They require individualized fittings and venting plans and can be very expensive.  The overall results are very good.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for hearing loss is very broad as the condition has various causes. More than 300 congenital syndromes are related to hearing loss. Also, conductive hearing loss, as well as SNHL, has multiple triggering factors mentioned in the Etiology section. Therefore, a thorough history and clinical examination are key for correct diagnosis and management. The most important step is the physical examination and comprehensive audiogram to rule out easily correctible causes such as cerumen or Eustachian tube dysfunction. This must be performed before a more advanced workup is entertained.

# Staging

According to the American National Standards Institute, hearing loss ranking is as follows:

- Slight hearing loss: 16 to 25 dB

- Mild hearing loss: 26 to 40 dB

- Moderate hearing loss: 41 to 55 dB

- Severe hearing loss: 71 to 90 dB

- Profound: over 90 dB

# Prognosis

The prognosis of hearing loss varies between the multiple types. Sudden SNHL prognosis is very dependent on several factors such as the severity of the disease, age, co-morbidities, vertigo, and the shape of the audiogram. This is discussed in a separate StatPearls article.

# Complications

Complications of hearing loss in children involve speech delay and failure to thrive in school. Any child with speech delay requires a formal hearing evaluation, as this is the most common cause.

Adult patients, who are frequently elderly, can easily become isolated and depressed if their hearing loss is not addressed.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient education is critical both in children and adults. Hearing loss in children is very demanding, as parents need to understand how to communicate with their child as well as ensure their child's normal linguistic and social development. Parent education on how to evaluate their child's hearing as well as when to seek help is crucial.

Adult and elderly patients need to be educated carefully regarding how to use their hearing aids properly as well as when they require a new consultation with their otologist. Frequent hearing checks and hygiene of the hearing aids are essential factors to ensure the best hearing quality in the long term.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional teams are crucial in hearing loss diagnosis and management. The team responsible for the patients suffering from the condition includes the otolaryngologist, the speech and language therapist, the clinical geneticists, genetic counselors, audiologists as well as pediatricians, early hearing intervention, specialty-trained nurses, and family support specialists if the patient is a child. The various specialties cooperate to reach the correct diagnosis and ensure the best quality of management takes place and the patient has the most optimal hearing result possible.