Initial treatment in the emergency department consists of removal from the exposure and decontamination of the patient. After the patient and department are safe from exposure, supportive measures should begin, including oxygen and intravenous (IV) fluids. Monitor and manage any complications of the toxicity, such as respiratory distress, gastrointestinal bleeding, renal failure, and bowel perforation. GI decontamination should be attempted if possible, although there are risks of perforation. Charcoal which is not a highly effective binding metal should still be attempted, in addition to whole bowel irrigation, even if only minimally effective. Chelation should be initiated early in mercury exposure cases as it may decrease the toxic effects. Inorganic mercury and elemental mercury can be treated with an initial course of intramuscular dimercaprol and then followed by oral succimer. The dosing regimen for dimercaprol starts at 5 mg/kg per dose every 4 hours for 48 hours, followed by 2.5 mg/kg per dose every 6 hours for 48 hours, and then 2.5 mg/kg per dose every 12 hours for 7 days. Oral succimer follows this treatment at a dose of 10 mg/kg per dose orally 3 times a day for 5 days, then twice daily for 14 days. Organic exposures should not be treated with dimercaprol as there is evidence it can exacerbate neurologic toxicity.  In these cases, the only succimer should be administered. It is controversial whether peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis is beneficial due to the high degree of protein binding and distribution, although dialysis may be necessary due to renal damage. In addition, exchange transfusions should be attempted, but there is no supporting evidence of improved outcomes.