The WHO grade system is based on the histological features of meningioma.

Grade 1 constitutes more than 80% of meningiomas, includes nine histological variants, and lacks anaplastic features that can be seen in other grades. These variants include meningothelial, fibroblastic, transitional or mixed, psammomatous, angiomatous, microcystic, secretory, lymphoplasmacyte-rich, and metaplastic subtypes.

Grade 2 are atypical lesions characterized by three or more of the following: necrosis, sheet-like growth, prominent nuclei, increased cellularity, or high nucleus/cytoplasm ratio. An increased mitotic activity (4-19 mitoses per 10 high-power fields) will also indicate an atypical tumor. The histological variations included in this grade include atypical, clear, and choroid cell subtypes. A meningioma with brain invasion is now considered a grade 2 tumor.

Grade 3 are anaplastic, malignant lesions that can be similar to high-grade sarcomas, carcinoma, or melanomas with a high rate of distant metastases. A high mitotic activity (20 or more mitoses per 10 high-power fields) will also indicate a grade 3 lesion. The histological variations of this grade include papillary and rhabdoid subtypes.

Cystic meningioma represents a meningioma with intratumoral or peritumoral cysts. It accounts for about 4 to 7% of meningiomas.

Type 1 represents a single or multiple intratumoral cysts located centrally, mainly within the tumor. Type 2 represents a single or multiple intratumoral cysts located peripherally to meningioma and surrounded by the tumor cells. Type 3 represents a single or multiple peritumoral cysts located peripherally to the meningioma lying adjacent to the parenchyma. Type 4 represents a single or multiple peritumoral cysts with walls formed by the arachnoid located between the meningioma and adjacent brain parenchyma. Another classification, el-Fiki, explain the association between the cyst contents and location categorized into four types.

Type A represents a cystic meningioma containing CSF or clear fluid divided into two locations, A1 and A2. A1 represents an extratumoral cystic meningioma containing CSF and surrounded by an arachnoid membrane. A2 represents an extratumoral cystic meningioma containing clear fluid not surrounded by an arachnoid membrane. Type B represents a cystic meningioma containing a xanthochromic fluid divided into two locations, B1 and B2. B1 represents an extratumoral cystic meningioma not surrounded by a wall. B2 represents an intratumoral cystic meningioma surrounded by a thin rim of an enhancing tumor. Type C is a cystic meningioma containing a yellowish or dark brown fluid located intratumorally. Type D is a cystic meningioma containing both clear fluids of peritumoral or extratumoral cysts and small intratumoral dark brown cysts.

Meningioma en plaque (MEP) is another type of meningioma described as a carpet or sheet-like lesion. It can cause extensive angioinvasion to bones, dura, and soft tissues. These tumors grow along the dural surface and can significantly involve bony structures such as the sphenoid ridge and calvarial bones hence causing intraosseous infiltration. MEP is classified as WHO grade 1, accounting for 2 to 9% of all meningiomas, mainly occurring intracranial and rarely found in the spine.

Radiation-induced meningioma (RIM) is a tumor that has a latent occurrence and develops as a complication from iatrogenic or environmental exposure to radiation. The incidence of RIM is not well established yet in the literature; however, these tumors have a long latency period from 2 to 63 years, with an average of approximately 38 years following radiation exposure. A high dose of radiation exposure is linked with high grades of RIM and higher tumor recurrences.

Ossified meningioma is an uncommon slow-growing tumor characterized by complete ossification or calcification. The ossification is different from those seen in psammomatous meningiomas.