The physician must assess the patient's posture, which is a crucial indication of TMJ dysfunctions. Facial symmetry or asymmetry is the primary indication of TMJ dysfunction. Any somatic dysfunction that leads to exaggeration or restriction of motion may act as an indication. Specifically, the following conditions may initially indicate TMJ dysfunction:

- TMJ restriction-led pain

- Mandible restriction

- Neck pain

In cases of temporomandibular dysfunctions, the physician goes through a thorough observational phase by palpating the TMJ during the mouth's opening and closing. There is a noticeable midline deviation of the mandible in cases of dysfunctions with complaints of pain. The physician may also hear clicking and popping sounds during mouth opening. Abnormalities may specifically appear in:

- Cervical spine

- 
              
- Occipital joint, C2, and C3

- Cranial bones

- 
              
- Noticeable via craniosacral motion

- Highlighted within temporal bones and muscles, including:

- 
              
- 
                  
- suprahyoid muscles
                  
                  
- ipsilateral temporalis
                  
                  
- masseter
                  
                

              
              
- medial and lateral pterygoids

The physician may also check for tenderness within shoulder muscles along with assessing for muscular spasms or imbalances. The patient's jaw measurements may also indicate dysfunction; an average adult can open their mouth up to 40 mm in length.