# Continuing Education Activity

Umbilical cord prolapse is when the umbilical cord exits the cervical os before the fetal presenting part. Compression of the cord results in vasoconstriction and resultant fetal hypoxia, which can lead to fetal death or disability if not rapidly diagnosed and managed. This activity reviews the diagnosis and management of patients with umbilical cord prolapse in the emergency department and highlights the role of early recognition and interprofessional involvement in improving patient outcomes.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the clinical presentation of umbilical cord prolapse.
- Outline the key steps in the acute management of umbilical cord prolapse.

- Review alternative management strategies that can be utilized after initial attempts at funic decompression have failed or in cases where obstetric care is not immediately available. 
- Explain strategies to improve care coordination between the interprofessional teams caring for patients with umbilical cord prolapse to improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Umbilical cord prolapse (UCP) occurs when the umbilical cord exits the cervical opening before the fetal presenting part. It is a rare obstetric emergency that carries a high rate of potential fetal morbidity and mortality. Resultant compression of the cord by the descending fetus during delivery leads to fetal hypoxia and bradycardia, which can result in fetal death or permanent disability. Early recognition and intervention are paramount to the reduction of adverse outcomes in the fetus.

# Etiology

Certain features of pregnancy increase the risk for the development of umbilical cord prolapse by preventing appropriate engagement of the presenting part with the pelvis. These include fetal malpresentation, multiple gestations, polyhydramnios, preterm rupture of membranes, intrauterine growth restriction, preterm delivery, and fetal and cord abnormalities.

# Epidemiology

Estimates of the incidence of umbilical cord prolapse range from 1.4 to 6.2 per 1000.

# History and Physical

The occurrence of fetal bradycardia in the setting of ruptured membranes should prompt immediate evaluation for potential cord prolapse. There are two forms of umbilical cord prolapse.

# Evaluation

Umbilical cord prolapse is a clinical diagnosis and should be considered in the case of fetal bradycardia or recurrent variable decelerations, especially if they occur immediately after rupture of membranes. The diagnosis is confirmed by palpation of a pulsatile mass in the vaginal vault. No radiographic or laboratory confirmation is available, and funic decompression should be attempted as soon as the diagnosis is suspected. Antenatal ultrasound for cord presentation has been demonstrated to be a poor predictor of umbilical cord prolapse.

# Treatment / Management

The definitive management of umbilical cord prolapse is expedient delivery; this is usually by cesarean section. In rare cases, vaginal delivery or operative vaginal delivery may be faster and, thus, preferable, but this should only occur under the presence and guidance of an experienced obstetrician.

Until delivery is possible, the cornerstone of management of umbilical cord prolapse is funic decompression, relieving the pressure on the cord by elevation of the fetal presenting part. Studies suggest that the interval to funic decompression may be more important to outcomes than interval to delivery.

If the cord is visibly protruding from the introitus, it should remain warm and moist because the ambient temperature is significantly colder than the temperature in the uterus and can result in vasospasm of the umbilical arteries, contributing to fetal hypoxia.

In very rare cases of umbilical cord prolapse in peri-viable pregnancies, case studies demonstrate that conservative management may allow the continuation of the pregnancy until reaching a more desirable gestational age.

Pre-viable gestational age, lethal fetal abnormalities, or fetal demise are not indications for expedient delivery, and instead, a dilation and evacuation or labor induction should be the therapeutic choice, dependent on gestational age or maternal preference.

# Differential Diagnosis

Potential causes of a palpable mass in the vaginal vault include fetal malpresentation.

# Prognosis

The rate of fetal mortality in umbilical cord prolapse is estimated to be less than 10%.

# Complications

Outcomes for umbilical cord prolapse have drastically improved in recent years.

# Consultations

Emergent obstetric consultation is necessary for umbilical cord prolapse occurring in the emergency department. The attending clinicians should attempt maneuvers for funic decompression until definitive management is available.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Many patients in resource-rich countries are opting for childbirth at home under the supervision of a non-physician attendant such as a midwife. Cases of umbilical cord prolapse that occur outside the hospital carry a nearly 20 times increased rate of mortality. As such, patients with increased risk of prolapses, such as those with fetal malpresentation or umbilical cord abnormalities, should be strongly discouraged from delivering outside of the hospital. Concentration on other portions of their birth plan, such as a silent birth or minimal pharmacologic intervention, may help these patients decide to deliver in the hospital. Since umbilical cord prolapse may happen in patients without risk factors, training for non-physician birth attendants in the early recognition and intervention in umbilical cord prolapse may lead to improved fetal outcomes in these cases.

Patients themselves should also be counseled to recognize cord prolapse in the scenario of a gush of fluid followed by the feeling of vaginal pressure or something in the vagina. The patient should be instructed to call an ambulance and assume a knee-chest position while waiting for help to arrive.

Given the iatrogenic risk factors for umbilical cord prolapse, physician education also has a role to play in decreasing the frequency of this condition. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends against routine amniotomy in normally progressing labor unless needed for fetal monitoring.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Knowledge of the risk factors for umbilical cord prolapse does not decrease its occurrence

Umbilical cord prolapse cases require an interprofessional team approach to care. This team includes physicians and specialists, as well as specialty-trained neonatal nursing staff. Through collaborative team communication, optimal care can be the result, with the best possible patient outcomes for both the mother and the neonate. [Level 5]