The labyrinthectomy procedure can be performed by either a transcanal approach or a transmastoid approach.

**Transcanal Labyrinthectomy**

It begins as a long tympanomeatal flap centered over the posterior superior quadrant of the tympanic membrane. Once the flap has been elevated, the scutum may need to be curetted in order to completely visualize the stapes footplate and the round window niche. As the flap is being elevated and the scutum is curetted, care is taken to avoid injuring the chorda tympani nerve. The incudostapedial joint is then separated, the stapedial tendon is ligated, the incus is removed, and the stapes along with the footplate are gently rocked out of the oval window.

Removal of the promontory between the oval and round windows allows for adequate visualization of the vestibule. Care is taken not to suction the perilymph so as not to disrupt the positions of the membranous neuroepithelial tissue. A 4 mm right-angle hook is then extended superiorly medial to the horizontal facial nerve to gently excise the utricle neuroepithelium from the elliptical recess. The hook is then used to palpate and excise the ampullae of the superior and lateral semicircular canals.

Gentle suction is used to remove the saccule from the spherical recess taking care not to injure the medial wall of the vestibule and cause a cerebrospinal fluid leak from the internal auditory canal. The right-angle hook can then be used medial to the vertical facial nerve to palpate and excise the ampulla of the posterior semicircular canal. Alternatively, drilling of the bone posterior to the round window can identify the singular nerve which can subsequently be sectioned. Once the procedure has been completed, the middle ear is packed with gel-foam soaked in gentamicin to chemically ablate any remaining neuroepithelium that may have been missed.

**Transmastoid Labyrinthectomy**

It begins with a complete mastoidectomy. Exposure is obtained through a postauricular curvilinear incision, raising of anterior and posterior flaps at the level of the superficial temporal fascia, and a T-shaped incision through the periosteum with the top of the T at the linea temporalis and the vertical segment extending toward the mastoid tip. An anterior subperiosteal flap is elevated toward the ear canal until the edge of the bony canal has been reached, and the spine of Henle has been identified.

A posterior subperiosteal flap is elevated to allow for adequate exposure of the mastoid cortex and placement of a Wietlander retractor. A complete mastoidectomy is then performed, identifying the tegmen mastoideum superiorly, the sigmoid sinus posteriorly, and thinning the bony external auditory canal anteriorly. Medially, the lateral semicircular canal and the antrum are identified. At this point, the labyrinthectomy procedure begins. Using a 3 mm diamond burr, the air cells surrounding the otic capsule of the semicircular canals are removed. These include air cells lateral to the SSC and extending into the subarcuate area as well as air cells posterior to the PSC and extending superiorly to the crus communis. Once the semicircular canals have been identified, the labyrinth is typically first entered at the dome of the LSC.

Care is taken to enter LSC superiorly and to avoid drilling past the inferior edge of the lumen in order to minimize the chance of facial nerve injury. The LSC is followed anteriorly to its ampulla, which is signified by an obvious increase in caliber compared to the lumen of the canal itself.  The lateral semicircular canal is then followed posteriorly toward the dome of the PSC, where the lumen of the PSC is entered. This is followed inferiorly and slightly anteriorly until the ampulla is reached. As this is being done, care is taken to avoid drilling inferior to the inferior border of the lumen of the PSC in order to avoid possible injury to the jugular bulb. Also, note that the ampulla of the PSC is medial to the facial nerve.

The PSC is then followed superiorly to the crus communis, and the posterior limb of the SSC is identified. This is then traced superiorly and anteriorly toward the dome of the SSC. Care is taken to stay inferior to the superior border of the lumen to avoid injuring the tegmen. Note that drilling the SSC typically results in some bleeding from the subarcuate artery that can be stopped with bone wax or bipolar cautery. The SSC is then followed anteriorly until its ampulla. Drilling then continues deep to the LSC between the ampulla of the LSC and PSC to enter the vestibule widely. At this point, a small suction and a joint knife are used to gently scrape all neuroepithelial elements from the vestibule as well as all three ampullae. Gelfoam soaked with gentamicin can be used to pack the vestibule and ampullae based on the surgeon’s preference to chemically ablate any residual neuroepithelium.