Several techniques are available to screen for hearing loss. Newborn screening is typically via OAE and/or ABR, with further diagnostic testing including tympanometry, behavioral, and pure-tone audiometry as needed. The role of imaging and genetic testing in the evaluation of pediatric hearing loss will also be briefly discussed below.

**Otoacoustic Emissions**

A probe is placed within the child's ear and serves as both a stimulus emitter and recorder. Standard testing utilizes multiple frequencies ranging from 2000 Hz to 5000 Hz. Many practices use TEOAE for screening purposes, although both TEOAE and DPOAE are acceptable. Results are binary and qualitative with either a "pass" or "refer" result based on the presence or absence, respectively, of cochlear microphonics.

**Auditory Brainstem Response**

Earphones are placed in the child's ear, and electrodes are placed on the scalp. If the patient is a newborn or young child, feeding and performing diaper hygiene may facilitate sleep. The earphones emit a sound signal ranging in frequency and intensity that are detectable by electrical changes seen on a monitor. The results can be viewed at waves I to V, representing the anatomic landmarks described in the Anatomy & Physiology section.

**Tympanometry**

An ear probe with a soft tip (immittance probe) is placed within the ear canal of the test ear, with the tip sealing the ear to maintain pressure. The pressure within the external ear is changed while the child hears low-frequency noise stimuli. Recordings of the movement of the tympanic membrane are obtained. The standard probe tone is a 226 Hz signal, which is used for most purposes in children over six months of age. Some research suggests that a 1000 Hz probe-tone may be more accurate at diagnosing middle ear effusions in children under six months old due to improved stiffening of the tympanic membrane with a higher frequency probe tone.

A typical tympanogram indicates the ear canal volume in cubic centimeters, the maximum pressure in decapascals (daPa), and the peak compliance in milliliters (ml). "Type A" tympanograms suggest normal middle ear function with peak compliance between -100 and +100 daPa and compliance from 0.3 to 1.5ml. "Type Ad" and "Type As" tympanograms demonstrate highly compliant and less compliant middle ear systems, respectively. "Type B" or flat tympanograms occur when there is no identifiable peak compliance, usually due to the presence of middle ear fluid or a perforated eardrum. An ear canal volume (ECV) larger than 1.5 cm suggests a perforation or the presence of a tympanostomy tube in the tympanic membrane. "Type C" tympanograms demonstrate peak compliance below -100 daPa and suggest negative middle ear pressure and eustachian tube dysfunction.

**Acoustic Reflex Testing**

While not commonly performed in newborns or children, reflex testing may be employed in certain circumstances. An immittance probe is inserted into the test ear, with a second probe placed in the other ear. A 1000 Hz tone is typically used in neonates, while a 226 Hz tone is more commonly used after the neonatal period. A sound stimulus is initiated at 70-80 dB sound pressure level (SPL) with 5 dB SPL increases until an acoustic reflex is detected due to stapedial contraction. Stimulus intensity should not exceed 105 dB SPL unless a conductive hearing loss is suspected. Results can be confirmed by repeating the test or increasing the intensity by 5 dB SPL and ensuring a reflex is present. Reflex testing is not performed if a patient is found to have a flat or type B tympanogram.

**Behavioral Audiometry**

Between approximately 6 to 24 months of age, children should undergo VRA testing. A patient must be able to sit unassisted and have enough head and neck control to be able to turn the entire head in the direction of a sound stimulus. Earphones are placed in the child's ear, and visual reinforcers are placed at 90 degrees to the patient's left and right sides. Examples of visual reinforcers may include a toy behind tinted glass or a video-based reinforcer. Sound stimuli are presented to both ears at different frequencies and intensities. When the child correctly turns to the direction of the ear in which the sound was presented (turning right when stimulus presented to right ear), they are rewarded with either a video clip or a view of the toy.

From ages 2-5 years, children undergo audiometric testing via CPA. Sound stimuli are presented to both ears via headphones or earphones with varying frequencies and intensities. The child participates via play, such as putting a peg into a board or placing a ball into a basket in response to a sound. Testing can occur at different frequencies until all frequencies have been tested in both ears.

**Pure-Tone Audiometry**

Pure tone audiometry is often considered the standard form of audiometry. It can generally be performed on patients older than age 5, although some patients may be able to participate earlier than five, and some may be slightly delayed. Headphones are placed on the patient's head, and sounds of varying frequencies and intensities are presented to each ear. The patient is typically given a button to depress each sound heard. An alternative set-up for children may include a verbal response, raising the hand, or clapping every time a sound stimulus is heard. This continues until all frequencies have been tested bilaterally, and threshold levels can be calculated based on the procedure results.

**Imaging**

Both CT and MRI may be used to evaluate pediatric hearing loss. However, research and consensus expert opinion favors not ordering routine imaging for children with bilateral hearing loss.

**Genetic and Laboratory Testing**

Patients with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss or ANSD may benefit from a genetic workup. Approximately 50% of congenital hearing loss is reportedly genetic, with the vast majority of genetic cases being non-syndromic in nature. Syndromic cases can be divided into autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive cases.

Common causes of autosomal dominant congenital hearing loss include Waardenburg syndrome, Crouzon syndrome, branchio-oto-renal syndrome, and neurofibromatosis. The most common causes of autosomal recessive congenital hearing loss include Usher, Pendred, and Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndromes. After audiometry, genetic testing has been shown to have the second-highest diagnostic rate of any single test for bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Asymmetric hearing loss is unlikely due to genetic causes and should not routinely prompt a genetics evaluation.

While 50% of congenital hearing loss is genetic, 50% is acquired. The most common cause of acquired hearing loss is congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, responsible for approximately 25% of all cases of congenital hearing loss. Within the first three weeks of life, CMV testing can be performed via saliva or urine samples; however, after three weeks, these samples become less accurate, and testing is performed using blot spot testing. Previous guidelines have suggested that no treatment for congenital CMV is necessary unless the patient is experiencing other symptoms of CMV infection. Limited research has shown a potential role for oral valganciclovir to improve hearing outcomes in patients with asymptomatic congenital CMV infection; however, this treatment has not been FDA approved.