Damage to descending motor pathways in the CNS results in UMN neuron signs. This can be due to various pathologies such as trauma, cerebrovascular accidents, infections, malignancies, neurodegenerative disorders, and metabolic disorders. It is important to distinguish upper motor neuron signs from lower motor neuron signs during the physical exam. Lower motor neuron signs typically present with muscle atrophy, paralysis of individual muscles, fasciculations, fibrillations, hypotonia, and hyporeflexia. UMN signs can be divided into negative and positive signs. Positive signs refer to symptoms that exhibit increased muscle activity and exaggerated spinal reflexes. These include hyperreflexia, propagation of reflexes, clonus, spasticity, flexor and extensor spasms, co-contraction, synkinesias, and spastic dystonia. Negative symptoms are those that involve loss of motor control. These include weakness, loss of dexterity, fatigue, and impaired motor planning and control. Alpha motor neurons are preserved in UMN lesions, therefore muscle atrophy, fasciculations, and fibrillation are not present as UMN signs. The specific constellation of UMN signs is dependent on the location of UMN lesions. The onset of these UMN signs is preceded by a period of spinal shock following a UMN lesion.  Understanding the range of clinical symptoms is important in the assessment of weakness.

**Spinal Shock**

Spinal shock typically refers to the interval of acute flaccid paralysis following spinal cord lesions. UMN lesions that are secondary to spinal cord damage result in flaccid paralysis of voluntary movement, lack of motor response to external stimuli, and the abolishment of spinal reflexes below the level of the lesion. This presentation of areflexia and hypotonia can also be seen in cerebral UMN lesions; however, it is not as prominent as spinal cord lesions. Generally, the more severe the UMN lesion, the more severe the symptoms. The motor findings in spinal shock are often accompanied by sensory or autonomic abnormalities depending on the specific spinal lesion. These symptoms include paralysis of the bowels and bladder, loss of sensation below corresponding spinal levels, and loss of vasomotor tone below the level of the lesion. Spinal shock is believed to be caused by the deprivation of spinal circuits of input from descending motor pathways from the cerebellum and brainstem. In a span of a few days to weeks, the spinal cord gradually regains its function, and the symptoms of spasticity and hyperreflexia develop. The exact mechanism for this transition of symptoms is still unknown.

**Weakness**

A defining characteristic of upper motor neuron weakness is its tendency to affect muscle groups rather than individual muscles as in lower motor neuron lesions. In addition, the paralysis induced by UMN lesions varies based on the severity of the damage. This is in contrast to the complete paralysis seen in lower motor neurons lesion due to the destruction of the alpha motor neurons targeting specific muscles. In the face, there is a characteristic weakness of contralateral lower facial muscles due to UMN lesions at the cerebral, midbrain, and pontine levels. The weakness of the extremities is most prominent on distal musculature compared to proximal muscles. In addition, fine finger movements are most affected due to the loss of upper motor neurons that directly innervate alpha motor neurons. Finally, there is a distinct pattern of weakness observed where the antigravity muscles of the body are most noticeably affected. For example, the extensors of the upper arm are weaker than the flexors whereas the flexors of the leg are weaker than the extensors. Other patterns of weakness in the upper extremity include weakness of wrist extension compared to flexion and weakness of shoulder abduction compared to adduction. Patterns of weakness in the lower extremity include weakness of hip abduction compared to the adduction and weakness of ankle eversion compared to inversion.

The pronator drift test is an indicator of UMN weakness. The test is performed by asking the patient to hold their arms outstretched in front of them with the palms face up, fingers spread wide, and eyes closed. The clinician may observe the hands beginning to close, pronation of the arms, and downward drift of the arms. The findings of this test are due to the weakness of the supinator compared to the pronator muscles of the arm.

**Spasticity**

Spasticity is clinically defined as a velocity-dependent increase in muscle tone. This presents as increased resistance to passive lengthening. The mechanism is related to the disinhibition of spinal reflex arcs causing increased excitability of muscle stretch reflex. As previously stated, spasticity follows a period of spinal shock due to the adaptation of spinal neuronal pathways. On physical exam, slow extension or flexion of the arms or legs will not elicit increased muscle tone. In contrast, performing brisk stretches of the of muscles elicits abrupt increases in tone followed by decreased muscular resistance. This constitutes the clasp knife phenomenon of spasticity. In addition to the velocity dependence of spasticity, it is also a length-dependent movement. There has been no linear association seen between the spasticity and weakness observed with UMN lesions. Some patients with severe weakness only exhibit mild spasticity while severe cases of spasticity are associated with minimal levels of muscle weakness. This suggests that the mechanisms for weakness and spasticity follow different paths from the central nervous system.

**Hyperreflexia**

The loss of inhibitory activity from descending motor results in disinhibition of spinal reflex circuits. This, in turn, leads to exaggerated deep tendon reflexes such as the knee jerk reflex on the physical exam. Radiation of reflexes is a commonly observed sign in a patient in the spastic state. For example, tapping on the radial periosteum may result in reflex contraction of the biceps, triceps, and finger flexors in addition to the brachioradialis. This is most likely due to the radiation of vibration waves from bone to muscle.

**Clonus**

Hyper-reflexive signs can take the form of rhythmic, involuntary contractions known as clonus. The contractions occur at frequencies between 5 and 7 Hz and are most commonly seen at the ankle and patella. It is performed by rapidly stretching and sustaining a stretch at a constant length around a muscle joint.

**Babinski and other reflexes**

Damage to the descending motor pathways causes loss of modulation of spinal reflexes. One of the most reliable upper motor neuron signs is the Babinski reflex. This is performed by stroking the lateral sole of a foot from the heel to the toe with a firm but painless stimulus. A positive sign is seen with an extension of the large toe along with extension and fanning of the remaining toes. The Babinski reflex is commonly seen in neonates but diminishes as the descending motor pathways mature. The reemergence of the reflex is strongly indicative of damage to the pyramidal tract. There are a number of Babinski-like reflexes that elicit an abnormal plantar response. Examples of these include the Chaddock sign, Moniz sign, and Oppenheim sign. The Chaddock sign is elicited by stroking the lateral malleolus. Moniz sign is tested by forcefully and passively plantar flexing the ankle. Finally, the Oppenheim sign is examined by placing pressure on the medial side of the tibia. A testable upper extremity reflex is the Hoffman reflex. The reflex is performed by stabilizing a patient’s middle finger and quickly flicking the tip of the finger. The reflex is positive if the fingers and thumb flex.

**Hyporeflexia of superficial reflexes**

The superficial reflexes are motor reactions in response to light stimulation of overlying skin. Classic superficial reflexes are the abdominal reflex, cremasteric reflex, and the corneal reflex. Decreased intensity of the superficial reflexes can be a sign of upper motor neuron damage. However, they may be difficult to analyze because the reflexes may be absent in normal individuals while it may reemerge in patients with UMN lesions. The mechanism of the hyporeflexia is not known.

**Synkinesias**

Synkinesias are the involuntary movement of one limb following the voluntary movement of a different limb. For example, voluntary flexion of the arm may result in flexion of the leg or dorsiflexion of the foot. These involuntary movements may also occur with certain automatisms such as yawning and sneezing.

**Co-contraction**

Physiologic co-contraction is the concomitant contraction of agonist and antagonist muscle groups in preparation for a movement or as a response to environmental stimuli to maintain adequate tension around a joint. A pathologic co-contraction as a UMN sign is a hyperactive stretch reflex in an antagonist muscle generated in response to normal contraction of an agonistic muscle, which results in decreased rates of rapid alternating movement. There is ultimately greater fatigability and decreased ability to perform voluntary movements.

**Pseudobulbar Palsy and Cranial Nerves VII and XII**

Nearly all cranial nerves receive bilateral innervation from the corticobulbar tract. Exceptions to this are cranial nerves VII and XII. Parts of CN VII and XII only receive unilateral innervation from higher-order processing centers. Because of the bilateral innervation of most cranial nerves, unilateral UMN lesions of the corticobulbar tract will not result in paralysis or weakness.  Bilateral lesions to the corticobulbar tract results in a set of clinical findings known as pseudobulbar palsy. Acutely, pseudobulbar palsy has a progression of symptomatology similar to spinal shock. Patients can present obtunded, comatose, or severely demented. Patients will also lose all ability to speak or swallow. As the patient recovers, their symptoms will give way to dysarthria, dysphagia, dysphonia, spastic tongue, pseudobulbar affect, and exaggerated facial reflexes. On facial reflex testing, a brisk jaw jerk can present with normal or increased palatal reflexes. Pseudobulbar affect, also known as emotional incontinence or emotional lability, are episodes of unintentional crying or laughing.

Parts of cranial nerves XII and the lower division of cranial nerve VII are unique in their unilateral innervation from higher-order motor centers. Unilateral lesions of UMN supplying these cranial nerves are sufficient in creating clinical deficits. A unilateral lesion to the UMN of CN VII manifests as a contralateral lower facial droop. A lesion to the UMN of XII manifests as tongue deviation pointing away from the side of the lesion.