The most important clinical scenario is one a patient presented to the emergency department or urgent care with acute vertigo. Most patients suffering from vertigo have a peripheral cause including benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, acute vestibular neuritis (or labyrinthitis), Meniere disease or even perilymphatic fistula or superior semicircular canal dehiscence. However, identification of central vertigo clinically is of utmost importance due to the serious underlying cause of brainstem ischemia or infarction.

The important history will include: mode of onset, duration of the vertigo, any relationship to posture, any tinnitus or hearing impairment, any previous episodes, any sick contact, any fever, any skin rash, vascular risk factors, medications and dosage, any headache, and lastly any brainstem symptoms including weakness, numbness, diplopia or dysarthria.

Important physical exam elements include the vitals and skin rash to suggest herpes zoster of the external ear. Presence of a neck bruit may indicate underlying carotid or vertebral stenosis. Cardiac exams are always important to rule out an arrhythmia especially atrial fibrillation or valvular heart disease which may cause an embolic event. The Dix-Hallpike maneuver is indicated to rule our benign positional vertigo. A focused and expedited neurological exam especially to look for a Horner syndrome and other brainstem signs are extremely important. Finally, the "HINTS" test needs to be performed on every patient suspected to be suffering from central vertigo. The test is valid only when the patient is still suffering from ongoing, continuous vertigo at the time the exam is performed.

Before describing the HINTS test/exam, the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) must be reviewed.

HINTS stands for head impulse test, nystagmus and skew deviation. This is the best bedside test to differentiate peripheral versus central vertigo. The head impulse (head thrust) test is performed by asking the patient to look at the examiner's nose. The examiner gently and quickly thrust the patient's head about 30 degrees to one side and try to look for any catch-up saccade. The test is positive when there is a catch-up saccade to one side. The side with a positive test is the side with peripheral vestibular dysfunction. It is important to note that positive head impulse test indicates a peripheral cause for vertigo and is generally not as serious prognostically. The nystagmus in peripheral vertigo is always unidirectional often with a rotary element regardless of which direction of the gaze the patient has.

On the other hand, the nystagmus in central vertigo will more commonly present with direction changing nystagmus. The nystagmus will be right beating when the patient looks to the right and change to left beating when the patient looks to the left. Any vertical nystagmus indicates a central cause for vertigo. The last part of the HINTS test is a skew deviation. Presence of a skew deviation (one eye higher than another eye) indicates a central cause for vertigo. This skew deviation can be assessed by alternately covering the patient's eyes and assessing for a vertical corrective saccade on the affected side.