# Introduction

The fossa ovalis is a depressed structure, of varying shapes, located in the inferior aspect of the right interatrial septum.

# Structure and Function

The fossa ovalis is a depressed structure located in the lower portion of the right atrial side of the interatrial septum.

# Embryology

During fetal life, ostia within the juxtaposed septa (septum primum and septum secundum) form a one-way flap valve, the foramen ovale, that allows shunting of blood from the right atrium to the left atrium.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The interatrial septum (IAS) receives vascular supply by anastomoses between the left and right branches of the anterior and posterior atrial branches of the right and left coronary arteries; termed Kugel’s artery or arteria anastomotica auricularis magna.

# Nerves

The right atrium has an angiotensinergic innervation and is a source of angiotensin II. The peripheral fibers are mainly non-catecholaminergic afferents and vagal efferents with a small amount being sympathetic.

# Muscles

The pectinate muscles or musculi pectinati compose the walls of the atria.  They are parallel ridges in the walls of the right atrium. The crista terminalis is a smooth muscular ridge in the superior portion of the right atrium.  It divides the musculi pectinati and the right atrial appendage from the smooth surface of the right atrium.

# Physiologic Variants

The fossa ovalis may assume various shapes and dimensions.

# Surgical Considerations

The (limbus) fossa ovalis represents the most direct anatomical landmark for atrial septal puncture for various procedures and may be located using the His bundle electrogram locating method.

- Patent foramen ovale and atrial septal defect repair

- Right heart catheterization

- Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty

- Radiofrequency catheter ablation

- Pulmonary vein isolation

- Left atrial appendage closure

- Catheter-based mitral valve repair

- Hemodynamic assessment of the mitral valve

- Paravalvular leak closure

- Alternative access to the left ventricle in the presence of a prosthetic aortic valve

Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) and fluoroscopy are useful for identifying the fossa ovalis, a critical landmark for electrophysiological procedures.

# Clinical Significance

The fossa ovalis may be a frequent site of cardiac pathology. Known pathologies involving the fossa ovalis include:

- Premature closure of the foramen ovale & Patent foramen ovale (PFO)

- Atrial septal defect (ASD)

- Rheumatic heart disease

- Amyloidosis

- Tumors: Prichard’s structures, myxomas, lipomatous hypertrophy of the cardiac interatrial septum

- Fossa ovalis membrane aneurysm (FOMA)

- Cardiac arrhythmias

Patent foramen ovale and atrial septal defect represent functionally similar pathologies; however, they differ in their etiology as well as clinical severity. ASDs are the result of the failure to form either of the interatrial septa (septum primum, septum secundum) or sinus venosus, whereas PFOs result when, in approximately 25% of the population, there is a failure of closure of the foramen ovale created by the septa.

Atrial septal defects may occur in isolation or as part of a syndrome. Several genes have been implicated in the development of atrial septal defects. NKX2.5 gene is known to produce secundum type defects, TBX5 gene mutations result in Holt-Oram syndrome which features ASD.

The structure and dimensions of the fossa ovalis are altered in the course of rheumatic heart disease.

Amyloidosis, characterized by diffuse thickening of heart valves, does not spare the interatrial septum. Thickening of the interatrial septum is 100% specific for amyloidosis

The fossa ovalis is a frequent site of atrial myxomas. Atrial myxomas are true neoplasms, appearing as pedunculated friable masses attached to the interatrial septum.

Prichard's structures are also benign structures derived from mature endothelial cells, they are more frequently found in individuals beyond 60 years of age and are unrelated to cardiac myxomas.

Lipomatous hypertrophy is fat accumulation greater than 2cm located on the interatrial septum. The mass characteristically spares the fossa ovalis. Arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death may be accompanying complications.

The fossa ovalis is found to be aneurysmal in some cases but is present with increased incidence in patients with stroke.

Electrophysiological studies may reveal increased automaticity in the region of the limbus fossa ovalis. Such automaticity may manifest as reversible focal atrial tachycardia and chaotic atrial rhythm and is responsive to focal radiofrequency ablation of the limbus with the restoration of cardiac function.

# Other Issues

Most patients with cryptogenic stroke have a patent foramen ovale which serves as a channel for paradoxical emboli leading to a greater incidence of cerebrovascular accidents.