**Retrobulbar Block**

- Povidone-iodine 5% ophthalmic preparation

- Topical anesthetic drops (e.g. proparacaine hydrochloride 0.5%, tetracaine hydrochloride 0.5%)

- Anesthetic agent (generally without epinephrine in seeing eyes, as it may cause vasoconstriction with resultant central retinal artery occlusion and irreversible loss of vision)

- Sterile gauze

- Syringe: 5 to 10 mL

- Needle: 23 to 25 gauge, 30 to 38 mm in length

**Periocular Nerve Blocks**

- Povidone-iodine 10% preparation

- Anesthetic agent

- Sterile gauze

- Syringe: 5 to 10 mL

- Needle: 25 to 30 gauge

**Anesthetic Agents**

The choice of local anesthetic agent is based on its pharmacologic properties and availability. The surgeon or anesthesiologist may choose to use a single agent alone or a combination of agents. The injected anesthetic agents most often used include lidocaine, mepivacaine, bupivacaine, and ropivacaine. Lidocaine and mepivacaine have a quick onset of effect, typically within 2 to 3 minutes after infiltration. Bupivacaine onset can take more than 10 minutes, and given its longer duration, can have more postoperative residual effects. Systemic toxicity is rare given the typically low volumes of medication (Table 1).

**Table 1.**Anesthetic agents and maximum recommended doses

4.5 mg/kg

(not to exceed 300 mg total)

7 mg/kg

(not to exceed 500 mg total)

2.5 mg/kg

(not to exceed 175 mg per dose, with a maximum 24-hour dose of 400 mg)

3 mg/kg

(not to exceed 225 mg per dose, with a maximum 24-hour dose of 400 mg)

**Adjunctive Medications**

Some adjuncts have been used in conjunction with local anesthetics for improved effects and outcomes. Hyaluronidase is an enzyme widely used to enhance the spread of local anesthetic through the connective tissue. This, in turn, optimizes the rate of onset and surface area with preserved tissue contour; however, it may reduce the duration of the anesthetic effect.