**History**

Like all workups, chest pain evaluation starts with taking a complete history. Start by getting a good understanding of their complaint.

- Onset: In addition to when the pain started, ask what the patient was doing when the pain started. Was the pain brought on by exertion, or were they at rest?

- Location: Can the patient localize the pain with one finger, or is it diffuse?

- Duration: How long did the pain last?

- Character: Let the patient describe the pain in his or her own words.

- Aggravation/alleviating factors: It is very important to find out what makes the pain worse. Is there an exertional component, is it associated with eating or breathing? Is there a positional component? Don't forget to ask about new workout routines, sports, and lifting. Ask what medications they have tried.

- Radiation: This may clue you into visceral pain.

- Timing: How many times do they experience this pain? For how long does it let up?

Ask about other symptoms, such as:

- Shortness of breath

- Nausea and vomiting

- Fever

- Diaphoresis

- Cough

- Dyspepsia

- Edema

- Calf pain or swelling

- Recent illness

Evaluate for any of the following risk factors:

- ACS risks: prior myocardial infarction(MI), family history of cardiac disease, smoking, hypertension (HTN), hyperlipidemia (HLD), and diabetes

- Pulmonary embolism (PE) risks: prior deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or PE, hormone use (including oral birth control), recent surgery, cancer, or periods of non-ambulation

- Recent gastrointestinal (GI) procedures like scopes

- Drug abuse (cocaine and methamphetamines)

Carefully review the patient’s medical history for cardiac history, coagulopathies, and kidney disease. Ask about family history, especially cardiac, and ask about social histories like drug use and tobacco use.

Once you have thoroughly ruled out life-threatening causes, move on to other possibilities. Pneumonia should be considered in patients with a productive cough and/or recent upper respiratory infection (URI). Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a common cause of chest pain so ask about any reflux symptoms. New exercise routines or recent trauma may help support a musculoskeletal cause.

**Physical**

The physical exam should include:

- Full set of vitals, including blood pressure (BP) measurements in both arms

- General appearance, noting diaphoresis and distress

- Skin exam for the presence of lesions (shingles)

- Neck exam for jugular venous distension (JVD), especially with inspiration (Kussmaul sign)

- Chest, palpate for reproducible pain and crepitus

- Heart exam

- Lung exam

- Abdominal exam

- Extremities for unilateral swelling, calf pain, edema, and symmetric, equal pulses