Normocalcemic secondary hyperparathyroidism also presents with a similar biochemical picture and must be ruled out before embracing a diagnosis of nPHPT. Causes of nSHPT include vitamin D deficiency (VDD) from inadequate sunlight exposure, diets poor in vitamin D (VD), eating unfortified foods, conditions producing malabsorption including bariatric surgical procedures, various medications that accelerate vitamin D metabolism, high-risk populations like older adults, malnourished children, pregnant and lactating women, HIV infection and its treatment, hypercalciuria, and chronic kidney disease, especially in the early stages.

Normocalcemic secondary hyperparathyroidism caused by hypercalciuria can result from excess sodium intake, excess tea and coffee consumption, loop diuretics like furosemide, and a thorough history will exclude these causes. Genetic defects causing hypercalciuria are rare and detected by genetic testing.

A thiazide challenge test has been reported to help differentiate HPT from hypercalciuria. In the thiazide challenge test, 50 mg of hydrochlorothiazide is given orally every day for two weeks. Thiazides will decrease urinary calcium excretion, so a patient with nSHPT due to hypercalciuria will show a decrease in urinary calcium excretion and decreased or normalized PTH, while a patient with nPHPT is likely to become hypercalcemic with only minimal or no reduction in their PTH levels.

Lithium deserves special mention. It can desensitize the calcium-sensing receptor to calcium and thereby shift the setpoint to the right, release PTH and cause nSHPT. It can unmask and also cause classical PHPT. Single PTH producing parathyroid adenomas, as well as multi-gland disease, have been reported with long-term lithium use.

Bisphosphonates and denosumab have been reported to cause hypocalcemic SHPT as well as nSHPT during treatment for osteoporosis. A case of insufficient calcium but adequate vitamin D intake with nSHPT is reported in a patient on a drug holiday from alendronate. It is important to consider these drugs when SHPT/PHPT are being entertained as diagnoses. Adequate calcium and vitamin D should be ensured in these patients, especially when malabsorption issues are present, to prevent SHPT.

Patients with cPHPT may have a coexisting vitamin D deficiency which masks their hypercalcemia. They would then present with normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism. Depending on the degree of vitamin D deficiency, they may present with bone pains, myalgia, and proximal muscle weakness. After the correction of their vitamin D deficiency, hypercalcemia is unmasked. They should be handled as other cPHPT patients; calcium supplements should not be withheld because PTH elevation occurs reflexively. Maintenance doses of vitamin D should be continued and are considered safe.

**Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia**is an inherited disorder that causes abnormally high calcium levels in the blood (hypercalcemia) but with low to moderate levels of calcium in the urine (hypocalciuria). It is always important to rule out benign familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia before making a final diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia is associated with mild hyperparathyroidism. It is caused by a mutation in the calcium-sensing receptor gene of the parathyroid gland and renal tubule. Chemically, patients will have mild hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia, hypocalciuria, hypomagnesemia, and hypophosphatemia. It is also characterized by a low calcium/creatinine clearance ratio. This can be calculated by the following: urine calcium x serum creatinine) divided by (serum calcium x urine creatinine).

An oral calcium loading test may help clarify the diagnosis of nPHPT in difficult cases:

One gram of oral calcium is given, and serum calcium and PTH values are measured at regular intervals from 0 to 120 minutes. In patients with nPHPT, there is only minimum suppression of PTH from baseline, whereas, in normal individuals and nSHPT, there is a marked decrease. Calcium loading can also be done intravenously, and the measurements made.

The ratio of the decrease in PTH (which usually happens in 80 to 120 minutes and parallels the increase in calcium after loading) and the baseline PTH is termed PTH inhibition rate (PTH-IR). The change in calcium levels from baseline to peak concentration after loading is termed delta calcium. The ratio of these two calculated values was used in one study to differentiate the various types of hyperparathyroidism. It was also recommended as a test to decide when PTH secretion becomes autonomous in SHPT due to CKD. These results are preliminary and need to be confirmed in large-scale studies.

Recently a parathyroid function index (PFI) has been described to differentiate cPHPT, nPHPT, nSHPT, and normal individuals. The product of serum total corrected calcium times PTH divided by the serum P (all in SI units) gives the PFI. A value of 34 is recommended as the cut-off to distinguish PHPT from nSHPT and normals. More testing in larger populations is required before the test can be formally recommended.