Treatment of Wilms tumor is usually nephrectomy followed by systemic chemotherapy, but some protocols initiate chemotherapy first and do the nephrectomy later. The opposite kidney may be explored to ensure that cancer has not spread, although this is unnecessary for low-stage tumors with favorable histology if imaging is negative. Lymph nodes around the aorta are sampled for staging and to improve survival.

There is no apparent significant difference in short-term morbidity, mortality out to three years, hospital readmission rate, or surgical margin status between traditional open surgery or minimally invasive techniques.  Open surgery, however, typically provides more lymph nodes in the surgical specimen.

Routine biopsies are not recommended except in unusual circumstances as a biopsy automatically increases tumor staging to Stage III.  This stage requires radiation and chemotherapy.

Postoperative radiation may or may not be administered depending on tumor histology and extent of spread. For patients without metastases who will be receiving radiation, initiation of therapy within 14 days of surgery appears to improve overall survival.

Combination chemotherapy is usually administered for more aggressive disease. Initial chemotherapy most typically includes vincristine and dactinomycin. Doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and carboplatin are also used.

In children with bilateral disease, immediate nephrectomy is not performed. Some experts attempt high-dose chemotherapy to kill the tumor cells and hopefully salvage the kidney. Bilateral nephrectomy immediately mandates dialysis, and so all efforts are made to salvage the kidneys. Repeat biopsies are required to determine if the tumor is responding to therapy.  Nephron sparing surgery can be performed in select cases.

Patients who relapse after initial combined therapy tend to have a worse prognosis than newly discovered Wilms patients.

The hepatic veno-occlusive disease can occur in patients receiving therapy for Wilms.  It is characterized by right upper quadrant pain associated with jaundice, ascites, weight gain, and/or hepatomegaly. Treatment for hepatic veno-occlusive disease is mainly supportive.