During embryogenesis and fetal development, the skeletal muscle myocyte derives from the mesodermal germ cell layer in a process called myogenesis. The process divides into three steps.

- Multi-potential mesodermal cells become myoblasts.

- Myoblasts exit from the cell cycle.

- They differentiate into skeletal muscle fibers.

Numerous factors called myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) in the myocyte play a vital role in this intricate process. Some key MRFs include Myf-5, MyoD, myogenin, and MRF4. They work at specific points in the process of myogenesis to influence gene transcription and proper myocyte functioning. Transcription factors and signal molecules from the nearby notochord, neural tube, surface ectoderm, and lateral plate mesoderm, also induce differentiation of the skeletal myocyte.

The embryonic heart is the first organ to become functional, and the developing heart shows four chambers by day thirty-two. Cardiogenic mesoderm forms cardiac myocytes as part of the process called cardiogenesis. Through an intricate network of interactions by growth factors and transcriptional regulators (Wnt, BMP, Nkx2.5, FGF, Gata4), cardiogenic mesoderm forms large parts of the ventricles, atria, and outflow tracts. The cardiogenic mesoderm also contributes to the conduction system, endocardium, and the aortic and pulmonary cushions.

The development and differentiation of smooth muscle myocytes are dependent on the various organ. For example, visceral smooth muscle development is different from the development of vascular smooth muscle. Thus, there have been smooth muscle precursors derived from predominantly form mesoderm, but neuroectoderm and endoderm are also contributory. Similar to skeletal and smooth muscle myocytes, numerous factors influence the development and differentiation of smooth muscle myocyte.

The myogenesis of skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle is very complex and deserve individual attention beyond the scope of this article.