Traumatic aortic transection or rupture is associated with a sudden and rapid deceleration of the heart and the aorta within the thoracic cavity. Anatomically, the heart and great vessels (superior vena cava, inferior vena cava, pulmonary arteries, pulmonary veins, and aorta) are mobile within the thoracic cavity and not fixed to the chest wall, unlike the descending abdominal aorta. Injury to the aorta during a sudden deceleration commonly originates near the terminal section of the aortic arch, also known as the isthmus. This portion lies just distal to the take-off of the left subclavian artery at the intersection of the mobile and fixed portions of the aorta. As many as 80% of patients with aortic transection die at the scene before reaching a trauma center for treatment. For those individuals who survive the initial injury and reach an emergency department, 30% will succumb to their injury within the first 24 hours. Patients that do survive have sustained either incomplete or non-circumferential lesions to the intima and media. The tunica adventitia, or outermost vessel wall, and mediastinal pleura can prevent free rupture in this clinical scenario. These types of injuries are typically the result of high-energy impacts most commonly following motor vehicle crashes (81%) but also motorcycle and aircraft crashes, automobile versus pedestrian collisions, serious falls (typically 3 meters or more), and crush injuries.

Aortic injuries have traditionally thought to be the result of severe frontal or “head on” vehicle crashes. Recent data on hospital admissions involving motor vehicle accidents demonstrates, however, that side impact collisions also pose a significant risk of aortic injury. Several identifiable crash factors have a strong correlation with aortic injury and rupture. These include a change in vehicle velocity of 20 miles per hour or greater, direct impact on the patient’s side of the automobile, and intrusion of the vehicle wall into the passenger’s compartment of 15 inches or more. This same study found no correlation between the incidence of traumatic rupture and the use of safety restraints such as seatbelts and airbags.

Additionally, aortic rupture can result from penetrating trauma as well as non-traumatic rupture of chronic untreated thoracic or abdominal aortic aneurysms.