Bilirubin encephalopathy in patients with severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia has different manifestations depending on the time of presentation. The level at which unconjugated bilirubin becomes neurotoxic is unclear, and kernicterus has been reported in infants in the absence of markedly elevated levels of bilirubin on autopsy.

**Acute bilirubin encephalopathy:**has been described to evolve through three stages:

**Phase 1:**The symptoms of phase 1 are seen during the first one-two days of illness and are marked by poor feeding, lethargy, hypotonia, or frank seizures.

**Phase 2:**If the infants continue to deteriorate, they may progress to phase 2, characterized by increased tone, especially of the extensor group of muscles leading to opisthotonus and retrocollis. These signs are typically seen during the middle of the first week of illness.

**Phase 3:**This phase, seen after the first week, is mainly dominated by increased tone.

**Chronic Bilirubin encephalopathy:**This condition is present in two forms depending on the timing of symptoms.

**Chronic Bilirubin encephalopathy in the First year:**These patients present with hypotonia, exaggerated deep tendon reflexes, obligatory tonic neck reflexes, delayed motor milestones

**Chronic Bilirubin encephalopathy beyond the First year:**Highlights of this phase include movement disorders (most commonly choreoathetosis), choreo-athetoid type of cerebral palsy, dental enamel hypoplasia, upward gaze abnormality, and sensorineural hearing loss.