The diagnostic criteria for HHS were developed as a result of cases series reported by Gerich et al. Arieff and Carroll also contributed to this work in a separate study, both of which were published in 1971.

According to the recommendation of the American Diabetic Association and current international guidelines, HHS is defined by plasma glucose level greater than 600 mg/dL, plasma effective osmolarity greater than 320 mOsm/L, and absence of significant ketoacidosis.

Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic non-ketotic coma is no longer accepted as a diagnostic nomenclature because not all patients with HHS will present with coma, even in the presence of significant hyperglycemia and hyperosmolarity.

The evaluation of HHS requires a detailed history and physical examination. The onset of symptoms and the precipitating factors are very important to elicit from patients. That apart, ancillary studies are also necessary as part of the diagnostic workup.

The first test in HHS is a fingerstick to determine the serum glucose level. The value is usually between 600 to 1200 mg/dl. The higher the level of glucose, the greater the serum osmolarity and the higher the degree of dehydration.

**Glucose**

The glucose level should be monitored hourly to guard against a sudden and precipitous drop during treatment with isotonic fluid and insulin. This is to prevent the development of cerebral edema, which is the most dreaded complication in both DKA and HHS. The risk of cerebral edema is higher in HHS.

**Hemoglobin A1C**

This is a measure of long-term glycemic control and is a useful tool in the assessment of new-onset diabetes mellitus.

**Serum Osmolarity**

The serum osmolality is very high in HHS. Levels between 320 to 400mOsm/kg are very common in HHS. Normal serum osmolarity is around 280 -290 mOsm/kg. Higher serum osmolarity is associated with alteration in the level of consciousness and might eventually lead to a coma.

The comprehensive metabolic panel allows for the determination of electrolyte derangements seen in HHS.

**Sodium**

The sodium level is falsely low (pseudohyponatremia). The hyperglycemic state creates an osmotic gradient, drawing water from the intracellular space into the extracellular space. The correct or true sodium level is usually calculated using the formula:

Corrected Sodium = Measured sodium + (((Serum glucose - 100)/100) x 1.6)

**Potassium**

The level of potassium might be high or low. A low level of insulin can cause an extracellular shift of potassium. However, because of ongoing urinary losses, the total body potassium is low in both HHS and DKA. Care must be taken to avoid aggressive correction of hypokalemia in HHS because of decreased glomerular filtration rate from dehydration.

**Bicarbonate**

Bicarbonate level is usually close to normal in HHS, around 8 to 12 mmol/L, because the production of ketone bodies is minimal as compared to DKA, where the bicarbonate level is usually very low. The anion gap in HHS is normal or close to normal. On the contrary, the anion gap is usually above 12 mmol/L in DKA. The anion gap is determined by the formula:

(Na +K) - (Cl +HC0)

If the anion gap is high in HHS, it is usually because of the production of lactic acid from tissue hypoperfusion and decreased circulation.

**Magnesium**

The magnesium level might be low in HHS.

**Phosphorus**

Hyperphosphatemia is common in HHS, especially if rhabdomyolysis is a complication. This is a result of muscular tissue breakdown. Administration of insulin and hydration with fluid might lower the phosphorus level as it is driven back into cells. Some of the phosphorus also get excreted by the kidneys as end-organ perfusion improves.

**Ketones**

Ketonemia is very minimal in HHS. Electrolytes should be monitored serially every 2 to 3 hours in the management of HHS.

**Arterial Blood Gases**

The role of blood gas is to determine the level of acidosis. In HHS, pH is usually above or around 7.30. The pC0 might be low from hyperventilation. In DKA, serum pH is usually much lower ranging from 6.8 to around 7.2 on initial presentation. Acidosis in HHS is mainly a result of dehydration and compromised end-organ perfusion.

Arterial blood gases should be monitored every 2 to 3 hours in HHS.

**Renal Function**

The BUN and creatine levels are usually elevated, reflecting prerenal azotemia. As hydration and insulin therapy are initiated, these values will usually drop and eventually normalize.

**Serum Enzymes**

The level of serum enzymes like creatinine kinase, aldolase, and transaminases is usually high from hemoconcentration and dehydration.

**Complete Blood Count**

The white blood cell count might be high because of the stress response or as a result of an infectious process triggering HHS. In most cases, hemoglobin and hematocrit levels are elevated. If the white count is elevated, blood culture, urine culture, and a chest X-ray might be needed to find the source of infection.

**Urine Analysis**

Urine-specific gravity is high in HHS. Glycosuria and ketonuria are also present.