HMs are dense, naturally occurring elements that cause health hazards by accumulation in the environment and living beings.

Some elements like Arsenic(As)share properties of both metals and non-metals, are known as semimetals or metalloids and listed as HM due to the toxic effects similar to metals.

The common list of non-essential HM that cause toxicity includes Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Lead (Pb), Mercury (Hg), and those that are essential to humans in trace quantities for various cellular activities like Cobalt (Co), Copper (Cu), chromium (Cr), Iron (Fe), Manganese (Mn), Molybdenum (Mo), Nickel (Ni), Selenium (Se) and Zinc (Zn).

Exposure to HMs can be natural or occupational.

**The various HMs and the risks for their toxicity appear in Tables:1 and 1A.
**

Toxicity can result from inhalation, ingestion, and skin contamination. Humans can acquire hMs as a result of activities harnessing nature like mining, fossil-burning, industrial, agriculture, consuming plants, seafood, and meat that have accumulated these HMs from contaminated soil, waterways, and seawater. Toxicity with multiple HMs can be more pronounced and cause tremendous morbidity. Some indigenous medicinal preparations contain toxic amounts of HMs. Children are more susceptible than adults. While acute toxicity results from short exposure to large doses, longterm exposure of smaller amounts results in chronic toxicity.

Industrial waste containing Hg is released into the waters. Aquatic microbes convert inorganic Hg (iHg) to organic Hg(CH3Hg). Fish consume this, and bigger fish consume the smaller fish. Humans consume the bigger fish and thus complete the food cycle and suffer HM toxicity.

When refurbishing old buildings, care is necessary when removing flaky loose paint. Sanding facilitates Pb and other toxins in the paint to be spread into the dust and atmosphere, so alternatives like suctioning or vacuuming should be used.