As with all evaluations of traumatic injuries in the prehospital setting, all EMS providers are instructed to follow advanced trauma support guidelines. This consists of a primary survey followed by a more thorough secondary survey.

After identifying a joint injury, it is imperative to promptly splint the joint and maintain proper alignment through the transport process. Joint injuries are difficult to manage, compared to other musculoskeletal injuries, given the complexities that can arise. In the prehospital setting, it can be difficult to distinguish between an isolated joint dislocation versus a joint injury with complications. Complications may include an associated fracture, injured blood vessel, or nerve injury. To provide safe management and avoid complications, it is important to treat all joint injuries in a stepwise fashion.

For stable injuries, it is important to splint the joint in the position found and avoid complications from further manipulation. In instances where the patient position does not allow for safe transport or when there is a concern for distal neurovascular compromise, subtle joint manipulation may be indicated. When considering this intervention, it is important to understand the goal of treatment. When manipulating a joint injury, the goal is not to reduce the joint but rather to return distal neurovascular function and place the extremity in the closest anatomically neutral position.

Another important aspect of properly managing musculoskeletal injuries is pain control. Analgesic medication is an important starting point when dealing with these patients and should not be withheld if there is a suspected joint injury; however, the most effective pain management in joint injuries is provided with immobilization. When a proper splint is applied to the injured joint, the underlying cause of the pain can be treated rather than treating the symptoms alone. This is done by limiting motion, which prevents further movement into the joint barrier and the severe pain that follows.