**Physiology of Fetal Circulation**

A comprehensive understanding of fetal and adult circulation is mandatory to grasp clinical and anesthetic considerations of congenital heart diseases (CHD). Fetal circulation has channels that shunt blood away from the lungs and the ventricles, which contribute to the systemic system by pumping blood into circulation. This parallel circuit permits fetal growth and development even in cardiac malformations. Three in-utero channels of the circulation shunt blood: ductus arteriosus, foramen ovale, and ductus venosus.

Well-oxygenated blood with a partial pressure of 33 mmHg enters the liver via the umbilical vein from the placenta. From there, ductus venosus shunts almost half of the blood into the inferior vena cava. Foramen ovale shunts one-third of the blood entering the right atrium into the left atrium. On the other hand, poorly oxygenated blood in the superior vena cava enters the right ventricle with only 2 or 3% blood crossing the foramen ovale. The right ventricle shunts blood into the descending aorta through the ductus arteriosus.

The fetal circulation structure allows the well-oxygenated blood from the inferior vena cava to perfuse the brain, coronary circulation, and upper extremities. The perfusion of the lower part occurs with less oxygenated blood from the ductus arteriosus. Hence, in fetal circulation, pulmonary and systemic circulation works in parallel. On the other hand, in adult circulation, the two circulations work in series that constitute the entire cardiac output.

At the time of birth, fetal circulation undergoes a remarkable transition that helps the infant adapt to the stresses of extrauterine life.

The ductus arteriosus functionally closes within a few hours of birth; however, anatomic closure occurs after several weeks. Those infants born with cyanotic heart disease, until the repair of palliative procedure, the ductus arteriosus is patent. The foramen ovale closes when the left atrial pressure exceeds the right atrial pressure within the few that occur after birth. The anatomic closure occurs after many months, and 30% of the adults may demonstrate probe patency of the foramen ovale.

The umbilical arteries and veins close right after birth and ductus venosus. There is a significant change in pulmonary vascular resistance, which is high in utero but decreases after birth. In the first 24 hours, it is lower than the systemic circulation, then gradually decreases over the next five to six weeks and more over the next two to three years. During the transition period, the pulmonary vasculature is very sensitive to hypoxemia, acidosis, or bronchospasm. It may result in elevated pulmonary artery pressure causing shunting of blood across the foramen ovale or ductus arteriosus.

**Preoperative Evaluation**

The age group presenting for surgical repair of congenital heart disease includes infants and children and is a diverse clinical population that varies considerably in anatomy, physiology, and size. A summary of preoperative evaluation is mentioned in the table below.

Palpitations or syncopeSigns and symptoms of congestive cardiac failureOther congenital abnormalities (e.g., airway, genito-urinary, skeletal, etc.)Recent hospital admissions and current medicationsPast surgical and interventional historyMost recent follow-up

Cardiac murmur, thrill, bruit, arrhythmiasTachypnea, rales, increased work of breathingPoor peripheral pulses, delayed capillary refill, bounding, or diminished pulses.Cold extremities, sweating, skin mottlingHepatomegaly, splenomegalyDependent edema

**Specific S****tudies**

**Clinical History**

The pediatric population most commonly presents for the correction of congenital heart defects. The current definition of pediatric patients by their age; is neonates ( birth to 28 days), infants (one month to one year), toddlers (one year to four years), and children (four to thirteen years).

All these patients undergo complete and detailed preoperative assessment. It should include current medications, allergies, past hospitalizations due to pulmonary infections, and any surgery, including previous anesthetic experience. The cardiac function and reserve evaluation is done by inquiring about age-appropriate activities. A crucial clinical indicator is a parent's observation of the worsening symptoms of cardiac failure, inability to keep pace with other siblings, sweating, tiring quickly, and failure to thrive.

**Physical Examination**

A physical examination is critical in assessing all the symptoms and ruling out the possibility of any issue that can delay the procedure. It includes age-specific vital signs, growth charts, and age-appropriate weight, head circumference, and height. Essential points in the physical examination include cyanosis, clubbing, symptoms of congestive cardiac failure, monitoring sites, and limitations to vascular access.

Almost 8% of children with congenital cardiac defects often have other congenital abnormalities. One must consider the likelihood of airway abnormalities in patients with congenital heart disease, especially premature and with a weight of fewer than 10 kilograms.

**Laboratory Data**

A correlation between laboratory data and clinical findings is pertinent. A child presenting with congestive cardiac failure may have iron deficiency anemia. A cyanotic patient may have erythrocytosis due to the blood's degree of desaturated hemoglobin. A high hematocrit level requires an exchange transfusion before surgery to prevent neurological sequelae associated with excessive blood viscosity. One may find prolongation of prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) in cyanosis. An anesthesiologist should be vigilant and in direct communication with the surgeon for the arrangement of blood and its blood products in case of extensive dissection with re-operation.

A preoperative detailed renal function evaluation is critical as acute kidney injury may occur in these patients during the perioperative period. Renal ultrasound rules out anatomical lesions and baseline serum creatinine and glomerular filtration rate for monitoring and preparation beforehand if the need for postoperative dialysis arises.

A chest radiograph as a screening tool provides anatomical and functional information. An organized approach to a chest radiograph includes seven steps; technique, situs, heart and chamber size, pericardium, excellent vessel anatomy, and pulmonary vascularity. It shows accuracy and reproducibility in identifying abnormal pulmonary vascularity in congenital heart disease. However, 24 to 68 % low sensitivity has decreased the ability to detect pulmonary vascularity.

A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is the gold standard for arrhythmia evaluation and the presence of sinus rhythm.

Cardiac catheterization and echocardiography data are crucial in understanding the pathophysiology and devising a surgical and anesthetic plan.

- Anatomical defects

- Saturation data to calculate the ratio of pulmonary to systemic blood flow (Qp: Qs), shunting, and V/Q mismatch

- Pressure data to compare right and left cardiac and systemic and pulmonary arterial pressures. Measure pressure gradients across valves and shunts.

- Angiographic data assess ventricular wall motion and blood flow patterns through great vessels and cardiac chambers.

- Study the current functional status of the heart and prior surgical interventions.

- Monitor the effect of interventions on the patients and assessment of reversible pulmonary artery hypertension.

Echocardiography is a critical non-invasive tool essential in diagnosing pediatric congenital heart defects. It helps define both the morphological and functional characteristics of a congenital heart defect. Compared with adults, echocardiography in pediatric patients provides information on the heart position in the thorax, the atrial situs viscerum, the vein-atrial, and the atrioventricular connections between the ventricles and ventriculoatrial connection, and the relationship of the great arteries.

Nowadays, assessments of congenital heart defects utilize MRI. It quantifies ventricle volumes, valve regurgitation, and blood flow through the heart and great vessels. It also highlights better delineation of extracardiac vascular anatomy and an assessment of previous scar tissue.

**Preoperative Preparation**

The routine preoperative preparation for surgery is rarely different for pediatrics and adults. It is crucial to have complete anesthesia equipment with various-sized airway equipment. Appropriate emergency medications in doses consistent with the patient's weight should be available. The anesthetist technician/ nurse prepares selected infusions in advance for critically ill patients. Using appropriate intravenous (IV) catheters and air-trap filters are recommended.

Routine preoperative intravenous fluids and nil-per-os (NPO) orders are according to age-specific requirements. The general rule of 2,4,6,8 is for NPO intervals in neonates, infants, and children with congenital heart disease, e.g., 2 hours for clear liquids, 4 hours for breast milk, 6 hours for formula milk, and 8 hours for solid food.

The anesthetist should avoid dehydration in these patients as this harms the hemodynamics or viscosity of blood in erythrocytosis patients. The neonates and infants also require glucose to prevent detrimental effects on the neurological outcome during the deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. It is given along with maintenance fluid in the perioperative period with 10% dextrose at 2ml/kg/hr.

As patients with congenital heart defects are psychosocially affected due to multiple surgeries and critical illness, premedication before induction alleviates anxiety in older children and adults. It helps in child separation from the parents and placement of an IV catheter. A benzodiazepine such as midazolam at a dose of 1mg/kg may be helpful in older children and adults with no history of cardiac surgery.

In patients with previous surgeries, midazolam alone may not be sufficient. Usually, an anesthetist utilizes another adjunct, such as oral or intranasal ketamine or intranasal dexmedetomidine.

One must individualize the premedication dose to the patient's need to avoid untoward side effects such as respiratory depression and hemodynamic instability. An anesthesiologist's presence is necessary for administering and assessing these patients. These patients are usually on routine use of diuretics, digoxin, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)-inhibitors. These medications should be withheld on the day of surgery to avoid exaggerated responses intraoperatively due to anesthetic agents. Those patients on prostaglandin and ionotropic infusions continue intraoperatively.

**Intraoperative Monitoring**

Multiple monitors can hinder a smooth induction as a child or infant awakens or minimally sedates, divided into pre and post-induction monitoring. Pre-induction monitoring includes a non-invasive automated blood pressure cuff, electrocardiogram, pulse oximeter, and end-tidal carbon dioxide monitor. After induction of anesthesia, the anesthetist places invasive arterial catheters in either radial or femoral arteries. In newborns, an umbilical artery may be cannulated, but it is later replaced with a peripheral arterial catheter.

In these patients, invasive blood pressure monitoring along with upper and lower extremity blood pressure monitoring is vital for detecting residual coarctation of the aorta or aortic arch/isthmus obstruction. Special considerations are given to previous cardiac procedures such as Blalock-Taussig shunt, subclavian artery patch repair or aortic coarctation, or sacrifice of an aberrant subclavian artery that compromise the ipsilateral intra-arterial pressure monitoring.

Percutaneous central venous access is a requirement in almost all cardiac surgeries.

Temperature monitoring intraoperatively occurs with either rectal, oesophageal, or nasopharyngeal temperature probe for all cardiopulmonary bypass cases.

The recent use of transcranial doppler in neonates and infants has evolved, allowing the measurement of cerebral blood flow velocity and detecting microemboli in the cerebral circulation.

**Airway Management**

Good airway management is fundamental to the anesthetic care of patients with congenital heart disease. As pulmonary vascular resistance is greatly affected by ventilatory pattern, PaO2, PaCO2, and pH, prompt control of the airway and ventilation will allow optimal pulmonary blood flow in these patients. Children with interstitial pulmonary edema have poor lung compliance and high peaked airway pressures.

During mask ventilation, care must be taken to as not to insufflate the stomach. As neonates and infants have a large tongue, the placement of an oral airway will pull the tongue away from the pharyngeal wall facilitating mask ventilation. Nasal endotracheal tubes are generally utilized for children under 2 or 3 years of age, as they provide better stability and TEE intraoperatively. However, it must be passed cautiously in patients with a bidirectional Glenn shunt or Fontan because of higher venous pressures. All patients before induction should be de-nitrogenated, even those affected by higher O2 concentrations that may compromise peripheral vascular resistance.

**Anesthesia Induction and Maintenance**

No one anesthetic induction technique is superior to others in patients with CHD. The patient's age, cardiopulmonary state, cyanosis, and emotional state all play a vital role in choosing an anesthetic technique. In patients with ventricular systolic function severely impaired, intravenous induction is the choice of anesthetic technique. A combination of sevoflurane with midazolam/fentanyl has no significant effect on the myocardium in patients with a single ventricle. Likewise, volatile anesthetics sevoflurane, halothane, isoflurane, and fentanyl/midazolam do not affect Qp: Qs in patients with atrial septal defect and ventricle septal defects when given with 100% oxygen.

Mask induction is safe with volatile anesthetics in patients with less severe cardiorespiratory compromise. However, the duration of induction is significantly prolonged in cyanotic patients with reduced pulmonary blood flow. In this regard, the airway is partially controlled and may result in obstruction or hypoventilation, leading to hypoxemia. The inhalational agent of choice is sevoflurane. Due to the pungent odor of isoflurane and desflurane, anesthesia induction with these agents is relatively unsuitable.

Intravenous induction is the most suitable technique accomplished with a combination of synthetic opioids and a muscle relaxant. In patients with low aortic diastolic volume, muscle relaxants, including rocuronium, vecuronium, or cis-atracurium, can be used without affecting the heart rate. In children with depressed systolic function, a combination of opioids with etomidate is often used. Ketamine is a beneficial intravenous induction agent as it causes a minimal increase in pulmonary artery pressure by preserving peripheral vascular resistance.

As thiopental and propofol depress the myocardial activity, their use in the induction of anesthesia makes them less favorable agents. These are only used in shunt lesions with preserved cardiovascular function.

For those patients with difficult peripheral vascular access, induction of anesthesia can be carried out through intramuscular induction with ketamine, succinylcholine, and glycopyrrolate. This technique provides rapid induction with reasonable airway control for tracheal intubation. Though it only provides a brief period for a patient's mobility.

The maintenance of anesthesia is generally done with synthetic opioid infusions such as fentanyl or sufentanil alone or in combination with sevoflurane or isoflurane. The maintenance of anesthesia during cardiopulmonary bypass holds unique considerations. Maintenance of the depth of anesthesia is crucial to avoid untoward actions during cooling and rewarding.

**Cardiopulmonary Bypass Circuit**

Surgical procedures are often challenging for congenital heart defects. Safe cardiopulmonary bypass is crucial to a successful outcome in patients with a narrow margin of safety. Implementation of safety protocols and checklists is vital to the successful conduct of open heart procedures. A firm hold of the principles of CPB is essential for better surgical outcomes.

- Perform the functions of the cardiopulmonary system

- Have the ability to add oxygen and remove carbon dioxide

- Provision of adequate perfusion to all organs

- Fulfillment of the requirements mentioned above without causing damage

**Infection Prophylaxis**

As CBP weakens the immune system to act against bacterial infections, postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis is necessary for children after cardiac surgery.

**Postoperative Intensive Care Management**

A multidisciplinary team involves coordinating multiple healthcare professionals (cardiac surgeon, cardiologist, intensivist, anesthetist, pediatrician, respiratory therapist, and cardiac critical care-trained nurse). The successful outcome in the postoperative critical care management of any cardiac surgical patient who has undergone a palliative or corrective procedure for congenital heart disease is due to effective postoperative care of such patients, and it includes;

- Continuous monitoring of cardiac hemodynamic functions, pulmonary, and other vital organs such as the kidney, liver, and central nervous system is necessary.

- The prompt appropriate action to restore normal function whenever deviations from normal are identified.

**Postoperative Problems and their Causes**

The most common postoperative problems and their causes are summarised in the table below.

Tense or light patient (inadequate sedation in ventilation patients); reduced right ventricle function, tamponade, pneumothorax; a high CVP indicates poor systemic ventricular in univentricular heart or atrioventricular valve regurgitation.