Anti-tuberculous treatment must start promptly to reduce morbidity and mortality in tuberculous meningitis. First-line anti-tuberculous treatments have excellent CSF penetration. Treatment for TBM consists of two months of an intensive phase of daily isoniazid (INH), rifampin (RIF), pyrazinamide (PZD), and either streptomycin (SM) or ethambutol (EMB). This regimen is followed by the continuation phase of 7 to 10 months of INH and RIF. This treatment plan is based on the assumption that the MTB is not a resistant strain. However, drug sensitivity results can take months to receive, and treatment can be tailored to identify the drug sensitivities.

Treatment with daily rifampin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, and fluoroquinolone is advised with isoniazid-resistant CNS TB. Moreover, the duration of therapy should be extended to 18 to 24 months, depending on the clinical response to treatment, the severity of the illness, and the patient's immune status.

Adjunctive therapy with corticosteroids has been used in the treatment of TBM. The goal of steroid treatment is to dampen the immune system's exaggerated response, which causes most of the neurologic complications seen with TBM, including tissue damage and brain edema. There has been concern that steroids would reduce the penetration in the CSF of the anti-tuberculous medication, but to date, studies have not shown this to occur. Studies have demonstrated improved clinical outcomes and reduced mortality with the administration of steroids. While there are no trials comparing which steroid is superior, the mainstay treatment has been daily intravenous dexamethasone for up to four weeks, followed by a four-week oral taper.