Congenital melanocytic nevi can be present at birth, or they can develop during the first 2 to 3 years of life. The latter is usually referred to as tardive congenital nevi.

They are classified according to their estimated adult size as small (less than 1.5 cm), medium (1.5 to 20 cm), large (20 to 40 cm), and giant (>40 cm). This classification is essential as the size of nevi is one of the main risk factors of melanoma development and neurological involvement.

At birth, they usually present as pigmented macules or slightly raised oval papules or plaques, which can be initially mistaken for café-au-lait macules. They usually show color darkening over time and tend to end up having a well-defined edge. They can also become raised or verrucous. They can display a wide variety of colors ranging from light brown to black. [figure1] Hypertrichosis is a common finding and is usually accompanied by perifollicular hypopigmentation. CMN usually grows proportionally with the child, covering the same area of skin in adulthood as they did at birth.

PN can be found within CMN. They can be present at birth or develop during childhood. They are generally round or oval soft papules or nodules with a well-defined border. They are normally less pigmented than their environment.

Pruritus and eczematization may be occasionally associated.

Giant CMNs frequently present with a garment appearance (in a bathing trunk, in coat sleeve, etcetera). They occasionally show satellite lesions, which resemble small or medium CMN.

Neurocutaneous melanosis is a disorder where CMNs are associated with melanocyte proliferation in the CNS. Those with larger CMN and satellite lesions are especially at risk. They may be asymptomatic, or they may have neurological symptoms, including seizures, cranial nerve dysfunction, or signs and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure. Symptomatic patients usually have an ominous prognosis.