- Benztropine has been in use for over 50 years, and there have been no reported incidents of liver injury due to the drug. The absence of liver injury is typical of anticholinergic agents and may also relate to the low therapeutic dose. However, benztropine overdose can cause an anticholinergic toxidrome, which, in its role, may require supportive care. The risk assessment for benztropine overdose can take place as soon as 6 hours after ingestion, and toxicity effects may vary between 12 hours to 5 days at most.

- The most crucial step of proper detection of benztropine overdose starts from carrying out intensive and inclusive investigations. For example, ECG can be an essential assessment tool using 12 leads during testing. Also, monitoring the medicine concentrations and blood glucose concentrations can become valuable for toxicity investigations if the toxicant is unknown. Undifferentiated patients that do not exhibit specific toxicity symptoms can have screening through many methods such as a lumbar puncture or brain CT scan.

- Decontaminating benztropine toxicity in cooperative and alert patients can be done by administering 50 g of activated charcoal during the first 2 hours of benztropine ingestion. Proper supportive care includes controlling delirium through IV administration of benzodiazepines such as diazepam. Also, catheter and bladder scans can help in case of urinary retention.

- Physostigmine is the antidote for benztropine toxicity in the event delirium is not controlled through benzodiazepines. It can be used for toxicity diagnosis if the patient regains a normal state after administration. However, caution should be practiced in determining its proper dose and route of administration since it can cause a cholinergic crisis that endangers the patient's life further.