A very significant clinical significance regarding the pterygoid plexus is the spreading of infection to the intracranial area. As previously noted, the pterygoid plexus is in connection with the cavernous sinus through small emissary veins which do not contain venous valves, which can allow infections within the dental area (which are drained by the pterygoid plexus) to travel to the cavernous sinus and cause intracranial infections from an extracranial source.

Epidural hematomas form from trauma to the middle meningeal artery at the pterion. The artery is within the periosteal dura and thus leaking of the vessel is under high pressure and causes a hematoma formation between the layers of the dura. More often epidural hematomas occur in younger patients aged 20 to 30 years old and less often in 50 to 60-year-old patients because older patients have dura that more tightly adheres to the cranium and it is less likely for a hematoma to form between the layers of the dura.  The patient initially experiences a brief loss of consciousness following a characteristic and almost pathognomonic “lucid interval,” where the patient can function. However, as the expanding hematoma continues to increase intracranial pressure, the patient then loses consciousness again with a high risk of mortality and morbidity. The most common modality used for evaluation of epidural hematoma is a non-contrast CT scan because it is more likely to show an acute bleed. The characteristic lens-shaped lesion, which does not cross suture lines, is how an epidural often presents. Epidural hematomas are considered neurosurgical emergencies and require immediate evacuation and relief of pressure off the brain. The gold standard is craniotomy; however, burr hole placement is also acceptable if the patient is not in a setting equipped to do a craniotomy.