**Preoperative Care of the Exposed Bladder**

Covering of the bladder plate with a non-adherent wrap or film not only avoids trauma and bleeding by the diaper but also prevents the formation of polyps. A polypoidal bladder is always difficult to close. Various films, wraps, and dressings have been used for the protection of the bladder plate. A clear plastic wrap or a saran wrap is the most commonly used.

**Surgical Treatment:**surgical treatment of classical bladder exstrophy not only involves the bladder closure, but it also includes procedures such as epispadias repair, bladder neck reconstruction, bladder augmentation, and ureteric reimplantation. Additionally, the abnormalities in the bony pelvis and the pelvic floor need to be addressed along with exstrophy repair. Various procedures have been described for bladder exstrophy. They fall into two main categories: the reconstructive procedures and the diversion procedures. The modern approaches focus mainly on the reconstructive procedure; however, the Mainz group in Germany has favored the diversion procedures and has highlighted different aspects from time to time. The major goals of exstrophy repair include the closure of the bladder and creating a receptacle for storage that grows with the child, preservation of the upper tract function, and reconstruction of the genitalia providing good functional outcomes in terms of continence and sexual function.

We will discuss some aspects of the common procedures of exstrophy repair, as a thorough discussion, including all the technical points is beyond the scope of this article. Among the reconstructive procedures, the two procedures that are commonly performed by pediatric surgeons across the globe are modern staged repair of exstrophy (MSRE) and complete primary repair of exstrophy (CPRE). Other procedures, which are less popular, include Kelly's radical soft tissue mobilization, Warsaw procedure, etc.

**(I) modern staged repair of exstrophy (MSRE):**the procedure was developed and refined by Jeffs and Gearhart. The main principle is to perform a staged repair (in three separate procedures) at appropriate times. The ideology is each procedure will provide some degree of outlet resistance and will help the bladder to grow. The first step is the primary turn-in, which is performed in the first three days, might avoid osteotomy, protect the lower abdominal skin from ammoniacal contents, and prevent the bladder from trauma. Although the first stage is performed in the newborn age, occasionally it has to delay. This is done where the bladder template is very small, and the closure is technically not feasible. The second stage, epispadias repair or genitalia reconstruction, is performed at 6 to 9 months of age. This ensures early bladder cycling and provides outlet resistance for the bladder to grow. Bladder neck reconstruction is the third procedure and is performed at a time when the child has sufficient bladder capacity (at least 100 ml) and has attained a certain age. It is usually done at 4 to 5 years of age when the child is in the school-going age and can participate in voiding training.

**(II) Complete primary repair of exstrophy (CPRE):**also is known as Mitchell's repair as it was first performed by Michael Mitchell. The procedure aims at performing the complete repair, including bladder turn-in, bladder neck repair, and epispadias repair in a single sitting. The ideology is the initiation of early bladder cycling to ensure the optimal development of the bladder. The subsequent surgeries are also avoided. The procedure utilizes complete penile disassembly and division of the intersymphyseal bands, such that the vesicourethral unit is buried deep into the pelvis.

**Osteotomy:**due to abnormalities of the bony pelvis, there is tension on the bladder and the abdominal wall following turn-in. The issue can be solved by performing an osteotomy. However, this is not universally performed the procedure and depends on the surgeon's preference along with the child's age. Different types of osteotomies have been performed by different surgeons including anterior osteotomy of the pubic ramus, anterior innominate osteotomy (with or without vertical posterior osteotomy), posterior iliac osteotomy, etc. Among these, the anterior innominate osteotomy offers various advantages including less blood loss, easy external fixation, and no need to turn the patient to perform the osteotomy, etc.

**Other Procedures:**It has been highlighted in various studies that the extrophied bladders fail to grow, even when primary turn-in is performed at an early age. Therefore, a good proportion of patients require augmentation of the bladder with other conduits. The most commonly performed procedures include ileocystoplasty, colocystoplasty, and gastrocystoplasty. Although each has its own merits and demerits, gastrocystoplasty offers some additional advantages of few metabolic complications, physiological superiority in children with deranged renal function, and less risk of calculi formation.