In most infants with NH, treating the correctable causes usually resolves the condition. The umbilical catheter should be removed as soon as possible. Hypercalcemia or excessive fluids intake should be corrected with fluid restriction and/or diuretics. Doses of medications like inotropes, steroids, or caffeine should be adjusted or the drug discontinued. Surgical conditions should be addressed as needed. Analgesia may be considered for the relief of pain. Appropriate hormonal therapy should be administered for endocrinal disorders. If hypertension persists above the 99th percentile of the normative data despite these measures, the antihypertensive therapy should be initiated.

Mild hypertension: These infants can be regularly monitored and closely observed. If hypertension does not resolve spontaneously, then they can be treated with a thiazide (preferred) or a loop diuretic agent.

Moderate hypertension: These infants have blood pressure readings between 95th to 99th percentiles for the age without signs of end-organ involvement. They can be treated with diuretics (first line), hydralazine, or propranolol. There is a paucity of information regarding the indications and benefits of oral antihypertensive agents for mild to moderate hypertension in neonates. The details of the commonly used oral agents are presented in table 3.

Severe hypertension: If the blood pressure is greater than the 99 percentile, treatment with continuous intravenous drug infusion is warranted. A rapid reduction in blood pressure should be avoided. Close monitoring of blood pressure with an intra-arterial catheter is preferred in these patients.

The recommended IV antihypertensive agents with their doses and side effects are presented in table 4.

Surgical intervention in the management of neonatal HT is indicated under conditions such as coarctation of the aorta, renal artery or vein occlusion, urinary tract or ureteropelvic junction obstruction, polycystic kidney disease, neuroblastoma, or Wilms tumor, among others.