Bleeding disorders may present in correlation with their severity, and some may be undetected until a major trauma or surgery occur.  Patients with a severe form of hemophilia In hemophilia,  categorized as less than 1% of normal plasma levels, will often present with 20 to 30 episodes of epistaxis a year, excessive bleeding after minor traumas or into muscles and joints (hemarthrosis).  Diagnosis usually occurs within the first two years of life and can be immediately evident after circumcision.   Newborns can also present with intracranial hemorrhages, cephalohematoma or umbilical cord bleeding immediately following delivery.

Von Willebrand factor (vWF) is a glycoprotein produced in endothelial cells and megakaryocytes that is responsible for facilitating platelet binding after injury of the endothelial surface occurs. Von Willebrand disease is a common congenital bleeding disorder in which there is a deficiency or dysfunction of vWF.  Factor VIII levels can be affected as well.  The disease presents similarly to that of a platelet abnormality and can exhibit variable clinical symptomatology from mild mucocutaneous bleeding of the nose or gingiva or menorrhagia to hemarthrosis in more severe cases. The disease categorized into three types.  Type I is the most common, representing 60 to 80% of cases.  Type 1 von Willebrand disease is a heterozygous deficiency in which there may be only 20% to 40% of normal levels of vWF in addition to a reduction in Factor VIII levels.  Patients with Type I von Willebrand disease can present with mild clinical symptoms like a propensity for easy bruising, mucosal bleeding or menorrhagia.