The patients with PDS present can be completely asymptomatic or present with pain, redness, photophobia, glare, and halos. Most of these patients are myopic patients detected on routine retinoscopic examination. A history of trauma, exercise, complicated cataract surgery should be ruled out in PDS.

The condition can be bilateral, and both eyes should be examined in detail. The patients may present with field loss or defective vision due to glaucomatous optic atrophy and corneal edema. A detailed history, meticulous anterior segment, posterior segment examination, applanation tonometry, gonioscopy, and Humphrey field analysis are necessary in each case to reach a conclusive diagnosis. A history of excessive blinking and hormonal changes should be ruled out.

**Cornea**

The pigment deposition is seen in the inferior corneal endothelium due to an aqueous current known as the Krukenberg spindle, which is not pathognomic of PDS. In the early stage, there may be diffuse pigment deposition at the back of the cornea.

**Anterior Chamber**

PDS patients have a deep anterior chamber, and there may be pigment deposition in the anterior chamber admixed with aqueous. Melanin granules can also be observed in the anterior chamber.

**Anterior Chamber Angle**

The pigment deposition is seen more in the inferior angle on the gonioscopy. Usually, all the quadrants are densely pigmented, with a circumferential homogenous band of pigment is seen on the posterior meshwork. A dense line of pigmentation may be seen anterior to Schwalbe's line, known as Sampaolesi's line. A reduction in pigmentation of angle is seen with growing age.

**Iris**

Iris's findings are a hallmark of PDS. These patients present with characteristic iris transillumination defects, radial spoke-like defects, melanin deposition on the surface of the iris. They may be atrophic patches or loss of pupillary ruff. There may be heterochromia, the iris with pigment deposition will be darker. There is the concave configuration of the iris mid-peripheral on the gonioscopy, and the iris is bowed backward.

**Lens**

The pigment may be deposited on the anterior lens surface. The pigment deposition has a typical pattern, such as a line (Scheie stripe) or a pigment ring (Zentmayer ring) around the equatorial lens surface and zonular apparatus.

**Fundus**

The fundus should be assessed for peripheral retinal depigmentation, myopic disc, tessellated background, myopic macular degeneration, lattice degeneration, holes, tears, and retinal detachment. There can be glaucomatous optic atrophy in cases of PG. The cupping can be asymmetrical, with one eye having advanced glaucomatous changes and mild changes in the other.