In the United States, about one in eight women will develop breast cancer in her lifetime. The lifetime risk of developing breast cancer is about 12%. Unfortunately, the etiology of most breast cancer cases is unknown; however, many risk factors have been identified. The most important risk factors for breast cancer are female gender and older age. Other significant risk factors include age at menarche, age at menopause, age at first pregnancy, family history, use of exogenous estrogen, alcohol consumption, prior history of chest irradiation, benign proliferative breast disease, mammographic breast density, and genetic mutations. Approximately 10% of breast cancer cases are associated with germline mutations such as BRCA1 and BRCA2. Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the most common. Other genetic mutations have been identified to carry mild to moderate risk for breast cancer. BRCA1 mutation carriers have a 55% to 65% lifetime risk of breast cancer while BRCA2 mutation carriers have about a 45% risk. In men, BRCA2 mutations carry a lifetime breast cancer risk of about 7%. BRCA mutations also carry an increased risk for ovarian cancer. BRCA2 mutations carry 10-15% lifetime risk of ovarian cancer. Prophylactic mastectomy significantly reduces the risk of breast cancer. Prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy decreases the risk of ovarian and fallopian tube cancers by 80% and breast cancers by 50%.  Majority of breast cancers are diagnosed in women who do not have a family history of breast cancer.  Most breast cancers occur as a result of somatic mutations due to the aging process and environmental factors as opposed to inherited germline mutations.