The presentation can be acute or chronic.

**Histaminergic angioedema**

Symptoms can involve different systems including skin (Urticaria, flushing, pruritus), Respiratory (bronchospasm), GI symptoms (abdominal pain and vomiting).

Etiologies: Drugs, foods, latex, and insect stings.

While comparing the bradykinin-mediated angioedema with histaminergic angioedema, the former has the following characteristics:

- It is not associated with urticaria

- More severe and longer duration

- Has associated abdominal symptoms

**Acquired angioedema related to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor**

It clinically presents as angioedema without urticaria or itching

**Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory disease-induced angioedema**

NSAID induced drug reactions include angioedema presenting with urticaria and facial swelling.

**Hereditary angioedema**begins in childhood or young adulthood, gets worse at puberty and presents as recurrent episodes of swelling or abdominal pain.

**Acquired angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency**

Acquired C1 inhibitor deficiency presents similarly to hereditary angioedema. However, the low C1 inhibitor in many cases is from an underlying lymphoproliferative disorder which increases protein consumption and an antibody against C1-INH causing overproduction of bradykinin.

**Physical examination**

Vital signs, level of consciousness, as well as a thorough ski, head, neck, respiratory and abdomen evaluation should be completed.

General monitoring of angioedema in the Emergency room include:

- Oxygen saturation

- Cardiac status