Butterfly-shaped pattern dystrophy is named after the characteristic bilateral pigmented deposits seen in a butterfly pattern at the RPE. Typically, there is a central area of RPE atrophy, outside of which there is RPE distention from lipofuscin.

FAF will reveal areas of both increased and decreased autofluorescence corresponding to lipofuscin changes. ERG and EOG will reveal mild changes; however, patients maintain normal vision. Patients are able to maintain good vision in the first two to three decades of life; however, fifth decade and beyond, vision changes may occur with corresponding atrophic depigmented lesions seen on FAF and FA.

Reticular dystrophy features a network of pigmented lines and knots in a fish net-like appearance in the RPE. Lesions are up to five disc diameters from the macula and typically fade away with age. Some of the lesions that fade away leave atrophic changes that appear irregular with white dots in the RPE.

Multifocal pattern dystrophy, resembling Stargardt or Fundus Flavimaculatus, demonstrates multiple irregular white-yellow flecks scattered throughout the macula, similar to the flecks seen in Stargardt disease. Lesions range from fleck deposits to confluent lesions of chorioretinal atrophy.

A distinguishing aspect of multifocal dystrophy is that it affects the peripheral retina beyond the macula and can feature constriction of the peripheral visual field. Depending on the severity, this constriction may be debilitating. Additionally, in severe cases, patients may demonstrate full-field ERG abnormalities. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) will reveal the flecks as highly reflective areas of focal thickening.

Adult-onset foveomacular vitelliform dystrophy (AFVD) is unique in that it is linked to mutations beyond the peripherin/RDS gene, such as mutations in the VMD2 gene.

Lesions are usually a third to a half of a disc diameter, with larger lesions appearing similar to Best vitelliform macular dystrophy.

One way to distinguish AVFD from Best is that both EOG and ERG in AVFD are normal.

Some patients with multiple drusen may develop vitelliform exudative macular detachments, and this fluid blocks background fluorescence early and stains late on FA. As such, AVFD may be mistaken for choroidal neovascularization. Patients with AVFD, unlike in choroidal neovascularization, will not respond with improvement in visual acuity after receiving anti-vascular endothelial growth factor or photodynamic therapy.

Fundus pulverulentus features a granular appearance and punctiform mottling of the RPE within the macula. Areas of pigment mottling appear as areas of hypofluorescence on FA.