Treatment of LH deficiency depends on the underlying cause, age, and gender, as well as the desired outcome for fertility.

In boys of prepubertal age, androgen (testosterone) replacement therapy will induce puberty and development of secondary sexual characteristics.

In men who have reached puberty, androgen replacement therapy can reverse signs and symptoms of hypogonadism. Testosterone replacement also helps in treating other conditions related to testosterone deficiency like anemia, decreased bone density, muscle atrophy, and alterations in mood/ cognitive abilities.

Estrogen therapy is the therapy in prepubertal girls for puberty induction and breast development. Several formulations of estrogen are available and include oral estradiol, oral conjugated estrogen, estrogen gel, and transdermal estrogen patches. The age at which estrogen therapy commences is individualized and incorporates factors such as chronologic age, bone age, absolute height, and psychosocial issues.

In women who desire fertility, ovulation induction occurs with gonadotropins along with estrogen therapy. Ovulation is the result of LH surge during the normal ovulatory cycle and does not occur with regular estrogen replacement therapy. Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) and human menopausal gonadotropin (HMG) are options for this purpose. Women with stress-related hypogonadotropic hypogonadism usually report the resolution of symptoms after the removal of stress. Weight gain also restores hypogonadotropic hypogonadism if it is due to weight loss and decreased fat tissue below a critical level.

Pituitary disorders are treated based on the etiology and hormone imbalance involved. Hyperprolactinemia caused by pituitary adenomas is treated with dopamine agonists and responds well to medical treatment. Resistant prolactinomas require surgery and close follow up.