MCV findings can be followed up with a peripheral blood smear (PBS). PBS will show the volume/size of the erythrocytes relative to leukocytes. Microcytes tend to be smaller and have a large central area of pallor in comparison to a normal erythrocyte (if due to iron deficiency or anemia of chronic disease). Depending on the cause of microcytosis, the microcytic erythrocytes can also be associated with target cells and anisopoikilocytosis for thalassemia, or basophilic stippling seen in lead poisoning. Sideroblasts are only present in bone marrow aspirates.

Megaloblastic macrocytosis has enlarged erythrocytes that tend to be the same size as a leukocyte.  Hypersegmented polymorphonuclear neutrophils are affected by DNA and RNA synthesis and also, appear with megaloblastic macrocytosis. However, patients with liver failure can appear to have acanthocytes or spur cells and macro-ovalocytes due to lipid dysfunction from hepatic insufficiency.

Normocytic anemia secondary to hemolysis can have a variety of histopathological findings such as sickled cells from sickle cell anemia, spherocytes from hereditary spherocytosis and autoimmune hemolytic anemia, Heinz bodies, Howell-jolly bodies, degmacytes, schistocytes, and many more. These presentations depend on the underlying intrinsic or extrinsic cause of normocytic anemia. Aplastic anemia has to be diagnosed with a bone marrow aspirate that appears “dry” or with multiple white adipocytes lacking erythrocytes, leukocytes or any progenitor cells.