Zinc is a vital trace element. It plays multiple, indispensable roles within the human body including growth and tissue repair. Zinc is involved in molecular synthesis, including the formation of DNA, RNA, and proteins. It stabilizes ribosomes, cell membranes and has protective effects by decreasing lipid peroxidation and subsequent free radicals. Beyond the molecular nuances of function, it is required for spermatogenesis, embryogenesis, and fetal growth.

Zinc has a significant role in the skin and is found in higher concentrations in the epidermis than dermis, with the majority found in the stratum spinosum. Tight regulation of intracellular zinc is maintained by transporters encoded by solute-linked carrier genes, including zinc transporter (ZnT; SLC30A). Other regulators include Zrt-Irt-like proteins (ZIP; SLC39A). Within keratinocytes, zinc suppresses activation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and diminishes inducible nitric oxide synthase and nitric oxide production. Furthermore, chelation of intracellular zinc results in activation of caspase-3 and DNA fragmentation with resultant apoptosis of keratinocytes. The net effect is that zinc is required for normal keratinocyte proliferation and suppression of inflammation. Zip2 and Zip4 are present in keratinocytes facilitating appropriate proliferation and differentiation and are crucial in skin health.

Its role in immune function is also well described. Overall, it keeps the skin viable as an initial barrier to pathogens. It mediates innate immunity with the function of natural killer cells and neutrophils while influencing the acquired immune system through T-lymphocyte activation and regulation, Th1 cytokine production, B-lymphocyte function, and antibody production with subsequent immunoglobulin G formation. Macrophages utilize zinc for phagocytosis, intracellular killing, and cytokine production. Zinc potentiates programmed cell death through apoptosis.