# Continuing Education Activity

Renal trauma can result in injury to the parenchyma or the renal vasculature which can cause bleeding or injury to the collecting system with possible leakage of urine. Overall, genitourinary tract injuries are rare (10% of all traumas) with the most commonly affected organ being the kidney. Renal trauma accounts for about 1% to 5% of all trauma patients, the majority of which are due to blunt abdominal trauma (80% to 90%). This activity reviews the cause and presentation of renal trauma and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the causes of renal trauma.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient with renal trauma.
- Summarize the treatment of renal trauma.
- Explain modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by renal trauma.

# Introduction

Renal trauma can result in injury to the parenchyma or the renal vasculature which can cause bleeding or injury to the collecting system with possible leakage of urine. Overall, genitourinary tract injuries are rare (10% of all traumas) with the most commonly affected organ being the kidney.

# Etiology

Blunt renal trauma is more common than penetrating renal trauma. The causes of blunt renal trauma in order of frequency are: motor vehicle accidents, falls, sports injuries and pedestrian struck injuries. Blunt injuries can result from a direct blow to the organ, crushing of the organ against the paravertebral muscles or due to rapid deceleration forces. Rapid deceleration can cause avulsion at the ureteropelvic junction, avulsion of the renal vessels, or arterial dissection/thrombosis leading to a devascularized kidney. The most common cause of penetrating renal injury is due to gunshot wounds followed by stab wounds.

# Epidemiology

As previously stated, renal trauma accounts for about 1% to 5% of all trauma patients, the majority of which are due to blunt abdominal trauma (80% to 90%).

# History and Physical

Trauma patients with blunt or penetrating injuries to the chest, abdomen, and pelvis have an increased risk of a renal injury, and so it is important to be on high alert during history taking in these patients for possible renal injury. It is also important to recognize the patient with preexisting renal anatomic abnormalities as they can have a significant renal injury with minor trauma, emphasizing the importance of an adequate history intake in these patients.

These patients need a careful examination of their chest, abdomen, flank, and genitourinary regions. Renal injury should be highly suspected in the patient with tenderness, pain, palpable mass or ecchymosis in their flank, abdomen or back.

# Evaluation

**Laboratory Evaluation**

Standard trauma labs should be obtained, for example, complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), coagulation panel, lactate, among others, along with urine for analysis. Hematuria is observed more in the blunt renal trauma patient than penetrating renal trauma and if present has an increased frequency of microscopic hematuria versus gross hematuria. Although hematuria can be the landmark of renal injury, the degree of hematuria (present or not) has not shown correlation in predicting the severity of renal injury.

**Imaging Evaluation**

The modality of choice in the suspected renal trauma patient is contrast-enhanced computed tomography with immediate and delayed imaging.

Renal imaging should be included, but not limited to the following clinical scenarios

- Blunt abdominal trauma with gross and microscopic hematuria

- Blunt abdominal trauma with hemodynamic instability

- Penetrating trauma to the chest, abdomen, flank or back and any entry/exit wounds that eludes a trajectory that includes the kidneys

- High clinical suspicion based on the mechanism of injury (i.e., displaced rib fractures adjacent to the kidney, high-speed motor vehicle accident, fall from significant height)

**Injury Grading**

The American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) grading system the most common injury grading system used for renal trauma.

# Treatment / Management

**Non-Operative Management**

An established consensus among trauma and urological surgeons that initial, non-operative management in the hemodynamically stable renal trauma patient have better overall outcome.

**Angiographic Embolization**

Selective angiography with angioembolization has revolutionized the evaluation and management of the bleeding patient from a renal injury with a successful embolization rate as high as 88% and renal salvage rate up to 92%.

**Operative Management**

Renal injury patients who are hemodynamically unstable, unresponsive to resuscitative measures or fail non-operative management should be taken for operative intervention.

**Management Highlights**

- Most renal injuries are low grade (I through III) and are managed supportively but it doesn't preclude these patients from angiographic embolization (i.e, active bleeding) or surgery (i.e hemodynamic instability)

- Grade IV injuries without expanding hematomas with hemodynamic stability can undergo a trial period of supportive management

- Pelvis-calyceal system injuries can be managed initially with stenting or drainage of the urinoma followed with surgical repair or nephrectomy if failed

- Complete ureteropelvic injuries or renal pedicle avulsion as seen in grade V injuries require surgical repair

- Partial ureteropelvic injuries can be treated with stenting or by diverting the urinary drainage

- All penetrating wounds associated with active bleeding, urine leakage or involve the hilum need to be surgically explored

# Differential Diagnosis

- Acute tubular necrosis

- Azotemia

- Chronic kidney disease

- Emergent management of acute glomerulonephritis

- Hemolytic uremic syndrome

- Henoch-Schonlein purpura

- Hyperkalemia

- Hypermagnesemia

- Hypernatremia

- Hypertensive emergencies

# Complications

Active bleeding is a complication of traumatic renal injury that is critical and guides the acute management of the injury. Active bleeding is more commonly seen with high-grade injuries (IV and V) but, it can also be seen in lower grade injuries as well (II and III). Delayed bleeding is noted in 2 to 3 weeks from injury and is usually due to either an arteriovenous malformation (AVM) or pseudoaneurysm. AVMs and pseudoaneurysms are sequelae that are more commonly seen with higher grade injuries and penetrating trauma. While active bleeding is a more critical complication with renal trauma necessitating immediate attention, urine extravasation is much more common finding and can be seen in about 7% of patients with renal injuries. Urinoma develops when the urine becomes encapsulated, most commonly in the subcapsular space. Most urinomas will resolve without intervention, and the few that are persistent or become infected will require percutaneous or surgical drainage. Furthermore, hydronephrosis, chronic pyelonephritis, and postrenal hypertension are delayed complications that can also be seen.

The most common complications following non-operative management of high grade traumatic renal injuries are hematuria, fever, acute kidney injury and urinoma compared to wound infection, perinephric abscess and urinary tract infection following operative management of these injuries.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In general, an interprofessional approach to patient care among interprofessional health professionals should be the goal for every healthcare facility. The key to implementing this is to utilize an evidence-based approach across all levels of care. In the setting of renal trauma, there is evidence of this collaborative effort in how the management of renal trauma has changed to a more renal salvage approach in light of supporting data and advancement in procedural techniques. Most frequently, the trauma surgeons are the clinicians encountering traumatic renal injuries and are very equipped in knowledge and experience in the management of these injuries. However, in the surgical setting where a nephrectomy may be questionable, it is best to involve the urological service to increase the probability of preserving the kidney when feasible. Urological specialty nursing can perform monitoring, assess therapeutic effectiveness, and keep the team informed of progress or lack of the same. Finally, upon discharge from the hospital or trauma service, post-renal trauma patients should have routine follow up with their primary care physician (possibly for life), especially if high-grade injury or post-nephrectomy, to monitor for hypertension. Therefore, it is important to educate the patient and involve social services as needed to help the patient achieve the best outcome given his or her injury.