The blood flow to the septum is derived from branches of the left anterior descending coronary artery and the posterior descending coronary artery. In rare cases, the blood supply may also be from the circumflex artery. The infarct is usually transmural and extensive. Nearly two-thirds of VSR occur in the anterior septal wall, and about one-third occur in the inferior or posterior wall. When the latter is involved, it is often accompanied by mitral valve insufficiency secondary to papillary muscle dysfunction/rupture. At autopsy, the culprit coronary artery is almost completely occluded with the absence of collaterals. In rare cases, there may be multiple septal perforations.

The most common pathological finding of an infarcted septum is coagulation necrosis, which is defined as dry denaturation of proteins due to lack of oxygen as a result of a loss in blood supply. It progresses to the thinning and weakening of the septum. This process usually takes three to five days after acute myocardial infarction. The ventricular septal rupture can also occur within 24 hours of myocardial infarction due to the dissection of an intramural hematoma or hemorrhage into the diseased myocardium.

The primary mechanism behind ventricular septum rupture is physical shear stressors, especially at the junction of the infarct area and normal healthy myocardium. Due to this mechanism, ventricular aneurysm, free wall rupture, or papillary muscle rupture are associated with ventricular septum rupture.

Cardiac free wall rupture and ventricular septum rupture after myocardial infarction are similar regarding pathological characteristics. There is a pathological classification regarding free wall rupture, which we can use for ventricular septum rupture as proposed by Becker.

- Type I: Sudden in onset, slit-like tear, within 24 hours

- Type II: Subacute, erosion of infarcted myocardium

- Type III: Late presentation, aneurysm formation, and rupture, associated with older infarcts

After establishing the new connection between the right and left ventricle due to ventricular septum rupture, oxygenated blood shunts from the high-pressure left ventricle to the low-pressure right ventricle.

The natural course of VSR after a myocardial infarction (MI) is short. The condition is progressive, and more than 90% die within the first 12 months. The poor prognosis is chiefly due to the sudden volume overload on both ventricles, which are already compromised by a large MI. Additionally, the patient may have superimposed ventricular pseudoaneurysm and/or mitral valve insufficiency, which also compromise ventricular function. Only a few reports of patient survival following medical therapy exist.