Delirium is a potential indicator of a life-threatening illness, and every episode of delirium should be appropriately evaluated. The evaluation involves taking a thorough history, a complete physical exam, laboratory tests, and possible imaging. The test selections should be based on information obtained from the history and physical examination, keeping in mind that delirium is often multifactorial in etiology and can be influenced by a number of predisposing factors, precipitating factors, or both.

Delirium is often referred to in 3 main manifestations.

1) Hyperactive Delirium: Patients present with increased agitation and sympathetic activity. They can present with hallucinations, delusions, and occasionally combative or uncooperative behavior.

2) Hypoactive Delirium: Patients have increased somnolence and decreased arousal. Hypoactive delirium is dangerous as it is often unrecognized or mistaken for fatigue or depression. It is associated with higher rates of morbidity and mortality.

3) Mixed Presentation: Patients can fluctuate between Hyperactive and Hypoactive presentations.

Delirium is defined by the DSM-5 (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition) and includes the presence of all of the following criteria:

- Disturbance in attention and awareness develops acutely and tends to fluctuate in severity.

- At least one additional disturbance in cognition

- Disturbances are not better explained by preexisting dementia.

- Disturbances do not occur in the context of a severely reduced level of arousal or coma.

- Evidence of an underlying organic cause or causes.

Other features include alterations in the sleep-wake cycle, perceptual disturbances, delusions, inappropriate or unsafe behavior, and emotional lability.

Detection is the first step in evaluation and treatment. The syndrome of delirium presents over hours to days. A recent study estimated that delirium is unrecognized in up to 60% of cases. It is much easier to detect hyperactive delirium because patients will often cause a disturbance in their environment. However, hypoactive delirium is often missed as patients are less disruptive. Caregivers may provide clues to the presence of hypoactive delirium with comments such as "they are sleeping more than usual," "they haven't eaten much in the last few days," or "I'm worried they are depressed; they just stay in their room all day."

Several tools have been developed in a monitored setting to help detect delirium. One of the tools with the most widespread use is the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM). It has been validated with a sensitivity of 94% to 100% and specificity of 90% to 95% in the diagnosis of delirium, and it includes the following criteria:

The presence of delirium requires features 1 and 2 and either 3 or 4:

- Acute change in mental status with a fluctuating course

- Inattention (reduced ability to sustain attention and follow conversations)

- Disorganized thinking (problems with memory, orientation, or language)

- Altered level of consciousness (hypervigilance, drowsiness, or stupor)

The CAM has been adapted for target populations, including the CAM-ICU, which added nonverbal tasks for ventilated patients. Adaptations have also been made for the emergency department and those residing in nursing homes.

When evaluating a patient with delirium, it is important to speak with caregivers or other people who know the patient well. Many patients with delirium have underlying dementia, and knowing the baseline functional status of a patient is critical to understanding whether acute changes have occurred. Other important questions to ask while taking the history include:

Have there been any changes to medications? Drug-related causes account for up to 39% of delirium cases.

Have there been any new symptoms such as cough, fever, headache, dysuria, expressions of pain, or change in eating or bowel and urinary habits?

Has there been any sleep deprivation or changes to their environment?

Have there been any falls? This may prompt the need for brain imaging. It may also suggest the need for X-rays to evaluate for bone fractures.

It is also imperative to carefully review recent and current medications. If possible, avoid drugs known to precipitate and perpetuate delirium, including psychoactive or anticholinergic medications.