**Subarachnoid Hemorrhage**

The subarachnoid space is susceptible to blood collection secondary to damage to any of the cerebral blood vessels that travel close to the brain surface beneath the arachnoid mater. Most subarachnoid hemorrhages (SAH) are traumatic in nature, while a small portion of cases is the result of vascular malformations like aneurysms. During the hemorrhage, the build-up of clotted blood and fluid within the rigid skull not only irritates the lining of the brain but also increases pressure on the brain surface, which can lead to shift and herniation. Also, the part of the brain previously supplied with oxygen-rich blood from the affected artery now suffers from ischemia. Furthermore, blockage of the normal CSF circulation can enlarge the ventricular system (hydrocephalus) and lead to symptoms like loss of consciousness, lethargy, and confusion. After 5 to 10 days, the irritating by-products of blood cause the arterial walls to contract, resulting in vasospasm or decrease in lumen diameter of the artery. This condition leads to an interruption in blood flow, causing a secondary stroke.

The hallmark symptom of SAH is thunderclap headache, and typically the patient calls it the "worst headache of my life." Additionally, the patient may also complain of nausea, seizures, vomiting, and diplopia. The initial diagnosis is confirmed by imaging, typically a CT scan of the head. If the CT scan is normal, but the clinical suspicion is high, an alternative way to establish the diagnosis is a lumbar puncture for CSF analysis. This test typically reveals xanthochromia or yellowish appearance of the CSF, which is evidence of blood or its products within the CSF. A CT angiography should be included in the evaluation if there is SAH present. Management of SAH varies depending on the underlying cause and the extent of brain damage and typically provides symptom relief (pain medications and anticonvulsants), repair of the damaged vessel (surgery), and preventing complications.

**Papilledema**

The sheath of the optic nerve is continuous with the brain's subarachnoid space. In the event of raised intracranial pressure, there is relative sparing of the brain itself from the detrimental consequences of high pressure. However, the increased pressure is transmitted through to the optic nerve, creating protrusion and pinching of the optic nerve at its head. The retinal ganglion cells' fibers at the optic disc become engorged and bulge forward. Long-standing optic disc edema can eventually lead to loss of fibers and permanent visual damage.