# Continuing Education Activity

Plummer-Vinson syndrome (PVS) is a rare condition characterized by the classic triad of dysphagia, iron-deficiency anemia, and esophageal webbing. Plummer-Vinson syndrome is more common in middle-aged women and is associated with an increased risk of developing squamous cell carcinoma of the pharynx and proximal esophagus. Other disorders associated with Plummer-Vinson syndrome include celiac disease, Crohn disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and thyroid disease, raising the possibility that immune dysregulation may be involved in its pathogenesis, although this remains to be proven. This activity addresses the presentation, evaluation, and management of Plummer-Vinson syndrome and examines the role of an interprofessional team approach in the care of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of Plummer-Vinson syndrome.
- Outline the examination findings in a patient with Plummer-Vinson syndrome.
- Explain the management of Plummer-Vinson syndrome.
- Review the interprofessional team strategies for enhancing care coordination and communication to advance the evaluation and management of Plummer-Vinson syndrome and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Plummer-Vinson syndrome (PVS) is a rare condition characterized by the classic triad of post-cricoid dysphagia, iron-deficiency anemia, and upper esophageal webs.

# Etiology

Even a century after the first reports of the cases, the etiology of Plummer-Vinson syndrome remains unknown. Proposed etiopathogenic mechanisms include nutritional and iron deficiencies, genetic predisposition, and autoimmunity.

As patients with Plummer-Vinson syndrome may also suffer from malnutrition, vitamin B deficiency has also been suggested as a cause, although the evidence is weak and inconclusive. Other disorders associated with Plummer-Vinson syndrome include celiac disease, Crohn disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and thyroid disease, raising the possibility that immune dysregulation may be involved in its pathogenesis, although this remains to be proven.

# Epidemiology

Epidemiological data about the incidence and prevalence of Plummer-Vinson syndrome are not widely available due to the rarity of this syndrome, as noted in the literature, with most cases focusing on case reports. Although this syndrome appeared to be more common in temperate northern countries during the previous century, improvements in nutrition and subsequent correction of iron deficiency have led to a decline in its prevalence. In addition, although webs may be identified in barium studies or esophagogastroduodenoscopy, these webs may be symptomatic in only a minority of patients, and their presence alone does not meet the criteria for diagnosing Plummer-Vinson syndrome. However, an interesting single population-based study conducted in the 1960s in South Wales reported that the prevalence of post-cricoid webs in women was between 0.3% and 1.1% and 8.4% and 22.4% in women with dysphagia. In contrast, no webs were identified in men.

PVS was commoner in the earlier half of the 20th century, particularly in middle-aged Scandinavian women. The rapid decline in the prevalence of the syndrome in the second half of the 20th century is attributable to an improvement in nutritional awareness, including the widespread fortification of flour with iron.

# Pathophysiology

The exact pathogenesis of Plummer-Vinson syndrome and the formation of the esophageal web is not well known. It has been postulated that iron deficiency induces iron-dependent enzyme dysfunction, leading to oxidative stress and DNA damage.

On biopsy, no inflammatory infiltrates are found.

PVS has also been proposed as an autoimmune phenomenon. It has been associated with autoimmune pathologies, such as pernicious anemia, rheumatoid arthritis, celiac disease, and thyroiditis.

A complicated inlet patch, heterotopic gastric mucosa, has also been proposed in the pathogenesis of PVS.

# Histopathology

Histologically, webs in patients with Plummer-Vinson syndrome show fibrosis, epithelial atrophy, epithelial hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, basal cell hyperplasia, and some features of chronic inflammation.

# History and Physical

Most patients with Plummer-Vinson syndrome are initially asymptomatic. Plummer-Vinson syndrome classically presents as a triad of iron-deficiency anemia, post-cricoid dysphagia, and upper esophageal webs.

Interestingly, splenomegaly, enlarged nodular thyroid glands, and edentia (loss of teeth) have also been found in a few patients with PVS.

# Evaluation

Although Plummer-Vinson syndrome is a rare diagnosis, there should be high clinical suspicion in patients with iron-deficiency anemia, esophageal webs, and post-cricoid dysphagia. Hematological testing is done to ascertain the cause of iron deficiency and the severity of anemia. Complete blood count, peripheral smear, and iron studies (e.g., serum iron, ferritin, total iron-binding capacity [TIBC], transferrin saturation) should be carried out to confirm the diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia.

The esophageal web is investigated by radiographic tools such as barium swallow, which is generally available easily even in remote locations and is a diagnostic tool with the advantage of reproducible documentation. Videofluoroscopy is usually more reliable for the demonstration of esophageal webs.

Fiberoptic endoscopy is the safest and most reliable tool for GI tract examination. Esophagoscopy, an endoscopic examination of the esophagus, can be both diagnostic and therapeutic in the same setting. During esophagoscopy, esophageal webs appear as smooth, thin, gray lesions with normal-appearing mucosa and a central or lateral lumen and are most commonly located on the anterior wall of the esophagus.

# Treatment / Management

Medical management of Plummer-Vinson syndrome includes iron supplementation. Occult or overt blood loss is generally ruled out, along with any underlying malignancies or iron malabsorption. Iron replacement is essential to correct anemia and to resolve most of the features associated with iron deficiency. The need for continued iron replacement is doubtful except for anemia correction.

Those with advanced and long-standing dysphagia typically require mechanical dilation. Commonly used techniques include endoscopic balloon dilatation or Savary-Gilliard dilators.

Patients should be advised to eat slowly and chew thoroughly. Solids should be prepared and cut into small pieces, especially meats. Surgery is rarely indicated and is reserved for those whose webs are unmanageable with dilation or associated with Zenker diverticulum.

# Differential Diagnosis

Other causes of dysphagia are much more common than Plummer-Vinson syndrome; even the presence of iron deficiency anemia or an esophageal web should not lead to a diagnosis of PVS. Tracheoesophageal fistula in neonates, injuries to the esophagus like blunt trauma or penetrating injuries, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), vascular rings, and diverticula are some of the conditions which can present with similar dysphagia and spectrum of symptoms. Motility disorders like scleroderma, achalasia and diffuse esophageal spasm may present with the esophageal web and dysphagia. Benign and malignant tumors of the esophagus can have a similar presentation.

Other conditions to consider in the differentials of PVS include the following:

- Heterotopic gastric mucosa with stricture

- Pill-induced stricture

- Hypopharyngeal bar

- Inflammatory conditions associated with webs, such as chronic graft versus host disease, blistering skin diseases, etc.,

# Prognosis

Patients with Plummer-Vinson syndrome have an excellent outcome, with most symptomatic patients requiring only one esophagogastroduodenoscopy with dilatation for complete relief of symptoms in conjunction with iron replacement therapy.

Patients are at an increased risk of developing squamous cell carcinoma of the hypopharynx or upper esophagus, which may be related to chronic iron deficiency. This is believed to cause irreversible mucosal changes leading to malignant degeneration.

# Complications

Untreated esophageal webs can lead to dysphagia for solids, absolute dysphagia, and aspiration pneumonia.

Iron-deficient patients may develop symptomatic anemia (fatigue, malaise, dyspnea, angina pectoris) if iron supplementation is not provided.

Patients may develop squamous cell cancer of the proximal esophagus, although the actual risk is unknown.

Endoscopic treatment of the esophageal web with Savary dilatations or balloon dilatations can be associated with a small risk of esophageal perforation.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As this condition is rare with no identifiable cause, deterrence of this condition is not possible. However, patients should be advised regarding dietary modifications and eating habits. To ensure appropriate follow-up care, pIn addition, patient education about the likely association between PVS and esophageal and hypopharyngeal cancers should be emphasized.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Plummer-Vinson syndrome is best managed by an interprofessional team comprised of a primary care practitioner and gastroenterologist. Although esophagogastroduodenoscopies are often performed as the initial evaluation in patients with dysphagia, abnormalities such as rings or webs may be missed. Such patients should be evaluated further with a barium esophagogram. Patients and primary care practitioners need to be aware of the small risk of malignancy associated with this condition. Such patients require long-term follow-up with prompt evaluation if new symptoms such as recurrent dysphagia or weight loss develop.