The mainstay of treatment for hypothyroidism is thyroid hormone replacement. The drug of choice is titrated levothyroxine sodium administered orally. It has a half-life of 7 days and can be given daily. It should not be given with iron or calcium supplements, aluminum hydroxide, and proton pump inhibitors to avoid suboptimal absorption. It is best taken early in the morning on an empty stomach for optimum absorption.

The standard dose is 1.6 - 1.8 mcg/kg per day, but it can vary from one patient to another. Patients less than 50 years old should be commenced on a standard full dose; however, lower doses should be used in patients with cardiovascular diseases and the elderly. In patients older than 50 years, the recommended starting dose is 25 mcg/day with reevaluation in six to eight weeks. In contrast, in pregnancy, the dose of thyroxine needs to be increased by 30%, and in patients with short-bowel syndrome, increased doses of levothyroxine are needed to maintain a euthyroid state.

There is less evidence to support an autoimmune/anti-inflammatory diet. The theory behind the inflammation has to do with the leaky gut syndrome, where there is an insult to the gut mucosa, which allows the penetrance of proteins that do not typically enter the bloodstream via transporters in the gut mucosa. It is theorized that a response similar to molecular mimicry occurs, and antibodies are produced against the antigens. Unfortunately, the antigen may be very structurally similar to thyroid peroxidase, leading to antibody formation against this enzyme. The concept of an autoimmune diet is based on healing the gut and decreasing the severity of the autoimmune response. More research is required on this topic before it becomes a part of the guidelines.