All forms of CL have loose and sagging skin with reduced elasticity and resilience in common. This clinical aspect is sufficiently characteristic to make the diagnosis. The skin is diffusely flaccid and redundant, especially in the face. The laxity usually progresses over time. It realizes a prematurely old and sad aspect. However, in all cases, it is the severity of the visceral disorders which conditions the prognosis of CL. For the autosomal dominant CL, cutaneous manifestations are quite late. Visceral involvement is absent or benign. It includes pulmonary lesions (emphysema, bronchiectasis, stenosis of the pulmonary artery), digestive hernias, and genital prolapse. The life expectancy of these patients is considered roughly the same as the general population, even if cases of aneurysms or aortic ruptures and severe pulmonary emphysema have been reported. Differential diagnosis with acquired CL can be difficult. X-linked CL is identical to Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Type IX and considered a variant of Menkes disease with a good prognosis. In addition to cutaneous manifestations, there are facial and thoracic dysmorphism, exostoses, sinuous carotids, intracranial arterial stenoses, stenosis, and genitourinary tract diverticula,

Autosomal recessive CL type one is probably the most severe form of CL. Cutaneous involvement occurs early in life. It is usually associated with intrauterine retarded growth, facial dysmorphism, thoracic and spinal deformities, as well as mental retardation. Severity is related to the fatal pulmonary involvement (early emphysema, pneumothorax), digestive and urological involvement (hernias, diverticula), or vascular involvement (sinuous and ectatic arteries). For autosomal recessive CL type two, cutaneous lesions usually respect the face and involve the palms and the plants. They are associated with delayed growth,