Child abusive head trauma, and child abuse are public health problems that lead to lifelong health consequences, both physically and psychologically. Physically, those who undergo abusive head trauma may have neurologic deficits, developmental delays, cerebral palsy, and other forms of disability. Psychologically, child abuse victims tend to have higher rates of depression, conduct disorder, and substance abuse. Academically, these children may have poor performance at school with decreased cognitive function. Every healthcare professional has a responsibility both legally and ethically in identifying cases of child abuse.

- Clinicians must have a high index of suspicion for child maltreatment, as early identification may be lifesaving.

- Healthcare providers may have ethical concerns about the legal implications of a preliminary diagnosis of abusive head trauma, but providers are legally and morally required to report suspected abuse to child protective services in all states. As a result, if child abuse or abusive head trauma is suspected, it is important to take the time to do a thorough assessment to rule out other potential causative factors in the differential diagnoses.

- It is crucial and necessary to provide thorough documentation as most cases of abusive head trauma result in legal action against the responsible caregiver.

- The early identification of abusive head trauma is particularly important. Studies have suggested that 80% of deaths associated with abusive head trauma might have survived with earlier intervention.

- While children younger than 2 years of age are the most common victims of abusive head trauma and typically exhibit the classic signs, one study of children 2 to 7 years showed that they exhibited similar signs and symptoms, which included bilateral retinal hemorrhages, diffuse axonal injury, and acute subdural hematoma.

Due to the frequency, negative impact on infants and children, and expense to society, it is imperative that clinicians become proficient in recognizing the signs and symptoms of abusive head injury. All health providers that evaluate children should be:

- Vigilant and cognizant of the signs, symptoms, and patterns of head trauma associated with abusive head trauma.

- Learn how to conduct a thorough, objective assessment of infants and children exhibiting signs and symptoms of possible abusive head trauma.

- Trained to consult ophthalmologists, radiologists, and neurosurgeons to assist in interpreting findings and confirm the diagnosis.

- Able to ensure a complete medical assessment and make an accurate diagnosis.

Clinicians that take care of infants and children should always remember:

- Use the term abusive head trauma rather than a shaken baby syndrome or another term that suggests a single mechanism of injury.

- Educate parents and caregivers regarding the dangers of shaking or striking an infant or child's head.

- Participate in community-based prevention efforts that teach parents the importance of only leaving children in the care of adults who can be trusted not to harm the child accidentally or deliberately.

- All clinicians must recognize, report, and respond appropriately to suspected child abuse and neglect.

While the diagnosis of abusive head trauma may sometimes be readily apparent, inexperienced and unsuspecting clinicians may fail to recognize injuries caused by child abuse. Further, when the diagnosis is not clear-cut, the clinician must exercise restraint until the evaluation is complete. The care of children with abusive head trauma is best undertaken by an interprofessional team including primary care providers, emergency department physicians and nurses, radiologists, intensivists, and neurosurgeons. [Level 5]