In normal individuals, urinary citrate excretion is directly related to the net gastrointestinal absorption of alkali.

Urinary citrate is increased in females and metabolic alkalosis as well as by estrogens, parathyroid hormone, growth hormone, and vitamin D.  It is decreased by testosterone in males, in starvation, and all types of acidosis; whether dietary, metabolic, uremic, or diabetic.

Specific causes of hypocitraturia include:

- Acetazolamide therapy (by creating a hyperchloremic acidosis through its effect on reducing bicarbonate reabsorption in the proximal renal tubule. This is similar to the mechanism in distal renal tubular acidosis.)

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (by increasing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) citrate lyase activity.)

- Chronic diarrhea syndrome, colitis, and irritable bowel syndrome (due to alkali loss in the stool. This is also responsible for the burning rectal sensation in patients with chronic diarrhea who are actually experiencing a mild chemical alkali burn.)

- Chronic renal failure. A reduced glomerular filtration rate results in less filtered citrate. This effect is compensated by increased fractional citrate excretion, so hypocitraturia is not typically apparent until relatively advanced renal failure has developed.

- Citrate GI malabsorption. Some patients may demonstrate a blunted response to oral citrate supplementation due to a primary intestinal absorptive defect.

- Dietary factors (typically, high animal protein, high sodium, low citrus, and low alkali diet)

- Distal renal tubular acidosis.

- Ethacrynic acid.

- Gastric bypass surgery; particularly Roux-en-Y procedures.

- Genetic factors.

- Gout, hyperuricosuria, and gouty diathesis.

- Glycogen storage disease, type 1.

- High animal protein diet (from the high acid ash load. Animal proteins are high in sulfates and phosphates, which are excreted as acids. A low animal protein diet can increase urinary citrate by an average of 25%.)

- High sodium intake (due to sodium-induced hypokalemia); a high sodium diet can decrease urinary citrate by 20%.

- Horseshoe kidneys. (Over 50% of nephrolithiasis patients with a horseshoe kidney will demonstrate hypocitraturia.)

- Hypokalemia (from increased intracellular acidosis).

- Ketogenic diets.

- Medullary sponge kidney.

- Primary hyperaldosteronism (secondary to the chronic hypokalemia produced by this disorder.)

- Thiazide diuretics (from the hypokalemia associated with thiazide medications)

- Topiramate therapy (due to the induced metabolic acidosis.)

- Starvation (increases citrate absorption by stimulating cellular transporters directly and by increasing acidosis)

- Strenuous physical exercise (due to lactic acidosis).

- Urinary tract infections (from direct bacterial breakdown of citrate. Up to 30% of calcium oxalate stone formers will have a history of E. coli urinary tract infections.)

**Chronic Diarrheal States, Colitis, and Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)**

The overall risk of nephrolithiasis is markedly increased by up to 38% in patients with chronic diarrheal states, colitis, and irritable bowel syndrome compared to the general population.

Among IBS patients, those with Crohn's disease tend to have the highest incidence of hypocitraturia and nephrolithiasis, especially if they've also had intestinal surgical resections. Urolithiasis develops in up to 28% of Crohn's patients who've had a resection of the terminal ileum.

**Distal Tubular Acidosis (Type 1)**

Of the various types of metabolic acidotic conditions due to kidney disorders, only distal renal tubular acidosis (Type 1) has been associated with nephrolithiasis, usually producing calcium phosphate stones.

Distal renal tubular acidosis is characterized by persistent urinary alkalinity, hypercalciuria, hypocitraturia, nephrocalcinosis, calcium phosphate nephrolithiasis, hypokalemia, and osteoporosis. The underlying cause is a failure of hydrogen ion excretion in the distal renal tubule resulting in metabolic acidosis, which is partially buffered by the release of calcium from bone, thus causing osteoporosis. This effect, together with increased intestinal calcium absorption and reduced renal calcium reabsorption, results in hypercalciuria. The degree of hypercalciuria is roughly equivalent to the severity of acidemia.

Hypocitraturia results from increased citrate reabsorption in the proximal renal tubule caused by metabolic acidosis, while the elevated urinary pH is directly due to the kidney's inability to excrete excess acid.

Hypokalemia in distal renal tubular acidosis comes from renal potassium wasting.

The combination of chronically alkaline urine together with hypercalciuria and hypocitraturia results in nephrocalcinosis and calcium phosphate stone production.

The metabolic acidosis, hypercalciuria, and hypokalemia can be corrected with appropriate potassium citrate therapy, reversing osteoporosis, halting nephrocalcinosis, and reducing calcium phosphate stone production.

**Gastric Bypass Surgery (Roux-en-Y)**

While Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery is no longer the most commonly performed bariatric procedure performed in the US (gastric sleeve has become more popular), it is still considered the most effective and comprises a significant portion of all weight-loss surgeries.

Patients undergoing Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery will typically average a 40% reduction in urinary citrate, which, along with a 50% or more increase in urinary oxalate and a 30% decrease in their daily urinary volumes, dramatically increases their nephrolithiasis risk.

**Topiramate Therapy**

Topiramate is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, like acetazolamide, increasingly used in epilepsy, as an anticonvulsant, and for migraines. It is also used, off-label, for weight loss and pain management.