Although strabismus can occur at any age, its commonly seen before six years with a peak onset around three years. Parents often claim that their child has crossed eyes since birth. Family photographs often help to document the age of onset. Moreover, pictures might show ocular preference in fixation. Alternating fixation denotes an absence of amblyopia in squinting infants. Strong fixation of one eye implies strabismic amblyopia in the other eye. A history of low birth weight indicates retinopathy of prematurity, which might lead to pseudostrabismus from ectopic macula. Acute onset of esotropia in an older child always requires a thorough evaluation to rule out neurological abnormalities. Intermittent strabismus indicates a better recovery of normal binocular vision as it implies that fusion is a present part of the time. Photosensitivity is commonly seen in intermittent exotropia and is caused by a decreased binocular photophobia threshold.

Clinical features of the commonly occurring strabismus conditions are as follows:

- Essential infantile esotropia (Congenital esotropia): Large angle stable esotropia, which presents within six months of age with positive family history and no neurological deficit. Refractive error is uncommon with poor potential for BSV. Cross fixation, asymmetrical optokinetic response, and latent horizontal nystagmus are seen. Dissociated vertical deviation (DVD) develops in 80% of children by three years of age. Treatment is aimed at correcting hyperopia and treating amblyopia. Muscle surgery should be performed early between 6 months to 2 years of age.

- Accommodative esotropia: Onset between 2-5 years of age with less than 10 prism diopters (PD) deviation and precipitated by trauma or illness. Family history and amblyopia are common. Mechanisms involved in accommodative esotropia are uncorrected hypermetropia, accommodative convergence, and poor fusional divergence. Normal accommodation convergence/accommodation ratio (AC/A ratio) with hyperopia of more than 2 Diopters (D) is seen in refractive type, while non-refractive type shows a high AC/A ratio with no clinically significant hyperopia. Treatment includes full cycloplegic correction and short term miotics if children are intolerant to spectacles. If AC/A ratio is high, Bifocals are prescribed with minimum plus add given for near vision. Surgery is indicated if the residual esotropia is greater than 10 PD.

- Microtropia: Microtropia or Monofixation syndrome is a unilateral abnormality of BSV with amblyopia, and ultra-small angle deviation of fewer than 5 degrees or 8 PD. Anisometropia is seen nearly in all patients with reduced stereopsis, abnormal retinal correspondence (ARC), normal motor fusion, and foveal suppression scotoma. ‘4 -prism diopter’ placed base out in front of the non-fixating eye, will not show any re-fixation movement in microtropia as the image will be shifted within the central suppression scotoma. Treatment is by correcting anisometropia and amblyopia.

- Intermittent exotropia: This presents around two years with exophoria, which breaks down to exotropia under conditions of visual inattention, bright light, and fatigue, or ill-health. Other features are headache, asthenopia, diplopia, photo-diplopia, micropsia, abnormal stereopsis, and temporal retinal hemisuppression. Treatment should begin with correcting refractive error and treating amblyopia. Orthoptic exercises with pencil pushups help to some extent. A bilateral lateral rectus recession is commonly performed strabismus surgery to correct the divergence excess.

- Dissociated vertical deviation (DVD): This bilateral, asymmetric, and asymptomatic strabismus manifests around two years and is commonly associated with congenital esotropia (75%). It presents as an updrift with excyclotropia of the eye undercover or during visual inattention. When the cover is removed, the affected eye will move down without the corresponding downdrift of the other eye. This downdrift of the occluded eye is also seen when the fixating eye is occluded with increasing neutral density filters. This is called the ‘Bielschowsky phenomenon’ and is specific for DVD. Inferior oblique overaction (IOOA) is the most common differential diagnosis of DVD, which shows the absent Bielschowsky phenomenon. Superior rectus recession with Retroequatorial myopexy (Faden procedure) is the surgery of choice.

- Monocular elevation deficiency: Also called ‘Double elevator palsy’, presents as a unilateral total inability to elevate with hypotropia in primary gaze, ptosis, and chin-up position. Knapp procedure (full tendon width vertical transposition of horizontal recti) for superior rectus weakness and inferior rectus recession for inferior rectus restriction is the procedure of choice.

- Alphabet patterns: Alphabet pattern is strabismus where the horizontal deviation changes from upgaze and downgaze. V pattern is common than A pattern.

- Duane retraction syndrome: This congenital syndrome presents as a globe retraction on adduction with narrowing of the palpebral fissure. In severe cases, globe up-shoot or down-shoot is seen with adduction. Its commonly seen in females with a preponderance to the left eye and is seen bilaterally in 20% of cases. It arises due to a congenital innervation of lateral rectus by the third cranial nerve due to agenesis of the sixth cranial nerve (pontine agenesis). Globe retraction is due to the co-contraction of both medial and lateral rectus. Surgery is indicated in significant heterotopia in primary gaze, abnormal head position, cosmetically unacceptable globe retraction, and for up-shoot/down-shoot movements.

- Browne syndrome: This restrictive disorder of superior oblique tendon can be congenital or acquired and presents as a limitation of elevation in adduction. Presents bilaterally in 10 % of cases, commonly seen in females affecting more in the right eye. Acquired causes are due to trauma or inflammation (Rheumatoid arthritis, sinusitis, scleritis, etc.) to the superior oblique tendon. Forced duction test is positive on retropulsion.

- Mobius syndrome: This presents as an inability to abduct either eye past midline with vertical gaze being normal and is due to congenital bilateral aplasia of the sixth and seventh cranial nerve.

- Oculomotor palsy: Third cranial nerve palsy presents as ptosis with abducted and intorted eye with defective accommodation.

- Lateral rectus palsy: Presents as an esotropic eye with limitation of abduction.

- Superior oblique palsy: Presents as ipsilateral limitation of depression on adduction, excyclotorsion, vertical and torsional diplopia on looking down. Parks 3 step test helps in diagnosing the paretic muscle in vertical diplopia, especially in superior oblique palsy. A right superior oblique palsy presents as hypertropia on the primary gaze with increasing hypertropia on the left gaze and on right-sided head tilt. The Head is tilted and turned towards the opposite side with depression of chin. Bilateral cases show right hypertropia in right gaze and left hypertropia on left gaze with greater than 10 degrees of cyclodeviation on double Maddox rod test and chin depression without head tilt. It is seen both as a congenital or acquired disorder. Acquired causes are trauma, vascular lesions, aneurysm, and tumors. Surgery involves superior oblique strengthening by Tucking/Tenoplication or Harada Ito procedure (Splitting and anterolateral transposition of the lateral half of the superior oblique tendon).