According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the emergence of viral diseases represents a serious public health risk. In the past two decades, several epidemics caused by viruses such as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) from 2002 to 2003, and H1N1 influenza in 2009, and the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in 2012 have been described which have had a significant impact on global health. Since being declared a global pandemic by the WHO, SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for COVID-19 has spread to 223 countries with more than 593 million cases, and more than 6 million deaths reported globally. A recent epidemiological update by WHO reported that more than 200 countries around the world have reported SARS-Co-V-2 variants of concern of which the Omicron VOC has been reported as the most dominant current circulating VOC since first being reported in November 2021. The U.S. has experienced the highest number of SARS-CoV-2 infections and COVID-19 related deaths followed by India and Brazil. In fact, COVID-19 was the third leading cause of death in the U.S. in 2020 after heart disease and cancer, with approximately 375,000 death reported.

**Age, Gender-based Differences And The Impact Of Medical Comorbidities in COVID-19**

Individuals of all ages are at risk of contracting this infection and severe disease. However, patients aged ≥60 years and patients with underlying medical comorbidities (obesity, cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, diabetes, chronic lung disease, smoking, cancer, solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients) have an increased risk of developing severe COVID-19 infection. The percentage of COVID-19 patients requiring hospitalization was six times higher in those with preexisting medical conditions than those without medical conditions (45.4% vs. 7.6%) based on an analysis by Stokes et al. of confirmed cases reported to the CDC during January 22 to May 30, 2020. Notably, the study also reported that the percentage of patients who succumbed to this illness was 12 times higher in those with preexisting medical conditions than those without medical conditions (19.5% vs. 1.6%).

**Racial and Ethnic Disparities in COVID-19**

The severity of infection and mortality related to COVID-19 also varies between different ethnic groups.[30] Racial and ethnic minority groups were reported to have a higher percentage of COVID-19 related hospitalizations than White patients based on a recent CDC analysis of hospitalizations from a large administrative database that included approximately 300,000 COVID-19 patients hospitalized from March 2020 to December 2020. This high percentage of COVID-19 related hospitalizations among racial and ethnic groups was driven by a higher risk for exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and an increased risk for developing severe COVID-19 disease.****The results of a meta-analysis of 50 studies from the US and UK researchers noted that people of Black, Hispanic, and Asian ethnic minority groups are at increased risk of contracting and dying from COVID-19 infection.****COVID-19 related death rates were the highest among Hispanic persons.