The hallmark of SSc is non-inflammatory proliferative/obliterative vasculopathy followed by interstitial/vascular fibrosis. Perivascular inflammatory infiltrates of CD4+ T-lymphocytes may be seen early in the disease but are absent in long-standing SSc.

The vasculopathy of SSc is characterized by bland intimal proliferation along with thickening of the basement membrane, rarefaction of capillaries, loss of vascular endothelial cadherin, platelet aggregation, and microthrombi formation. Vasculitis or immune complex deposition is uncommon. In later stages of SSc, there is extensive perivascular fibrosis, progressive luminal occlusion, and tissue fibrosis.

Early SSc is associated with dermal edema in the skin, and perivascular inflammatory infiltrate is composed of T-lymphocytes and monocytes. In later stages, dermal fibrosis predominates, and histopathology reveals loss of dermal capillaries and loss of skin appendages, hair follicles, sweat, and sebaceous glands in addition to marked dermal expansion with dense collagen and hyaluronic acid accumulation. There is a loss of dermal lymphatics and the subcutaneous adipose layer.

Pulmonary involvement is very common in SSc, and similar to skin, pulmonary involvement is associated with inflammatory changes early in the disease with fibrosis and vascular damage later. The early inflammatory changes are seen in the alveolar walls with infiltration with lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells. The pulmonary involvement in SSc is most commonly nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP) that shows a fairly uniform distribution of fibrosis in addition to interstitial inflammation and type II pneumocyte hyperplasia. Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) showing a patchy distribution of fibrosis with scattered fibroblastic foci can be seen and carries a worse prognosis. Pulmonary artery hypertension occurs due to vasculopathy, as well as a loss of pulmonary microvasculature due to progressive pulmonary fibrosis.

Renal involvement has become less frequent. Chronic ischemic changes are common, but glomerulonephritis is uncommon unless overlap syndrome. Scleroderma renal crisis, a rare but life-threatening manifestation of SSc, is associated with changes seen in thrombotic microangiopathy or malignant hypertension. Onion skinning (intimal proliferation and reduplication of the elastic lamina with luminal narrowing) of the small interlobular and arcuate renal arteries is seen.

Fibrosis is the predominant pathological finding of SSc and can be seen in other organs, including the gastrointestinal tract (anywhere from the mouth to rectum), thyroid gland, salivary glands, and even penile blood vessels. Inflammatory myositis can also be seen in SSc alone or overlap syndromes. Cardiac involvement can reveal constrictive pericarditis, pericardial fibrosis/effusions, and patchy myocardial fibrosis.