The heart rate can vary quite remarkably depending on various environmental and physiologic factors. At rest, the SA nodal myocytes depolarize at an intrinsic rate between 60 and 100 beats per minute, which is generally considered a normal heart rate. The autonomic nervous system tightly controls input into the sinus node. The autonomic fibers regulate the firing of the sinus node to initiate the start of subsequent cardiac cycles and thus, influence the heart rate. Parasympathetic input slows down the rate of action potential production, thereby decreasing the heart rate; on the other hand, sympathetic input increases the rate of action potential production, thereby increasing the heart rate. This tight, regulated control of the sinus node allows the heart to adapt to various physiologic stressors placed on the body. For instance, the heart responds to the body’s increased oxygen demand during exercise, increasing sympathetic input, and increasing heart rate.

Because the sinus node is composed of multiple myocytes, the first myocyte to produce an electrical impulse is not always the same. This is referred to as the pacemaker shift. For example, one myocyte may produce an action potential that is faster than the myocyte that produced the previous action potential, which would increase the heart rate within normal limits. This is considered a superior shift. However, myocytes may also produce action potentials that are slower than the previous action potential produced. This would cause a decrease in heart rate still within normal limits and is considered an inferior shift. The shift in the origin of the SA nodal pacemaker activity appears to depend on predominant sympathetic or parasympathetic activation. With sympathetic predominance, the origin seems to emerge more superiorly within the sinus node, while with parasympathetic predominance, the origin seems to emerge more inferiorly within the sinus node.