The presentation of 5 main disorders have been discussed below-

**Friedrich ataxia**: The cardinal clinical features of FA include progressive gait and limb ataxia, absent lower limb reflexes, extensor plantar responses, dysarthria, and reduction in or loss of vibration sense and proprioception (sensory modalities mediated by posterior column neurons). Cardiomyopathy, scoliosis, and foot deformity are common but non-essential features. The use of strict diagnostic criteria (refer table 1) was essential to ensure that patients used to study the natural history of FRDA, as well as for molecular studies, definitely had FRDA. Cases of FRDA meeting these criteria are defined as typical FRDA; those that do not meet the essential criteria are labeled atypical. Nerve conduction studies characteristically show absent sensory nerve action potentials as well as absent spinal somatosensory evoked potentials, although these may be reduced or even normal early in the disease course. Motor nerve conduction velocities are reduced to a lesser extent than sensory nerve action potentials.

**Fragile X syndrome:**The facial features are often less noticeable, particularly in affected females and children. The macrorchidism often develops during or after puberty and is frequently absent in young patients. Seizures are observed in approximately 20% of young affected males, with a lower prevalence in adults. Fragile X infants often have relative macrocephaly persisting into adult life. However, the adult height of affected males is below normal. A few patients present with either overweight or general persisting overgrowth, which can be confused with either Prader-Willi syndrome or Sotos syndrome. During infancy, connective tissue abnormalities, such as congenital hip dislocations and inguinal hernia, may be present. In later life, the connective tissue dysplasia may lead to scoliosis, flat feet, and mitral valve prolapse.

Syndromic associations like Robin sequence (micrognathia, glossoptosis, and soft cleft palate), the FG syndrome (congenital hypotonia, macrocephaly, distinctive face, and imperforate anus), and the DiGeorge anomaly (defects of the thymus, parathyroids, and great vessels) are reported. However, there is no definite evidence of any association with the FMR1 gene.

**Spinocerebellar ataxias:**The triad of symptoms of SCAs includes gait ataxia and incoordination, nystagmus/visual problems, and dysarthria. Specific features depending on individual SCAs include pyramidal, extrapyramidal signs, ophthalmoplegia, and cognitive impairment. These type-specific additional features help distinguish among subtypes.

**Huntington's disease:**The classic clinical triad in HD is (1) progressive movement disorder, most commonly chorea; (2) progressive cognitive disturbance culminating in dementia; and (3) various behavioral disturbances that often precede diagnosis and can vary depending on the state of disease.

- Cognitive disturbance: Subtle cognitive impairment is among the earlier manifestations in the disease process and is associated with progressive caudate atrophy. By the time of diagnosis, most subjects with HD have significant cognitive impairment readily measurable by neuropsychological testing.

- Movement disorder: Although the range of movement disorders in HD extends beyond chorea, it remains the classic motor sign of HD. Overt chorea involving larger muscle groups becomes evident over the course of the disease. Patients often will incorporate chorea into purposeful movements; something is known as parakinesia. As this progresses, disabling flailing can manifest in these patients.

- Behavioral disorders: They range from affective illness, most notably depression and apathy, to delusional behavior that can include, rarely, hallucinations. As is true of other progressive neurodegenerative diseases, the behavioral disorders of HD evolve during the course of illness. Most HD gene carriers will experience some behavioral symptoms before establishing the diagnosis.

**Myotonic dystrophy:**The clinical presentation has a wide range of severity. It could present as a lethal disorder of infancy or a mildly presenting disease in late adulthood.

Congenital and prenatal presentation: The prenatal manifestations include reduced fetal movement, polyhydramnios, and ultrasound findings of talipes equinovarus or borderline ventriculomegaly. After birth, neonatal hypotonia, along with feeding and respiratory difficulty, are common. It is important to consider the diagnosis of DM1 in these patients even when they have a negative family history because their mothers, who are the source of the mutated gene transmission, might be asymptomatic but carriers of full mutations.

Childhood DM: Onset of DM1 is after the first year but before age 10. Often present with predominant cognitive and behavioral features that are not accompanied by conspicuous muscle disease.

Classical/Adult-onset DM1: This occurs between the second and fourth decades. The most common presenting symptom is myotonia. The myotonia in DM is more pronounced after rest and improves with muscle activity, the "warm-up phenomenon." In contrast to RGM, the action myotonia in DM1 selectively involves specific muscle groups of the forearm, hand, tongue, and jaw. The cardinal finding on examination is the myotonic myopathy, consisting of action and percussion myotonia, weakness, and muscle wasting in a characteristic distribution.