Often, when patients learn of having peritoneal carcinomatosis, they become taken with fear and anxiety, losing hope for a cure. The evolution of surgical and medical management for peritoneal carcinomatosis has provided for much-needed encouragement, better outcomes, and enhanced quality of life for some of these patients. Healthcare providers should become increasingly aware of the potential benefits of cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC when appropriately applied. They should encourage and arm newly diagnosed patients with currently available information and help arrange for appropriate referrals to consider surgical treatment options, preferably in interprofessional oncologic settings when available.

In the hope for the best possible outcomes, patients and their healthcare providers alike are encouraged not to underestimate general abdominal and bowel-related symptoms, especially when suggestive of intestinal obstruction, and keep malignancy, including peritoneal carcinomatosis, on the differential diagnosis for early detection and treatment whenever possible.

The overall outlook for patients with PC is poor. Thus, it is essential to approach these cases in an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nursing, and pharmacy. A board-certified oncology pharmacist should work with the oncologist on agent selection and dosing, as well as educate the patient on pain management and available options. [Level 5] Consult with pain services, a hospice nurse, and palliative care merits consideration early on in the treatment.