Patients with substance-induced affective disorders will present similarly to patients with independent mood disorders with or without comorbid substance use disorders. Thus, patients may endorse sad mood, insomnia, feelings of guilt, suicidal ideation, psychomotor retardation, distractibility, hopelessness, helplessness, irritability, decreased libido, anergy, or anorexia if depressed. In the setting of mania, the patient will endorse grandiosity, distractibility, impulsivity, pressured speech, racing thoughts, sexual promiscuity, irritability, insomnia, and increased energy.

The anamnesis of a patient experience a substance-induced affective disorder will consist of mood symptomatology in direct temporal relation to the ingestion of the substance. These symptoms will resolve following the cessation of severe intoxication or acute withdrawal (up to 1 month). Generally, severe intoxication produces symptoms consistent with mania or hypomania, whereas withdrawal manifests as symptoms of depression. Depressants (e.g. alcohol, sedative-hypnotics, analgesics, etc) may induce states of euphoria, decreased impulse control, or mood lability. This intoxication phase is then supplanted by a withdrawal phase, most notable for irritability, agitation, and dysphoria. Stimulant use (e.g. cocaine, amphetamines, etc.) can mimic bipolar spectrum disorders by producing euphoria, increased energy, anorexia, grandiosity, and paranoia. Stimulant withdrawal can cause anhedonia, apathy, depressed mood, and suicidal ideation.