As with all surgical procedures, a good history and physical should be obtained to identify risk factors for the procedure. Though this is considered a low-risk procedure, those patients with significant cardiac history may require cardiac risk stratification and medical optimization before undergoing surgery. It is important to identify possible coagulopathies to correct and prevent complications post-operatively.

The patient's history should be taken into account when deciding which venous access to use. If the patient has a history of kidney disease, subclavian access may not be the best choice for that patient.

An adequate physical exam can reveal sites of previous venous access, cellulitis, underlying trauma, or physical limitations that would prevent safe venous access.

Basic laboratory work including a complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic panel, and coagulation studies should be ordered and reviewed preoperatively. Correction of electrolytes and coagulation should occur before surgery.

A chest x-ray and electrocardiogram should be considered preoperatively in patients with associated risks: smoker, lung cancer, chronic kidney disease or acute renal failure, electrolyte abnormalities, cardiac history.

The chest should be mapped with the patient standing to determine the best exit site for HD catheters and subcutaneous port sites. Concurrently, body habitus should also be assessed to determine the easiest, safest, and cleanest venous access sites.

Also, a conversation with the patient's referring clinician should occur preoperatively to determine what type of tunneled catheter and the number of lumens required by the referring clinician.