No reliable, definitive test exists for amniotic fluid embolism (AFE). The suspicion of AFE is suggested by the sudden appearance of dyspnea, dysphoria, hypotension, cardiovascular collapse, and coagulopathy following some action during the peripartum period-, e.g., active labor, rupture of membranes, vaginal delivery, or cesarean section. AFE has also been seen during or after elective pregnancy terminations (induced or surgical). The initial evaluation for AFE is usually done during aggressive cardiopulmonary resuscitation. This evaluation is tailored to the two main system failures, which are hemodynamic and hematologic. Bedside measurement of pulmonary wedge pressure, cardiac output, central venous pressure, pulse oximetry, arterial waveform, electrocardiography, and chest radiography should start the initial hemodynamic evaluation.

Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) or transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is essential to the diagnosis. If stability is acquired, TEE is preferred. Significant findings of AFE are right ventricle dilatation, hypokinesis, and overload, tricuspid regurgitation, and right atrial enlargement. Early cardiac thrombi may be detected in the enlarged right ventricle or right atrium. Highly associated with this syndrome is the bowing of the intraventricular septum into the left ventricle, creating left ventricular obstruction and systolic dysfunction. The echocardiographic appearance of this bowing resembles the letter ‘D.’ Blood should be obtained immediately for urgent type and crossmatch, complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, and a full coagulation panel to include platelets, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, bleeding time, fibrinogen, d-dimer, and fibrin degradation products (FDPs).

Metabolic and respiratory acidosis is common. This should be evaluated by an arterial blood gas, as well as an end-tidal carbon dioxide (etCO2) measurement. The international society on thrombosis and hemostasis (ISTH) has a formal scoring system (10) to determine the presence of DIC in pregnancy. The score is based on platelet count, international neutralization ratio (INR), and fibrinogen level. Scores of more than 3 are indicative of DIC in pregnancy. Determining strict criteria for the diagnosis of AFE has been trying since there is no single definitive test to clinch the diagnosis. Internationally, various standards have appeared defining AFE. The American Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, after a consensus symposium has created its criteria for AFE, which require the following:

- Sudden cardiopulmonary collapse, or hypotension (systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg) with hypoxia (SpO2 less than 90%)

- DIC, according to ISTH definition

- Symptomatology either during labor or during placental delivery (or up to 30 minutes later)

- No fever

They specifically note that there are cases outside of these parameters (such as during pregnancy terminations) and emphasize that their goal was to establish standardized research reporting criteria. They freely admit that there would be countless outlier cases using their standards, but hopefully, not many.