**Corticosteroids**

Corticosteroids are potent anti-inflammatory agents used in the management of uveitis. They can be used topically as eye drops to treat anterior uveitis. However, topical steroids are insufficient in the control of posterior uveitis. The most commonly used topical corticosteroids are prednisolone acetate 1% or difluprednate 0.05%.

**Regional corticosteroids**

These agents are used in cases of posterior uveitis or when the patient is poorly compliant to frequent dosages of topical corticosteroids. They can be given as posterior subtenon injection in a dose of 20 to 40 mg of triamcinolone acetonide or intravitreal injection of 1 to 4 mg of triamcinolone acetonide.

Long-acting sustained slow release steroid implants such as 0.7 mg of dexamethasone, 0.19 mg of fluocinolone acetonide, or 0.59 mg of fluocinolone acetonide provide longer periods of anti-inflammatory effect. The regional corticosteroids may cause glaucoma and cataracts, and thus the patients should be observed closely and promptly treated for the complications.

**Systemic steroids**

Systemically dosed steroids are used in cases of bilateral uveitis with systemic involvement or when there is poor disease control with local steroid use. Prednisolone in the dose of 1 to 1.5 mg/kg/day initially followed by slow tapering is the usual treatment protocol.

**Cycloplegic Agents**

These agents are used to relieve ciliary spasms and associated ocular pain. They help in breaking or preventing posterior synechiae. Commonly used agents include cyclopentolate 1%, homatropine 2%, and atropine 1%.

**Systemic Immunosuppressive Agents**

These agents are used in cases of corticosteroid-resistant cases or steroid-dependent cases where the side effects of the steroid regimen outweigh the anti-inflammatory effects. Most commonly used agents for the treatment of non-infectious uveitis are methotrexate (7.5 to 25 mg /week; oral, subcutaneous, or intramuscular route), mycophenolate mofetil (500–1500 mg bd; oral route), cyclosporine (2.5 to 10 mg/kg/day bd; oral route), and azathioprine (1 to 4 mg/kg/day; oral route).

**Biologic Agents**

These are used in cases of refractory non-infectious uveitis. The most commonly used biologic agents are tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibitors (TNF α) such as infliximab, adalimumab, etanercept, and golimumab. These agents promise to offer a new option in resistant cases. The patient should be tested for latent tuberculosis and hepatitis B before starting biologic agents to prevent the reactivation of infection.

**Treatment of Orbital Disease**

Orbital inflammation is typically amenable to systemic steroids or immunosuppressive agents. In cases with chronic eyelid or lacrimal gland swelling, a biopsy is necessary to differentiate it from tumors.

**Treatment of Ocular Surface Disease**

Conjunctival lesions and KCS usually responds to topical cyclosporine eye drops.

**Treatment of Ocular Complications**

Glaucoma is one of the most common uveitis complications and a serious side effect of chronic corticosteroid use. Glaucoma needs to be monitored at each visit and requires early intervention either medically or surgically. Cataract surgery is usually planned after three months of disease inactivity. Uveitic cystoid macular edema is one of the common causes of ocular morbidity and requires intervention in the form of anti-inflammatory agents.

In certain cases, posterior subtenon triamcinolone, intravitreal injection of steroids (triamcinolone, dexamethasone implant, or fluocinolone implant), or anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) agents like bevacizumab or ranibizumab are required to control cystoid macular edema. Development of epiretinal membrane at the macula, vitreomacular traction, and vitreous hemorrhage may warrant surgical intervention in the form of vitrectomy.