The goal of treating intestinal NETs is to achieve symptoms control, tumor growth control, and biochemical control.

**Treatment of Non-metastatic Intestinal Carcinoid**

Treatment of localized disease is surgical resection with a negative margin. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment and the only way to achieve a complete cure for primary intestinal NET. However, most patients have either synchronous metastatic tumors or liver metastasis at the time of presentation due to the indolent nature of the tumor.

The extent of surgical resection depends on the size, location, and local spread of the disease. The same principle of loco-regional control used in surgical treatment of midgut malignancies is followed. A small tumor of 1 cm size can be locally excised. This is particularly important in duodenal tumors where wider resection and pancreaticoduodenectomy can be avoided. Carcinoids of the small intestine have a high likelihood of metastasis, irrespective of the size. Therefore, patients without evidence of metastasis should be treated with resection of the involved area of the small bowel including the small bowel mesentery with curative intent. Colorectal carcinoid tumors are mostly more than 2 cm and are invasive. Patients without metastasis should be treated with partial colectomy and lymphadenectomy. When presented with complications like bowel obstruction, surgical treatment is indicated primarily to relieve the bowel obstruction on an urgent basis. Segmental bowel resection with the involved mesentery and primary anastomosis is sufficient treatment for primary control and complication relief.

**Treatment of Metastatic Intestinal Carcinoid**

For patients with symptomatic carcinoid syndrome and unresectable disease, initial treatment is advised with a somatostatin analog. However, for patients with metastatic disease that is resectable without extrahepatic metastases, cytoreductive surgical resection is preferred over medical therapy. Surgical treatment of tumor related complications is indicated to control the complications.

Medical Management:

- Somatostatin analogs: These are first-line agents used for the treatment of symptomatic carcinoids. Right-sided includes octreotide and lanreotide which have been shown to be highly effective in controlling symptoms with intestinal carcinoid. A depot preparation of octreotide is available in the form of monthly intramuscular injections. These are usually well-tolerated except for mild symptoms such as nausea or bloating.

- Interferon: This may be an option for patients with advanced disease who have worsening symptoms while on treatment with somatostatin analogs or who are intolerant of somatostatin analog therapy, but it is less commonly used due to potentially adverse effects.

- Molecular-directed therapy: mTor inhibitors like everolimus are currently approved as second-line therapy for patients who have progressive symptoms despite the use of somatostatin analogs.

**Treatment of Hepatic Metastasis**

Surgical liver resection in patients with hepatic metastasis has a role in symptoms relief and survival rate improvement.