# Introduction

The superior cervical ganglia are involved in the autonomic nervous system. They are involved explicitly with sympathetic efferent innervation, particularly to the face and head. The superior cervical ganglion is the most superior ganglion of the sympathetic chain, bilaterally. It is the largest of the three ganglia of the cervical sympathetic trunk, the other two being the stellate and middle cervical ganglion.

# Structure and Function

The superior cervical ganglia are made up of the paravertebral ganglia of cervical vertebral levels one through four (C1-C4).

# Embryology

The superior cervical ganglia derive from neural crest cells. Neural crest cells come from the ectoderm in embryological development. Many structures of the head, neck, face, and cardiovascular system also originate from the neural crest cells.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Branches from the ascending pharyngeal artery, coming off of the external carotid artery, provide blood supply to the superior cervical ganglia. Venous drainage is through the internal jugular vein through direct posterior branches. There is a noted deficiency in gross blood supply at the junction of the upper one third and lower two-thirds of the neck; this is important for surgical considerations mentioned in the later part of this activity.

The superior cervical ganglia are anterior to the retropharyngeal lymph nodes.

# Nerves

As previously described, the superior cervical ganglia are made up of the paravertebral ganglia of cervical vertebral levels one through four (C1-C4).

# Muscles

The superior cervical ganglia provide sympathetic innervation.[10] Their location is lateral to the longus colli muscles.

# Physiologic Variants

The superior cervical ganglia are typically present at cervical vertebral levels one and two (C1 and C2). However, they have been found between the cervical vertebral levels one through five. (C1-C5).

Branches coming off of the superior cervical ganglia include the:

- Pharyngeal branch

- The communicating branch of the cervical nerve

- The internal carotid branch

- The communicating branch of the pharyngeal mucosa

- The communicating branch of the vagus nerve

- The communicating branch of the superior laryngeal nerve

- The laryngeal branch

- The communicating branch of the internal jugular vein

There are reports of up to seven different types of branch combinations coming off of the superior cervical ganglia.

It is crucial to recognize that these are common variants of branches coming off of the superior cervical ganglia as damaging these may lead to consequences such as the development of Horner syndrome as described later in this activity.

# Surgical Considerations

It is important to avoid this the superior cervical ganglia during open anterior neck surgeries. When the superior cervical ganglia are damaged, Horner syndrome can develop. Horner syndrome comes from tension on the sympathetic trunk during anterior neck surgeries such as anterior cervical disc fusions. The tension causes damage to the fibers along the sympathetic trunk. More about Horner syndrome is described later in this activity.

Anterior surgical procedures to the neck area such as anterior cervical discectomies can cause a disruption of the blood supply to the superior cervical ganglia, causing ischemic damage to the ganglia. This ischemic damage can also cause symptoms similar to Horner syndrome.

To prevent damage to the sympathetic ganglia during an anterior approach to the cervical spine, it is always advisable to create longus colli gutter and then place the retractors within the same, thereby minimizing the risk of inadvertent injury to the ganglia that lie lateral to the muscle.

# Clinical Significance

The superior cervical ganglia can be a site for locally injected anesthetics such as opioids, which is useful for neuropathic pain management of the face.

Damage to the superior cervical ganglia can cause a postganglionic pattern of Horner syndrome. The symptoms of Horner syndrome include miosis, facial anhidrosis, and partial ptosis; this is due to the superior cervical ganglia's role in providing sympathetic innervation to these targets.

# Other Issues

The superior cervical ganglion can appear as pathologic retropharyngeal lymph nodes on imaging. The superior cervical ganglia are anterior to the retropharyngeal lymph nodes.