The most important differentials in a patient with suspected PCT include hereditary coproporphyria, variegate porphyria, and congenital erythropoietic porphyria due to the cutaneous manifestations seen in all four along with elevated porphyrin levels. As mentioned above for PCT, all other conditions will have specific patterns of porphyrin elevation, which would be diagnostic of that disease. Variegate porphyria, for example, would have an increased urinary level of coproporphyrins, ALA, and porphobilinogen, whereas congenital erythropoietic porphyria would have normal urinary ALA and porphobilinogen levels. However, both variegate porphyria and hereditary coproporphyria can be clinically differentiated from PCT based on their presenting neurovisceral symptoms, which is lacking in patients with PCT.

**Blistering skin diseases**: Epidermolysis bullosa, polymorphous light eruptions, and pseudoporphyria cutanea trade. All three conditions, although clinically similar to PCT, will not cause a rise in porphyrin levels and hence can be distinguished from PCT using laboratory investigations.

- Pseudoporphyria cutanea tarda is clinically and histologically indistinguishable from PCT but without the porphyrin elevation. It is associated with Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), furosemide, antibiotics (nalidixic acid, tetracyclines), or retinoid use.

- Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita is an autoimmune blistering disorder that presents with widespread blisters not limited to sun-exposed skin surfaces.

- Polymorphous light eruption is a photo distributed pruritic rash that develops minutes to hours after sunlight exposure and is characterized by erythematous papules, vesicles, and plaques that are nonscarring.

Porphyrin elevation is also seen in liver disease, advanced renal disease, and other porphyrias. However, they will not show the typical cutaneous manifestations seen in patients with PCT.