Complications associated with vascular access closure devices can be categorized into the following three types:

**Ischemic**

Lower extremity ischemia from vascular access closure devices can be related to the stenosis/occlusion of the access artery or distal embolization. Device selection according to the characteristics of the access artery is important in minimizing this complication. These complications are usually managed with open surgical exploration. Endovascular approaches have also been employed in select cases.

**Hemorrhagic**

The risk of hemorrhagic complications is higher if the device is deployed in a vessel with unfavorable characteristics such as dense calcifications or at an inappropriate anatomic location (above inguinal ligament). Other factors can increase the risk of bleeding including increased age, interventional procedure, and end-stage renal disease. On-going hemorrhage from device failure can lead to blood loss anemia and hemodynamic instability requiring conversion to open surgical femoral exploration particularly if wire access is no longer in place. Alternatively, if the sheath size used was small and patient is hemodynamically stable, manual compression may be applied while either allowing heparin to wear off or administering protamine to reverse the heparin that was given during the procedure. Incomplete closure can also lead to the development of pseudoaneurysm from the access site. Depending on the clinical situation and imaging characteristics, this pseudoaneurysm can be managed either with ultrasound-guided thrombin injection or open surgical exploration.

**Infectious**

Vascular access closure devices introduce foreign material in the body (such as braided suture, nitinol, polyethylene glycol) and this can rarely serve as a nidus for infection. Particular attention should be paid to sterile technique throughout the procedure to minimize infectious complications from closure devices.