Penicillin G administration can be either intravenously or intramuscularly. Penicillin G potassium for injection USP vial is available in 1 million units, 5 million units, and 20 million units per vial. Penicillin G degrades more easily by stomach acid and has less than 30% bioavailability; therefore, it is a parenterally administered drug. Because of the short half-life, penicillin G is usually administered in divided doses 4 to 6 hours apart via the intravenous or intramuscular route. Penicillin G benzathine administration ensures a continuous low dose of penicillin G over 2 to 4 weeks.

Penicillin V and penicillin VK (potassium salt of penicillin V) is available in orally administered forms as a solution for reconstitution (125 mg/5 mL, 250 mg/5 mL) and tablets (250 mg and 500 mg).

As with any antibiotic, patients must receive counsel to finish the full medicine course to prevent bacterial resistance. Penicillin demonstrates limited crossing of the blood-brain barrier and can only treat some bacterial meningitis.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Pregnant Women:**Penicillin G belongs to FDA pregnancy category B. No severe adverse events are observed with penicillin G. Elimination of penicillin V is increased during pregnancy, requiring dose adjustment with an increased dose of the standard dosing interval or shorter dosing intervals of the standard dose.

**Breastfeeding Women:**According to literature, penicillin G and penicillin V can be found in milk at low levels that are unexpected to cause adverse reactions in breastfed infants. It is sometimes reported that penicillin can disrupt the infant's gastrointestinal flora, causing diarrhea or thrush; however, these side effects have not been adequately evaluated. The penicillin G or penicillin V use is acceptable for nursing mothers.

**Pediatric Population:**The pediatric dose of penicillin is calculated based on their body surface area and weight.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Although renal impairment is not a contraindication for penicillin, doses will have to be adjusted given end-stage renal disease. Depending on the glomerular filtration rate, these patients will receive a full loading dose and then half a loading dose every 8 to 10 hours or 4 to 5 hours.