Since etomidate is intended to induce general anesthesia, any clinician who administers etomidate must be trained in administering general anesthesia and managing complications encountered. In addition, emergency equipment must be readily available and in good working order. A trained, certified registered nurse anesthetist (CRNA) helps comprehensive perioperative care. Finally, hospital pharmacists should ensure proper dosing as the duration of action is closely related to the dose. In the case of overdose, critical care physician supervision is necessary. This interprofessional approach to etomidate use is crucial for optimal patient outcomes with the fewest adverse events. All clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nurses, pharmacists, and other staff involved must alert the rest of the interprofessional team to any changes in patient status, as well as document them in the patient's health record so all team members have access to the same information base. [Level 5]

Clinicians should use the revised Cardiac Risk Index for Pre-Operative Riskto estimate the risk of cardiac complications after noncardiac surgery.

The decision to use etomidate as an induction agent is ultimately up to the clinician based on the physiologic state of their patient. Large, prospective controlled trials are still needed to determine the final role of etomidate, especially in critically ill patients. In the specific case of increasing the seizure duration potential, etomidate is superior to propofol and thiopental.