History and physical exam findings differ drastically depending on which type of osteopetrosis the patient presents.

Malignant, autosomal recessive osteopetrosis presents in the infant within a few months of delivery. Symptoms include frequent infections, abnormal bruising, and bleeding abnormalities. These symptoms are secondary to the bone that is no longer being correctly resorbed by osteoclasts and is consequently encroaching into the medullary space.

The history and physical exams of patients with intermediate autosomal recessive osteopetrosis are highly variable. Symptoms resemble but are not as severe and do not present as early as the symptoms present in the malignant form of the autosomal recessive disease. Due to the fact this variety of osteopetrosis can be secondary to carbonic anhydrase II dysfunction, renal tubular acidosis can be present in these patients.

Type 1 autosomal dominant osteopetrosis tends to have a very mild clinical presentation. Unlike other forms of osteopetrosis, type 1 autosomal dominant osteopetrosis has been found to be due to an error in increased bony formation rather than a defect in osteoclast function.

Type 2 autosomal dominant osteopetrosis is the most common form managed by orthopedic surgeons, and it has a very heterogeneous course. Most patients with this form of the disease lead relatively normal lives with a generally normal life span, overall health, and physique. Patients will often discover that they have this disease after the clinical presentation for evaluation of either fracture determined radiographically to be pathologic or early-onset osteoarthritis. Fractures occur in approximately 4 out of 5 of these patients. The average number of fractures per affected individual is 3, and the bone that experiences the most pathologic fractures is the femur.