Healthcare professionals who treat patients with chronic pain should understand best practices in opioid prescribing, approaches to pain assessment, pain management modalities, and appropriate use of opioids for pain control. Pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic approaches should be evaluated. Patients with moderate-to-severe chronic pain who have been assessed and treated with non-opioid therapy without adequate pain relief are candidates for opioid therapy. Initial treatment should be a trial of therapy, not a definitive course of treatment. The CDC has issued updated guidance on the prescription of opioids for chronic pain. These guidelines address when to initiate or continue opioids for chronic pain; opioid selection, dosage, duration, follow-up, and discontinuation; and assessing risk and addressing opioid use harm.

**Pain Management Referral**

Recommendations are to refer a patient to pain management in chronic pain that does not respond to initial therapy. The pain may be located at multiple locations, requiring multimodal treatment or increases in dosages for adequate pain control or invasive procedures to control pain. Treatment of both pain and a comorbid psychiatric disorder leads to a more significant reduction of both pain and symptoms of the psychiatric disorder.

**Pharmacologic Options and Risks/Benefits**

The list of pharmacological options for chronic pain is extensive: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, local anesthetics, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, topical analgesics, skeletal muscle relaxants, N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists, alpha 2 adrenergic agonists, and opioids are also possible pharmacological therapies.

Musculoskeletal pain conditions involving both central and peripheral sensitization mechanisms.

If neuropathic pain is a component of the patient’s chronic pain syndrome, a combination of multiple pharmacological therapies may be necessary.  Less than half of patients with neuropathic pain will achieve adequate pain relief with a single agent.

Antidepressants in the class of serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCA) are other appropriate options for pain management. Antidepressants are beneficial in the treatment of neuropathic pain, central pain syndromes, and chronic musculoskeletal pain. For neuropathic pain, antidepressants have demonstrated a 50 percent reduction of pain.

Adjunctive topical agents can be used to manage chronic pain and allow for less systemic adverse effects than parenteral or oral administration.  Common examples include lidocaine, topical NSAIDs (e.g., diclofenac), capsaicin, and methyl salicylate-menthol. There are also compounded topical medications, which usually include a mixture of three or more single medications, to provide a more customized therapy regimen; however, the studies are limited due to the preparation of these medications and the pain conditions treated with these medications.

Additionally, botulinum toxin can also be an option for chronic pain and disorders of muscle spasms, including myofascial pain syndrome, headaches, temporomandibular joint disorders, and neuropathic pain.

Opioids are considered a second-line option for chronic pain syndromes; however, they may be warranted for pain management for patients with severe persistent pain or pain due to a malignancy. Opioid therapy can be considered for the management of neuropathic pain if non-opioid therapies have failed or while titrating first-line medications when prompt pain relief is needed.

The patient must make an informed choice before starting opioid treatment after discussing the risks, benefits, and alternatives to opioids.

When initiating opioids, the clinician should start with a dose as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) to provide analgesia without significant adverse effects.

**Non-Pharmacologic Options**

The list of nonpharmacological therapies for chronic pain is extensive. Non-pharmacological options include heat and cold therapy, massage therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, relaxation therapy, biofeedback, group counseling, ultrasound stimulation, acupuncture, aerobic exercise, chiropractic manipulation, physical therapy, osteopathic manipulative medicine, occupational therapy, and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). However, the data supporting the efficacy of TENS for the treatment of chronic pain have been inconclusive.

Interventional techniques can also be utilized in the treatment of chronic pain. Commonly performed procedures include trigger point injections, nerve blocks, radiofrequency nerve ablations, intra-articular injections, and epidural steroid injections. Neuromodulation procedures, including spinal cord stimulation, peripheral nerve stimulation, and intrathecal drug delivery systems, are also options to consider, especially in patients that have exhausted more conservative measures. The Food and Drug Administration has approved spinal cord stimulation to manage chronic intractable pain of the trunk and limbs associated with failed back surgery syndrome, complex regional pain syndrome, and neuropathy.