ONS is a minimally invasive technique in which a stimulator is implanted either unilaterally or bilaterally at the level of occipito-cervical junction. The stimulation parameters, like pulse width, amplitude, and frequency, can be adjusted to create paresthesia in the distribution of the occipital nerve. The procedure is performable under a lateral or medial approach.

Lateral approach. Weiner and Reed originally described the lateral approach in which the clinician makes an incision on the mastoid process, and the catheter was then subcutaneously advanced towards midline at the level of C1 with the help of fluoroscopy.

Medial approach. A 2 cm midline incision is made at the level of C1, and then leads are inserted laterally from the midpoint.

The advantages of the medial approach include

- There is more subcutaneous fat in midline than laterally, which gives enough space to make a large subcutaneous pocket for placement of leads and adequate fixation to minimize dislocation.

- It is a more acceptable approach for patients who use spectacles and have complained of pain at the incision site.

- The bilateral electrodes are implantable through a single incision.

Implant placement. The different positioning sites of the IPG include the upper buttock, abdomen, infrascapular region, and infraclavicular regions.

Programming. Specific personnel appointed by the manufacturer do the device programming and maintenance.

A skull X-ray is taken after procedure completion to document the final lead position; this is also useful in the future to assess complications associated with lead migration or fracture.