Since its original founding in 1906, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has played a central role in regulating and safety of prescription drugs. The first regulatory law for prescription drugs was the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act which required medications to accurately listed their ingredients. This law was passed to address the growing number of medications with potentially hazardous ingredients. Although this law was a critical step towards ensuring the safety of prescription drugs, it took nearly sixty years until laws were passed requiring evidence of drug efficacy before a prescription drug was approved for public use.

Following the thalidomide crisis in which an antinausea medication was discovered to cause severe congenital disabilities, the Kefauver-Harris Drug Amendments were passed in 1962 to prohibit the marketing of prescription drugs without documentation of efficacy. In the years following, the regulation of prescription drugs has evolved with new laws to address challenges in healthcare delivery and methods seeking to circumvent FDA regulation.

Included within these new laws are efforts to regulate the importation of prescription drugs. Although such laws were intended to ensure drug safety, regulations such as the PDMA have been under increasing pressure to address how such laws restrict the public to more affordable prescription drugs abroad. Legislative proposals have been introduced that seek to increase patient access to drugs abroad; however, such proposals have been limited in their ability to address the challenges facing the FDA in monitoring the safety of such imported drugs.