Brachioradialis reflex testing can constitute an important portion of the neurological exam. For one, in cases where the patient has hyperreflexia of the brachioradialis, it may point to the presence of hyperactive stretch reflexes caused by the presence of an upper motor lesion.

While the brachioradialis reflex is not in and of itself diagnostic, it can be used to rule in or out possible explanations for symptoms seen. Included within these possibilities are upper and lower motor neuron lesions as described above, as well as cervical spine dysfunction among others. In a study looking at 249 patients with symptoms associated with cervical spine dysfunction, and abnormal brachioradialis reflex was seen, through multivariate analysis, to be able to rule in cervical spine dysfunction when coupled with any two of the following signs: gait deviation, a positive Hoffman’s test, a positive Babinski test, or an age greater than 45 years old.

While the testing of the brachioradialis reflex has been shown to be of importance, the significance of an abnormal reflex in asymptomatic individuals has yet to be determined. One studied aimed at answering this was done over the course of 6 months and involved 277 asymptomatic, neurologically normal individuals. The mean age of the participants was 27 years old with the youngest participant being 16 and the eldest 78. The brachioradialis reflex was found to be abnormal in 75 (27.6%) of the participants. 39% of the participants exhibiting the abnormal response exhibited it bilaterally, and 10% also had a positive Hoffman’s signs. No other signs of myelopathy were found in these participants. Due to these findings, the result was held that an abnormal brachioradialis reflex when present in isolation is potentially a variation of a normal clinical response.

As both the biceps brachii and the brachioradialis muscle receive innervation from C5 and C6 and work to flex the elbow, studies have been conducted to separate the effects of their respective reflexes. In one study an automated system was used to create controlled passive movement stretch reflexes in patients with upper motor lesions. Analysis of the results showed that the brachioradialis has an earlier and larger stretch response.