**Chronic Hypoparathyroidism**

Traditional treatment of chronic hypoparathyroidism includes supplemental calcium and active vitamin D metabolites.

Patients with hypoparathyroidism have classically been categorized as having "vitamin D resistance."  Historically, this term was applied since normocalcemia can only be achieved by administering extremely large doses of vitamin D (ergocalciferol or cholecalciferol), doses that would likely cause hypercalcemia in normal individuals. In fact, patients with hypoparathyroidism are normally responsive to physiological doses of the active metabolite of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D but have abnormal vitamin D metabolism. Conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D is stimulated by PTH and low phosphate levels. Since patients with hypoparathyroidism have low levels of PTH and hyperphosphatemia, the production of the active vitamin D metabolite (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D) is markedly reduced.

In past years patients were treated with supraphysiological doses of vitamin D (ergocalciferol or cholecalciferol), but the current recommendation is to treat with physiological doses of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (calcitriol) along with supplemental calcium.

- Supplemental calcium 1-2 grams of elemental calcium in divided doses, as calcium carbonate or calcium citrate

- Calcitriol 0.25-2.0 mcg daily

Patients with hypoparathyroidism treated with calcium and calcitriol must be monitored periodically for calcium, phosphorus, and renal function. When treatment is initiated, calcium levels should be checked every few weeks. Once patients are on a stable dose of calcium and calcitriol, the frequency of monitoring can be reduced to every 3 to 6 months. The absence of PTH reduces the renal tubular reabsorption of calcium. Therefore, patients treated for hypoparathyroidism are at risk of urolithiasis or renal and other soft tissue calcifications.

While most hypoparathyroidism is still treated with calcitriol and calcium, selected patients who are more difficult to control on traditional therapy can be treated with daily subcutaneous injections of recombinant human parathyroid hormone (1-84). Parathyroid hormone replacement can reduce the oral calcium and calcitriol requirements and, in some cases, eliminate the need to use calcitriol.