Different imaging techniques are pivotal in diagnosing bone tumors. Radiograph comprises the initial and one of the most important diagnostic modalities. Often radiographic findings and the patient's age are sufficient to arrive at a diagnosis. The radiographic examination begins with locating the site of the lesion (epiphyseal, metaphyseal, or diaphyseal). An epiphyseal lesion in an unfused physis is likely chondroblastoma whereas that in a fused physis is likely a giant cell tumor.

Computed tomography is less useful in the diagnosis of benign bone tumors as compared to that of malignant bone tumors

MRI helps in better soft tissue imaging, differentiating certain benign bone cysts like unicameral and aneurysmal bone cysts. In malignant bone tumors, they assist in evaluating the extent of marrow involvement and skip lesions, for surgical planning.

Technetium bone scans are used to determine active bone lesions and to rule out bone metastasis. However, a bone scan may be positive in specific active benign lesions, and it may be falsely negative in multiple myeloma

Positron emission tomography (PET) records the whole-body distribution of positron-emitting radioisotopes. In musculoskeletal tumors, PET is useful in staging, biopsy planning, response to chemotherapy, detecting recurrence, and follow-up imaging.

Ultrasonography is useful for differentiating solid from cystic bone lesions and better imaging of soft tissue lesions.

Blood and urine tests may be helpful in selected clinical situations. The complete blood count may help predict wound healing following surgery and to rule out any infection or leukemia. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) may show as elevated in infection, metastatic carcinoma, leukemia, etc. Elevated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is often present in prostate cancer metastasis. Hypercalcemia is a presenting feature in certain malignancies and hyperparathyroidism.

Biopsy should be the last step after the complete evaluation of musculoskeletal tumors for the site of lesion, the behavior of the tumor, and the extent of resectability. Type of biopsy, placement of biopsy incision, and histopathological workup of biopsy tissue require planning. MRI and bone scans can be adversely affected by biopsy and postoperative changes in the tissue; hence they are generally obtained preoperatively.

Important imaging features of certain different lytic bone lesions bear mentioning:

Fibrous dysplasia: FD is a common benign lesion with no age predilection. Classically it presents as well-defined lytic lesion, ground glass matrix, no periosteal reaction. Common sites are ribs (monostotic disease), pelvis, and extremities.

Eosinophilic granuloma: It is a form of histiocytosis X. It can be lytic or blastic, with or without sclerotic margin, with or without periostitis. There are no clear radiological features for this entity. However, based on previous experiences EG is rare in age over 30 years. It can be monostotic or polyostotic. It is also known to show sequestrum.

Enchondroma: It is the most common benign lesion of phalanges. Calcified chondroid matrix is invariable except when in phalanges. No periostitis. The most important differential is bone infarct. The syndrome associated with multiple enchondromas is Ollier disease and if presenting with multiple hemangiomas then, Maffucci syndrome.

Giant cell tumor: They occur typically in closed epiphysis, eccentric lesion, subarticular abutting the epiphysis with possible extension into metaphysics, and sharply defined nonsclerotic border; they are considered a moderately aggressive tumor.

Nonossifying fibroma: It is one of the most common incidental bone tumors. They are benign, asymptomatic tumors with a well-defined sclerotic margin. They are usually juxtacortical in location and typically occur in the metaphysis of long bones, and are most common in the under 30 age group. When the lesion is smaller than 2 cm, it is called a fibrous cortical defect (FCD).

Aneurysmal bone cyst

Osteoblastoma: This is a rare solitary benign tumor. It is one of the differentials of tumors involving the posterior element of the spine. Typically it is more than 2cm, to differentiate from osteoid osteoma.

Solitary bone cyst: This is a well-defined lytic lesion, central in a location involving proximal humerus and femur. It occurs in an age group of under 30 years. Most commonly presents with pain due to fracture through the cyst wall.

Chondroblastoma, chondromyxoid fibroma (CMF):  These are cartilaginous tumors. They typically arise in the epiphysis and show no calcified matrix.

Metastasis: must be included in the differential in age over 40 years, whether lytic or sclerotic, and well defined or ill-defined. Bone metastasis has a predilection for hematopoietic bone marrow such as spine, pelvis, rib, cranium, and proximal long bones.

Myeloma: It must be a consideration in the differential for individuals greater than 40 years. The most common location is an axial skeleton. It demonstrates multiple punched-out lesions on CT. It does not show any uptake on bone scan.

Infection: Infection of bone or osteomyelitis is a great mimicker of the tumor. It can present anywhere in bone.

Hyperparathyroidism or browns tumor: Browns tumor can occur in any bone and presents as multiple osteolytic lesions. Important differentials are metastasis, ABC, and GCT according to the site of the lesion.