Calcium channel antagonists block the inward movement of calcium by binding to the L-type “long-acting” voltage-gated calcium channels in the heart, vascular smooth muscle, and pancreas. There are two major categories of calcium channel antagonists based on their primary physiologic effects. The non-dihydropyridines have inhibitory effects on the sinoatrial (SA), and atrioventricular (AV) nodes are resulting in a slowing of cardiac conduction and contractility. This allows for the treatment of hypertension, reduces oxygen demand, and helps to control the rate in tachydysrhythmias. The dihydropyridines, in therapeutic dosing, have a little direct effect on the myocardium, and instead, are more often peripheral vasodilators, which is why they are useful for hypertension, post-intracranial hemorrhage associated vasospasm, and migraines.

Absorption: Calcium channel antagonists are absorbed well orally, however many have low bioavailability due to hepatic first-pass metabolism, primarily by CYP3A4.

Distribution: Calcium channel antagonists are highly protein-bound, and many have high volumes of distribution.

Metabolism: In repeated doses, or overdose, the hepatic enzymes responsible for metabolism become saturated and reduce first-pass effects, which therefore increases absorption of the active drug. Modified release formulations and saturation of metabolism of these drugs increase the half-life of various calcium channel antagonists.

Excretion: Calcium channel antagonists are primarily excreted renally after metabolism.

There is the potential for drug-drug interactions because calcium channel antagonists are metabolized by CYP3A4, which is responsible for the metabolism of many other xenobiotics.