Ciprofloxacin was patented in 1983 by Bayer A.G. and approved in 1987 by the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA).****It should be recognized thatNeisseria gonorrhea has high rates of resistance to ciprofloxacin.Streptococcus pneumoniae is the primary pathogen. Ciprofloxacin is an appropriate treatment option in patients with mixed infections or patients with predisposing factors for Gram-negative infections. According to the American academy of family physicians guidelines, acute bacterial prostatitis can be treated with ciprofloxacin.

Ciprofloxacin ophthalmic solution is FDA-approved for treating corneal ulcers and conjunctivitis caused by susceptible strains.

Ciprofloxacin otic solution is approved for treating acute otitis externa caused by susceptible strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Staphylococcus aureus.

Ciprofloxacin does not have a marketed indication for neonates worldwide; however, it is prescribed for life-threatening infections as salvage therapy for sepsis due to multi-drug resistance (mainly in Europe and developing countries). A systematic search of observational cohort studies and case reports suggests that most clinical responses were positive, and there was a lack of serious adverse events, especially joint toxicity.In vitro studies on tumor cells made from transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder resulted in both a dose and time-dependent inhibition of cell growth. These results were achieved by ciprofloxacin with concentrations that are easily attainable in the urine of patients. However, these indications require additional clinical research.