Management of persistent pulmonary hypertension includes maintaining temperature, glucose, cardiovascular support, and intravascular volume.

Past therapeutic interventions included hyperventilation, alkali infusion, sedation, paralysis, inotropes, and tolazoline, but most of these strategies are outdated and not being used anymore. The response to alkalosis induced by hyperventilation and alkali infusion is short-lived and prolonged alkalosis can cause reactive hyperreactivity, worsening persistent pulmonary hypertension.

Inotropes: Ionotropic agents are often used in persistent pulmonary hypertension. Dopamine and milrinone are commonly used medications. Dopamine is a non-selective vasoconstrictor and should be used with caution in higher doses.

Oxygen therapy and mechanical ventilation: The mainstay of treatment is improving oxygenation by optimizing mechanical ventilatory support. Gentle ventilation and maintaining adequate lung volume is an essential management strategy in persistent pulmonary hypertension. Though oxygen is a potent vasodilator, fractional inspired oxygen concentration (fiO2) over 50% is rarely beneficial.

Achieving adequate lung volume improves oxygenation and pulmonary vascular resistance in newborns with parenchymal lung disease. A conventional or high-frequency ventilator can be used to correct any ventilation-perfusion mismatch.

Surfactant therapy: Studies show conflicting results with surfactant use in PPHN. In infants with parenchymal lung disease, surfactant use is associated with improved oxygenation in mild disease (OI 15-25).

The oxygenation index (OI) is used to assess the severity of the disease. Persistent OI > 40 is often used to indicate the severity and the need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). ECMO is life-saving but is invasive, labor intensive, and associated with severe complications such as intracranial hemorrhage.

**Pulmonary Vasodilators**

Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO): iNO is the only FDA-approved pulmonary vasodilator therapy in neonates with persistent pulmonary hypertension. iNO causes selective pulmonary vasodilation. It is a rapid and potent vasodilator used in inhaled form. iNO treatment should always start at 20ppm to evaluate for a response. Large trials showed the efficacy of iNO in decreasing the need for ECMO.

While iNO is the mainstay of treatment for persistent fetal circulation, it did not decrease mortality, hospital stay, or risk of neurologic impairment. Early initiation of iNO did not affect the need for ECMO or the risk of death or neurodevelopmental outcomes.

Milrinone: It is an inotropic vasodilator that inhibits phosphodiesterase III. It improves right and left ventricular function and can improve oxygenation in infants with severe pulmonary hypertension.

Sildenafil: Sildenafil is a phosphodiesterase V inhibitor. Though not yet approved by the FDA for the treatment of persistent fetal circulation, clinical data suggest beneficial effects of sildenafil in infants who did not respond to iNO. It is usually administered orally since the intravenous form is rarely available. Studies showed improvement in oxygenation with oral and intravenous forms of sildenafil.

Sedation: Agitation can increase pulmonary vascular resistance and further worsen persistent pulmonary hypertension. Sedatives and anti-anxiolytic are used in infants with PPHN as adjunctive therapy to reduce wide swings in saturations.

ECMO: ECMO bypasses the heart and lungs, providing the necessary time for resolving lung pathology. In severe respiratory failure, ECMO use was associated with improved survival.

The best outcomes in survival are seen in infants with meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS). ECMO use in other conditions such as trisomy 21 or CDH had post-ECMO morbidity or a low survival rate of one year. Very few infants survived with no long-term sequelae (12%).

Though its use in persistent fetal circulation drastically decreased since improved ventilation strategies and the introduction of iNO, it is still an effective rescue therapy. ECMO use remains controversial in babies with CDH.