There have been several proposed behavioral and non-behavioral strategies for enhancing memory tasks. Behavioral approaches, or cognitive training, are mostly focused on the maintenance rehearsal which facilitates the memory processing through repetitive stimuli, and the elaborative rehearsal which focuses on the association of new information with already stored knowledge and analysis of new information to make it memorable. There are several proposed behavioral strategies, and some of these, such as the combination of Tai Chi movements and breathing,

Apart from the complex strategies used in specific settings and when the deficit appears to be very clear, involving different domains and other types of memory, it is possible to train the STM using simple expedients. One of these is at the base of the nursery rhymes used to let children memorize numbers, months of the year, etc. This strategy works by attaching a word, phrase or image to an object. In practice, it is the same process that we put into practice when we choose a password. Memory games, which consist of the short exposure of objects (e.g., pictures of animals) to then remember and associate them, is another system that can work to exercise memory.

Ongoing investigations

On these bases, researchers have designed more complex training programs for specific contexts. These non-pharmacological approaches are essential in the case of neurodegenerative conditions when there are no effective therapies and in those in which the impairment is not severe and can be still slowed down or (probably) stopped. For example, in mild cognitive impairment – for which no medications currently have approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) – computer-based memory training programs are adopted. The computer brain fitness training can also combine with wellness education programs and physical exercise (yoga). Web-based cognitive training (30 internet sessions, 4 to 5 times a week) may be useful alterations involving memory processing in Parkinson disease.

Apart from cognitive training, non-behavioral strategies concern the use of transcranial direct current stimulation in STM impairment due to primary progressive aphasia whereas there are ongoing investigations on the effect of nutraceuticals such as thymoquinone or green tea against AD-related STM decline, and tryptophan-tyrosine (WY)-related peptides (lactolin) in stress-induced memory alterations.