SCSTs are similar to GCTs present in the form of testicular mass with swelling or discomfort.

On physical examination, a testicular lump or swelling may be found. In addition, lymph nodes may be palpable in the later stages of the disease. Other findings may include hardness of the testes, enlargement of the breast (gynecomastia), cough, and difficulty breathing, which may occur later due to lung spread of the malignancy.

Typical markers of testicular cancer like LDH, hCG, and AFP are not found elevated in SCSTs.

Individually the SCSTs show certain peculiar features:

**A) Leydig cell tumor (LCT)**

- Commonest SCST (91% to 93%)

- 25% diagnosed at greater than 50 years

- 15% to 30% show gynecomastia

- Children nearly always have isosexual pseudo-precocity

- About 10% have cryptorchidism, Klinefelter, or Turner syndromes.

These tumors produce androgen or estrogen, and they can show virilization or feminization symptoms. Endocrine symptomatology is seen in about 25% of cases, with the commonest being gynecomastia in adults. Libido loss, erectile dysfunction, impotence, and infertility may also be seen.

**B)****Sertoli cell tumor**

- 1% or less of testicular cancers

- Rare in children

- Infancy to old age

- Occasionally develop in AIS (androgen insensitivity syndrome) or Peutz-Jegher syndrome.

There may be testicular mass and various endocrine manifestations of increased estrogen production in the form of gynecomastia and impotence. Compared to LCT, virilization is not seen commonly. Sclerosing tumors may have a presentation as a testicular mass without any endocrine features**.**Large-cell calcifying type cases have younger age (average 20 years). It can also be part of the Carney complex and Peutz-Jegher syndrome (intratubular large cell hyalinizing type) also, with the tumor is generally multifocal.

**C) Granulosa cell tumors**

They are divided into 2 types:

**1) Adult GCT**

- The average age of****42 years

- Presentation - longstanding testis mass with 50% show gynecomastia

**2) Juvenile GCT**

- The juvenile type occurs in males in the early months of life.

- It is the most common testicular tumor in infancy, benign nature.

- Commonest testicular malignancy first 6 months

- 20% have sex-chromosome anomaly affecting Y chromosome, ambiguous genitalia**(Denny-Drash syndrome)**

- 40% in cryptorchid

- No malignant cases

**D) Mixed and unclassified**

**1) Gonadoblastoma**

- Undescended testes,

- Ambiguous genitalia

- Hypospadias

**2) Testicular lymphoma**

- Mostly seen over the age of 60