Personal protective equipment (PPE) functions as a barrier between the responder and the environment or an exposed victim. PPEs are classified into levels A, B, C, and D depending upon the level of protection offered. Each classification designates a level of protection for the respiratory system, body, eyes, face, hands, and feet. The highest degree of protection is level A protection, but healthcare facilities generally do not have PPE capability higher than level C.

Level A protection is used in situations where there is a high potential for exposure to harmful vapors or particles, areas of poor ventilation with limited or no breathable atmosphere, or areas with a high potential for skin contact with a known hazardous substance. The hallmark of level A protection is that it is completely self-contained and therefore is vapor impermeable. PPE for level A exposure includes:

- Full-facepiece self-contained breathing apparatus, or positive pressure supplied area with a secondary self-contained breathing apparatus.

- Encapsulating protective suit

- Chemical resistant outer and inner gloves

- Chemical resistant steel-toed boots

- Disposable complete outer suit, worn over the encapsulating suit

Level B protection, like level A, is a capability that is generally used by highly-trained HAZMAT personnel and is not typically available for use at healthcare facilities. It does share the capability of having a self-contained breathing apparatus, but unlike level A, it is not vapor-impervious. This level of protection is utilized in situations of low oxygen concentration or when vapors are present that are not thought to pose a high risk of skin absorption, such as organophosphate insecticide or military-grade weapon. The components of this level of protection include:

- Full-facepiece self-contained breathing apparatus, or positive pressure supplied area with a secondary self-contained breathing apparatus

- Hooded chemical resistance clothing with a face shield

- Chemical resistant outer and inner gloves

- Chemical resistant steel-toes boots with an outer disposable covering

Level C protection, as noted previously, is the highest level of PPE utilized by most healthcare facilities. Level C is utilized in a situation when there is a high possibility of dangerous air contaminants or if there is a possibility of hazardous liquid splashes. The primary difference between level B and level C protection is the absence of a self-contained breathing apparatus. It is important that receiving stations, such as emergency departments, have the needed components of this level of protection pre-stock and prepared for rapid deployment in the event of a short or immediate-notice patient who is contaminated with a potentially hazardous chemical. PPE for level C protection includes:

- Air-purifying respirator that is either full-face or half-mask

- Hooded chemical-resistant clothing with face-shield.

- Chemical resistant outer and inner gloves

- Steel-toed boots with an outer disposable cover

Level D is the lowest degree of protection and should be utilized when the atmosphere contains no known airborne contaminant. There is no risk for inhalation or contact absorption of a hazardous chemical. While offering little in the way of hazardous chemical protection, this is the most likely PPE level utilized when a victim is received at a healthcare facility. Therefore, a plan must be in place to enable treating personnel to don additional protective equipment rapidly. Level D components include the following:

- Face shield

- Chemical splash goggles or safety glasses

- Gloves

- Boots or shoes

- Work uniform