Breast implant surgery demand continues to increase annually.  Implants available for implantation include saline and gel implants of differing shapes, textures, and profiles. A newer baffled, dual-lumen saline implant has just been introduced to provide the characteristics of a gel implant without any risks of having silicone gel, but their profile is currently limited to high profile styles, and they are working on introducing a moderate profile in the future.  All implant shells are still manufactured from silicone, so exposure to silicone is not eliminated. Implant choice depends on many variables, including anatomy, tissue thickness, patient desires, and surgeon preferences, and excellent outcomes have been achieved.

There is a small but vocal group advocating silicone poisoning, and this is diagnosed by sending in tissue to their lab where the diagnosis is established. They provide treatment products that patients can pay for out of pocket. Mainstream science has not supported their contentions, but patients who believe in this need extra attention and empathy when trying to outline a treatment plan for them as they often want surgeons who also believe in what they believe.

Implant companies have many statistics to show that their product is better than the competition. Still, in the end, if one product were truly better than the others, it would emerge as the dominant product and the implant of choice for all surgeons. That has not yet happened.

In March of 2017, the FDA released a statement that confirms a relationship between implants and the development of anaplastic large cell lymphoma. Information released by the American Society of Plastic Surgeons shortly after the FDA announcement reported the following information. This is a T-cell lymphoma that is not breast cancer. The studies suggest that textured implants are the only common thread with this phenomenon that is estimated to occur 1:30,000 worldwide, but smooth-surfaced implants cannot be excluded from this. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma has been seen with both saline and gel implants. This usually presents as a delayed seroma or acute expansion of the mound once the patient has recovered from the procedure itself. Diagnosis requires fluid aspiration and immunohistochemistry and should be discussed with the pathologist, so the proper studies on the fluid are done to rule this out or confirm the diagnosis. A multidisciplinary approach is recommended if this diagnosis is made with PET/CT and MRI helpful in management. If there is no spread, a complete capsulectomy with implant removal is considered curative as incomplete capsulectomies have been associated with recurrence and a poorer prognosis.