**Cranial Nerve I**

The olfactory nerve is the least tested cranial nerve.

CN I functional assessment is easily performed by having patients close their eyes and occlude one nostril. A familiar scent, such as coffee, soap, or cloves, is introduced to the open nostril, and the patient is instructed to sniff and identify the substance.

Failure to identify either scent or distinguish between the 2 smells makes diagnosing anosmia highly probable. Standardized kits such as the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT), the Connecticut Chemosensory Clinical Research Center (CCCRC) test, the Brief Smell Identification Test (B-SIT), and Sniffin' Sticks Test (SST) are frequently used, allowing for portable and consistent testing materials.

Other tests to measure olfaction include the odor discrimination test to distinguish between odorous and odorless substances and the odor identification test to identify the substance. This method was developed based on the T&T Olfactometer, a standardized olfactometer used in Japan.

Chemosensory event-related potentials (CSERPs) can be used to evaluate chemosensory function objectively. Psychophysical olfactory testing is a helpful technique for evaluating olfactory function in those who have lost their sense of smell. This testing may also enable us to gain a semi-objective and fundamental assessment of olfactory performances.

**Cranial Nerve II**

Functional testing of the optic nerve requires multiple operational assessments to assess the integrity of the nerve. Testing includes evaluation of visual acuity, the visual fields, pupillary light reflexes, the accommodation reflex, and fundoscopy (ophthalmoscopy).

Visual acuity is tested using a Snellen eye chart placed 20 feet away from the patient. Have the patient read the smallest line he can see and record the corresponding visual acuity fraction listed beside the row on the chart. Each eye is assessed individually, while the examiner covers the other eye or the patient covers the eye using an occluder. Test the weaker eye first, and ensure the patient is wearing any glasses or corrective lenses they have for distance vision.

If the patient cannot read the largest (top) line at 20 feet, have them move closer three feet at a time until they can read the top line. Adjust the top portion of the visual acuity fraction accordingly. If the patient cannot read the letters at three feet, have them count fingers at a distance of fewer than 3 feet. Testing light perception is the last resort if the patient cannot count fingers. Charts with pictures instead of letters can be used for patients who cannot read letters due to language or literacy.

The same process is undertaken to assess near vision using a handheld Snellen chart held 30-40 cm away from the patient's face. Any glasses the patient has for near vision should be worn. To test accommodation, have the patient focus on a pen or the examiner's finger. Slowly bring the object closer to the patient and stop within 3 cm of the patient's eyes. Look at both eyes to observe convergence and pupillary constriction. There is a physiological decline of accommodation associated with aging and presbyopia.

Visual fields are tested by direct confrontation. Each eye is tested individually, with the other eye covered. The examiner stands 3 feet away from the patient, and the patient focuses on the examiner's eyes or nose. A pen or a finger is moved toward the center of the visual field in all 4 quadrants, and the patient will indicate when they can see the object. Alternatively, hold a select number of fingers up in a quadrant and have the patient identify how many fingers they see. Repeat this for all quadrants.

In comatose patients, blink to threat can be used to evaluate the visual fields. Quickly move a hand toward the patient's lateral eye and watch for blinking. Unilateral loss of the blink reflex is suggestive of hemianopia. Note any diminished vision and the location of the deficit (ie, inability to see the temporal fields bilaterally). Visual fields are described from the perspective of the patient. An ophthalmologist should further evaluate deficits in detail.

The pupillary light reflex is assessed using the swinging flashlight test. In a dimly lit room, a flashlight or penlight is shone into the patient's pupil for 1 to 3 seconds.

The accommodation reflex is assessed by asking the patient to keep looking at the tip of the examiner's index finger as it is slowly brought from a distance toward the tip of the patient's nose. Observe for the convergence of the eyes and pupillary constriction.

The fundoscopic exam requires significant practice. Typically, the examiner's eye will view the same eye as the patient (use the left eye to look into the patient's left eye with the ophthalmoscope). Dim the lights in the room. With the patient looking slightly upward and inward, slowly move closer from the temporal side with the ophthalmoscope and look through the pupil. View the ocular vessels and follow their course back to the papilla. Note any evidence of optic disc edema or optic atrophy.

**Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI**

The oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves are tested by holding a pen or finger 30 to 40 cm in front of the patient and moving in an H-shaped pattern pausing during vertical and lateral gaze.

Patients with trochlear nerve palsy often tilt their heads away from the affected eye and may have strabismus.

A head tilt may also be associated with abducens nerve palsy; however, the head will be tilted toward the affected eye. Patients may also exhibit a constant head-turning motion to try and lessen the diplopia. Eye abduction will be impaired or absent on examination.

**Cranial Nerve V**

The trigeminal nerve has sensory and motor functions.

The sensory portions of the trigeminal nerve are evaluated by lightly touching a blunt tip needle and a cotton swab or ball to the patient's face in each of the divisions while their eyes are closed. Have the patient indicate whether the sensation is soft or sharp. The sensation of the angle of the mandible should be tested if the facial sensation is diminished, as the C2 spinal root innervates this area. Sparing of the angle of the jaw is indicative of trigeminal pathology.

Evaluation of trigeminal nerve function should also include testing the corneal reflex. With the patient looking away, gently touch a cotton swab to the middle or lateral portion of the cornea to test the corneal reflex.

A patient with a lower motor neuron facial nerve palsy will have a stronger and more brisk consensual response when testing the eye on the affected side.

Motor function of the trigeminal nerve is tested by having the patient open their mouth against resistance. If weakness is present, the jaw will deviate to the side with the weakened pterygoid muscle. With the patient's teeth clenched, palpate the masseter muscles and note any asymmetry.

The masseter reflex, or jaw jerk, is tested by tapping the examiner's thumb kept over the patient's chin with a knee hammer with the patient's mouth partially opened. This causes reflex contraction of the masseter leading to the closure of the mouth. Afferent neurons located in the mesencephalic nucleus of the midbrain travel through the motor root of V3, and the efferent motor neurons are located in the pontine trigeminal motor nucleus and stimulate the ipsilateral masseter muscle.

**Cranial Nerve VII**

Facial nerve function is tested by assessing for asymmetric facial movements. This can be observed while obtaining the medical history, particularly during talking, blinking, and smiling.

Upper motor neuron (UMN) lesions are classified as damage to the corticobulbar tract from the motor cortex to the facial nerve nucleus. Unilateral damage will result in drooping of the mouth, flattening of the nasolabial fold, and paralysis of the contralateral lower face. Eye closure and forehead movement will be spared as bilateral UMN innervation exists in that area.

To evaluate taste, ask the patient to stick out her tongue and close her eyes. Apply a small amount of salt (for salty), quinine hydrochloride or caffeine strips (for bitter), tartaric acid (for sour), or sugar (for sweet) to the lateral surface and side of the anterior tongue, then have the patient identify the substance. Rinse the mouth thoroughly with water and assess the opposite side with a different substance. Solution kits with varying concentrations are commercially available for quantitative testing, and premade taste strips have also been developed as an alternative to solutions.

**Cranial Nerve VIII**

Initial hearing testing is conducted by rubbing the fingers by one ear while occluding the other, then repeating for the other ear. This can also be accomplished by whispering in one ear while occluding the other and repeating for the opposite side.

The Rinne test is performed by placing a vibrating 512-hertz tuning fork on the mastoid process, and once the sound is no longer heard, moving the fork to just outside the ear. In a normal (positive) Rinne test, air conduction is greater than bone conduction. In an abnormal (negative) Rinne test, bone conduction is greater than air conduction in the affected ear. A patient with profound sensorineural hearing loss may not hear anything from the tuning fork placed on the mastoid process or near the external auditory canal. Sound will transmit through the skull to the opposite ear, and the patient may be unable to identify which ear heard the sound. In this situation, it would appear that bone conduction is greater than air conduction when in fact, the ear is completely nonfunctional. This is called a false negative Rinne test. A Weber test can delineate between a negative and a false negative test.

The Weber test is performed by placing a vibrating 512-hertz tuning fork on the center of the forehead. Sound is louder in, or "lateralizes to," the ear experiencing conductive hearing loss or opposite the ear with sensorineural hearing loss. Sensorineural hearing loss can be further divided into sensory or neural based on brainstem auditory evoked responses (BSAERs), and the patient should be referred for further testing.

To assess vestibular function, test for nystagmus and note the direction, duration, and trigger of the nystagmus. Further in-depth testing is used to distinguish central from peripheral sources, particularly if the patient is experiencing vertigo during the examination. Frenzel lenses or +30 diopter glasses can be used to prevent visual fixation, which can suppress nystagmus. Testing for acute vestibular syndrome involves the head thrust maneuver; the Dix-Hallpike maneuver tests for positional vertigo.

The head thrust maneuver is performed by holding the head of the sitting patient while they focus on an object, such as the examiner's nose, and quickly turning the patient's head 20 degrees to the right or left. This is a normal result if the eyes remain focused on the examiner's nose. Temporary deviation away from the object with a corrective saccade that brings the eyes back to the object indicates a peripheral source of nystagmus, such as vestibular neuronitis.

For the Dix-Hallpike maneuver, the patient is quickly lowered to the supine position with the head extended 45 degrees below the table and turned 45 degrees to one side. Note the direction and duration of nystagmus and assess for vertigo. Raise the patient back to the upright position and perform the maneuver with the head turned to the other side. Nystagmus with a latency period of five to ten seconds that is vertical when the eyes are turned away from the affected ear and rotary when the eyes face the involved ear is pathognomonic for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. This response also diminishes with repeated testing. Positional nystagmus caused by central nervous system dysfunction will not have a latency period and will not diminish with further testing.

**Cranial Nerves IX and X**

Testing of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves is performed simultaneously. Have the patient open their mouth and say, "Aah." Determine whether the palate elevates symmetrically and the uvula remains in the midline. If weakness is present, the uvula will lift away from the paretic side of the palate.

To assess the pharyngeal gag reflex, lightly touch one side of the posterior pharynx with a tongue blade and watch for gagging, then the opposite side. Contraction of the pharyngeal musculature ipsilateral to the side of the stimulus is known as the direct gag reflex, and contraction of the musculature on the contralateral side is known as the consensual gag reflex. Unilateral damage to the glossopharyngeal nerve will result in the absence of a gag response when that side of the pharynx is stimulated. When the vagus nerve is damaged, the palate will elevate and deviate toward the affected side with stimulation of either side of the posterior pharynx. Unilateral injury to both the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves leads to deviation of the palate to the intact side when the intact side is stimulated. When the damaged side is stimulated, there is no response. The bilateral absence of the gag reflex is common. Stimulating the soft palate with a tongue blade can also elicit the gag reflex; however, the trigeminal nerve provides the efferent portion of this reflex.

In an intubated patient, suction the endotracheal tube and note the presence or absence of coughing.

Note any hoarseness in the patient's voice, as the vocal cords will need inspection and visualization if hoarseness is present.

**Cranial Nerve XI**

Evaluation of the spinal accessory nerve involves the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. To assess the left sternocleidomastoid, place one hand on the patient's right cheek and have the patient turn their head to the right while providing resistance. Have the patient turn their head to the left against resistance to test the left side. Weakness with turning the head to the left indicates right-sided pathology, and weakness when turning the head to the right indicates left-sided pathology. Further testing involves having the patient flex their head against resistance.

For the trapezius, inspect the shoulder and upper back for any asymmetry, drooping of the shoulder, or winging of the scapula; winging is noted when the medial side of the scapular appears more prominently than the unaffected scapula. Note any atrophy of the trapezius or internal rotation of the humerus. There may also be hypertrophy or subluxation of the sternoclavicular joint due to increased strain on the joint from loss of trapezius muscle support. Have the patient shrug their shoulders while providing resistance by pressing down on the shoulders.

Ipsilateral upper motor neuron lesions present with ipsilateral sternocleidomastoid weakness and contralateral trapezius weakness. Pathology of the lower cervical cord, ventral brainstem, or lower spinal accessory nerve roots displays isolated trapezius muscle weakness.

Isolated sternocleidomastoid weakness indicates pathology within the brainstem tegmentum or upper cervical accessory root. Peripheral lesions can cause isolated weakness of either the sternocleidomastoid or the trapezius. Damage within the contralateral brainstem, ipsilateral high cervical cord, or an accessory nerve lesion peripherally before the nerve bifurcates to both muscles results in ipsilateral weakness of both the sternocleidomastoid and the trapezius.

**Cranial Nerve XII**

To test the hypoglossal nerve, have the patient protrude her tongue. Assess for deviation of the tongue, atrophy, and fasciculations.