For over 50 years, researchers have been investigating possible risk factors and mechanisms that lead to suicidal ideations (SI) and behaviors. It turns out there are thousands of risk factors associated with suicide ideation, but not a single one of these SI factors or grouping of SI factors is a reliable, clinically useful predictor of who will end their life by suicide.  The current theories suggest that suicidal thoughts and behaviors occur in response to complex interactions between psychological, biological, environmental, and cultural factors. Brief summaries of psychological and biological theories are provided in this section. Readers are encouraged to review the primary sources for a more comprehensive understanding.

**Diathesis-Stress Models of Suicide**

This model proposes that stress alone is an insufficient explanation for suicidal thoughts and behaviors because, given the same stressful life events, only a small percentage exhibit SI and suicidal behaviors. The diathesis models suggest that variations and interactions between biological and/or psychological risk factors predispose some individuals to a vulnerability, referred to as a diathesis. When predisposed individuals encounter particular life stressors, the resulting confluence of distal and current risk factors can trigger suicidality.

A systematic review of 40 years of research studies showed a relationship between negative life events and suicidal ideations. However, the relationship between negative life events and SI was most evident in people with severe ideations. The authors concluded that better research designs are needed because most studies in their review were limited by poor design and ambiguous terminology. No evidence was found that supported the notion that positive life events reduce SI.

More than 3000 constructs/factors have been proposed and tested as possible risk factors for suicidal ideations and behaviors over the past 50 years. Franklin et al. explained the only way to accurately determine whether a construct/factor is a key risk factor is by using a longitudinal research design to examine the outcomes of the factor's effect years later. They completed a meta-analysis of every longitudinal study completed in 50 years. The average follow-up was 4 years, although some were as long as 10 years duration. When reviewing the hundreds of studies, these researchers noted that a preponderance of studies (almost 80%) focused on five broad categories of risk factors for SI and suicidal behaviors. The five categories and examples of factors studied within these categories are summarized below:

- internal psychopathology (e.g., anxiety disorders; mood disorders; hopelessness; emotion dysregulation; sleep disturbances)

- demographic factors (e.g., age; education; employment; ethnicity; gender; marital status; religion; socioeconomic status)

- prior suicidal thoughts and behaviors (e.g., prior deliberate self-harm, nonsuicidal self-injury, suicide attempt, suicide ideation)

- external psychopathology (e.g., aggressive behaviors; impulsivity; incarceration history; antisocial behaviors; substance abuse)

- social factors (e.g., abuse history; family problems; isolation; peer problems; stressful life events)

Coding the constructs/factors that were tested in the 365 studies revealed (n=495) "protective factor" cases and (n=3428) "risk factor" cases for meta-analysis using random effect models. The results showed that no risk factor alone or in the combinations that have been studied has predictive abilities that are much better than chance. The only two factors that emerged were hopelessness and previous SI and suicidal behaviors, but these were weak predictors of future suicidality. The researchers concluded there is a need to improve the quality of research being conducted and to consider new approaches such as using machine learning algorithms to identify combinations of risk factors that are predictive of suicidality. A half-century of research has not provided empirical knowledge that is needed to identify clinically important risk factors for SI and suicidal behavior.

**The Ideation-to-Action Framework of Psychological Theories**

The ideation-to-action framework is the basis for several theories that share the same basic underpinnings.  These theories contend there are separate, distinct stages that mark the development of SI and its progression from SI to lethal suicide attempts. Each stage has its own risk factors, processes, and explanations. Importantly, all of these theories share the belief that suicidal desires do not automatically lead to suicidal actions. This is promising because it offers hope that ideators can be helped before they acquire the capacity to inflict life-ending self-harm.

The Interpersonal-Psychological Theory of Suicide (IPTS) developed by Joiner in 2005 predicts that the combination of feeling like a burden to others ("perceived burdensomeness") and being socially alienated ("thwarted belonging) will produce death desires or SI.

Three Step Theory (3ST)****by Klonsky and May, published in 2015, proposes that pain and hopelessness are the primary factors that produce SI. If the cause of pain (psychological, interpersonal, and/or physical acute or chronic pain) resolves, or when there is hope that the pain will diminish with time or effort, SI will dissipate because the individual's focus will be on a better future rather than suicide.

The Integrated Motivational-Volition Theory (IMV) model by O'Connor in 2011 differs from the IPTS in several ways. First, the pathways to SI are defeat and entrapment instead of belongingness and burdensomeness. A meta-analysis of 40 studies (n > 40,000) found similar-sized, strong relationships for defeat and entrapment in patients with depression, anxiety problems, PTSD, and suicidality.

**Implications for Healthcare Professionals**

Given the moderate to strong associations between the risk factors in these theories and the presence of SI, healthcare professionals may consider including SI assessment interview questions to elicit a patient's physical or/and emotional misery or pain; feelings of defeat and entrapment; their level of hopefulness and sense of connectedness. Additionally, reducing the capability for suicide by restricting access to lethal means (e.g., firearms) is recommended in suicide risk reduction guidelines, although more research is needed to determine the best way to limit access. Incorporating strategies to address cognitive distortions and build hopefulness and connectedness may protect overwhelming perceptions of defeat and entrapment.

**Biological Factors**

- Researchers have investigated a variety of biological factors hoping to find clinically useful biomarkers to detect severe SI before individuals make lethal attempts.

- Substantial knowledge has been gained in the past decade, but additional research is needed to understand the mechanisms and identify relevant biomarkers.

**HPA Axis Dysfunction**

Dysregulated hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function was initially proposed decades ago within the stress-diathesis model. More recently, it has been discussed in the context of epigenetic factors, which may link childhood trauma and adverse events to subsequent conditions thought to be associated with HPA dysregulation. FKBP5 gene produce differences in GC receptor sensitivity.

**Neuroinflammation and Immune System Dysfunction**

Microglia are the primary immune system cells in the central nervous system, and they function like peripheral macrophages. When injury or pathogens are detected, the microglia become activated. They rapidly change their morphology, quickly proliferate and begin to migrate to the location of the injury/pathogens to phagocytose and destroy pathogens and remove damaged cells. Like the peripheral immune system, they release a multitude of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory mediators (cytokines and chemokines). Post-mortem examinations of suicide victims' brains show an increased density of microglia in the anterior cingulate cortex, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and the mediodorsal thalamus regions.

Kynurenine pathway (KP) dysregulation has received considerable attention recently. The amino acid tryptophan is primarily catabolized in the kynurenine pathway. The enzymes that regulate kynurenine metabolism in the CNS are upregulated in response to inflammation, which incidentally lowers the availability for serotonin.  The tryptophan is converted to l-kynurenine, which is then enzymatically processed into neuroactive metabolites, including kynurenic acid in the astrocyte cells and quinolinic acid in the microglial cells.  The kynurenic acid is an N-Methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist with neuroprotective and anti-convulsive properties.  Quinolinic acid, on the other hand, is an NMDA agonist which has been described as neurotoxic. During neuroinflammation, increased production of quinolinic acid creates an imbalance with the neuroprotective metabolites. This is thought to create downstream effects in the glutamate systems.

Translocator protein (TSPO) is upregulated in activated microglial cells and is an indication of neuroinflammation. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans were used to compare the level of TSPO in the brains of depressed patients and healthy controls. The scans revealed a significant increase in the availability of TSPO in depressed patients vs. healthy controls (p = .005).  The elevation of TSPO (large effect size) was found in the anterior cingulate cortex.  TSPO was not elevated in the patients who did not experience suicidal ideations but was shown to be significantly increased in those with SI, most robustly in the regions of the anterior cingulate cortex (p = 0.008) and the insula (p = 0.023).

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is involved in neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity.  Some studies have shown that lower concentrations of BDNF in the CNS and peripherally may be useful biomarkers for suicidality. A meta-analysis concluded there was insufficient data and recommended additional research.

**Genetic Factors**

An emerging area of research focuses on genetic factors. Variants of the FKBP5 gene have been widely studied and implicated in depression and SI and behaviors. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis focused on studies that examined the role of the FKBP5 gene variants rs1360780, rs3800373 and rs4713916. Results showed that the variants rs3800373 and rs4713916 were associated with a significant increase in the risk for depressive disorders when modeling with heterozygous and dominant configurations. A stratified analysis based on ethnicity showed the same variants were significant for increased risk of depression in Caucasians. However, when the FKBP5 gene variants were analyzed concerning suicidal behavior, the rs1360780 was a significant risk for suicidal behavior risk within the overall population, and rs3800373 was significant in the subgroup who were known to have completed suicide. Although the evidence shows FKBP5 gene polymorphisms are associated with the risk of depressive disorders and suicidality, the authors recommended additional studies with larger sample sizes to confirm their results.