Often an incidental finding, many patients present without symptoms, and a peliosis hepatis diagnosis may become included within the differential once a patient has notable derangements in their liver function tests. However, some patients may demonstrate no changes within their hepatic panel with pristine synthetic function, often making this diagnosis a challenging one. Less frequently, patients may present with signs more consistent with hepatobiliary pathologies such as abdominal pain, especially right upper quadrant pain, jaundice, and signs of portal hypertension.

To date, the symptoms associated with peliosis hepatis have not demonstrated a temporal relationship with the extent of disease burden. However, depending on the trigger and specific pathophysiology related to the development of the disease, patients may present in their unique way. Often the patients do not appear acutely ill and may be turned away by providers given their vague abdominal symptoms together with their benign laboratory findings. There have been some case reports in the literature that demonstrates patients presenting with severe abdominal pain found to have an intra-abdominal hemorrhage. Occasionally patients may also present with signs and symptoms of infection, including fever and abdominal pain, at which time prompt imaging is necessary to rule out intra-abdominal biliary sepsis. However, in those presenting with the symptoms above as well as weight loss, lymphadenopathy, and loose stools, Bartonella peliosis should be considered, especially in the setting in which patients may have exposure to household pets.