Oropharyngeal dysphagia associated with myasthenia gravis responds to treatment with anticholinesterase inhibitors.

A speech therapist usually sees patients with oropharyngeal dysphagia. The management plan may include:

- Elimination of certain food consistencies from the diet

- Adjustment of meal bolus seizes

- Use of techniques such as chin-tuck, head-turn, and supraglottic maneuvers to help in minimizing/preventing aspiration. Also, strengthening and coordinating muscles involved in swallowing.

Gastroscopy tube may be indicated in patients who fail to respond to the above-stated measures.

Most patients with stroke will regain their swallowing function within 1 to 2 weeks after infarction.

In patients with advanced Parkinson disease, dysphagia does not respond to the dopamine precursor L-DOPA treatment. Measures discussed earlier should be applied.

Patients with Zenker diverticulum are usually managed surgically by cricopharyngeal myotomy through the oral route. However, if the patients have mild symptoms, dilatation of the upper esophageal sphincter may be indicated.

Patients with dysphagia related to head and neck tumors will require long-term swallow rehabilitation. Usually, their dysphagia continues despite the surgical excision of the tumor mass, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy.

Patients with a mild esophageal stricture are usually managed by controlling their esophageal reflux and by endoscopic esophageal dilatation.

Dysphagia caused by esophageal malignancies is usually esophageal adenocarcinoma secondary to longstanding reflux disease. In these patients, the development of Barrett metaplasia and dysplasia is a precursor to cancer. Esophageal squamous carcinoma typically occurs in the upper-mid esophagus and is related to smoking and alcohol drinking. Patients with esophageal malignancy are usually managed by a team of surgeons, gastroenterologists, and radiation oncologists, and the rehabilitation team.

Patients with achalasia are treated with:

- Pharmacotherapy-nitrates, calcium-channel blockers (e.g., nifedipine 10 to 20 mg sublingual 15 to 30 minutes before meals). It acts by lowering the lower esophageal sphincter resting pressure. Side effects include hypotension, headache, dizziness in about one-third of patients.

- Botulinum toxin A is usually used by direct injection in 4 to 8 quadrants into the lower esophageal sphincter during endoscopy.

- Pneumatic dilatation- this involves tears of the lower esophageal sphincter using air-filled balloons under fluoroscopic guidance. However, nearly one-third of patients have a recurrence of their symptoms in 4 to 6 years. Pneumatic dilatation is contraindicated in patients with poor cardiopulmonary status or have comorbidities that prevent surgical intervention should esophageal rupture occurs, and surgical intervention needed.

- Laparoscopic Heller myotomy – surgical myotomy of the distal esophageal muscle and lower esophageal sphincter. Laparoscopic Heller myotomy, when combined with fundoplication, results in a significant reduction of reflux.

- Peroral-endoscopic myotomy (POEM):

Based on the high-resolution esophageal manometry results, three subtypes of achalasia can be identified. The identification of the subtype forms the basis of achalasia treatment. These are organized as follows:

- Types I and II: pneumatic dilatation, laparoscopic Heller myotomy, or POEM.

- Type III: POEM is the preferred treatment.

Because the etiology of dysphagia due to diffuse esophageal spasm (DES) is unknown, and usually patients present with a range of different manifestations and pathology, the treatment of these patients is directed at the symptoms rather than cause treatment.

Scleroderma can cause aperistalsis or low-amplitude esophageal contractions of the distal esophagus as well as a hypotensive lower esophageal sphincter. Usually, these patients have dysphagia to both solids and liquids. The treatment is focused on symptomatic management. No pharmacological intervention has been shown to be promising. Prokinetic agents (metoclopramide, erythromycin, bethanechol, buspirone, and domperidone), which stimulate gut peristalsis, may help.