Children under 18 years of age identified as having aidable hearing loss should be offered hearing aid devices. The following factors are taken into account when making decisions on whether a child may be suitable or unsuitable for hearing aids:

- **Level of hearing loss**: due to the acoustic nature of the sound delivery, hearing aid outcomes can be directly related to the amount of inner and outer hair cell function in the child's cochlea.
- Severe to profound hearing losses, which are attributed to poor hair cell function, may not be well supported with hearing aids, as the amplification is often not sufficient to allow access to speech phonemes at a normal conversational level.
- There is no universal consensus in the literature as to the benefits of hearing aids for children with very mild, unilateral, or isolated hearing loss. Insufficient evidence that such interventions can improve speech and language delay in this population means that clinicians often prescribe hearing aids on a case-by-case basis.

- **Nature of hearing loss**: in cases of temporary fluctuating conductive hearing loss, such as those secondary to middle ear effusion (glue ear), bone conduction hearing aids may provide more suitable aiding for the child to avoid over-amplification and the need for regular fine-tuning.

- **Anatomy of the ear**: children with malformations of the outer or middle ear, which could prevent an air-conduction acoustic signal from reaching the inner ear, may have better outcomes with bone conduction devices. Malformed pinnae may need assistance in supporting a behind-the-ear hearing aid which can usually be achieved with retention equipment such as toupee tape. Malformations can include:
- Microtia
- Atresia
- Absent or incomplete middle ear ossicles
- Absence or malformed middle ear space

- **The motivation of parents/guardians or older child**: while not an absolute factor in the decision to offer hearing aids, the motivation of the parents/guardians or the cooperation and motivation of an older child should be well considered during the process. If hearing loss is not yet or well accepted by the older child or child's caregiver(s), devices may be fitted and subsequently under-utilized.

- **Completeness/reliability of the audiogram**: the whole of a hearing aid's prescription is the sum of its audiogram. In situations where a child's audiogram is incomplete or suspected to be unreliable, a hearing aid may over- or under-amplify. In these cases, more time should be taken to assess the child, either behaviourally or through objective measures such as auditory evoked response testing, to ensure their true thresholds are obtained. If predicted audiograms are used as a last resort, much consideration is required to ensure a conservative yet robust approach and should be approached only by expert and experienced healthcare professionals.

- **Communication options**: some families, particularly those who use manual sign languages at home or are considered culturally Deaf, may feel that hearing aids are not the preferred direction for their child. In these cases, a substantial amount of counseling should be done to ensure that families give a fully informed withdrawal of consent, particularly in children with pre-lingual deafness. An interprofessional team should work with the family so that they are well-supported in their decision.