Important considerations for team planning of radiotherapy in pregnant patients:

- Confirm pregnancy based on history (last menstrual period) and ultrasound diagnostics. Note the patient's age, prior obstetric history if present, and any previous surgeries or procedures such as a cesarean section, myomectomy, hysteroscopic probes, and dilation/curettage. If the patient is not presently pregnant, she should be counseled to avoid pregnancy until the end of treatment.

- If the patient is evaluated to be pregnant, the decisions subsequently need to be tailored as per the patient reproductive and treatment goals with strong participation of the patient and the husband, or another appropriate person, the treating oncologist, and additional team members (surgeons, obstetricians, and psychologists).

- Potential hormonal effects of pregnancy on the tumor

- Various therapeutic regimens and their length, efficacy, and complications

- Impact of delaying therapy

- Expected outcomes of maternal ill-health on the fetus

- Gestation period, chorionicity and amnionicity, gestational morbidities (diabetes, Rh incompatibility, oligo/poly-hydramnios)

- Fetal assessment and monitoring (bio-parameters)

- Delivery method: Normal or surgical

- Discussion if the pregnancy should be terminated

- Legal, ethical, and moral binding issues

Informed consent and understanding by the patient are pivotal components before proceeding with the treatment:

- The pregnant patient has a right to know the extent and type of potential radiation effects from in-utero exposure.

- Three significant points should be communicated: consent, role-related responsibility, and remedy/compensation since radiotherapy in a pregnant patient, not only the risks to the mother but the fetus as well. So in this setting, the mother has a role-related responsibility to care for her unborn child and make informed decisions about herself without counter influence.

- The level of disclosure should be related to the risk ascertained. In low dose exposure procedures such as a CXR, a verbal assurance suffices since the risk is significantly low. However, when fetal doses are at 0.001 Gy (1 mGy) and above, a more detailed explanation is essential.

- The oncologist should inform about potential radiation risks and alternative modalities and the potential risks from not having the procedure.

- Comply with any local or institutional laws and rules.