**Medical Treatment****:**Blood transfusion has been the mainstay treatment of beta-thalassemia major (Cooley anemia). Usually, the patient dies before reaching puberty if he/she does not receive periodic blood transfusions. It provides normal RBCs that compensate for anemia, halts ineffective erythropoiesis, which results in decreased oxidative stress, thus reducing bone deformities, improved symptoms, and increased survival. There is general consensus between the Thalassemia International Federation (TIF) and other national guidelines (the United Kingdom and the United States) about thalassemia management despite few differences in terms of iron overload (IO) and iron chelation therapy (ICT) strategies.

The degree of anemia and/or clinical findings should be considered when the frequency of blood transfusions is decided, and leukoreduced RBCs are preferred. To accelerate growth and minimize symptoms, the pretransfusion goal Hb level is 9-10g/dL or if clinical complications are present irrespective of Hb level, and the post-transfusion is between 14-15g/dL. A higher pretransfusion level of 10-12g/dL is set in cases of a worsening of extramedullary hematopoiesis or cardiac abnormalities. However, care should be taken during regular blood transfusion because of the high risk of iron overload (IO), infections, transfusion reactions, and allogeneic antibody formation.

Clinical features and serum ferritin are reliable tools in close monitoring for IO in routinely transfused TM patients. Iron chelation therapy (ICT) is the treatment of choice for iron overload. Deferoxamine was the first to be used via subcutaneous (SC) or intravenously (IV) route over 8 to 24 hrs, 5 to 7 nights/week. Compliance was the main issue with deferoxamine. Currently, oral ICT such as deferasirox or deferiprone is widely used either alone or in combination and is well tolerated. Due to rapid cell turnover, other nutritional deficiencies such as folate/vitamin B12, and calcium need to be addressed as well.

No added benefit of hydroxyurea has been established in patients receiving adequate blood to achieve the pretransfusion goal. Unlike sickle cell disease (in which it reduces sickling by increasing HbF level), the role of hydroxyurea is unclear in Hb <9 g/dL.

The only definitive treatment at present is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (allo-HSCT) in transfusion dependant patients with >90% success rate if it takes place before the IO-related damage occurs.

**Luspatercept:**Luspatercept is an erythroid maturation agent that has been approved for anemia in adult beta TM patients who require regular blood transfusions. Recently an open-label phase 3 study (BELIEVE) of adult thalassemia patients, luspatercept has yielded promising results in terms of transfusion independence.

**Gene therapy:**This is also in the pipeline to be considered as a potential cure for beta-thalassemia and sickle cell disease (SCD). Several clinical trials are currently underway to establish its efficacy and safety. However, preliminary results of one of the recent ongoing trials have been promising. A total of 3 beta-thalassemia patients (n=3) have been transduced with autologous CD34 HSCs using GLOBE or TNS9.3.55 as lentivirus and have demonstrated minimal and reversible adverse effects. However, to further validate its efficacy and safety, more data is warranted.

**Surgical treatment:**TM patients can develop hypersplenism and massive splenomegaly, therefore, they require splenectomy as well as vaccination against encapsulated bacteria due to the high risk of infections following splenectomy.

**Prevention:**Currently implementation of prevention strategies is required to prevent new cases particularly in developing countries where there is limited access to standard medical treatment in addition to high consanguinity practice in the communities. Molecular diagnostics, genetic counseling, carrier detection, and prenatal screening are important tools of comprehensive preventive programs.