Despite all the advances, the outcomes for lung cancer remain abysmal. The key reason is that most patients are diagnosed with advanced-stage disease. To improve outcomes, an interprofessional team approach with close communication between the members may perhaps lead to earlier diagnosis and treatment.

Most patients with lung cancer are first seen by the primary care provider, nurse practitioner, or internist. These clinicians need to have a high suspicion of lung cancer in smokers and others with occupational exposures and order the appropriate imaging tests when indicated. Referral to a thoracic surgeon should be done on a timely basis.

The thoracic surgeon's definitive diagnosis and management plan for lung cancer are made in collaboration with the radiologist and pathologist.

After surgery, nurses usually monitor the patients for oxygenation, ventilation, and pain. Since many of these patients are smokers, they also have other comorbidities like heart disease and peripheral vascular disease, which often present with symptoms in the post-operative period. Thus, nurses must be extra vigilant for physical abnormalities and communicate with the surgeon.

After surgery, patients need prolonged rehabilitation. Some may need chemotherapy and radiation, and hence the oncology nurse should educate the patients on the procedures and protocols. The specialized oncology pharmacist should educate the patient on the chemotherapeutic drugs, their benefits, and their adverse effects. Oncology board-certified pharmacists can consult with the oncologist on the regimens for chemotherapy and the alternatives based on patient response.

Due to high incidence and mortality, there has been a worldwide interest in developing a screening program for lung cancer. A landmark study, the National Lung Screening Trial, showed an overall decrease in mortality of 6.7% with screening. Currently, lung cancer screening is offered to men and women 55 years or older who have smoked 30 pack-years or more or have quit smoking less than 15 years ago.

Lung cancer screening uses a low-dose helical CT scan of the chest which takes less than 25 seconds. A significant drawback of screening is the detection of benign lesions, resulting in a relatively high number of unnecessary biopsies, surgeries, or continued radiological follow-ups.