The microscopic examination of diseased skin entities reveals specific findings correlated to the clinical results. Dermatologic diseases have been broken into various histopathologic reaction patterns differentiated by changes throughout the skin, while various organizing schemes exist.

The predominant histologic finding of spongiotic dermatitis is spongiosis, seen as intraepidermal edema. This widening of the spaces between the keratinocytes reveals the intercellular desmosomes. Some of the classic spongiotic disorders include atopic dermatitis and allergic contact dermatitis.

The predominant histologic finding of vesiculobullous dermatoses is acantholysis, or loss of connection between cells at various levels of the epidermis, which correlates to the blisters seen clinically. This is more severe than the simple widening of spaces in spongiosis and represents the actual dehiscence of cells through autoimmune or infectious degeneration of desmosomes and hemidesmosomes.

The predominant histologic finding of the psoriasiform disorders is acanthosis, or epidermal hyperplasia, with concurrent elongation of the rete ridges, which correlates to the thickened plaques seen clinically. The quintessential example of a psoriasiform disorder is psoriasis vulgaris, but other examples include pityriasis rubra pilaris and pityriasis rosea.

The previously mentioned keratinocyte proliferation, neutrophil chemotaxis, and angiogenesis correlate clinically with the thick plaques, microabscesses of Munro and pustules of Kogoj, and superficial vessels that are visible when the scale is peeled off. This pinpoint bleeding is named the Auspitz sign.

The predominant histologic finding of the interface disorders is the bandlike infiltrate of leukocytes abutting the epidermis that represents inflammation and is associated with concomitant dermo-epidermal junction changes such as basement membrane thickening, vacuolar degeneration of the basal cells, or apoptosis of keratinocytes. Some prominent examples include lichen planus, erythema multiforme, or dermatomyositis.

All of these patterns can have degrees of overlap with one another and variation within the reaction pattern, especially depending on chronicity. An early, acute spongiotic dermatitis will appear vastly distinct from a chronic condition. Concurrent treatment of conditions will also alter the appearance histologically.