Normal child development is predictable with observable milestones according to age. Individuals vary, so a delay in a particular milestone may not mean there’s a delay, but the risk rises when there’s a delay in achieving several milestones.

The factors that impact the child’s development can be biological, like chronic illness, abnormal hearing or vision test, prematurity and low birth weight; or environmental risk factors, whether they’re from the community (poor or lack of access to services, poor housing) or the immediate family (poverty [has the highest association to mild/intermediate developmental delay], social isolation, parental mental illness or low education).

Parental concern is the most reliable method of early detection, and should never be ignored by the health professional. However, a lack of concern from the parents doesn’t mean that the development is normal; also, recall of milestones could be biased toward normality and is more accurate when the delay is significant.

Having a milestone checklist is also a reliable method of early detection, however, relying on this method alone could likely lead to overidentification of delay in children, due to them normally having a singular delay at a particular point in time but eventually catching up to the norm. A physician who solely bases their assessment on a clinical judgment is not using a reliable method of identifying developmental problems.

Another method of early detection of developmental issues with low specificity is the developmental screening tests, such as the Denver Developmental Screening Test (DDST) and other more recent ones. These tests should not be considered diagnostic [10]. However, when these standardized tests are integrated as part of developmental surveillance and interpreted in a much wider context, the diagnostic capability expands. Developmental surveillance is a longitudinal process that consists of repeated reviews of the patient and family. It aims to early detect and intervene in risk factors of developmental delays, such as eliciting parental concerns, offering them guidance depending on their needs, and making skilled periodical observations of the children's milestones during every GP encounter.

Involving the parents with questionnaires, such as the Parents' Evaluation of Developmental Status (PEDS), helps improve the accuracy of clinical estimates of development.

Children should be referred for formal assessment when there are any of the following red flags: suspicion of autism, developmental regression, prematurity specially <28 weeks of gestation or born with <1500g,  conditions associated with a high risk of developmental delays such as an abnormal neurological examination, chromosomal, hearing and/or vision abnormalities, and lastly those patients with failed screening tests, major risk factors, and major parental concerns that persist even if there's a normal observation of the patient.