Noonan syndrome has phenotypical heterogeneous manifestations, which change with age. The most consistent features are widely set eyes, low-set ears, short stature, and pulmonic stenosis. Diagnostic criteria have been developed to aid in the diagnosis of Noonan syndrome. Please refer to the attached table for the criteria.

One of the more common features prenatally is increased nuchal translucency in utero. However, increased nuchal translucency is associated with other conditions such as Down syndrome. Other manifestations include polyhydramnios from renal anomalies, congenital heart diseases, mild limb shortening, and fetal macrosomia. As noted before, the vague symptoms present in the prenatal period can elude to a variety of other conditions. Therefore, the index of suspicion for Noonan Syndrome must be relatively high. If karyotyping is done, it will reveal a normal karyotype, which will rule out trisomies. Noonan syndrome should be considered in all fetuses with increased nuchal translucency, polyhydramnios, and cardiac abnormalities with a normal karyotype.

For many with Noonan syndrome, there are no clinical manifestations at birth. Macrosomia and macrocephaly may be present. Cryptorchidism may be present in males. Males have an increased risk of infertility, even if without a previous diagnosis of cryptorchidism. Most females are not at risk for infertility. The most common congenital heart defects are pulmonic stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; depending on the severity, it may or may not be detected in a routine physical. The infant may experience feeding difficulties and failure to thrive, hearing loss, and strabismus. Noonan syndrome is associated with intellectual and developmental delays. Patients may display delayed speech or motor milestones, deafness, and short stature.

Distinct facial characteristics are formed in early childhood that change as they age. Features include hypertelorism, low-set ears, blue irises, ptosis, mild neck webbing, high forehead, down-slanting palpebral fissures, and epicanthic folds. In adulthood, facial features show signs of premature aging, and lengthening the jaw occurs to give the face a triangular shape.

Lymphatic dysplasia is common and can lead to early generalized lymphoedema in the extremities and abdomen. A fetal examination may show a cystic hygroma, which is a fluid-filled sac caused by a blockage in the lymphatic system. Patients may experience easy bruising or bleeding due to coagulopathy. The most common etiology is due to factor XI deficiency. Skeletal abnormalities are also common, such as pectus carinatum or pectus excavatum.