**Musculocutaneous Nerve Palsy**

As with all nerves, direct trauma to the musculocutaneous nerve in lacerations, gunshot wounds, and nearby bone fractures has been reported.

Another critical clinical scenario involving the musculocutaneous nerve is a shoulder dislocation. While the most frequently injured nerve in this scenario is the axillary nerve, several cases of musculocutaneous nerve damage have been reported secondary to anterior humeral dislocations. The musculocutaneous nerve branches from the lateral cord just anterior to the glenohumeral joint, explaining its susceptibility to damage with anterior dislocations. Additionally, it has been found that downward traction and external rotation place significant tension on the nerve, and anterior humeral dislocations may place the nerve in this position.

**Lateral Cutaneous Nerve of the Forearm Palsy**

In addition to the musculocutaneous nerve lesions described, specific damage to the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm has also been examined. While this sensory-only lesion often goes unnoticed clinically, a few clinical situations are worth noting. Just prior to exiting the deep fascia to supply cutaneous innervation, the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm passes between what has been described as a tunnel created by tough fascial layers of the brachialis and bicipital aponeurosis. The nerve can become compressed by the bicipital aponeurosis in cases of chronic elbow extension with the forearm in a pronated position.

The lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm travels in close proximity to the cephalic vein and thus is at risk for injury during venipuncture procedures. General practice is to avoid the medial aspect of the cubital fossa during venipuncture due to cases of injury to the medial cutaneous nerve of the forearm. However, cases of injury to the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm, similar to that described by Rayegani and Azadi, suggest that caution should be taken when using the lateral aspect of the cubital fossa. It has been suggested that using as superficial an approach as possible may reduce the overall risk of peripheral nerve damage.