Hydrocarbons come in four structural classes.

- **Aromatic**- contain a benzene ring (most toxic) and are used in solvents and glues but also in paint and paint remover.

- **Aliphatic**- petroleum distillates found in polishes, lamp oils, and lighter fluid.

- **Halogenated**- fluorinated, chlorinated, or brominated, and are used for refrigeration (freon) and as insecticides and herbicides.

- **Terpene**- found in turpentine and pine oil. Some of these hydrocarbons may be found in various mixed forms and used as an aerosol spray propellant.

Hydrocarbon's ability to cause disease is dependent on three factors.

**Route of Exposure**

Direct skin contact can happen, causing local skin irritation and, rarely, systemic disease. However, prolonged exposure can lead to tissue breakdown and superficial, partial thickness chemical burns. Severe, full-thickness chemical burns can lead to absorption and acute toxic systemic manifestations. Ingestion and inhalation/aspiration of hydrocarbons can also occur, which may signify disease and lead to systemic toxicity and morbidity and mortality.

**The Chemical Properties**

The hydrocarbon's chemical properties, including its volatility, viscosity and surface tension, affect the disease-causing potential of the hydrocarbon. Volatility refers to the rate at which the hydrocarbon can vaporize or exist as a gas. Chemicals with high volatility have an increased risk for pulmonary absorption and can lead to central nervous system (CNS) depression. Viscosity refers to the ability to resist flow. Low viscosity allows for deeper penetration into the lungs. The ability of the molecules to adhere along a liquid surface is surface tension. Low surface tension can allow compounds to spread easily over large areas.

**Amount of Exposure**

Hydrocarbon exposure, either in a single or cumulative dose, can determine the systemic CNS effects on the patient.