Most developmental delays are time-limited. However, prevention of the delays themselves and shortening their duration may respond to environments that stimulate cognitive, motor, sensory, psychological, social, and emotional development across setting (home, school, daycare, etc.) It appears that parent training can foster a proper understanding of the functional impact of the needs of children and the risks intrinsic to development developmental delay.  Parent guidance should be a part of every prenatal and well-child visit.  Several well-designed parent training programs may also foster skills in other caregivers. One such program is the caregiver skills training program (CST) devised by the World Health Organization (WHO) for families of children suffering from developmental delays or disorders. It consists of the following modules:

**Engagement**—2 sessions,

**Communication**— 2 sessions

**Management of behavior**— 2 sessions

**Play and home routine**—1 session

**Adaptive behavior**—1 session

**Caregiver self-care and continuing practice**– 1session

Additionally, communities need to provide support services for parents and children:

- Physically safe environment

- Appropriate Sanitary facilities

- Safe drinking water

- Adequate nutrition

- Prenatal care

- Post-natal care for women including maternity leave

- Well-childcare for all children

- Early childhood education

- Universal Pre-school

- High-quality education

- Universal developmental guidance and support.

Most parents are competent and concerned about their children. Clinicians need to foster competence and support parents in the difficult task of childrearing. This includes encouraging parents to voice concerns and for clinicians to take very seriously all parental comments and concerns.