Trichosporon spp. can cause two types of infection: superficial and systemic, and both presentations can lead to hypersensitivity pneumonia.

**Superficial Infection**

Commonly known as white piedra ("piedra" is a Spanish word for "stone"), this is a condition that affects the hair shafts and starts to grow beneath the cuticle until a nodule is formed, weakening the hair shaft and leading it to break. The main characteristic of this disease is rough and hard hair. Nonetheless, once the nodule is identified, removal of this is very easy, preventing the evolution of the disease. It has been suggested that strains of Corynebacterium can enhance the growth of Trichosporon spp. and may play a synergistic role in white piedra. This disease can affect any part of the body with hair.

**Invasive Infection**

Invasive infection occurs in three forms: disseminated disease (which is the most common presentation), disease localized to major organs, and infections that do not affect the tissues but are related to catheters. Trichosporon spp has virulence factors that allow its growth and permit the establishment of the disease and its dissemination within the host. It has the ability to adhere to and form biofilms on implanted devices. Another important virulence factor is the ability to produce and secrete enzymes for scavenging nutrients from the environment. Most invasive Trichosporon spp infections probably start with the colonization of mucosal or cutaneous surfaces, with a break in the integrity of the surface subsequently seeding the bloodstream. Such breaks may be secondary to chemotherapy-induced epithelial damage or intravascular catheters. Antibiotics may also increase the incidence and extent of colonization and may play a role in increasing the risk of human infections.