PLP catalyzes different reactions such as transamination, decarboxylation, racemization, and elimination, in either enzyme-bound or free form. These reactions are significantly facilitated and accelerated in the presence of PLP due to the electron-withdrawing nature of the molecule, which unstabilizes the bonds around the alpha-carbon atom through the system formed with amino acids.

**Metabolism of Vitamin B6**

Pyridoxine, pyridoxamine, and pyridoxal are rapidly absorbed from food and oral drugs by mucosal cells of the small intestine, while their phosphorylated analogs first undergo dephosphorylation and are then absorbed.

Vitamin B6 analogs are absorbed in the intestine by passive diffusion, which means that a considerable amount of the compound is readily absorbable without cell saturation.

After their uptake, PM and PN are acted on by pyridoxal kinase to form PMP and PNP, respectively; then, these compounds are converted by pyridoxine (pyridoxamine) phosphate (PNP) oxidase enzyme into the coenzyme PLP. This process only occurs in hepatocytes, and to a lesser extent, in mucosal cells of the small intestine, due to a lack of PNP oxidase in most tissues. Due to cell membranes being impermeable to PLP, it is either dephosphorylated by phosphohydrolase enzyme so that PL can be released into the bloodstream or is directly attached to albumin and liberated by the hepatocytes into the circulation as PLP-albumin complex.

Finally, protein-bound PLP is dephosphorylated, and the end-product PL in combination with the free PL in plasma is then transformed inside target tissues by the effect of pyridoxal kinase enzyme into the coenzyme PLP, which is the active form of vitamin B6. PLP is bound to various proteins inside tissues to protect it from phosphatase enzymes.