A complete history and physical are necessary. Acute simple cystitis presents with symptoms of urinary frequency or urgency, dysuria, and suprapubic pain. The probability of cystitis is greater than 90 percent in women with dysuria and frequency without vaginal discharge or irritation.

In a study of 113 women, it was found that the presence of hematuria and urgency as symptoms of initial urinary infection were the strongest predictors of a second infection.

Men who have recurrent episodes of cystitis should undergo an evaluation for prostatitis, while elderly or debilitated patients may present with more generalized symptoms of infection (like fever and chills) or even a change in mental status without any clear localization to the urinary tract.

To confirm a diagnosis of recurrent UTIs, there should be documentation of positive urine cultures associated with appropriate urinary symptoms.

In women who have very rapid recurrences of cystitis after treatment, clinical clues should be sought to attempt to classify cystitis as reinfection (i.e., new infection after the previous one was completely eradicated) or a relapse (i.e., re-emergence of the previous infection, which was incompletely eradicated previously). A recurrence is termed reinfection if the interval between two episodes is greater than 2 weeks, if a different strain of uropathogen is documented or if a sterile culture (with the patient off antibiotics) was documented between two UTI episodes. If the interval between the two episodes is less than two weeks, it is defined as a relapse. Relapsing infections often require additional evaluation with urological imaging.