Chelation agents function by forming bonds with various metal ions, including calcium, zinc, lead, etc. After these bonds are formed, a soluble chelate-metal complex is created that can be excreted from the body. In a similar method, EDTA has a complex structure that allows it to bind various metals. The molecular composition of EDTA consists of multiple oxygen molecules, which function to donate electrons and form coordination complexes with metal ions. When calcium disodium edetate binds to metals, the calcium is displaced from the structure. The bonds formed with the metals are extremely strong and prevent further toxic effects from occurring before excretion out of the body.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption**

EDTA is rapidly absorbed through intravenous access and moves into the plasma and interstitial fluids. Oral administration is avoided due to very low (less than 5%) absorption and elevated lead concentrations within the gastrointestinal tract.

**Distribution**

EDTA is distributed throughout the entire extracellular compartment. Within the blood, the molecule stays within the plasma. It has an ionic form preventing it from entering into cells.

**Metabolism/Excretion**

After IV administration, calcium EDTA largely goes unmetabolized and is excreted in its administered form through the kidneys. Similarly, the chelate-metal complexes will be quickly excreted in the urine. The half-life is around 20 to 60 minutes. The kidneys can filter out the drug and secrete it into the tubular lumen.