- To understand the pathophysiology and prognosis, knowledge of nerve injury classification is necessary. In 1943 Seddon and 1953 Sunderland have proposed a classification that is still in use. Accordingly, there are three degrees 1) neurapraxia, 2) axonotmesis, and 3) neurotmesis.

- In neurapraxia, the nerve remains intact, but due to a temporary injury to myelin, the propagation of the signal is affected. The endoneurium, perineurium, and the epineurium remain intact. Conduction is unaffected in the distal segment and proximal segment, but no conduction occurs across the area of injury; the term for this is conduction block. Conduction studies reveal signs of demyelination as prolonged latency and slow nerve conduction velocity across the compressed segment. The prognosis for recovery is the best of the three classifications.

- In axonotmesis, the axon becomes damaged, but the surrounding connecting tissue, i.e., the epineurium and perineurium, remain intact. Wallerian degeneration takes place distal to the site of injury. Nerve conduction studies show sensory and motor deficits distal to the site of the lesion. Some conduction that may initially be present disappears after 3 to 4 days following the injury. In 3 to 4 weeks after the injury, signs of axonal damage, i.e., fibrillation potentials (FP), and positive sharp waves appear. Eventually, axonal regeneration occurs, and recovery is possible, although it may not always be complete.

- The last degree is neurotmesis, in which both the axon and connective tissue suffer damage. Wallerian degeneration occurs distally to the injury site. Sensory-motor problems and autonomic function defects accompany this. Nerve conduction distal to the injury site is not possible. Since electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity (NCV) findings are similar to those of the second degree, the distinction is difficult. Surgical intervention is sometimes necessary.

- There are five lumbar vertebrae. From each of the five lumbar vertebrae nerves, roots emerge. They extend from L1 to S4. These nerve roots emerge from the lateral spinal recess formed by the superior facet of the distal vertebra and the inferior facet of the proximal vertebra. They join to form the lumbosacral plexus. The lumbosacral plexus has only two main components: the portion made of nerve fibers from the L2 through L5 roots is called lumbar plexus, and the other from S1 through S4 roots is called sacral plexus.

- Anteriorly, the largest branch that emerges from the LS plexus is the femoral nerve. Posteriorly, another large branch emerges through the sciatic notch and is called the sciatic nerve. At or around the popliteal fossa, this nerve divides into two branches — the tibial and fibular or peroneal nerve. The tibial nerve travels down to the posterior thigh supplying the hamstring group, then continues to supply the calf muscles, the gastric soleus tibialis posterior, flexor hallucis, and flexor digitorum and all the intrinsic muscles of the foot.

- The sural nerve is a large sensory nerve that gets contributions from both the tibial and peroneal nerves; this is the primary sensory nerve that supplies the posterior leg and heel.

- The common peroneal nerve continues down the lateral side of the leg at the fibular head. It divides into the superficial peroneal nerve, which supplies the peroneus longus and brevis, the main eversion muscles of the foot.

- The superficial branch supplies sensation to the dorsum of the foot and lateral calf. The deep branch supplies a small area at the first webspace.

- Because of its superficial location, the peroneal nerve is vulnerable to compression during surgical procedures, tight cast placements, and other traumatic conditions sustained during sports. Patients with diabetes seem to be affected more often. Any compression of the common peroneal nerve leads to foot drop.

- The normal gait cycle consists of the stance phase of 60% and the swing phase of 40%. When one foot is in the swing phase, the other is in the stance phase. The gait cycle starts with a heel strike and ends with a heel strike on the same side. During the stance phase, the foot remains flat on the ground. In the heel strike, the foot is in dorsiflexion, preparing for gradual lowering before the stance phase. Any damage affecting the neuraxis from the roots to the peripheral nerve can lead to weakness of the muscles supplied by that nerve. Therefore a lesion of the L5 root, lumbar plexus, sciatic nerve, common peroneal, or the deep peroneal nerve can potentially lead to foot drop due to the weakness of the anterior compartment musculature. The presenting symptom is the inability to ambulate as before. More specifically, there is a weakness of the muscles in the foot that assist in dorsiflexion. There may or may not be a pain. The person will be unable to dorsiflex during the heel strike, and the foot remains flat on the ground. Sometimes this can also cause toe drag and inability to clear the foot, potentially leading to falls.