The causative etiologies of acute scrotum pain are broad. These include ischemic, traumatic, infectious, inflammatory, referred pain, acute or chronic, or idiopathic. Given the nature of these, an acute scrotum should be considered analogous to patients presenting with an acute abdomen.

It is difficult to describe the causes of acute scrotum pain in subgroups, as many conditions are chronic but have an acute presentation. For example, inguinal hernias remain asymptomatic but when obstructed or strangulated present acutely.

**Ischemic/traumatic**

- Torsion of testes

- Torsion of testicular appendages

- Testicular hematoma

- Thrombosed varicocele

- Inguinoscrotal hernia (obstructed/strangulated)

**Infective/inflammatory**

- Epididymitis

- Epididymo-orchitis

**Neuropathic/referred pain**

- Mid urethral stone

- Inguinal hernias (obstructed/strangulated)

- Aortic/common iliac artery aneurysm

- Nerve entrapment

- Diabetic neuropathy (chronic presentation is more common)

- Sexual abuse

By far the most common causes are epididymitis/epididymo-orchitis, testicular appendage torsion, spermatic cord torsion (commonly referred to as testicular torsion), varicoceles, and obstructed or strangulated inguinal hernias. The incidence and frequency of these etiologies are highly variable by age groups. Acute scrotal pain in children is much more likely to represent torsion of the spermatic cord or testicular appendages whereas patients older than 25 are much more likely to have epididymitis. A complete list of differential diagnoses is discussed later.