A definitive diagnosis of tracheobronchial tear is usually made on clinical findings at initial evaluation or surgical exploration or findings at a bronchoscopic fiberoptic assessment in suspected cases. However, tracheobronchial injuries could easily be missed in 25% to 68% of the patients, and the following imaging modalities might throw more clues to enhance the suspicion, especially in chest and neck trauma.

Chest radiographs would be normal in about 10% of the patients where the tracheobronchial tear/injury does not extend beyond the peri tracheal or peri-bronchial connective tissue, or spontaneous sealing of a minor tear has occurred due to fibrin formation. The most common site of tracheobronchial tear is at the level of carina where the mediastinum is fixed and hence vulnerable to shear stress. Tears within the mediastinal pleura cause pneumomediastinum and tear beyond the mediastinal pleura causes pneumothorax. The right main bronchial injury is most likely expected to produce a pneumothorax, whereas the tear on the left main bronchus is more likely to produce a pneumomediastinum. This is due to the longer course of left main bronchus in the mediastinum. Fallen-lung sign is seen in severely injured patients due to the partial or complete detachment of the main bronchus resulting in the relocation of the lung in the lateral dependent position, unlike the typical collapse of the lung towards the hilum in usual pneumothorax.

Other classic descriptions include the incorrect position of an endotracheal tube, overdistension of a cuff, and persistent pneumothorax after intercostal tube placement. Abnormal hyoid bone elevation (above the third cervical vertebra) could occur due to contraction and upward pull of suprahyoid muscle whenever a cervical tracheal tear results in rupture of the infrahyoid muscle. However, the most specific radiologic signs for a tracheobronchial tear are the location of the endotracheal tube beyond the expected tracheal anatomy and the fallen-lung sign.

CT scan is much more sensitive and specific in delineating tracheobronchial injury and is the non-invasive investigation of choice. It would be able to identify subtle pneumothoraces, mediastinal emphysema, and active bleeding in an injured airway. Detection of air in the wall of the trachea or bronchus is a helpful finding in the diagnosis of the tracheobronchial tear. It has got added advantage of helping to detect associated critical injuries to the heart and great vessels. MPR/3D reconstructed images in the long axis of airways, or virtual endoscopy could help evaluation in a more precise manner. CT scans would be falsely negative in subtle injuries. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy may throw more light in such circumstances.

Though the advantage of MRI includes a multiplanar display, high tissue contrast, reduced risk for contrast-induced nephropathy, and no risk for radiation, these advantages are easily offset by the need for preparation, increased scanning time with enhanced risks involved in monitoring the unstable trauma patients. Moreover, MRI is not available universally.

Nuclear imaging will not be of any help, especially in minor injuries. Varying findings are noted depending on the severity of injuries. If there is a partial or complete airway obstruction with an intact vascular supply, evidence of V/Q mismatch would be present with the physiological response of diminished blood supply. Angiography would be of any help only if the tracheobronchial tear is actively bleeding. However, angiography will help in the determination of associated vascular injuries.

The gold standard for the detection of tracheal tear/injury is fiberoptic bronchoscopy.