Although Diamond Blackfan anemia presents in only a small percentage of patients, significant complications can develop. An interprofessional team that has an integrated approach towards the management of DBA is essential for a better outcome. An evidence-based approach is of paramount importance when dealing with patients suffering from DBA.

The pharmacist should educate the patient on corticosteroids, as they are the drugs of choice. These drugs have serious side effects that require monitoring. Pharmacists should also verify all dosing and perform medication reconciliation, reporting any concerns to the healthcare team.

The hematology nurse must educate the patient about the potential adverse impact of chronic blood transfusions, which relate to iron accumulation. Nursing will also be on the front lines administering these transfusions and must report on the effectiveness or lack thereof with these interventions.

The obstetrician and labor & delivery nurses should counsel the patient on pregnancy. DBA patients during pregnancy can trigger a relapse of the condition when one is in remission. Hence, pregnancy should be avoided in a patient with DBA and should remain under high-risk obstetrics care in such circumstances.

To determine renal, liver, and cardiac abnormalities, renal, liver imaging, and echocardiograms are recommendations for patients with DBA.

Because of the constant need for treatment and admissions, the quality of life of many patients is poor, and hence, a mental health nurse should be involved in counseling. Finally, social workers should be involved to ensure that the patient has the necessary support and finances to undergo treatment. Open communication between the interprofessional team is necessary for improved outcomes and limiting morbidity of the treatment.

As is evident from the above, DBA requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, psychological professionals, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]