The type of cataract determines the initial presentation. Nuclear cataracts can present with decreased distance visual acuity, decreased ability to recognize faces and discriminate colors. Patients with nuclear cataracts can have good levels of Snellen acuity. Cortical cataracts may cause glare, difficulty reading, and light sensitivity. Patients with posterior subcapsular cataracts can present paradoxically, with poor vision in good lighting and improved vision in dim lighting. They can also have difficulty with driving during the day and reading.

According to the American Academy of Ophthalmology, the goal of diagnosis is to determine if visual complaints are due to the presence of cataracts, if a cataract is present, to understand the clinical significance, and to rule out other conditions that cause visual impairment.

The evaluation includes:

- A comprehensive history

- Visual acuity with correction

- Glare testing

- Assessing pupillary function

- Examining ocular alignment

- External examination

- Measuring intraocular pressure (IOP)

- Slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment, lens, vitreous humor

- Ophthalmoscopy of the macula, retina, and optic nerve

- Other tests that may be considered include, optical coherence tomography (OCT), to evaluate retinal or anterior segment disorder. B-scan ultrasound can be done if cataract density prevents visualization of the posterior segment.

**Differential Diagnosis**

- Glaucoma

- Diabetic Retinopathy

- Age-related macular degeneration

Glaucoma is a group of conditions that are characterized by progressive damage to the optic nerve. Although it is often associated with increased ocular pressure, the optic disc can be damaged with normal IOP. Initially, the patient is asymptomatic but eventually begins to lose both peripheral and central vision. Vision loss is permanent. The incidence is highest among black Americans.

Diabetic Retinopathy: Presents in patients with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Patients typically present complaining of fluctuating vision, floaters, photopsia, and visual loss. On exam, microaneurysms, intraretinal hemorrhages, and hard exudates in the non-proliferative type. In the proliferative type, fibrous proliferation, new blood vessels, and macular edema can be seen.

Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD): Dry AMD presents with worsening vision and more dependence on brighter lights or magnifying lenses. Scotomas, difficulty reading, or driving might be noticed.

Cataracts may occur in patients with glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, or age-related macular degeneration. Comorbidities should be managed appropriately.

Indications for surgery vary by country but generally include poor visual acuity, visual difficulties, or both due to cataracts.