Critical updates and changes in the 2022 standards can be found in the StatPearls article on Nursing Professional Development Standards. The scope of practice for the NPD practitioner reflects the changing landscape in healthcare. The NPD scope of practice defines the who, what, where, when, why, and how that drive nursing professional development practice. It is reflected in the updated NPD practice systems model, which includes inputs, throughputs, and outputs. All NPD activities occur in the context of interprofessional practice and learning environments. NPD practitioners continuously engage in environmental scanning to ascertain internal and external opportunities and challenges within the organization.

Evolving trends in healthcare and nursing education have influenced NPD practice. There is a continued emphasis on interprofessional education, collaborative practice, and EBP. Due to the various positions that focus on education, there is a need for role clarity for NPD practitioners. Differences between NPD practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, academic clinical nurse educators, and academic nurse educators are outlined in the updated standards. Other trends affecting NPD practice include longer life expectancy, burgeoning patient technology, healthy practice, learning environments, and global events.

NPD practice changed focus during the pandemic, transitioning from in-person to virtual educational delivery formats. One strategy was described by Reid et al. to prepare NPD practitioners to teach in a virtual environment.

Staffing redeployment during COVID was an issue during the pandemic. Several approaches to address this were published. Fox and Richter described how their NPD practitioners were split into three teams to meet the demand for the orientation and training of frontline staff. One team was responsible for the orientation of new hire employees and travel nurses.

Another approach to surge staffing was identified by Kelley et al.

NPD practitioners support the transition of nurses and other healthcare team members across learning and practice environments. With the new practice arenas come new roles for nurses. The Future of Nursing Report from the Institute of Medicine challenged nurses to assume new and expanded roles to help meet the evolving needs of the healthcare system. There are now nurse navigators, health coaches, community health workers, and many new roles in nursing informatics, telehealth, and patient safety. Nursing as a profession and associations such as ANPD are working on ways to increase diversity in the field. We need to have diverse practitioners to help meet the needs of the diverse population.

Return on investment is another important concept impacting NPD. Ongoing restricting and healthcare changes continue to reshape how healthcare organizations operate and how they measure success. Return on investment (ROI) is a key factor in the viability of any organization. NPD practitioners must establish and articulate the financial and clinical impact of NPD practice through ROI data.

Research in the field of NPD has increased. Harper et al. detailed the work of a task force charged with redesigning ANPD’s small research grant process.Journal for Nurse in Professional Development editorial board and included an open-ended question of the ANPD annual convention evaluation beginning in 2016. Ten spirit of inquiry areas identified were:

- Determination of strategies that significantly increase engagement of learners

- Types of technology that enhance learning

- Development of learning outcome metrics

- Strategies to sustain behavior change pursuant to NPD intervention

- Strategies that result in successful career and care continuum transitions

- NPD practices and/or programs that significantly impact outcomes (residencies, onboarding, competency management, life support, etc.)

- Examine models (Lean, Six Sigma, QI, etc.) that create more efficient and effective NPD practices       a. Time studies       b. Interruptions

- Examine stakeholders’ views that impact the perceived value of NPD practice/role/influence       a. Chief nursing officers       b. Managers       c. Chief financial officers       d. Academic educators

- Factors that increase “buy-in” of stakeholders & target audiences

- Strategies that influence the adoption of interprofessional development (pp. 121-122)

Numerous studies have been conducted in these focus areas. Phillips et al. described a longitudinal, quasi-experimental sepsis simulation pilot study on the impact of boost methodology on nurse knowledge retention.

Harper et al. conducted a study on preceptor practice in 2020. ANPD used a nonexperimental, cross-sectional, descriptive design using the practice analysis method to identify the roles and competencies essential to preceptor practice.

The capacity of the NPD leader has expanded. The value of NPD relies heavily on the ability to show value across the board in ways that benefit the entire organization. There is a StatPearls article specific to the NPD leadership role in advancing the specialty practice of NPD. An important responsibility of the NPD leader is to help develop a department plan that supports the organization’s mission, vision, and strategic goals. Leadership is not an organizational position but a personal, professional behavior. The Association for Nursing Professional Development has both a Leadership Academy and an Evidence-Based Practice Academy to help NPD practitioners develop leadership skills.

As with any specialty, certification is available for NPD practitioners. In addition to the basic certification in nursing professional development offered through the American Nurse Credentialing Center, there is also advanced certification in nursing professional development offered through the Competency and Credentialing Institute. The advanced certification is a portfolio-based certification.