# Continuing Education Activity

In 1953, Dr. Herman Pinkus first described the fibroepithelial tumor of Pinkus (FEP) as a pre-malignant epithelial tumor. Although there has been some dispute over the classification of FEP, its histologic appearance is unique and distinguishes it from other fibroepithelial tumors. Several important distinctions can be made between FEP and basal cell carcinoma (BCC.) Most notable is the presence of Merkel cells in FEP and the absence of those cells in BCC. FEP also occurs more frequently in females and has no association with sun exposure. It typically occurs on the lower trunk; whereas, BCC is more common in sun-exposed areas of the body. From a prognostic standpoint, FEP does not have an aggressive course and has not been reported to invade or metastasize. Basal cell carcinoma, on the other hand, can invade and metastasize if left untreated. This activity reviews the evaluation of premalignant fibroepithelial tumors and identifies the role of the interprofessional team in managing this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of fibroepithelial tumor of Pinkus. 
- Describe the presentation of fibroepithelial tumor of Pinkus. 
- Summarize the treatment of fibroepithelial tumor of Pinkus. 
- Outline the evaluation of premalignant fibroepithelial tumors and identifies the role of the interprofessional team in managing this condition.

# Introduction

In 1953, Dr. Herman Pinkus first described the fibroepithelial tumor of Pinkus (FEP) as a pre-malignant epithelial tumor. Although there has been some dispute over the classification of FEP, its histologic appearance is unique and distinguishes it from other fibroepithelial tumors. Several important distinctions can be made between FEP and basal cell carcinoma (BCC.) Most notable is the presence of Merkel cells in FEP and the absence of those cells in BCC. FEP also occurs more frequently in females and has no association with sun exposure. It typically occurs on the lower trunk; whereas, BCC is more common in sun-exposed areas of the body.

# Etiology

The origin of FEP is enigmatic. Some have suggested that it develops in seborrheic keratosis.

# Epidemiology

It is considered a rare tumor, though some authors suggest that FEP may not be as rare as it seems, and its rarity may be a product of misdiagnosis.

# Pathophysiology

FEP is not related to sun exposure. Development of FEP may be related to activation of the Hedgehog pathway by mutation of PTCH (patched transmembrane molecule), which decreases the negative regulation of the Hedgehog pathway. This is known to occur in some basal cell carcinomas and may also play a role in the development of FEP. Ionizing radiation has also been implicated.

# Histopathology

FEP exhibits a “fenestrated pattern” consisting of islands of the tumor, often referred to as nests, holes or nubbins surrounded by thin anastomosing strands of basaloid or squamous cells.

# History and Physical

FEP typically presents as a single or multiple papillary or polypoid growths on the skin. The tumor may be pink, tan, brown, or skin-colored. It can be sub-divided into pigmented and non-pigmented types based upon gross coloration. There may also be some superficial excoriation or erosion, but typically not deep ulceration.

# Evaluation

Some authors advocate for dermoscopy and reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM) to aid in the diagnosis of these lesions. On dermoscopy, one can see finely branching short vessels as well as punctate vessels around the periphery. If a polarized light source is used, short, white streaks called crystalline, or chrysalis structures can be seen. In pigmented lesions, dermoscopy can reveal gray-brown areas and/or gray-blue dots, which suggests FEP.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment involves recognition of the lesion followed by complete excision. Because of its potentially benign gross appearance, a fibroepithelial tumor of Pinkus may be an under-recognized and under-reported condition. Electrodesiccation and curettage of the lesion may be effective, but since this is a rare and likely under-recognized tumor, evidence for the efficacy of these treatments is not available. Mohs surgery has been performed for this type of tumor and is indicated if the anatomic location on the body limits clear margins. There is no role for chemotherapy or radiation. FEP has not been reported to result in patient death.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of a skin lesion which is FEP can include many other pathologies, both benign and malignant. When FEP is mistaken for a benign lesion, such as acrochordon, seborrheic keratosis, dermal nevus, pedunculated fibroma, lipomatous nevus or neurofibroma, this delays biopsy. Since many benign skin lesions are treated without submitting tissue for biopsy, the diagnosis of FEP may never be made.

# Prognosis

It generally runs an indolent course. Prognosis is generally excellent and excision is considered curative.

# Complications

The controversy about whether FEP is a subtype of basal cell carcinoma or a trichoblastoma is ongoing, though the most recent literature supports FEP as a subtype of basal cell carcinoma. The presence of Merkel cells and weak expression of the p53 oncogene in both FEP and trichoblastoma leads to the association of the two entities and separates them from BCC.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Although the development of fibroepithelioma of Pinkus is not related to sun exposure, it is vital to properly educate all patients with basal cell carcinoma about the proper use of sunscreens, the avoidance of excessive sun exposure and the dangers of tanning.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Identification and treatment of fibroepithelial tumors of Pinkus are best done by an interprofessional team consisting of primary care, dermatology, pathologist, and specialty trained nurses. Dermatology nurses provide patient education, arrange follow up, and supply updates to the team. Evidence related to diagnosis and management of fibroepithelial tumors of Pinkus is limited to class 3, 4, and 5 evidence, due to the rarity of the condition.