Clinical features vary for mild hip instability, limited abduction in the infant, asymmetric gait in the toddler, hip pain in adolescence, and osteoarthritis in the adult.

American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons(AAOS), the Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of North America(POSN), and the Canadian Task Force recommends screening newborn for DDH.

**Newborn:**Clinical examination is crucial in the identification of DDH, especially babies with risk factors. Hip instability/dislocation can be identified by Barlow and Ortolani manoeuver.

Ortolani maneuver: Infant in the supine position, hip flexed at 90 degrees and in neutral rotation. The infant should be calm, and clothes and diapers should be removed. This manoeuver reduces dislocated hip. The hip is held in the way the thumb on the inner aspect and index and ring finger on the greater trochanter. While applying anterior force on the greater trochanter, gently abduct the hip. If the hip dislocated, one would feel a jerk or clunk. "Hip clicks" are clinically insignificant without instability.

Barlow maneuver: in the same above position, while applying posterior force to trochanter (AAP recommends against posterior force), adduct the hip. You will feel the clunk or jerk if the hip can be dislocated. This maneuver should be done gently as forceful adduction can cause instability.

The sensitivity of this maneuver with experienced hands (ranging from 87 to 97 percent) and specificity varies from 98 to 99 %.

Asymmetry in the position and or the number of the gluteal skin folds may be a clue for DDH. But asymmetry is a normal finding in 27 % of infants.

Galeazzi (Allis) sign identifies real or apparent of the femur,  by comparing the knee height while hip and knee are flexed and feet flat on the table.

**Beyond the neonatal period:**Limited range of movement in the hip joint, could be a clue for diagnosis. Limited hip abduction (<75°) or adduction (30 degrees past midline).

The Klisic test: Place the middle finger over the greater trochanter and index finger over the anterior superior iliac spine.

- On the normal hip, an imaginary line between the two fingers points at or above the umbilicus.

- On a dislocated hip, the trochanter is elevated, and the line projects inferior to the umbilicus.

Asymmetrical gait (Trendelenburg gait) due to abductor insufficiency, Lumbar lordosis, toe walking, leg length discrepancies, and early hip osteoarthritis may indicate DDH.