Fascioliasis is exceedingly rare in the United States, but should be on the differential for any patient with the combination of abdominal pain (especially right upper quadrant), transaminitis, and marked peripheral eosinophilia. Even more suspicion should arise if a patient has traveled to endemic areas of Europe, Asia, or the Pacific, and their dietary history includes watercress ingestion or consumption of raw vegetables washed in potentially contaminated water. Often there is a delay in the diagnosis of this disease even in endemics areas due to its rarity and nonspecific acute symptoms.

Serology has become the fastest and most efficient way to test for fascioliasis in recent years. Titers against Fasciola antigens become positive during the early phase of parasite migration and are detectable for 2 to 4 weeks following initial exposure to the host’s immune system. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) techniques have largely replaced stool ova and parasite testing because of its fast turn-around, sensitivity, and quantification.Fasciola antigen levels often positively correlate with the degree of infection.Fasciola antigens. Antibodies may still be detectable at low levels for years. The assay becomes undetectable in approximately 65% of patients one month following successful treatment. Some patients will have a low positive titer for life without any evidence of active infection.

Microscopic examination of stool or duodenal bile aspirates for eggs is still useful for detecting chronic infections in rural or third-world settings where resources can be scarce. They are also sometimes found incidentally while working up biliary obstructions. Fasciola hepatica eggs are yellow-brown and ovoid measuring 130 to 150 micrometers long by 60 to 90 micrometers wide. A single adult fluke can release over 20,000 eggs per day, but that release is intermittent. Thus, an examination of multiple stool or duodenal aspirate specimens may be needed as one negative examination does not necessarily exclude the diagnosis.

Rarely, one might also identify adult flukes in the biliary tree during endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) during assessment in a patient with biliary obstruction. Occasionally capsular liver nodules can be seen by a surgeon during a diagnostic laparoscopy, but with no further clinical history are nonspecific. Liver biopsy is not routinely warranted as serology is much more specific, sensitive, and cost-effective.

Computerized tomography (CT) scan may show multiple, nodular, small (approximately 25 mm in diameter), branching, subcapsular lesions in the parenchyma of the liver. These tortuous tracks are left behind by the migrating parasites. Necrotic areas may be seen on scans utilizing intravenous (IV) contrast.

Ultrasound, cholangiogram, and ERCP are helpful during the biliary stage and may show the mobile, leaf-like flukes in biliary ducts or gallbladder, and are often associated with stones. Irregular common bile duct wall thickening, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and/or periportal lymphadenopathy are often present, especially in the acute phase.