In chronic renal failure, there is an increase in the ability of parathyroid cells to synthesize and secrete hormone, which is responsible for an increase in serum PTH concentration at first. This results in hyperplasia of the gland linked to both cell hypertrophy and increased cell proliferation, which is still potentially inhibited by therapeutic measures. As renal function deteriorates, the expression of calcium, vitamin D, and FGF23 receptors gradually decreases in the parathyroid gland, which leads to parathyroid gland hyperplasia.

Parathyroid hyperplasia is classified into four categories: diffuse hyperplasia, diffuse and multinodular hyperplasia, multinodular hyperplasia, and the simple nodular hyperplasia.

Renal osteodystrophy comprises a group of bone mineral disorders. There are five types based on histological classification.

Mild disease is a state of slightly increased bone remodeling and usually seen in early or treated SHPT.

Osteitis fibrosa cystica is a state of high bone turnover from increased osteoclast activity and bone destruction and resorption caused by the high PTH levels.

Osteomalacia is the softening of the bone due to inadequate osteoid or insufficient mineralization of the osteoid, depending upon the rate of bone remodeling. The problems with mineralization arise due to abnormal calcium and phosphorus metabolism.

Mixed disease has features of both osteomalacia and osteitis fibrosa and is associated with aluminum deposition

Administration and overuse of vitamin D analogs, calcimimetics, and phosphate binders decrease PTH levels, which, in turn, leads to a state of low bone turnover with normal mineralization known as adynamic bone disease.