Diascopy commonly reveals non-blanchable to partially blanchable lesions. Diascopy may not be consistent within the same lesions some areas may show blanching while others may not.

Dermoscopy shows well-demarcated oval to round red lagoons due to dilated vascular spaces within the papillary or superficial reticular dermis. The dermoscopy findings in angioma serpiginosum have been described as “school of red fish in a pond.” Dermoscopy might especially be helpful distinguishing angioma serpiginosum from purpuric dermatoses.

Skin biopsy shows that the affected papillae are distended by a large single ectatic capillary, lined by flattened endothelial cells of normal appearance. There is an absence of erythrocyte extravasation, hemosiderin deposits or inflammatory cells which help differentiate angioma serpiginosum from its mimics.

Imaging studies are not usually done and are indicated only if atypical findings are present.

Reflectance confocal microscopy has been used in the diagnosis of angioma serpiginosum. Reflectance confocal microscopy also shows the multiple dilated vascular spaces in the superficial dermis, arranged perpendicular to the epidermis with a deeper vascular plexus which is arranged parallel to the epidermal surface.

Electron microscopy findings include thickening of the capillary walls which is caused by a heavy precipitate of basement membrane-like material mixed with thin collagen fibers and an increased number of concentrically arranged pericytes. The dilated capillaries may also show slit-like protrusions of their lumina and endothelial lining into the surrounding thickened vessel walls.