If 3 or more clinical criteria are met, then the individual has definite HHT. If they only meet 1 or 2 criteria, then HHT is suspected. The clinical criteria are spontaneous recurrent epistaxis, characteristic mucocutaneous telangiectasias, visceral telangiectasias/AVMs, and HHT in a first-degree relative. More than 90% of patients with HHT will meet these criteria by 40 years of age.

Because of the life-threatening complications that can occur in a patient who has visceral AVMs, it is important to order the appropriate diagnostic tests.

- Pulmonary AVMs: Transthoracic contrast echocardiography should be ordered. If negative, repeat screening should be considered after puberty, within the 5 years preceding a planned pregnancy, after pregnancy, and otherwise every 5 to 10 years. This test is indicated for either suspected or confirmed HHT. If positive, confirmation with high-resolution thoracic CT should be performed.

- Brain AVMs: Brain MRI with and without gadolinium should be ordered for suspected and confirmed HHT.

- Liver AVMs: Screening via doppler ultrasound or triphasic helical CT is recommended in all patients with HHT and abnormal liver enzyme tests or clinical evidence of complications from liver AVMs, including high-output heart failure, portal hypertension, and cholestasis.

- Anemia: Annual blood tests to look at hemoglobin and hematocrit levels should be completed in HHT patients over 35 years old.

- Genetic analysis: A screen for ENG and ACVRL1 ± SMAD4 and/or GDF2 should be done in those that are at risk because of an affected first-degree relative or are clinically suspected to have HHT.