Although SI with serious intent to die is a clinical emergency, to date, there is no evidence-based treatment to manage it.

**No-harm Contracts vs. Crisis Safety Plans**

- No-harm contracts, sometimes called no-suicide contracts, were advocated as best practices and taught to healthcare professionals for many decades. The value of these began to be questioned over a decade ago, and some findings suggested they may have detrimental effects.

- Current evidence supports the use of Safety Plans, which are made in collaboration with the client and personalized to help them identify triggers and use internal and external coping strategies.

No-harm Contracts vs. Safety Planning: A recent RCT compared the use of no-harm contracts with standard or enhanced crisis safety plans. Active-duty soldiers (n=97) who presented with SI and were being treated for their behavioral health concerns were randomly assigned to one of three groups. At the 6-month follow-up, approximately 5% of the participants who had received crisis safety plans and 19% who received no-harm contracts attempted suicide (log-rank χ(1)=4.85, p=0.028; hazard ratio=0.24, 95% CI=0.06-0.96). This suggested a 76% reduction in suicide attempts in the groups with either the standard or enhanced safety plans (both forms of safety plans were equally effective). Additionally, the safety plans were associated with a significantly faster decline in suicide ideation (F(3,195)=18.64, p<0.001) and fewer inpatient hospitalization days (F(1,82)=7.41, p<0.001).

Comparing Quality of the Safety Plan to Suicide Attempts: The quality of the safety plan has been shown to affect patient outcomes. DOD/VA guidelines for the management of SI include developing a client-focused safety plan. Researchers examined the documented safety plans for Veterans and rated the quality of the plan based on whether the plan was fully completed and the degree to which it showed personalization. The plans were compared this longitudinally to subsequent suicide-related outcomes among the Veterans for whom the safety plans were developed. They found that poor quality plans, which were not personally relevant or were incomplete, predicted an increased likelihood of suicidal behavior. Higher quality safety plans, particularly plans with higher scores for part 3, which includes places and people that serve as distractions, had a lower probability of suicidal behaviors. The authors concluded that many of the plans were of poor quality and suggested that more training about how to complete safety plans should be done with healthcare professionals. They also highlighted the importance of personalizing the plans and ensuring completeness in the area that focuses on creating a list of people and places that may serve as distractions.

**Creating a Safety Plan: Best Practice**

- The safety plan is created after the risk assessment is completed and includes information gathered by the healthcare professional during the interview.

- Collaboration between the client and the healthcare professional is essential to ensure the plan is specific and personalized for each individual.

An example of the Safety Planning used by VA and published in Green et al., (2018)

1. Warning Signs  (e.g., isolating myself, drinking alcohol, thinking I'm unlovable, feeling like a burden)

2. Internal Coping (e.g., playing guitar, meditating, playing with my dog, listening to music)

3. Social Contacts/Locations that serve as Distractions (e.g., John Smith [phone #], Jane Doe [phone #], go to Big Lake, walk downtown)

4. Family or Friends that may offer Help (e.g., Mother [phone #], Father [phone #], Friend Sam [phone #])

5. Professionals or Agencies (e.g. Therapist [phone #], nearest VA Urgent care or ED [address & phone #], National Suicide Help Line 1-800-273-TALK)

6. Reducing the Potential for Lethal Means (e.g., Brother will keep handgun until therapist and Veteran agree Veteran is safe; Provider will work with VA pharmacy for meds to be dispensed in blister packaging; Wife will help manage Veterans meds keeping them stored and locked at all times; Carbon monoxide detector that sends smartphone alert will be purchased)

**Technology to Reduce Suicidality**

- With suicide rates higher in rural areas, the WHO recommended developing technologies that may be beneficial to support individuals experiencing SI and who are at risk of suicide.

- Further research is needed to test the effectiveness of such strategies. Several examples of technology-driven management tools are provided.

Safety Plans Added to the Patient Portal of Electronic Medical Record - An outpatient behavioral health service integrated the collaboratively developed safety plans of patients into the patients' portal area within the system's overarching electronic medical record (EMR). This enabled both patients and all providers to access the plan 24/7 and gave the patients the ability to securely message healthcare providers as needed through the portal. The ability to modify the plan as a living document was another benefit. Limitations were also addressed, such as the need to log in to access the plan and the questionable feasibility of doing this while in crisis.

Internet-based Self-guided Safety Planning - Individuals (n=150) were recruited from a depression/SI screening website to complete a self-guided Internet-based safety plan and then evaluate its usefulness. Findings showed moderate support for online safety planning, but the majority believed the tool might be more helpful for others than for themselves (p < .001). There were many limitations to this study, and the quality of the safety plans was not assessed. Currently, there is insufficient evidence to recommend this approach.

Text-based helpline for children and youth - A recent intervention in Denmark uses text-based communication rather than phone calls to assist children in distress. Approximately 13.5% of the text messages involved SI, and these were typically sent by older girls. Within the group of ideators, 26% had severe suicidality. The helpline staff assisted the youth in developing action plans, and over half of the sessions ended with an action plan in place. More of the ideators than non-ideators recontacted the helpline to follow up. Almost 36% of the children who had SI felt better immediately after their initial text session; 24% reported feeling better when they followed up two weeks later, but 37% indicated they felt worse. The interventions that were most associated with positive impact were concluded to be discussing emotions, expressing empathy, and encouraging the children to talk to somebody. When boundaries were set, the impact was more negative.

**Limiting Access to Lethal Means**

- Reducing access to lethal means is best practice and consistent with several theories of suicidality.

- Documentation suggests few SI patients/families are being counseled to remove or restrict access to lethal means.

- Clinical guidance is needed to identify what to include in lethal means counseling and to train more healthcare professionals to provide it.

Documentation in EMR of a Discussion to Reduce Access to Lethal Means - A recent study reviewed ED charts (N=800) of patients who screened positive for SI and suicide risk. There was no documentation that any healthcare professional assessed access to lethal means before discharging to home the majority of people who screened positive for SI (n=545, 85%). This study revealed that only 18% (n=145) had any documentation of an assessment of lethal means.  However, for the small group of ideators who were asked assessed for lethal means, only 8% (n=11) had documentation that a healthcare professional discussed a safety/action plan to reduce access to lethal means. This most frequently entailed changing home storage or moving objects out of the home.

Reducing Access to Firearms - A systematic review of studies (n=70) shows that reducing access to firearms corresponds to reduced firearm suicides. Reduced access through legislation has been effective in other countries, but the 2nd amendment in the United States curtails the feasibility of this. Most firearm suicides are from guns purchased years earlier, so restricting purchases may be ineffective as well. The probability of a firearm suicide increases for everybody in the household when a gun is in the home, so education about firearm safety should be provided. This includes keeping the weapon stored unloaded and in a locked location, preferably out of the home if any family member has SI. Ammunition should never be stored with the firearm. The efficacy of smart gun technologies that use fingerprints for locking has not been systematically evaluated yet, although few gun-owners have purchased this technology, so this is a limitation. Firearm suicide rates for males are higher than females throughout the world, and approximately ten times higher in the United States, with older white males having the highest rate. This group is less likely to seek psychiatric care, so discussions about removal or safeguards to reduce lethal means should be initiated by primary care professionals, ED staff, and clergy have been suggested. More high-quality research is needed to identify the most effective measures and the best practices for firearms safety counseling.

Firearm Safety Counseling and Legal Implications - The American Medical Association (AMA) authored "A Physician's Role in Firearm Safety." This March 2017 document summarized the AMA's position and addressed legal concerns related to counseling individuals about gun safety. The AMA indicated that physicians and other health professionals should be trained to assess and respond to individuals at risk of suicide. Although Florida law does not permit providers to ask about gun ownership, there are no restrictions in any state to providing “lethal means counseling” or asking about firearms in Florida if imminent safety concerns exist. Discussing firearms safety measures is recommended universally as part of pediatric safeguarding risks in the home and should include proper storage and use of devices to prevent accidental firing. When an individual is at risk of suicide, working with them, their family, and support systems are recommended to limit access until the suicide risk subsides.

Healthcare Professionals Perceptions about Providing Firearm Safety Counseling - A majority of healthcare providers endorse screening for firearms and providing safe storage counseling. However, they had neutral positions on whether to provide patients with firearm locks, and only 15% provided caregivers free safety locks, which were available for distribution.

Training Healthcare Professionals - formally training staff on how to counsel patients and families to reduce assess to lethal means has been shown to be beneficial. The message is more likely to be received well by the recipient(s), but without training, nurses report be reluctance because they do not want to appear confrontational.

**Environmental Safety Considerations**

Home/residential setting:  Treatment of suicidal ideation focuses on keeping the individual safe while treating the underlying causes. The treatment setting will vary based on the severity of the ideations and suicide risk.

Medical unit:  Often, patients who have attempted suicide require care on medical units until they are stable for transfer to in-patient psychiatry or discharge to another location.  Approximately 25-30% of hospital suicides occur someplace other than in an in-patient psychiatric unit. Bathrooms are the most common locations for suicide in hospitals, especially because of the privacy and abundance of ligature tie points hanging. Staff in ED and on medical units should be aware of this and monitor the patient's environment for equipment and supplies that could provide lethal means. Whenever possible, patients who have attempted suicide, or have a history of SI or attempts, should be in a room where they can be observed from the nurses' station. Universal SI screening is not typically done when admitted to a medical unit for a non-behavioral health concern.  Healthcare professionals should bear in mind that SI can be triggered by painful and/or chronic conditions, anxiety, insomnia, or adverse reactions to medications. Similarly, complications during treatment, such as ICU delirium, can produce fear and provoke aggression or self-harm. Assessing and documenting each patient's mental status each shift is important for staff on all care units. In behavioral health settings, environmental management includes maintaining close observation (typically every 15 min) or constant observation of suicidal individuals. Checking and storing all possessions is important during the admission process, but it is equally important to ensure that no potential means are brought into the patient during a visit.

The majority of suicides on behavioral health units occur in bathrooms and involve asphyxiation using door handles, hinges, or other areas fixation points. Approximately a decade ago, the VA urged staff to conduct thorough environmental risk assessments to detect and correct safety concerns that contributed to suicide risks. The report generated hundreds of ligature tie points and physical materials that could cause harm. The VA system initiation extensive architectural and structural changes to their units, resulting in a suicide rate that dropped by over 80%.

**Pharmacologic Therapy**

As mentioned above, most patients with SI have psychiatric diagnoses. Proper treatment of depression, bipolar disorder, and borderline personality disorder is essential. This can include selective serotonin uptake inhibitors, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, lithium, antipsychotics, especially olanzapine can be of benfit.

**Electroconvulsive Therapy**

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) has been used for decades to provide rapid treatment of unipolar or bipolar depression with severe SI, which has not responded to other treatments or when a delay is too risky. However, the mechanisms of ECT that are associated with improvements in depression and reduction of SI are poorly understood. A recent study supports the hypothesis that at least some benefit may be attributable to changes in the immune-moderated tryptophan-kynurenine pathway (KP). As discussed in the pathophysiology section of this paper, the KP metabolites are characterized as neuroprotective or neurotoxic. Analysis of serum blood levels of the neuroprotective metabolites showed increases in both the quantity and ratio of neuroprotective metabolites throughout ECT treatments. The authors concluded their study provides the first evidence that some of the positive effects of ECT on depression are related to changes in the supply and balance between the neuroprotective and neurotoxic metabolites of the KP.

**Ketamine for Suicidal Ideation**

For half a century, the pharmaceutic treatment of major depressive disorders (MDD) has been driven by the monoamine hypothesis of depression. This theory proposes that a deficiency of synaptic neurotransmitters (e.g., serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine) produces depressive symptoms, so replenishing the synaptic deficiency would alleviate the symptoms. However, this model does not explain the latency period before benefit is achieved from antidepressant medications nor the reason that approximately one-third of MDD patients do not have symptom reduction with meds. Advances in neuroimaging have enabled investigators to identify structural and functional changes associated with MDD and SI. More recent hypotheses offer explanations that help to explain the limitations of current antidepressants and provide a more comprehensive explanation of possible underlying mechanisms. The difference in mechanisms between acute and chronic stress responses is of central importance, as is the role of glutamatergic pathways. Glutamate is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain and essential in the regulation of emotion, cognition, and behavior. Exposure to acute stress triggers an increase in glutamate within the prefrontal cortex.  This leads to a brief elevation in the extracellular glutamate and sustained elevations in synaptic strength and activation of the NMDA receptors and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptors. The AMPA receptor activation increases the release of brain-derived neurotrophic factors (BDNF). However, in chronic stress responses, the opposite occurs. Neuronal hypertrophy in the nucleus accumbens and amygdala is associated with increased alarm responses while executive functioning becomes compromised. Prefrontal glutamate levels are decreased, synaptic strength is reduced, and NMDA and AMPA receptors are less activated, and extracellular glutamate remains elevated. This interferes with normal glutamate neurotransmission by reducing intracellular signaling in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. The decreased levels of neuroplastic and neurotrophic factors contribute to the morphological neuronal changes evident in MDD and suicide victims. The neuronal dendrites retract, branching in the prefrontal cortex diminishes, the spine density of neurons in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex is reduced, resulting in decreased synaptic strength and neurotransmission.

Ketamine was introduced in 1962 as a medication that provided dose-dependent analgesia, sedation, and anesthesia without suppressing respiratory function or producing hypotension. Despite these advantages, a serious limitation of ketamine was also evident - it produces psychoactive experiences, including depersonalization and hallucinations. Ketamine is an AMPA and NMDA receptor antagonist. Therefore it increases BDNF and promotes a rapid burst of glutamate after administration. This leads to an increase in synaptic strength and activation in the prefrontal cortex, promotes glutamate neurotransmission, and improves prefrontal synaptic connectivity. In 2010, a double-blind RCT of in-patients (n=33) with treatment-resistant MDD  showed rapid and robust treatment effects, with significant improvements evident within hours of administration of IV ketamine (0.5mg/Kg). All of the participants had extensive histories, with almost one-third having attempted suicide and 61% having endorsed SI. The participants had been ill for an average of 26 years, so the significant improvements in hopelessness, anxiety, and depression were clinically important.

Whether SI reductions were independent outcomes or secondary to improvements in mood was investigated in a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of individual participants' data (n=167) from 10 RCTs. All individuals had active or passive SI at baseline (measured on a validated scale) and were treated with a single dose of IV ketamine. Twenty-four hours after administration, there was a significant decrease in the severity of most participants' SI on both the clinician-administered (p<0.001) and self-reported outcome measures (p<0.001). Effect sizes were found to be moderate-to-large (Cohen’s d=0.51–0.85) at all time points. Sensitivity analysis showed ketamine was associated with significant benefits on the SI items on all scales (all p<0.001) but not on the Beck Depression Inventory (p=0.080). After controlling for the severity of the participants' depressive symptoms, ketamine’s beneficial effect on SI remained significant.

Ketamine consists of two mirror-image molecules referred to as enantiomers. In March 2019, one of the mirror image molecules, the s-enantiomer of ketamine, called esketamine (trade name Spravato), received fast-track and breakthrough treatment designation by the FDA who approved its use as a nasal spray for treatment-resistant MDD in adults. Side effects during esketamine trials included sedation, dissociation, hypoesthesia, vertigo, anxiety, nausea, drunk-like feelings, and hypertension. Ketamine has a high risk for abuse as a recreational drug, so esketamine is only available to certified providers within a monitored distribution system. The potential for adverse reactions to esketamine, including the possibility of a paradoxical increase in SI or CV-related complications, prompted the FDA to require a risk evaluation and mitigation strategy (REMS). Patients must continue taking another anti-depressant while using esketamine, and patients will be required to administer their dose at a certified medical office where their response will be observed for two hours after inhalation. Both the patient and provider must sign the patient enrollment form that outlines post-administration safety precautions and an acknowledgment regarding esketamine intended use and possible risks.

**Clozapine for Suicidal Ideation in Schizophrenia**

Clozapine, the first atypical antipsychotic, was approved by the FDA in 1972. Although it has life-threatening adverse reactions, including agranulocytosis, cardiac toxicity, and CNS alterations, anecdotal evidence suggested it reduced suicides in people treated for schizophrenia. This prompted a series of RCTs throughout the 1990s. Researchers concluded there were significant reductions in suicide rates when treated with clozapine compared to olanzapine or haloperidol. Based on these findings, in 2003, the FDA approved the use of clozapine as the first and only medication specifically labeled to treat suicidality (in schizophrenia). A meta-analysis based on six studies showed significant reductions in suicides (p<0.0001) and approximately a three-fold reduction in suicide-related behaviors.

**Other Interventions**

Few studies of SI treatments are longitudinal, and many have a high risk for bias. The majority of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of treatment interventions acknowledge this limitation. The following findings are from recent systematic reviews and meta-analyses of SI treatments.

Online and mobile telephone apps for the management of SI and self-harm:  Authors of a systematic review and a meta-analysis of 14 studies, all randomized controlled trials (RCTs), quasi-experimental and pre/post observational studies (n>3300 individuals), noted all study designs that had one or more aspects that introduced the risk for performance and detection bias. They concluded that digital apps for SI and self-harm might be more effective than waitlist but also stated it is "unclear whether these reductions would be clinically meaningful at present."

Dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT) for SI and suicidal behaviors: Authors of a meta-analysis concluded that dialectical therapy reduced suicidal behaviors but did not significantly reduce SI (d = -.229, 95% CI = -.473 to .016). They suggested this could be because DBT is aimed at focusing on behavior changes more so than thoughts.

School-based prevention programs for youth: An expedited knowledge synthesis of studies (n=7) which were RCTs or controlled cohort studies (CCSs), was done to facilitate evidence-informed decision-making. No changes in suicide death rates occurred, but improvements in there were reductions in SI and attempts reported.

Interventions for older adults: A systematic review of research studies (n=21) included a variety of programs, mostly aimed at depression, including telephone counseling, community-based education programs, gatekeeper training, and group activities. The researchers concluded the quality of the studies was low. Several RCTs were of higher quality and suggest multi-faceted primary-care-based depression screening and management with pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy may be effective at reducing SI, but more research is needed to verify this.