The mean age at presentation was 8.8 years (range 0.25 to 46 years) in a large study of 51 eyes of 44 patients—most patients present with either vision loss, strabismus, or leukocoria. Unilaterality is seen in around 85% of cases, while bilateral findings are seen in 15%. Gender predisposition is not seen. Family history is usually not present, though familial cases of CODA have been reported.

Fundus evaluation reveals an enlarged disc situated centrally within an excavated area.

The retinal blood vessels arise from the peripheral disc and course radially towards the retinal periphery. They are abnormally straight and branch at acute angles. It is often difficult to differentiate an artery from a vein. Vascular sheathing may be present. The macula may be incorporated in the funnel-shaped excavated area, a finding known as "macular capture." Persistent hyaloid remnants may be found in the fellow or the affected eye.

Retinal detachment may be present. It may be found in 38% of cases.

In other cases, there may be a communication between the subretinal space and the subarachnoid space allowing the cerebrospinal fluid in the optic nerve to reach the subretinal space and cause a retinal detachment. In one such case of MGS with retinal detachment, metrizamide was injected intrathecally. It was radiographically found to move into the subretinal space. Reattachment happened after optic nerve sheath fenestration, thus confirming the existence of this connection.

Irvine and associates were able to reattach the retina through optic nerve sheath fenestration. They also observed the gas bubbling out of the optic nerve sheath defect when injected into the vitreous. They suggested the possibility of continuity between the subretinal space and perineural space.

In another histopathological study, Manschot described clear fluid leaking from a hole in the optic nerve during sectioning.

The fellow eye can have Mittendorf's dot, cataract, microphthalmos, and retinal detachment. Close monitoring of the fellow eye is important as retinal complications may occur when a disc or retinochoroidal coloboma is present.