**Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies**

In a patient with spinal stenosis, sensory nerve conduction studies and amplitudes are usually normal because the sensory fibers travel through the dorsal root ganglion, which is outside the spinal canal.

**Motor Nerve Conduction Studies**

In a patient with spinal stenosis, motor nerve conduction studies and amplitudes are usually normal. Distal latencies should also be normal as the distal aspect of the nerve is not disturbed. However, if the disease has progressed to the point where axonal damage has occurred, you will see a decrease in amplitude of the CMAP on nerve conduction studies.

**Late Responses**

If the S1 nerve root is affected, one may find the H-reflexes to be prolonged or absent bilaterally. The F-reflex is routinely not performed in a spinal stenosis study as it does not provide specific information

**EMG**

For the needle EMG portion of the exam, it is essential to test multiple paraspinal levels bilaterally and multiple myotomes in both extremities. In spinal stenosis, often, there are findings of bilateral multilevel nerve root involvement. If there is a significant narrowing of the vertebral canal in the acute setting, you may find fibrillations and positive sharp waves at different levels bilaterally. If there is significant narrowing of the vertebral canal in the chronic setting, you may find large-amplitude, polyphasic, increased duration motor unit action potentials at different levels bilaterally.

**Electrophysiological Recordings**

Electrophysiological recordings provide supplementary information to the neurological examination to help increase your suspicion of spinal stenosis. Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) measure the speed of electrical conduction across the spinal cord. When the spinal cord has experienced considerably impinged, the electrical signals will travel slower than usual. Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) can help confirm neurogenic claudication due to cauda equina involvement.