Like many inhaled anesthetics, enflurane has associated adverse effects. Amongst the effects are hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and neurotoxicity.

Hepatotoxicity. Enflurane has shown minor elevations in serum aminotransferase levels (5- to 50-fold) 1 to 2 weeks after surgery and anesthesia. Furthermore, jaundice has been reported 2 to 21 days following surgery.

Nephrotoxicity. Nephrotoxicity from enflurane use is associated with high doses of the drug. This anesthetic can cause significant renal structure damage and transient renal functional impairment. However, there is a greater potential for toxicity when there is already renal impairment. The mechanism of injury appears to be due to increased concentration from an enflurane metabolite, inorganic fluoride. Approximately 2.4% are fluorinated urinary metabolites, of which 0.5% as fluorine inorganic and 1.9% as organic fluorine. Along with decreased ability to eliminate inorganic fluoride, there is an increased urine flow rate and more significant damage in the proximal convoluted tubule cells.

Neurotoxicity. Currently, no anesthetic is contraindicated for pregnancy due to neurotoxicity. However, there is very limited research on the effects of volatile anesthetics on developing brains. Exposure to volatile anesthetic theoretically causes acute neurotoxicity and later defects in learning and memory during the postnatal period.

Early studies have shown potential neurotoxicity via N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonism and potentiation of GABA signal transduction.