Knowledge of anatomic variability of the aorta and its branches is important in medicine, particularly in the surgical and radiologic fields. The clinician should be able to recognize the various physiological variants of the aorta on imaging and correlate with clinical findings to guide management. Anomalies are often visible on computed tomography (CT), including CT angiography, but magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is widely considered the preferred standard for imaging of the aortic arch and its arterial branching pattern.

**Dextrocardia**

Dextrocardia refers to the occurrence of a right-sided cardiac apex. Dextrocardia of embryonic arrest is an isolated form in which the heart is simply placed further to the right than is normal. This form is often associated with severe heart defects.

**Bovine Aortic Arch**

A bovine arch is the most common physiologic variant of the aortic arch. It occurs when the brachiocephalic artery shares a common origin with the left common carotid artery. It is a misnomer as this branching pattern is found in many animals such as canines, felines, and Macaque monkeys, but differs from the true branching pattern of bovine.

**Aberrant Right Subclavian Artery**

Also known as arteria lusoria, this branching pattern occurs when the right subclavian artery arises distal to the left subclavian artery (rather than arising from the brachiocephalic artery) and hooks back to reach the right side. It can be associated with trisomy 21 as well as other chromosomal abnormalities.

**Innominate Artery Compression Syndrome**

Innominate artery compression syndrome occurs when the brachiocephalic trunk (innominate artery) is located further to the left than normal in a location that is directly anterior to the trachea, thus causing compression. Compression can be seen on tracheography, CT, or MRI. There is a tendency for the origin of the brachiocephalic trunk to become more rightward with age, thus leading to the resolution of symptoms in many cases. Symptomatic patients are treated with aortopexy or reimplantation of the innominate artery.

**Right Arch Mirror Image**

This variant occurs when the aortic arch travels posterior and rightward rather than posterior and leftward. The arch passes over the right main-stem bronchus rather than the left. Although asymptomatic, the majority of patients have associated congenital heart disease.

**Double Aortic Arch**

A double aortic arch (DAA) accounts for up to 45% to 65% of patients undergoing repair of a vascular ring. Many subtypes exist, but all types commonly result in compression due to the splitting of the ascending aorta into 2 vessels that pass on either side of the trachea and esophagus. The 2 vessels then join to form a single descending aorta. See Image 1.