As the GnRH is a peptide hormone, its receptors are located in the cell membrane.

The GnRH receptor (GnRHR), is part of a receptor superfamily of rhodopsin-like G protein-coupled receptors. These receptors have a hydrophilic extracellular domain, intracellular domain, and finally, a hydrophilic transmembrane domain.  This transmembrane domain spans the cell member a total of seven times.  These receptors, once bond to the hormone, undergo conformational changes that activate an intracellular signal cascade, and through several phosphorylation events, eventually leads to transcriptions modulation of genes within the target cell. Activation of these receptors induces the formation of receptor clusters that become internalized into the cell, where they are then shuttled back to the surface of the cell or degraded in lysosomes. The relatively short intracellular carboxy-terminal tail of the GnRH Receptor makes it differ from other G-protein coupled receptors. This tail slows the internalization of the receptor and prevents rapid desensitization. GnRH receptors are Gq-protein coupled. This process occurs in the following steps.

GnRH or GnRH agonist binds to GnRH receptors located at pituitary cells.

- It results in phosphorylation of GDP and formation of GTP, GTP binds to the alpha subunit of Gq protein, and the alpha subunit along with bound GTP gets detached from G protein and attaches itself to phospholipase C.

- Phospholipase C breaks down PIP (Phosphoinositol diphosphate) into IP (inositol triphosphate) and DAG (Diacyl Glycerol).

- DAG causes further activation of Protein kinase C.

- Protein kinase C causes phosphorylation of intracellular proteins.

- Inositol triphosphate binds to receptors on the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and causes the release of calcium into the cytoplasm.

- The proteins phosphorylated by Protein kinase C, serve as the intracellular signaling pathway for mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) pathway, including ERK, JNK, and p38 MAPK.

- Calcium released into cytosol binds to calmodulin, causing further phosphorylation of proteins via activation of another set of protein kinases, performing functions of intracellular transport, enhancement of cell metabolism, and exocytosis of vesicles storing hormones.

Another point worth remembering is that although most GnRH receptors are Gq-protein coupled, few of them are also Gs protein-coupled. This Gs/cAMP pathway is involved in the initial response of pituitary gonadotroph to GnRH or GnRH analogs and further regulation of synthesis and secretion of pituitary gonadotroph.

**Differential regulation of LH and FSH:**

Although GnRH acts on pituitary cells to enhance gonadotropes release, its action is not equal to both FSH and LH. The frequency of GnRH pulses selectively upregulates gonadotrope gene transcription. Rapid pulses promote LH formation and secretion, while slow pulses promote FSH formation and secretion. Researchers have observed that even blockade of GnRH agonist by giving GnRH antisera also has a differential effect on FSH and LH, resulting in the absence of LH pulses in 24 hours while FSH levels remain detectable for a longer period.