Two general categories of pathologic derangement exist wherein management of CPP is vital: intracranial pathology, where ICP management is most important; and hemodynamic instability/shock, where MAP management is most important.

Intracranial pathology includes space-occupying lesions such as tumors, epidural and subdural hematoma or acute intraparenchymal hemorrhage, and cerebral edema as seen after ischemic injury, traumatic brain injury, or severe hepatic encephalopathy. In these cases, adequate CPP is dependent on lowering the ICP back to a reasonably normal range as quickly as possible while maintaining an adequate MAP. While CPP has a range of normal, it is important to remember that each patient’s brain tissue has a CPP that is “normal” in the context of that individual patient’s physiology, which may be influenced by other medical problems such as hypertension or vascular disease. There is a push towards more dynamic management of CPP using the patient’s own auto-regulatory capacity.

For example, in the setting of substantial traumatic brain injury, significant cerebral edema can decrease intracranial compliance and overcome initial CSF shunting measures, producing an elevated ICP (intracranial hypertension). Auto-regulatory mechanisms may or may not function normally, and if ICP remains elevated, CPP will decrease, causing further injury through an ischemic mechanism. In this case, in addition to initiating ICP lowering measures, it is important to avoid hypotension (MAP – ICP = CPP), and in some cases, allowing hypertension is reasonable.

In cases of hemodynamic instability, the ICP is relatively stable as cerebral autoregulation is intact. In the setting of hypotension, the MAP decreases due to blood loss (hemorrhagic shock), intravascular leak (distributive shock), or decreased cardiac output (cardiogenic shock), and the CPP decreases as well. The relationship between MAP and CPP drives resuscitation guidelines to recommend maintaining a MAP greater than or equal to 65 mm Hg. Assuming a normal ICP, this threshold should guarantee a CPP of 55 to 60, the minimum needed to prevent cerebral ischemic injury. As in the case of ICP and cerebral auto-regulation, MAP goals should be within the context of an individual patient’s baseline hemodynamic function. Patients with untreated hypertension should have higher MAP goals to maintain appropriate CBF and CPP.