After exposure to antigen, an individual's immune system responds by creating antibodies after 4-10 days. The antibody reacts with the antigen, forming immune complexes that circulate and can diffuse into the vascular walls, where they may initiate fixation and activation of complement. These immune complexes, along with complement, produce an influx of polymorphonuclear leukocytes into the site, where tissue damage takes place by the release of proteolytic enzymes.

**1: Immune complex formation:**Endogenous or exogenous antigen exposure triggers an antibody formation. Exogenous antigens are foreign proteins such as infectious microbes or pharmaceutical products. Endogenous antigens are self-antigens against which autoantibodies are generated (autoimmunity). In both cases, the antigens bind to antibodies, forming circulating immune complexes, later migrating out of plasma and depositing in host tissues.

**2:****Immune complex deposition:**The pathogenicity of immune complexes is partly dependent on the antigen-antibody ratio. When the antibody is in excess, the complexes are insoluble, do not circulate, and are phagocytosed by macrophages in the lymph nodes and spleen. However,****when the antigen is in excess, the aggregates are smaller. They freely filter****out of circulation in organs where the blood is transformed into fluids such as urine and synovial fluid. Therefore, immune complexes affect glomeruli and joints.

**3:****Inflammatory reaction:**After the deposition of the immune complexes, the final step is activating the classical pathway, leading to the release of C3a and C5a, which then recruit macrophages and neutrophils and causes inflammatory damage to tissues. Depending on the site, symptoms of vasculitis (blood vessels), arthritis (joints), or glomerulonephritis (glomeruli) develop.