Pre-operatively, early recognition or suspicion of open globe trauma and placement of a rigid shield is an easy step to perform if an ophthalmic exam is delayed. At the same time, the patient is being treated for other trauma. In addition, managing the patient's pain and nausea can prevent unnecessary movement and intraocular and intraorbital pressure.

Intra-operatively, direct communication with the anesthesia provider on when an extraocular muscle will be manipulated can alert the anesthesia provider to medicate if an oculocardiac reflex is observed.

Post-operative education on avoiding strenuous activity, heavy lifting, or bending during the early postoperative period is imperative, as well as other sinus precautions, including no nose blowing or drinking through a straw or suction (if there is an orbital fracture). These are typically iterated by the operating surgeons and post-operative nursing team.

Post-globe repair management includes the installation of topical antibiotics and steroid eye drops. The steroid eye drop is continued until ocular inflammation is resolved and then tapered. Prolonged steroid tapers can result in elevated intraocular pressures. Often the elevation in intraocular pressure is transient and can be managed with eye drops. In cases with persistently elevated pressures or eyes refractory to conventional pressure-lowering drop therapy, the patient may need to be referred to a glaucoma specialist for surgical management.

Often an oral antibiotic is continued for a week after surgery. The antibiotic used is generally a fourth-generation fluoroquinolone. The patient should be counseled on side effects such as prolonged ventricular depolarization (QTc prolongation) and muscle tendonitis. The appropriate dose, agent, and concomitant drug interactions are monitored by a pharmacist. The use of antibiotics after orbital surgery is variable. Clear communication and consolidation of the plan for antibiotics among the ophthalmologist and orbital surgeons (if part of a different department, such as otolaryngology or oral and maxillofacial surgery), nursing staff, patient, and primary trauma team can eliminate confusion.