Patients complain of sudden monocular vision loss that can last between 2 to 30 minutes. The vision loss can involve the entire visual field or can be partial. Patients often describe it as a "curtain coming down” in front of their eye or as a generalized darkening or shadow. These episodes spontaneously resolve. Patients can experience 1 or multiple episodes. In anyone over the age of 60 experiencing multiple episodes, giant cell arteritis should be suspected, and further investigations should be undertaken.

Some patients can present with signs of intraretinal emboli, such as cholesterol plaques (Hollenhorst plaques). Depending on the extent of the resulting retinal ischemia, central retinal artery occlusion or branch retinal artery occlusion can develop.

In some patients, particularly those with the ocular ischemic syndrome, exposure to bright lights can provoke the episodes, as the ipsilateral severe internal carotid occlusion causes hypoperfusion of the retinal circulation and the resulting vascular insufficiency of the retinal photoreceptors combined with increased metabolic demand leads to blurred or decreased vision in those patients. Vision usually returns to normal once the photoreceptors have completely hyperpolarized.

Patients with ocular ischemic syndrome typically present with blurred vision that can be transient. The visual acuity declines with the progression of the disease. The affected eye shows episcleral injection and, on slit-lamp examination, minimal anterior chamber inflammation is present. Intraocular pressure can be low or normal due to the decreased perfusion of the ciliary body which is responsible for aqueous production. The fundus examination usually demonstrates dilated and tortuous retinal veins with narrowed arterioles accompanied by mid-peripheral dot-and-blot retinal hemorrhages. With persistent hypoperfusion, ischemia progresses and manifests as neovascularization of the iris, anterior chamber angle, retina, and optic disc. Ocular pain is a hallmark of the disease and is usually alleviated in the supine position. The latter is a result of ischemia of the ocular and orbital branches of the trigeminal nerve.