Treatment depends on the type of vasculitis. If an offending antigen is recognized, e.g., hepatitis infection, it should be treated appropriately along with the treatment regimen of vasculitis. Treatment regimens center upon the specific diagnosis and the severity or extent of the disease. The approach to treatment for any vasculitis generally includes three components: remission induction, remission maintenance, and monitoring.

Glucocorticoids are the first-line treatment for patients with vasculitis used with or without immunosuppressive agents. The type of vasculitis guides the choice of immunosuppressive agents. Methotrexate (MTX), azathioprine (AZA), mycophenolate (MMF), cyclophosphamide (CYC), rituximab (RTX), intravenous immunoglobulin, plasma exchange, etc., have all been used in various treatment regimens in different forms of vasculitis.

In this article, we will discuss the treatment and management of GCA, GPA, and MPA briefly.

Initial treatment for GCA includes steroids, starting at doses of 40 to 60 mg a day, as single or divided doses. Glucocorticoid treatment should be initiated without delay in patients with a strong suspicion for GCA. Intravenous pulse steroids are an option in patients with recent vision loss. After remission, steroids should be slowly tapered off. Methotrexate and azathioprine can serve as steroid-sparing agents. Tocilizumab has been approved recently for treatment of GCA

Patients with AAV have poor survival rates without treatment, with 81% mortality after one year of diagnosis. Current treatment regimens aim to induce remission and then maintain remission. Depending on disease severity, with organ- and life-threatening manifestations warranting the most aggressive therapy, treatments are tailored for various types of AAV. EULAR/ERA-EDTA published guidelines for the management of AAV in 2016, and patients with the non-organ threatening disease can start on a regimen of methotrexate or mycophenolate mofetil in combination with glucocorticoid. Patients with life-threatening disease should start on a regimen of cyclophosphamide or rituximab with glucocorticoids. Plasma exchange can be a consideration in patients with progressive renal failure or pulmonary hemorrhage. For maintenance therapy, regimens of azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, or rituximab with a tapering course of steroids have demonstrated efficacy.