The term ‘dactylitis’ indicates inflammation of a digit and is attributed to inflammatory infectious or non-infectious causes as well as certain contagious agents.

This inflammatory process may affect only the bone (as in sickle cell dactylitis, syphilitic dactylitis), the bone, soft tissues, and skin (as in tuberculous dactylitis, sarcoid dactylitis), or only the skin as in BDD.

BDD presents as a single, or sometimes multiple, oval-shaped tense bullae containing seropurulent fluid on an erythematous base over the palmar aspect of the finger which may extend dorsally to involve lateral nail folds. The lesions usually range in size from 10 mm to 30 mm. Darkening of the skin may be noticed a few days before the actual onset of the blisters. The bull progresses to form bullae with central erosions or simple erosion with adherent layers of skin. Some reports have shown that the infection may also affect the toes. Even more rarely, lesions might affect the palmar or dorsal hand and feet.

******Differential diagnosis**

- Herpetic whitlow: HSV infection can resemble BDD with grouped vesicular lesions. A Tzanck smear from the vesicle shows viral cytopathic effects. PCR for HSV as well as antibodies to HSV-1 and HSV-2 can be sent for confirmation in suspected cases. It has been suggested that blistering distal dactylitis and herpetic whitlow could coexist at the distal phalanx. One hypothesis for this is an autoinoculation due to thumb sucking in children, and also when infants are exposed when their fingers tend to explore the mouth of infected adults. Clinical response to antibiotics makes herpetic whitlow unlikely and can be used to differentiate from BDD.

- Friction blisters including those due to thumb sucking (and in the case of toes, secondary to friction due to new shoes)

- Thermal and chemical burns

- Insect bites

- Contact dermatitis and pompholyx

A detailed history of thumb sucking, insect bites, or contact with chemicals or heat gives clues to differentiate these conditions from BDD.

- Bullous impetigo: The vesicles are more superficial although the etiology is same as BDD. A bacterial culture more commonly grows Staphylococcus than Streptococcus.

- Blistering disorders like Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS), localized bullous pemphigoid (BP)-EBS occurs commonly over the exposed trauma-prone sites; histopathology including direct immunofluorescence can confirm BP. Other tools like antigen mapping also help in diagnosis.

- Acute paronychia

**Course and Prognosis**

BDD usually resolves rapidly with the appropriate antibiotics and local dressing without any complications or sequelae. There is a report of digital amputation post BDD which emphasizes the need to treat infections aggressively, especially in HIV positive individuals.