Despite the number of studies performed, there is still debate on the appropriate treatment for superficial thrombophlebitis.

Multiple strategies have been proposed to control symptoms and decrease the extension of thrombosis and risk for PE in low-risk superficial thrombophlebitis.

Those who are at higher risk include patients with an SVT in the lower extremity that is at least 5 cm in length; SVT proximal to the knee, especially within 10 cm of the saphenofemoral junction; the presence of severe symptoms; greater saphenous vein involvement; previous SVT/venous thromboembolic disease; active malignancy; or recent surgery.

This Cochrane review also evaluated topical and surgical treatments but noted that the data is too limited regarding these treatments and their effects on venous thromboembolic disease, so further studies are recommended at this time.

In those patients who develop superficial thrombophlebitis from an infusion, multiple agents have been evaluated for treatment. Per the 2015 Cochrane review of this topic, there is no consensus recommendation on the safety, dose required, or therapy duration for topical treatments, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, or systemic anticoagulation.

Practices in the United Kingdom suggest using compression stockings with or without additional therapies, but there is no current recommendation for or against their use in the United States of America.

Antibiotics are useful only with clear infection.

For Trousseau syndrome, the main priority is to eliminate the underlying malignancy. However, as this is commonly a challenge, heparin is the recommended treatment given that multiple pathways contribute to the development of the thrombus. Low molecular weight heparins have been used, but some have been less effective than heparin; therefore, further studies are recommended. Fondaparinux has also been evaluated but found to be less efficacious than heparin, and the utility of this agent also requires further study.

Mondor disease, discussed separately, is usually self-limited and benign and will resolve in four to eight weeks. However, if it is due to vasculitis, malignancy, or a hypercoagulable state, treatment is aimed at the underlying cause.