Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) is a complicated surgical procedure requiring precision to detail and care in the pre-operative period, intra-operative period, and post-operative period. Furthermore, It is physically strenuous and a life-changing event for most patients. Therefore, it is imperative to have systems in place to ensure the completion of all aspects surrounding the pre-operative management, intra-operative care, and post-operative care including cardiac rehabilitation. Beginning with the pre-operative care, in addition to covering all of the risks and benefits of the procedure with the patient and assessing understanding, screening must be done to ensure the patient meets the requirements for CABG. Just as in any other surgical procedure, proper sterile technique is fundamental to the outcome. Intra-operative care should be attending to by a trained cardiothoracic surgeon (CTS) as well a board-certified anesthesiologist or nurse anesthetist whose job is to monitor the patient's intraoperative hemodynamics closely. In the postoperative period, which might very well be the most crucial period according to many CTS, the patient should be monitored regularly for post-operative complications by a specialty trained peri-operative nurse. Recovery should take about 6 weeks at home following by cardiac rehabilitation and strength training. With all the details surrounding CABG, it is now recommended to have an interprofessional care team approach including a primary care physician, cardiac rehabilitation specialist, a cardiac nurse, perioperative nurse, and cardiac pharmacist to enhance patient-centered care and optimize procedural success. Studies have shown that the proper care coordination among health professionals and access to post-operative services does improve surgical outcomes. [level1]