Symptoms are abundant, many of which overlap; therefore, it is particularly essential to assess the chronology of symptoms to distinguish between other peroxisomal biogenesis disorders and between CRD and IRD. The clinical findings, correlated along with a series of biochemical tests and genetic profiles, are the mainstay of accurate diagnosis.

**Classic/adult Refsum Disease**

- Usually presents in late childhood or adolescence, although onset maybe later.

- Ocular: Typically, symptoms usually initiate with progressive deterioration of night vision due to retinitis pigmentosa. Electroretinography is used in children, which helps to obtain the diagnosis in the early stages.

-  Reduced visual fields, miosis, and cataracts. Typically, patients experience night blindness years before the progressive changes of constricted visual fields and decreased central visual acuity.

- Anosmia: Loss of the sense of smell. If a patient reports loss of taste, consider that as a pertinent symptom.

- After 10–15 years, other associated symptoms entail including progressive sensorineural deafness, peripheral polyneuropathy (also known as hereditary sensory-motor neuropathy type IV) with raised cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), proteinuria and ataxia.

- Neural: Characterized by mixed asymmetric polyneuropathy and involves motor and sensory nerves. As a result, the distal lower limbs have muscular atrophy and weakness, which progressively can become widespread, disabling not only the limbs but the trunk as well.

- It may not be clinically evident initially, and symptoms often wax and wane.
- Deep sensation, vibration, and proprioception in the legs are usually affected.
- Hearing loss: Sensorineural hearing loss due to auditory nerve involvement affecting both ears is common. It can be assessed with a brainstem auditory evoked response test.
- Cerebellar ataxia: Presents as a late manifestation with an unsteady gait.

- Atypical:

- Ichthyosis (scaly skin)
- Kidney malfunction directly related to the plasma level of phytanic acid.
- Cardiac arrhythmias directly related to the plasma level of phytanic acid.
- Bilateral shortening of metacarpals or metatarsals is seen in around 30% of patients.
- Psychiatric disturbances can occur in a small proportion of patients.

**Infantile Refsum Disease**

- It can present as early as the sixth month of infancy when the child displays symptoms of severe developmental delay.

- Visual impairment due to tapeto-retinal degeneration.

- Neurologic manifestations

- Hypotonia
- Cerebellar ataxia and gait
- Peripheral neuropathy
- Severe mental retardation
- Sensorineural deafness
- Anosmia
- Neurologic deterioration is slower than in Zellweger's syndrome or neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy. Patients can walk but might have ataxia. Many patients survive until adolescence.

- Craniofacial dysmorphism

- Some lesser observed findings are:

- Hepatomegaly with cirrhosis
- Sporadic bleeding events
- Gastrointestinal manifestations including vomiting, diarrhea, and malabsorption

- It is potentially fatal.

- Some patients might have a less severe phenotype, where they can survive until adulthood. This phenotype is commonly associated with the G843D mutation.