Dialysis involves the removal of solutes across a semipermeable membrane down the concentration gradient by two mechanisms:

- Diffusive clearance due to random molecular motion. Small molecules have a higher rate of diffusive transport through the membrane

- A convective clearance occurs when the osmotic force of the water pushes solutes along with it through the membrane (solvent drag)

Dialysate consists of highly purified water with sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium, bicarbonate, chloride, and dextrose. It lacks low-molecular-weight waste products present in uremic blood. When a semipermeable membrane separates uremic blood and dialysate, the flux rate of waste solutes from blood to dialysate exceeds the back-flux from the dialysate to blood. Eventually, the concentrations of permeable waste products in the dialysate and the blood become equal with no further net removal of the waste products.

During dialysis, a concentration equilibrium is prevented from forming, and the gradient is maintained by continuously refilling fresh dialysis solution in the dialyzer and replacing dialyzed with undialyzed blood. “Countercurrent” flow maximizes the concentration difference of waste products between blood and dialysate. The diffusion rate of a solute depends on the magnitude of the concentration gradient, the mass transfer coefficient of the membrane, and the membrane surface area. The transfer coefficient depends on membrane thickness, solute size, and flow conditions on both sides of the membrane.

The Kt/V urea was a parameter introduced by Gotch and Sargent through their National Cooperative Dialysis Study (1985). It was noted that a Kt/V of less than 0.8 was associated with higher morbidity or treatment failure as opposed to a Kt/V of more than 1.0, which produced a good outcome. It is a dimensionless ratio obtained by dividing the amount of plasma cleared of urea (Kt) by the distribution volume of urea (V). The urea-free plasma volume is a product of K, which is blood urea clearance, and t, which is the dialysis session length. A Kt/V of 1.0 implies that the total blood volume cleared during a session equals the urea distribution volume.

Dialysis may be intermittent or continuous. Continuous intravascular procedures are preferable in those who are hemodynamically unstable or have significant volume overload.