**Classic/adult Refsum disease**

- CRD is associated with the accumulation of phytanic acid in plasma and tissues, which is an unusual branched-chain fatty acid (3,7,11,15-tetramethyl-hexadecanoic acid), derived from the chlorophyll and is present in the typical human diet (strictly exogenous source) consisting of dairy products, meats, and ruminant fats.

- Because of the presence of a 3-methyl group, phytanic acid cannot be degraded by beta-oxidation. Phytanic acid will have alpha-oxidation, which shortens phytanic acid by one carbon atom yielding pristanic acid and carbon dioxide. In this process, phytanic acid must first get activated to its coenzyme-A ester-phytanoyl-CoA, and later converted to 2-hydroxy-phytanoyl-CoA by PAHX.

- Jansen et al. reported that PAHX activity was undetectable in the liver tissue of a Refsum disease patient. Hence, they concluded that Refsum disease is a true peroxisomal disorder type, unlike other variants.

- Phytanic acid accumulates in adipose tissue, myelin sheaths, kidneys, and liver. It induces damage to the structural integrity of cells and tissues by interfering with covalent bonds, which leads to a wide array of symptoms.

**Infantile Refsum disease**

- IRD differs from CRD in the pathophysiology. CRD is mainly due to PAHX deficiency, and phytanic acid accumulation while IRD can have multiple enzyme deficiencies of PEX-class leading to the accumulation of many substrates at once, primarily VLCFA, di- and tri-hydroxycholestanoic acid, pipecolic acid, and phytanic acid with reduced plasmalogen levels in neural tissues and erythrocytes.

- Phytanic acid levels can normalize with age.

- It is believed that elevated levels of phytanic acid and perhaps the other lipophilic intermediates intercalate into and disrupt retinal cell membranes leading to manifestations of this dystrophy.

- Due to deficient beta-oxidation of VLCFA and alpha oxidation of phytanic acid and reduced plasmalogen synthesis, many similar symptoms as in CRD are observed.

In both presentations, due to high phytanic acid levels that interfere with vitamin A esterification occurring in the retinal pigment epithelium, progressive visual failure occurs that helps to obtain an early diagnosis.