SIDS is a diagnosis of exclusion requiring a thorough investigation, including the review of the clinical history, death scene investigation, and a complete autopsy. Recommendations include detailed interviews with caregivers, a review of medical records, reports of the death scene observations, and a complete autopsy within 24 hours of death. Existing internationally standardized protocols for autopsy and national guidelines for the death scene investigation are effective tools to assist with the completion of the investigation. The CDC has established SUID monitoring programs in 22 states and jurisdiction, but no national protocol is available in the United States as state laws govern medicolegal death investigation.

**Clinical History**

Culturally sensitive professionals may engage in interviews with caretakers, using non-accusatory, open-ended questions that probe the presence of risk factors such as the infant sleeping position, co-sleeping, and medical (and prenatal) history.

**Autopsy**

An autopsy may identify congenital abnormalities, injuries, infection, or metabolic defects. Autopsy identifies the cause of death in only 15% of suspected SIDS deaths.

**Metabolic Screening**

Recommended metabolic labs include plasma acylcarnitine profile, quantitative plasma carnitine levels, quantitative plasma amino acid analysis, qualitative urine organic acid analysis, and plasma lactate and pyruvate. Collect plasma pyruvate in a specimen container with perchlorate.

**Death Scene Investigation**

First responders should be trained to make visual observations of the environment upon arrival at the scene before beginning to resuscitate the patient. It is important to note: the temperature of the room, the first temperature of the infant, type of ventilation or heating system operating in the home, the location of the infant, the condition and quality of the bed/crib, amount and location of the infant's clothing, the presence or absence of bedding or soft objects in the sleeping environment, the presence or absence of marks on the infant's body, and the reactions of the caretakers.