An organized and systematic evaluation should be performed when evaluating a patient for concerns of orbital cellulitis. Though a history of constitutional symptoms and vital signs should heighten clinical suspicion, nothing replaces a thorough physical exam.

Blood work such as a complete blood count (CBC) may show leukocytosis with a neutrophil predominance, though this is not needed for diagnosis. Some reports suggest obtaining blood cultures to assess for possible underlying bacteremia, but there has been a very low yield of less than 20% in most reports. The most definitive test to identify the causative agent is a surgical aspiration of a subperiosteal or orbital abscess if surgery is necessary. However routine aspiration or biopsy is not recommended and not needed to start treatment.

Imaging is another potentially useful, yet somewhat controversial topic. Some studies advocate for the routine use of computed tomography (CT) in the initial evaluation of patients with clinically confirmed or suspected orbital cellulitis to evaluate the orbital and paranasal sinus contents better. Of specific importance is the potential recognition of subperiosteal abscess formation which may show the need for possible surgical intervention.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is another good option for radiological evaluation with limiting radiation exposure of CT; this is especially true in pediatric patients. Though MRI does provide better resolution of the orbital tissues, it may be more suitable for the adult population given the length of study may require sedation and coordination with anesthesia for proper study in children.

Ophthalmology evaluation should never be underestimated in a patient with orbital cellulitis and consultation should be part of the initial evaluation. A proper comprehensive ophthalmologic assessment including visual function, testing afferent pupillary defect, and ophthalmoscopy to assess optic nerve edema and venous tortuosity should be performed, especially in patients with severe eyelid swelling and edema.