The natural history and examination findings in SMA are dependent on phenotypic variation and are classified clinically into SMA ‘types’.

- Type 0 (aka type 1a, congenital SMA)- Present in the neonatal period with hypotonia, early respiratory failure, severe weakness, and typically decreased fetal movements with associated arthrogryposis. Death usually occurs at birth or within the first month of life; this is a rare phenotype.

- Type I (aka Werdnig-Hoffman disease, ‘non-sitters,’ severe SMA) - Present in the first six months of life with limited head control, hypotonia and areflexia. Type I is defined as ‘non-sitters’ with a frog-like posture when supine. The weakness of intercostal muscles and preserved diaphragmatic function leads to a paradoxical breathing pattern and a bell-shaped chest. Swallowing difficulties are a typical feature with tongue fasciculations and associated complications such as failure to thrive and aspiration. Other cranial nerves are not normally affected at presentation, but facial nerve weakness typically develops later in the course of the disease. Notably, cognition is not affected, and patients are often described as alert and bright when diagnosed. Without ventilatory support, most succumb to the disease before two years of age. Type I is sometimes further divided into IA (or type 0, see above), IB: onset <3 months, IC: onset 3-6 months.

- Type II (aka Dubowitz disease, ‘sitters,’ intermediate SMA) - Presents at 6 to 18 months old; able to sit but with hypotonia, areflexia, a progressive proximal weakness that disproportionately affects the legs over arms. Progressive scoliosis and intercostal muscle weakness result in restrictive lung disease. Other notable characteristics are polyminimyoclonus of the hands, ankylosis of the mandible, and joint contractures. Around 70% of patients will survive until 25, with some surviving into the third decade; respiratory compromise is the major cause of mortality.

- Type III (aka Kugelberg-Welander disease, ‘walkers,’ mild SMA) - Presents after 18 months similarly to type II with progressive proximal weakness disproportionately affecting legs over arms, however, patients are ambulatory but can require a wheelchair as the disease progresses. Patients do not typically suffer from restrictive lung disease, and life expectancy is not affected. Type III sometimes further subdivides into IIIA: presents 18 months-3 years and IIIB: presents >3 years.

- Type IV (aka adult SMA) - Patients present in adulthood (>21 years old) and is the mildest phenotype of SMA. Patients are ambulatory and present with mild leg weakness and develop progressive proximal weakness. Life expectancy is not typically affected.