In most cases, treatment focus should be on the correction of dehydration and electrolyte disturbances. Supportive care is necessary for acute diarrhea and dehydration symptoms. Antipyretic therapy may also be provided if needed. Uncomplicated NTS localized to gastroenteritis without sepsis symptoms is not treated with antibiotics except patients less than 3 months of age and patients with immunocompromised states. Once NTS gastroenteritis is identified, blood cultures should be obtained. In the setting of NTS bacteremia or disseminated disease, initial therapy should be with third-generation cephalosporins like ceftriaxone for at least 7 to 10 days. Once bacterial susceptibilities are known, antibiotic treatment can be transitioned to azithromycin or a fluoroquinolone. Duration of treatment may be extended in certain focal infections such as meningitis (4 weeks) or osteomyelitis (4 to 6 weeks).

For enteric fever, the antibiotic treatment of choice is a fluoroquinolone. However, multidrug-resistant enteric fever is becoming more common globally, leading to a greater focus on susceptibility testing and the use of alternative antibiotics such as third-generation cephalosporins and azithromycin. Fluoroquinolones are not used in children as often compared to adults, and alternatives like azithromycin are often preferred. Treatment duration is typically 10 to 14 days. In cases of severe enteric fever with symptoms of delirium, obtundation, stupor, or shock, additional treatment with corticosteroids may be considered. Dexamethasone at 3 mg/kg, followed by 1 mg/kg every 6 hours for 48 hours, has been shown to decrease mortality. Chronic carriers of the bacteria require four weeks of fluoroquinolone therapy for resolution of carrier status. In adults, if antimicrobial therapy fails, cholecystectomy may be considered due to the persistence of the bacteria in the gallbladder.