Laboratory tests should be ordered as an adjunct in overall medical status.  Normalized hemoglobin, hematocrit, coagulation profile with prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and platelet counts will be needed for operative intervention.

**X-ray**

Evaluation of x-rays will provide limited but important information. Care must be taken to ensure proper radiographic imaging creates a picture from the occiput to the C7 through T1 disc space. This is essential in reviewing cervical spine trauma. Lateral, anteroposterior (AP), and open mouth odontoid views are necessary. Approximately 93% of cervical spine injuries are apparent with combined, lateral, AP, and odontoid view radiographs. X-rays are an excellent modality for determining alignment during the immediate injury, post-operative period, as well as long-term follow-up.

**Computed Tomogram (CT) Scan**

CT scan is the most important modality for determining fracture etiology and ruling out an injury regarding a C2 fracture. Even if plain films are negative and clinical suspicion is high, a CT scan is warranted. CT scan does not directly evaluate the spinal cord, soft tissue, or ligamentous construct. It is important to recognize the importance that complete imaging will require dedicated thin-cut CT reconstructions. Non-contrast CT scan is adequate for evaluation of the bony anatomy for fracture. This can be coupled with a CT angiogram (see below) for evaluation of the vascular anatomy.

**Magnetic Resonance imaging (MRI) Scan**

Evaluation with MRI is important for analyzing the ligamentous construct, disc space, spinal cord, nerve roots, and other soft tissue injuries. MRI is also useful for determining the acute nature of the fracture when this is otherwise unknown. This is done via non-contrasted imaging. T2 signal hyperintensities and STIR changes within the dens, ligaments, or soft tissue can illustrate an acute component.  MRI is less dangerous than flexion-extension cervical injury. Furthermore, MRI evaluation is mandatory in evaluating the transverse ligament for the surgical decision matrix of non-displaced type II odontoid fractures. An intact transverse ligament is needed for the anterior placement of an odontoid screw.

**Vascular Imaging**

Vascular imaging may be indicated. The vertebral artery’s second segment (V2) runs through the transverse foramen of C2 to C6, while V3 runs extradurally, exiting the C2 foramen across the sulcus arteriosus.  This can place it at risk for injury. Indeed, in one series, 15% of patients with C1 to C2 fractures had a vertebral artery injury. Of which, type-III odontoid fractures posed the greatest risk. It is important to note that an untreated vertebral artery injury has a 24% stroke rate. CT angiography can be coupled to CT imaging upon fracture evaluation with consideration of kidney function. Level-III evidence suggests that patients with C1 to C3 fractures can be screened with multi-slice multi-detector CT angiography. At this time, MR angiography cannot be listed as the sole imaging modality for the evaluation of vertebral artery injury. The first-line investigation with percutaneous angiography is overly aggressive.