Diagnosis of acute diverticulitis can be made clinically based on history and physical examination alone. However, clinical diagnosis can be inaccurate in 24% to 68% of cases. Hence, laboratory and radiological tests play an important role in the accurate diagnosis of acute diverticulitis. Laboratory tests may show leukocytosis and elevation of acute phase reactants such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP). The radiological test of choice for acute diverticulitis is CT of the abdomen and pelvis, preferably with water-soluble oral or rectal (if significant nausea and vomiting) contrast and intravenous contrast provided there be no contraindications. The sensitivity, specificity, and negative predictive value of a CT scan have been reported as greater than 97%. Typical findings of acute diverticulitis in CT scans include bowel wall thickening, pericolic fat stranding, pericolic fluid, and small abscesses confined to the colonic wall as well as contrast extravasation, indicating intramural sinus and fistula formation.

Abdominal ultrasound can accurately diagnose acute diverticulitis, with comparative sensitivity (84% to 94%) and specificity (80% to 93%) as of CT. However, ultrasound (US) results are highly operator dependent, and use is limited despite encouraging data, lower cost, and easy availability. MRI is another possible diagnostic modality. Due to cost and no direct comparison of sensitivity or specificity, CT is usually preferred. Radiographs of the abdomen will probably only show nonspecific abnormalities such as bowel gas; however, if the patient has an intestinal obstruction, air-fluid levels can be present.

Endoscopy should be avoided in suspected acute diverticulitis due to an increased risk of perforation. It is recommended that a colonoscopy is performed approximately six to eight weeks after symptoms have resolved to rule out malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, or possibly colitis if the patient has not had a recent colonoscopy.