Drug trials provide the best evidence of the efficacy and safety of a drug in human subjects. However, this is only true if the trial activity is transparent, discoverable, and high quality. The responsibility for the transparency of a drug trial and the safety of the research participants rests with the sponsor, the local site investigators, the various Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) that supervise the trial, and the national drug regulatory agency. All stakeholders need to understand the various ethical and moral issues commonly encountered in clinical trials and carry out their responsibilities in conducting high-quality research to produce the best and most accurate information possible to inform clinical decisions and practice. It is also of great significance that all parties fully understand the results of drug trials so that findings are applicable in clinical practice in an appropriate, relevant, and ethical manner.

All interprofessional healthcare team members bear a responsibility to remain current on clinical trials, so they can use the latest data-driven models to direct patient care and question practices that are not supported by the latest research. This responsibility will, of necessity, be specialty-driven, so the focus on trials will be on studies that pertain to the discipline of the provider; physicians will exhibit a great interest and need for knowledge on trials that deal with their specialty area. Likewise, pharmacists will be more inclined to look into drug trials that line up with their specialties if they have them. Nurses (again, especially within specialty certifications), PTs, even chiropractors, and other ancillary medical providers should be aware of the latest pertinent research and be willing to share this knowledge with other healthcare team members where needed and/or appropriate. Only through open collaboration and communication can everyone on the interprofessional team drive patient outcomes optimally. [Level 5]