# Continuing Education Activity

Keratoconus (KC) is one of the most common corneal ectasia, characterized by progressive, non-inflammatory changes in corneal stromal collagen and manifests as the protrusion and alteration of the central and paracentral cornea. The pathology usually progresses in the first three decades of life and, if not managed on time, can result in a drop in visual acuity. The management of keratoconus is governed by many factors such as age, stage of keratoconus, schiempflug imaging characteristics, and visual acuity. The various management options include spectacles, contact lenses, corneal collagen cross-linking (CXL)with riboflavin, Intacs, penetrating keratoplasty, and deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty. CXL is a technique of strengthening the corneal tissue by using riboflavin and ultraviolet-A light to halt the progression of progressive keratoconus. In CXL, riboflavin act as a photosensitizing agent, and UVA improves the formation of intra and interfibrillar covalent bonds by oxidative photosensitization. This activity describes the collagen cross-linking procedure's role in managing keratoconus. It highlights a number of clinical factors that should be considered in patients who undergo collagen cross-linking.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the common clinical and topographic features of keratoconus.
- Summarize the mechanism of action of collagen crosslinking.
- Outline the indications for the collagen crosslinking procedure.
- Review potential outcomes of the procedure in the available literature.

# Introduction

Keratoconus (KC) is one of the most prevalent corneal ectatic disorders characterized by progressive, non-inflammatory changes in stromal collagen structure and usually results in protrusion and alteration of the central and paracentral cornea.

On examination, several eponymous clinical signs may increase the suspicion for KC. Munson’s sign is a V shape bulging of the lower eyelid on downgaze. A slit-lamp examination may reveal Vogt striae: fine, vertical, stromal stress lines, and a Fleischer ring: a ring-like configuration of epithelial iron deposits. Distant direct ophthalmoscopy reveals a characteristic “oil-droplet” reflex, and retinoscopy can demonstrate a characteristic scissoring reflex.

Placido-disc topography, Scheimpflug imaging, and optical coherence tomography allow for detecting subtle changes in corneal topography, tomography, and epithelium changes associated with KC. A well-known classification system is an Amsler-Krumeich system which uses the patient’s refractive error, central keratometry readings, central corneal thickness, and the presence or absence of scarring. Notably, the Amsler-Krumeich system does not utilize corneal topographic values. Various topographic indices have been proposed for diagnosing preclinical KC (forme fruste keratoconus) and clinical KC. Rabinowitz suggests the following topographical characteristics of KC: increased areas of keratometric readings surrounded by areas of reduced corneal power, inferior-superior symmetry, and skewed radial axes.

Treatment of early keratoconus involves prescribing spectacles to improve vision, but as the disease progresses, rigid gas-permeable contact lenses are required. In a small but significant proportion of patients, disease progression may require eventual corneal transplantation. Several new therapeutic options have emerged, including refractive, optical, and lamellar surgery, which slow the progression of the disease and/or delay more intensive treatment. Collagen cross­linking (CXL) with ultraviolet A (UV-A) light and riboflavin (vitamin B2) is a relatively new treatment that reportedly slows the advancement of the disease in its early stages.

CXL was introduced to clinical practice in the late 1990s and has since completely modified conservative management of progressive corneal ectasia. CXL utilizes riboflavin as a photosensitizer, which, when exposed to longer wavelength UV-A, induces chemical reactions in the corneal stroma and ultimately results in the formation of covalent bonds between the collagen molecules. This collagen crosslinking increases the tensile strength and rigidity of the cornea, preventing further thinning and ectasia.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The cornea comprises distinct, densely placed, multi-scale structures with fibers of distinct patter arranged in various layers. Each layer is composed of distinct components having variations in collagen density, elastin, fibronectin, laminin, and proteoglycan.

The anterior-most layer over the corneal surface is the tear film composed of lipid and aqueous components, and the protein layer is typically 3 um thick in healthy subjects. The tear film helps provide lubrication and protection through soluble factors and maintains a smooth optical surface.

The spacing between the lamella and collagen fibrils is essential for maintaining corneal transparency, and the proteoglycans maintain this spacing. The stroma is acellular, and one keratocyte is found in every 50,000 cubic microns. The Dua's or Pre-Descemet's layer is nearly identical to adjacent stromal tissue. There is a difference in proteoglycan distribution due to the higher density of lamella and more spacing between the collagen fibrils.

The different macromolecules have varied subunits that point to other mechanical functions or different evolutionary developmental origins. Another group of molecules is glycosaminoglycans (GAG) which attract and retain water, absorb the shock, and impact tissue viscosity.

The endothelial pump plays a significant role in maintaining hydration of the cornea, which also plays a crucial role in maintaining corneal mechanics. The stroma also contributes to the major strength of the cornea. The interweaving corneal lamellae also provide resistance to the tensile strength of the cornea. The degree of collagen fibril alignment and the fibril diameter can vary; it will be essential to understand that the mechanical properties will also vary with the depth. Another critical point of consideration is lateral heterogeneity in the cornea. This fibril orientation provides a distinct lateral pattern at varying depths in the cornea. This is important because keratoconus may manifest in varied ways due to tissue structure, and surgical planning will benefit by taking these heterogeneities into account.

# Indications

Keratoconus, with evidence of progression, is the most common indication for CXL. Other indications include pellucid marginal degeneration, Terrien marginal degeneration, and post-refractive surgery (such as LASIK, PRK, or radial keratotomy) ectasia. The Global Delphi Panel of Keratoconus and Ectatic Diseases recognized the lack of set criteria for documenting disease progression and suggested that two of the following three parameters should be considered when considering progression: steepening of either the anterior or posterior corneal surfaces or corneal thinning.

Many studies have based their criteria based on an increase in Kmax value, myopia and/or astigmatism, mean central K-readings, and a decrease in mean central corneal thickness.

Not every cornea with keratoconus needs to undergo CXL; simple spectacle correction and rigid contact lenses form the basis of conservative therapy. CXL is not indicated for stable KC, as might be the case in older eyes that naturally have stiffer corneas due to age-related changes.

# Contraindications

The contraindications to standard CXL treatment include a corneal thickness of fewer than 400 microns and prior herpetic ocular infection. Traditionally, corneal thickness less than 400 microns is considered a contraindication for CXL, but hypo osmolar CXL can be performed when corneal thickness varies from 370 to 400 microns. Other contraindications are concurrent ocular infection, presence of severe corneal scarring, corneal opacity, neurotrophic keratitis, severe dry eye, history of poor epithelial wound healing, autoimmune disorders, and pregnancy.

Price et al., in their analysis of CXL in microbial keratitis, having negative bacterial or fungal cultures but positive for herpes simplex, showed that patients developed dendritic keratitis after undergoing CXL. There have been reports of herpetic keratitis after CXL.

# Equipment

The various equipment and instruments needed to perform CXL are

- Conjunctival forceps

- Diluted absolute alcohol

- Calliper

- Ink pen marker

- Hockey stick blade

- Crescent blade

- Riboflavin

- Ultraviolet light

- Hand-held slit lamp

- Normal saline

- Saline cannula

In the case of accelerated CXL, an accelerated CXL machine is needed.

# Personnel

For performing CXL, a combined effort of a team of Ophthalmic surgeons, an assistant OT nurse, mid-level ophthalmic personnel (MLOP), and a dedicated counselor is needed. The surgeon performs the surgery, the assistant nurse helps in patient preparation and provides instruments for the surgery, the MLOP helps in patient movement, and the counselor helps in guiding the patient pre-operative and postoperatively.

# Technique or Treatment

**Dresden Protocol**

As Wollensak et al. described, the Dresden protocol is considered the "conventional" CXL treatment protocol. This technique is named Dresden protocol because it was initially designed at the University of Dresden (Germany). Till today, this is the standard protocol followed at majority centers. Also known as the 'epi-off' protocol, this involves the removal of central 8-9 m epithelium followed by applying 0.1% riboflavin solution followed by 30 minutes of UVA radiation of wavelength 370nm and power 3mW/cm.

Thinner corneas are more susceptible to radiation damage to the endothelium and hence are unsuitable for epi-off CXL. Additional protection can be provided to the endothelium by either retaining the epithelium or using hypo-osmolar riboflavin to increase stromal thickness during the radiation exposure stage. Riboflavin penetration through tight epithelial junctions can improve using chemical enhancers like benzalkonium chloride or EDTA. This "epi-on" protocol reduces the risk of complications associated with the "epi-off" protocol. There are conflicting reports about the efficacy of this procedure.

A few modifications of the Dresden protocol, which have been used, are partial reepithelialization, with short- and medium-term results stabilization. But the effectiveness of this technique over the conventional Dresden protocol is still questionable.

**Epithelial On Collagen Cross Linking**

In this technique, the corneal epithelium is not scraped, and cross-linking is performed with epithelium. In the beginning, various studies showed limited riboflavin diffusion through the tight epithelial junctions, thus reducing the effectiveness of CXL.

Wollensak and Iomdina conducted a study using iso-osmolar riboflavin (20% dextran) and BAC, which resulted in biochemical and biomechanical changes after cross-linking in comparison to the control group. However, studies have shown that CXL without epithelial scrape and using BAC containing proparacaine eye drops causes biomechanical stiffening, approximately one-fifth of that induced by Dresden protocol.

**Accelerated**Collagen Cross Linking****

Accelerated CXL protocols were introduced to clinical practice to shorten the procedure length and reduce the exposure time of the cornea to sources of infection. This concept works on the Bunsen-Roscoe law of photochemical reciprocity: the same photochemical effect is achieved with a shorter irradiation time by a corresponding increase in irradiation intensity. The irradiation time is shortened from 30 minutes to 3 minutes with comparable results to the standard protocol and may be safe to use in thin corneas.

A cut-off of 400 microns is taken to avoid damaging the endothelium, although sometimes endothelial damage can occur even above 400 microns. In a comparative study of four CXL protocols by Shetty et al., in steeper corneas, they found that corneas treated with Dresden protocol (3 mW/cm^2 for 30 minutes)  showed a more significant flattening effect compared to accelerated CXL protocol of 9, 18, and 30 mW/cm2. In a study by Kanellopoulos of 21 patients treated with accelerated CXL protocol in one eye and Dresden in the other, they found equal results in both eyes with no progression of keratoconus endothelial damage, and there was good improvement in visual acuity and keratometry.

It is also known that a minimum oxygen concentration is needed in the stroma for CXL to occur and while applying UVA light in the presence of riboflavin. Moreover, considering the theoretical model of photochemical kinetics of CXL, the UVA radiations produce a reduction in the available oxygen in the riboflavin-applied cornea, leading to a secondary reduction in reactive oxygen species. When UV light is turned off, the oxygen level is returned to the original level from the environment within 3-4 minutes. Another alternative to increase the level of oxygen across the corneal stroma is to push the UV light during the cross-linking process to allow reoxygenation during the pause in exposure.

**Iontophoresis**

A technique currently under investigation is iontophoresis CXL, which facilitates the penetration of riboflavin through the cornea through a low-intensity electrical current. Iontophoresis shortens riboflavin penetration time and duration of irradiation and does not require epithelium removal.

**Combined**Collagen Cross Linking****

Combining CXL with other modalities was initially suggested by Kymionis et al. in 2011, known as 'CXL Plus.'

# Complications

Common complications related to this include temporary corneal haze (10 to 90%), delayed epithelial closure, sterile infiltrates, and central stromal scars. The literature describes postoperative microbial keratitis from bacterial, herpetic, protozoal, and fungal sources.

Rarer but more serious side effects include corneal melts and endothelial failure. Treatment failure is also a noted complication, defined as the progression of the condition with an increase in Kmax values of 1.0 D over the pre-operative value or greater than a 10% decrease in pachymetry readings six months post-operatively; this may occur in up to 10% of patients.

# Clinical Significance

More than 15 years since its introduction, conventional CXL has proven to be a safe and effective means of halting the progression of corneal ectasias, reducing the need for more invasive treatment options. Modified CXL techniques have had mixed results regarding efficacy when compared to conventional CXL, and long-term follow-up results are still needed. In addition to treating ectasias, CXL has increasing utilization as a treatment for microbial keratitis and reduction of low myopia, and further research into these domains is still underway.

The number of CXL procedures performed in the last ten years has increased drastically. The majority of patients are seen in the first two decades of life. Hence it is highly imperative to pick up these patients early in the course of the disease, document the progression, and cross-link these eyes so that irreversible visual loss can be prevented. There are treatment options for thin corneas of less than 400 um, and vision can be safeguarded in most cases.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional team approach involving subspecialty-trained physicians and ophthalmic-trained nurses providing patient support and follow-up care will lead to the best outcomes. With early detection of keratoconus by healthcare members, corneal crosslinking is an effective way of slowing down and potentially halting progression.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Nursing, allied health staff, and interprofessional team play a key role in patient preparation and pre-operative and postoperative counseling of keratoconus patients.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Nursing, allied health staff, and interprofessional team help monitor these patients after the surgery for BCL removal, intraocular pressure check, regular medication use, Schiempflug imaging visit, and to document any progression with the change of spectacles or contact lenses.