**BNT162b2**

- For adults and children aged 12 and older: The vaccine is administered intramuscularly (IM) as a series of two doses (0.3 ml each) 3 to 8 weeks apart.

- For children aged 5 to 11: The vaccine is administered intramuscularly as a series of two doses (0.1 ml each) 3 to 8 weeks apart.

- For children six months to four years of age: The first two doses are 3 mcg given 3 to 8 weeks apart. The third dose is usually a 3 mcg of the bivalent vaccine given 8 weeks after the second dose.

- For immunocompromised patients: The third dose is given at least 28 days after the second dose.

- The vaccine is distributed as a frozen suspension in a multiple-dose vial containing a volume of 0.45 ml that does not contain a preservative. After dilution with 1.8 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride injection, each vial contains up to 6 dosages of 0.3 ml. Vial labels and cartoons may state that after dilution, a vial contains five doses of 0.3 ml. Each 0.3 ml dose contains 30 mcg of mRNA, expressed in lipid nanoparticles encoding the spike (S) protein for the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

**mRNA-1273**

- The vaccine is administered intramuscularly as a series of two doses (100 mcg each) 4 to 8 weeks apart.

- The vaccine is distributed in 0.20 mg/ml white to off-white suspension rendered in vials containing ten doses of 0.5 ml. Each vial dosage carries 100 micrograms of mRNA.

- For immunocompromised patients: The third dose is given at least 28 days after the second dose.

- For children 6 to 11 years of age: 2 IM doses of 50 mcg each given 4 to 8 weeks apart.

- For children six months to five years of age: 2 IM doses of 25 mcg each given 4 to 8 weeks apart.

**Ad26.COV2.S**

- The vaccine is administered as a single dose of 0.5 mL and authorized for individuals aged 18 years or older who cannot receive or elect not to receive mRNA COVID-19 vaccines.

- An additional dose with an mRNA monovalent vaccine is recommended for immunocompromised individuals.

**NVX-CoV2373**

- The recommended dose is 2 IM injections of 5 mcg spike protein/50 mcg adjuvant protein for individuals aged 18 years or older, to be given 3 to 8 weeks apart.

- This vaccine is not authorized for individuals with immunocompromising conditions.

**Booster Dose**

The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends booster doses for all individuals aged five years and older. The preferred vaccine for booster dosing is a bivalent mRNA COVID-19 vaccine, which contains the original SARS-CoV-2 strain (in the monovalent BNT16b2 and mRNA-1273 vaccines) and the SAR-CoV-2 Omicron BA.4 and BA.5 variant strains.

For individuals 18 years or older who have completed a primary series and are unable or unwilling to receive an mRNA vaccine for a booster dose, a single dose of NVX-CoV2373 vaccine can be used if given at least six months after the COVID-19 vaccine.

According to the CDC, COVID-19 vaccines may be coadministered with other vaccines.