**Contraindications**

- Thrombocytopenia

- Thrombocytopenic purpura

- Hypersensitivity to quinine, mefloquine, quinidine, or to any component used in the drug preparation

- Heart block greater than a 1st degree

- Concurrent, amprenavir, cisapride, or ritonavir, fluoroquinolones drugs responsible for prolonging QT interval

- Congenital long QT interval

- AV block as the concurrent use of the drug can progress to complete block

**Precautions**

- Patients on digoxin demonstrated higher plasma quinidine levels and a shorter half-life on low doses when compared with patients who are not on quinidine.

- Children require a larger dose of quinidine as compared to adults.

- The elderly population shows reduced clearance of quinidine, and increased drug half-life, which can predispose to toxicity. Hence appropriate drug dose adjustment is necessary.

- Quinidine should be dose adjusted in patients with congestive heart failure as normal dosing of the drug may lead to abnormally high serum concentrations.

- Pregnancy - Quinidine is an "FDA pregnancy risk category C" and is not safe during pregnancy; it can only be given when potential maternal benefit justifies the possible risk to the fetus

- Although concentrations lower than maternal plasma, quinidine does pass in breast milk; breastfeeding neonates can develop serum quinidine concentration lower than maternal serum concentration. Neonates can develop toxicity with lower plasma quinidine levels.

- Myasthenia Gravis - Anticholinergic activity of quinidine can potentially worsen the patient's condition. Quinidine can also interact with drugs used for the treatment of the disease.

- Asthma and other allergic conditions - Its use requires caution in patients with asthma and other allergic conditions because these conditions can hide the hypersensitivity of the drug.

**Safe Practice**

- Quinidine can sometimes be confused with clonidine and quinine.

- Dose modulation may be necessary for patients with hepatic and renal disorders.

- To be used in caution with drugs that prolong QT interval such as thiazide diuretics, ondansetron, opioids, fluoroquinolones, risperidone, sotalol, antihistaminics, tricyclic antidepressants, macrolides (erythromycin), SSRIs.

**Drug Interactions**

- Quinidine is an inhibitor of CYP450 and can interact with drugs metabolized by this enzyme system.

- Quinidine has been shown to decrease digoxin's total clearance by 30 percent, renal clearance by 32 percent, and nonrenal clearance by 29 percent.

-  Erythromycin has been shown to decrease quinidine clearance, increase serum concentrations and possibly predispose to quinidine toxicity; hence when given concurrently with quinidine; it is advisable to monitor patients' serum potassium, magnesium, and timely EKGs for possible toxicity.

- Phenobarbital and phenytoin have been shown to decrease the half-life of quinidine by half, possibly by increasing its metabolism by induction of CYP450 class of enzymes.

- Cimetidine competes for the renal tubular secretion of quinidine in its unchanged form and its metabolites, increasing its concentration in plasma.