This article is made available for historical review, monoclonal antibody use is not currently indicated for this condition.

COVID-19 illness is a clinical syndrome caused by a SARS-CoV-2 infection. It was first reported in Wuhan, China, in December 2019 and quickly spread to a pandemic level in 2020. A meta-analysis report stated that an estimated 18.2 million people died globally because of the COVID-19 pandemic between Jan 1, 2020, and the end of December 2021.

SARS-CoV-2 or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, is a single-stranded RNA virus with a close resemblance to the virus causing the 2003 SARS outbreak.

The clinical presentation varies from asymptomatic cases to severe disease with hypoxia and respiratory compromise. The United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) classifies the clinical manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 as follows:[

- Asymptomatic or Presymptomatic Infection: positive testing for SARS-CoV-2 but no symptoms consistent with COVID-19.

- Mild Illness: Individuals who have any of the various signs and symptoms of COVID-19 but do not have shortness of breath, dyspnea, or abnormal chest imaging.

- Moderate Illness: The presence of lower respiratory disease without hypoxia (oxygen saturation (SpO) ≥94% on room air).

- Severe Illness: Hypoxia, Spo <94% on room air, a ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen (PaO/FiO) <300 mm Hg, respiratory frequency >30 breaths/min, or lung infiltrates >50% to lung volume.

- Critical Illness: Individuals who have respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction.

Mild to moderate cases of COVID-19 are usually managed on an outpatient basis. Patients requiring oxygen therapy to maintain their oxygenation are usually hospitalized and may require intensive care management for assisted ventilation, organ support, and treatment of secondary infections.

Management of non-hospitalized patients with COVID-19 in the outpatient setting involves triaging the severity of symptoms and the potential for clinical progression. Identifying patients who are at high risk for severe disease is of prime importance, so patients may be offered therapies that can deter their progression to severe disease.

Monoclonal antibodies have been identified as a potential therapy to prevent COVID-19 disease progression in patients at risk for severe disease. Most antibodies made by the human body are polyclonal, meaning that they are derived from multiple B lymphocyte lineages and have slightly different specificities for target antigens. Monoclonal antibodies, however, are produced by a single B-lymphocyte clone and are highly specific for their target antigen.

In the race to decrease the global burden of COVID-19, several monoclonal antibodies were developed and granted emergency use authorizations (EUAs). However, as COVID-19 variants emerged, most of the monoclonal antibodies had their EUAs revoked due to limited efficacy against dominant circulating variants and subvariants. This activity reviews the pathophysiology and function of these monoclonal antibodies and the risks and benefits of these agents. However, it must be noted that according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), none of these monoclonal antibodies are recommended in 2023 for the treatment of COVID-19. The only monoclonal antibody with an active EUA is tixagevimab co-packaged with cilgavimab, which is authorized for preexposure prophylaxis of COVID-19.