There are three types of autotransfusion systems in-line, self-filling, and continuous. In-line involves using a blood bag that collects the fluid for later use. The self-filling bag utilizes a vacuum to help improve the flow of fluid into the bag. Finally, the continuous autotransfusion uses an infusion pump and filter to directly place the blood into the patient's venous access. The advantage of a continuous system is that it is faster to transfuse, requires less staffing involvement after initial setup, and poses less risk of contamination. Continuous autotransfusion is often the method in the operating room, but many emergency departments do not have this type available and are more likely to utilize an in-line technique. There are various manufacturers of autotransfusion systems. Facilities should contact their supplier to see which system is available in their hospital as each may require additional, product-specific training.

The following equipment will be required to perform in-line autotransfusion.

- Sterile gown and gloves

- Face mask with a shield

- Hairnet or cap

- Sterile prep for patient's exposed skin (e.g., iodine or chlorhexidine)

- Blood collecting bag

- Microaggregate filter (typically 40 microns)

- 1 Liter sterile normal saline

- IV start kit with extension tubing.

- Pressure bag

- Citrate or heparin for anticoagulation

- Chest tube drainage kit with water seal

- Tube thoracostomy kit

A generalized list of equipment required is as follows:

- Personal protection equipment (i.e., gloves, mask, eyeshield)

- Chest-drainage unit

- Autotransfusion collection system

- Blood administration set

- 40- μ m microemboli filter

- Normal saline

- Wall suction and regulator