When a patient's history and proximal weakness are compatible, they should initially be evaluated by measuring the muscle enzymes, including creatine phosphokinase (CPK), aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and aldolase. CPK level usually correlates with the severity of muscle inflammation but, rarely, can be normal. Serial muscle enzyme measurements are useful for following myositis activity and are used to supplement serial strength testing. Inflammatory markers like ESR and CRP can also be elevated. Autoantibodies, muscle imaging, electrophysiologic examination, and muscle biopsy can be used to confirm the diagnosis. Autoantibodies are present in more than 80% of patients with inflammatory myositis. They are classified as (1) myositis-specific antibodies and (2) myositis-associated antibodies.

- Myositis-specific antibodies (MSA) have a specificity of 90% and are associated with distinct phenotypes. They include antisynthetases and dermatitis-associated antibodies. Antisynthetases are a group of antibodies that target the cytoplasmic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase enzymes(ARS). Anti Jo-1 is the most studied and commonly detected antisynthetase antibody. Anti-Mi-2, anti-MDA5, anti-TIF, anti-SAE, and anti-NXP are dermatomyositis-associated antibodies.

- Myositis-associated antibodies (MAA) are not disease-specific and are frequently seen in patients with overlap syndrome. The myositis-associated antibodies are anti-PM SCL, anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-Ku, and anti-U1 RNP.

If the muscle enzymes are abnormal, an objective evaluation of muscle inflammation is performed with EMG or MRI to document muscle abnormality and to identify a site for biopsy.

Abnormal findings expected in EMG are low amplitude, short duration, and polyphasic potential; increased membrane irritability; spontaneous fibrillation; and early recruitment. EMG should be done only on one side to reserve the contralateral side for the muscle biopsy to avoid electrical burn artifacts. MRI using short tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequence detects focal inflammation as bright signals, and a T1 sequence is useful in detecting atrophy and scarring.

Muscle biopsy helps differentiate polymyositis and dermatomyositis (PM/DM) based on their distinct histopathological features. In patients with dermatomyositis, a skin biopsy will show mild atrophy of the epidermis with vascular changes in the basal layer and perivascular inflammatory infiltrates in the dermis.

A chest X-ray should be done in all patients with PM or DM to detect lung involvement, such as interstitial lung disease. Pulmonary function tests and CT chest can be done based on the patient's symptoms and in cases of an abnormal chest X-ray. An increased prevalence of malignancy is described in patients with inflammatory myositis, particularly dermatomyositis.