Elevated hemidiaphragm is usually asymptomatic, and 90% of cases are diagnosed incidentally on imaging studies. In emergencies, the quickest and most reliable test to assess diaphragm function is an ultrasound that can be performed at the bedside.

**1.Imaging Studies to Diagnose Elevated Hemidiaphragm**

**Fluoroscopy:**

This was the test of choice. Have the patient perform sniff maneuvers with a fluoroscopic examination of the diaphragm. In patients with elevated hemidiaphragm, the weakened hemidiaphragm will move paradoxically during inspiration. The fluoroscopic examination involves ionizing-radiation, which may increase cancer risk.

**Ultrasound:**

This testing modality is fast, non-invasive, portable, and safe since there is no radiation. Therefore, ultrasound is now the better choice for assessing diaphragmatic function. The diaphragm is visualized best in M mode and appears as a thick line. During inspiration, when the diaphragm contracts, it is about 20% thicker than at the end of quiet respiration. Diaphragmatic weakness is suggested if the thickness does not increase by 20% or if the diaphragm thickness is <15mm.

**Chest X-Ray:**

To best see the diaphragm, the patient should take a deep breath, be standing upright. If elevated hemidiaphragm is present, the PA view will show either side of the diaphragm is more than 2cm higher than the other side. Chilaiditi sign can be visualized on a chest x-ray, identifying bowel loops over the liver.

**Chest and Abdomen Computed Tomography (CT):**

All patients suspected of diaphragmatic injury should undergo a chest CT. It is vital to diagnose, identify, and rule out the causes of elevated hemidiaphragm. A chest and abdomen CT will help identify any masses, thoracic, and or abdominal pathologies that explain the reason for elevated hemidiaphragm.

**2.Non-imaging Tests**

**EKG:**

Rules out acute coronary syndrome and evaluates whether the heart is functioning properly.

**Echocardiogram:**

Evaluates the ability of the heart to pump and function properly.

**Pulmonary Function Tests (PFT):**

The diaphragm is the primary muscle for inspiration since it accounts for 80% of the power required for respiration.

Electrophysiological studies- Aid in determining whether the etiology of diaphragmatic dysfunction is muscular or neurological.

**3.Lab Tests**

**Arterial blood gas (ABG)****analysis:**

Determines whether there is adequate gas exchange.