The mainstay of treatment of drug-induced AIN is the timely discontinuation of the offending drug. A renal biopsy must be promptly performed to establish a definitive diagnosis. The possibility of the absence of AIN on biopsy may impact a patient's medication regimen. The extent of interstitial fibrosis and delay in corticosteroid therapy initiation are risk factors linked to residual renal damage. If renal failure is severe, supportive therapy with dialysis may be required.

There is a paucity of data from randomized controlled trials to guide the treatment for AIN. Observational studies have shown improved renal recovery with early initiation of corticosteroids. Corticosteroids suppress the T cell-mediated inflammation and may plausibly mitigate the development of fibrosis and residual renal damage. The available prospective studies with the limited study population have shown no differences in the efficacy of oral versus intravenous pulse doses of steroids to treat AIN. One of the potential regimens of steroid therapy can be administering intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg for three days, followed by oral prednisone 1mg/kg for two weeks with a subsequent taper over 4 to 6 weeks.

Evidence of renal recovery is expected to be seen by two weeks on steroid therapy. In a study of 182 patients with biopsy-proven AIN, high dose steroid use for more than three weeks and steroid tapering over five weeks did not significantly benefit renal function recovery. Corticosteroids are considered for the treatment for AIN associated with sarcoidosis, TINU, and anti-TBM antibody-mediated disease with variable results.