Patients with LAM can present clinically with different manifestations.

- There can be the development of benign tumors in multiple organs (brain, heart, skin, eyes, kidney, lung, and liver).

- LAM can present with acute respiratory manifestations during pregnancy or after the use of oral estrogen in females of reproductive age.

- Dyspnea is the most common presenting symptom that can occur during rest and increase with exertion. It could easily be mistaken and treated as a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma. Progressive dyspnea and fatigue will be the initial symptom in about two-thirds of patients, one-third will present with spontaneous pneumothorax, and about a quarter will have a pleural effusion.

- Lymphatic abnormalities (i.e., thoracic duct dilatation, chylothorax, and chylous ascites) are most common in TSC-LAM than in S-LAM.

- Other less common manifestations include a productive cough, chest pain, pulmonary hypertension, and hemoptysis. Wheezing can be heard during physical examination in some patients.

- Patients with TSC have skin lesions characteristic of the disorder (such as hypopigmented macules, forehead plaques, and facial fibroadenomas) or defected nails (longitudinal nail grooves).

- Epilepsy and cognitive impairment are common in individuals with TSC.

- Brain lesions such as cortical hamartomas (glioneuronal and subependymal), astrocytoma (a low-grade astrocytic brain tumor within the ventricles of the brain), and heterotopia (which as ectopic collections of neurons). These brain lesions can be asymptomatic and detected radiologically or present clinically as papilledema or hydrocephalus in patients with TSC.

- LAM can be associated with renal angiomyolipomas (which are more frequent in TSC-LAM and often bilateral).

- TSC-LAM may be associated with polycystic kidney disease.

- Pulmonary symptoms may worsen during menses in a third of women with LAM. Likewise, lung function has been reported to worsen after estrogen administration and during pregnancy.