**Dresden Protocol**

As Wollensak et al. described, the Dresden protocol is considered the "conventional" CXL treatment protocol. This technique is named Dresden protocol because it was initially designed at the University of Dresden (Germany). Till today, this is the standard protocol followed at majority centers. Also known as the 'epi-off' protocol, this involves the removal of central 8-9 m epithelium followed by applying 0.1% riboflavin solution followed by 30 minutes of UVA radiation of wavelength 370nm and power 3mW/cm.

Thinner corneas are more susceptible to radiation damage to the endothelium and hence are unsuitable for epi-off CXL. Additional protection can be provided to the endothelium by either retaining the epithelium or using hypo-osmolar riboflavin to increase stromal thickness during the radiation exposure stage. Riboflavin penetration through tight epithelial junctions can improve using chemical enhancers like benzalkonium chloride or EDTA. This "epi-on" protocol reduces the risk of complications associated with the "epi-off" protocol. There are conflicting reports about the efficacy of this procedure.

A few modifications of the Dresden protocol, which have been used, are partial reepithelialization, with short- and medium-term results stabilization. But the effectiveness of this technique over the conventional Dresden protocol is still questionable.

**Epithelial On Collagen Cross Linking**

In this technique, the corneal epithelium is not scraped, and cross-linking is performed with epithelium. In the beginning, various studies showed limited riboflavin diffusion through the tight epithelial junctions, thus reducing the effectiveness of CXL.

Wollensak and Iomdina conducted a study using iso-osmolar riboflavin (20% dextran) and BAC, which resulted in biochemical and biomechanical changes after cross-linking in comparison to the control group. However, studies have shown that CXL without epithelial scrape and using BAC containing proparacaine eye drops causes biomechanical stiffening, approximately one-fifth of that induced by Dresden protocol.

**Accelerated**Collagen Cross Linking****

Accelerated CXL protocols were introduced to clinical practice to shorten the procedure length and reduce the exposure time of the cornea to sources of infection. This concept works on the Bunsen-Roscoe law of photochemical reciprocity: the same photochemical effect is achieved with a shorter irradiation time by a corresponding increase in irradiation intensity. The irradiation time is shortened from 30 minutes to 3 minutes with comparable results to the standard protocol and may be safe to use in thin corneas.

A cut-off of 400 microns is taken to avoid damaging the endothelium, although sometimes endothelial damage can occur even above 400 microns. In a comparative study of four CXL protocols by Shetty et al., in steeper corneas, they found that corneas treated with Dresden protocol (3 mW/cm^2 for 30 minutes)  showed a more significant flattening effect compared to accelerated CXL protocol of 9, 18, and 30 mW/cm2. In a study by Kanellopoulos of 21 patients treated with accelerated CXL protocol in one eye and Dresden in the other, they found equal results in both eyes with no progression of keratoconus endothelial damage, and there was good improvement in visual acuity and keratometry.

It is also known that a minimum oxygen concentration is needed in the stroma for CXL to occur and while applying UVA light in the presence of riboflavin. Moreover, considering the theoretical model of photochemical kinetics of CXL, the UVA radiations produce a reduction in the available oxygen in the riboflavin-applied cornea, leading to a secondary reduction in reactive oxygen species. When UV light is turned off, the oxygen level is returned to the original level from the environment within 3-4 minutes. Another alternative to increase the level of oxygen across the corneal stroma is to push the UV light during the cross-linking process to allow reoxygenation during the pause in exposure.

**Iontophoresis**

A technique currently under investigation is iontophoresis CXL, which facilitates the penetration of riboflavin through the cornea through a low-intensity electrical current. Iontophoresis shortens riboflavin penetration time and duration of irradiation and does not require epithelium removal.

**Combined**Collagen Cross Linking****

Combining CXL with other modalities was initially suggested by Kymionis et al. in 2011, known as 'CXL Plus.'