Evaluation of testicular cancer begins with obtaining a thorough history and performing a detailed physical examination. History includes inquiry regarding clinical features, as discussed above. It is important to ask specifically about the history of cryptorchidism, orchiopexy, or inguinal hernia repair as an infant. A family history of testicular cancer in father or brother should be elicited. Physical examination findings of any solid intratesticular mass should be considered to be testicular cancer until proven otherwise. Examination findings related to metastatic disease, described previously, may also be identified.

Testicular imaging with trans-scrotal ultrasound is the primary imaging modality to identify testicular cancer when suspected on physical examination.****before any intervention, including orchiectomy. Adequate counseling should be given regarding the possibility of infertility and placement of the testicular prosthesis if desired. Sperm banking should be considered in patients with bilateral testicular pathology.****

Radical inguinal orchiectomy is both therapeutic and provides tissue for histopathological diagnosis. Trans-scrotal biopsy should not be undertaken due to the risk of local dissemination due to the manipulation of established lymphatic drainage pathways. A retrospective analysis study showed a small but statistically significant increase in the incidence of local recurrence with trans-scrotal biopsy when compared to orchiectomy (2.9% vs. 0.4%).

Testicular germ cell tumors spread along well-described and predictable lymphatic channels.

All patients with testicular germ cell tumors should undergo abdominopelvic imaging with computed tomography (CT). Patients with elevated serum tumor markers (AFP, α-fetoprotein; β-hCG, β-subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase) should be evaluated further with computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis for staging.

Serum tumor markers play an important role in the evaluation and management of testicular cancer. Post-orchiectomy markers are part of the tumor staging and risk categorization of testicular cancer and are part of any evaluation of treatment response or of disease relapse.  LDH is found in diverse tissues throughout the body, and LDH-1 is expressed on chromosome 12p, which is over-expressed in germ cell tumors. Higher LDH levels can correspond to higher tumor burden. AFP and β-hCG evaluations are seen in many germ cell tumors.****β-hCG is produced by syncytiotrophoblasts within germ cell tumors and is seen in both non-seminomatous and seminomatous germ cell tumors. Choriocarcinomas commonly express β-hCG, as do approximately 15% of seminomas. AFP derives from the yolk sac, embryonal, and some teratomas within germ cell tumors and is never elevated in pure seminoma or pure choriocarcinoma.****

AFP and β-hCG are expressed not only in germ cell tumors but also in other neoplasms. β-hCG levels are increased in neuroendocrine tumors, cancers of kidney, lung, head, and neck, bladder, and GI tract.****AFP levels have been found to be elevated in liver diseases.

Multiple new immunohistochemical markers have been studied for diagnostic purposes.****They include PLAP, OCT3/4 (POU5F1), NANOG, HMGA1, HMGA2, PATZ1, RNF4, Aurora-B, AP-2γ (TFAP2C), and LIN28.

Note -->  E: Expressed; NE: Not Expressed; E(c): Expressed with cytoplasmic localization; NO: Not observed.