Cheilitis or dry lips are the most common dose-dependent adverse effect seen in about 90% of patients taking isotretinoin. Dry skin (xerosis), dry mouth (xerostomia), dry nose, and sun sensitivity are also very common adverse effects seen in patients taking isotretinoin. Sun protection and skin moisturizers and barriers are important patient education topics before starting the medication. Patients should also avoid all skin resurfacing procedures (waxing, dermabrasion, laser therapy) during treatment and at least six months after treatment to prevent skin irritation and scarring.

Hypertriglyceridemia and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate are also very common side effects of isotretinoin therapy. Frequent laboratory monitoring is indicated during the induction period and throughout treatment with isotretinoin to monitor these common adverse effects.

**Other Potential Adverse Effects**

Itching (pruritis), irritation, hair thinning, skin fragility, dry eyes, skin infections, rash, bone or joint pain, muscle aches, and joint pain (arthralgias); back and joint pain is most common in the pediatric population.

**Other Potential Laboratory Abnormalities**

Decreased high-density lipoproteins (HDLs), increased liver function tests (LFTs), increased creatinine phosphokinase (CPK), decreased hemoglobin and hematocrit, decreased erythrocyte, and leukocyte counts, and increased platelet counts. In the rare event that neutropenia or agranulocytosis should occur, isotretinoin should be discontinued.

There have been controversial associations with isotretinoin in patients who also suffer from inflammatory bowel disease or depression. However, recent meta-analyses have not shown an association with isotretinoin and these diseases.

Serious skin reactions, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis, have been reported and warrant prompt cessation of isotretinoin if they occur during therapy.

There are also reports of acute pancreatitis in patients taking isotretinoin with both normal and elevated serum triglyceride levels. Therapy should be discontinued if symptoms of pancreatitis occur.

**Caution**

Patients taking isotretinoin should avoid blood donation while on isotretinoin and for one month after discontinuing treatment due to the risk of embryo-fetal toxicity.

Reports also exist of episodes of depression and psychosis in patients taking isotretinoin. Even though the correlation is controversial, screening for depression, suicidal ideation, past suicide attempts, and aggressive and/or violent behaviors should occur prior to prescribing isotretinoin.

Pseudotumor cerebri (benign intracranial hypertension) has been presented in cases of patients taking isotretinoin with concomitant use of tetracyclines. For this reason, tetracyclines should not be administered with isotretinoin. If patients develop signs or symptoms of pseudotumor cerebri, prompt cessation isotretinoin is necessary, and the patient should receive a referral to a neurologist for further evaluation.