According to Sanko et al., a confederate is "among the most powerful tools available to simulation instructors".

To optimally use ESPs, they must be informed with comprehensive knowledge of the scenario, learning objectives, assessment tools, and a full simulation scenario script. ESPs must receive training on their role, be attuned to the level of learners in the simulation, and be cognizant of the intended impact on learning outcomes.  When educators design scenarios, consideration should be given to the roles of ESPs and how best to utilize them.  Simulation educators should also develop full scripts for each ESP and also permit the simulationist running the scenario to make changes on the fly to achieve the learning objectives.

Best-practices for utilization of ESPs are echoed in the Pascucci et al. publication that described their 10-year experience recruiting and training SPs for use as ESPs and other simulation roles at Boston Children's Hospital.

- Learning objectives

- Level of experience and training for learners/participants

- Duration of the scenario, including ways to end/stop authentically

- Clearly written medical details

- Glossary of medical terms and relevant background medical information

- Age

- Sex, including gender identity

- Socioeconomic status

- Family dynamics

- Emotional states of patients and families in similar situations

- Examples of typical comments, questions, or concerns expressed by patients and family members.

To meet these guidelines, ESPs need training and dress rehearsal sessions before running a simulation scenario with learners present.  These pre-scenario events represent current best practices in simulation education and the use of ESPs.

Jill S. Sanko is also the first author of Using Embedded Simulated Persons, a chapter in the SSH book Defining Excellence in Simulation Programs. Sanko et al. stated, "...simulation programs that lack training and assessment of ESPs do their learners and their programs an injustice, robbing them of the full spectrum of engagement and learning that can take place in a well-rehearsed, well-rounded, and well-acted simulation experience" (Sanko et al., 2015).  The chapter listed ten recommendations to improve the use of ESPs:

- Do allow learners to make mistakes: There is no better setting for errors than simulation.

- Do not ad-lib for drama's sake: There's a time and a place, for, but it is not usually in simulation.

- Do adapt to learner behaviors: The scenario should be scripted, but learners' responses are unpredictable.

- Do use communication devices: They help keep ESPs and scenario coordinators on track but beware of their pitfalls.

- Do know your learners: Their level of training should guide the ESPs' words and actions.

- Do use realistic props and costumes: They always tell a story and provide valuable clues.

- Do commit to the character: ESPs are playing roles to send messages to the learners, not playing themselves.

- Do pay attention to nonverbal cues: Emotional responses contribute to learning.

- Do not be the star of the show: Simulation is all about the learners' improvement.

- Do find ways to improve: Rehearse before, debrief, and evaluate after simulation.

Adler et al. showed that ESP training is essential and can be done well when following the above guidelines and recommendations.