Unfortunately, this condition is usually chronic and may be progressive in some individuals. Supportive care and management of chronic symptoms is the mainstay treatment for most patients. The quality of life of severely affected patients is often very compromised due to significant neurological symptoms and pain. Individuals diagnosed with this condition may be disabled and unable to work full time due to constant pain and various neurological deficits. Many patients with arachnoiditis, however, can walk and drive a car without significant limitations. The course of this disease remains highly variable due to the fact that arachnoiditis is both a static and progressive disease. It has been observed that most patients with arachnoiditis had relatively stable functional disability without significant exacerbations and no improvement in symptoms from the time of diagnosis. However, the severity of symptoms can fluctuate. The natural course of the disease is that neurologic deficits do not typically progress as much as surgical interventions can cause symptoms to progress. Although arachnoiditis is a chronic disabling disease, it is not usually a life-threatening condition itself. The natural course of the disease is not a progression of symptoms and functional impairments that results in death. Rather, it is the effect of chronic, accumulating pain as well as functional limitations, diminished quality of life, and a variety of secondary problems that typically brings detrimental results. A long-term follow-up study of fifty patients revealed death by suicide in two patients as well as other deaths not directly related to arachnoiditis, thereby shortening the average lifespan by 12 years.