Simulation training has its roots in the aviation industry, with the first flight simulators built in the 1930s. The military, NASA, and commercial airlines further pioneered simulation techniques to improve pilot training and safety. The field of medicine implemented forms of simulation for training as early as the 1950s, but it wasn’t until the turn of the century that medical simulation took off. Anesthesia was an early adopter of simulation; a first simulator appeared in the 1960s, which could reproduce some physiology, respond to drugs, and teach basic airway management. Since then, medical simulation has expanded across all disciplines of medicine.

The medical simulation utilizes multiple diverse modalities to teach learners in internal medicine.

Simulation is poised to expand in the future. Much like aircraft pilots are routinely tested for proficiency and ability to handle emergency situations during their careers, medical boards are starting to use simulation to assess clinical competency. For instance, the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM) offers the option of a simulated cardiac catheterization skills assessment to interventional cardiologists to maintain their certification in this procedure. Similarly, the American Board of Anesthesiology board exam incorporates an Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) to assess communication, professionalism, and technical skills. These offerings will likely expand to internal medicine and other specialties. Another growing and evolving area of simulation is virtual reality, which will have an increasing application to all fields of medicine; sight, sound, and new functions such as haptics provide an immersive world for learners to develop clinical skills.