Burns of the eye and ocular adnexa can be divided into two general categories, thermal and chemical. There are important distinctions between these two categories in how the injury progresses immediately after the injury. Tissue damage from thermal burns quickly abates once the heat energy is no longer in contact with the patient or after the source loses its thermal energy. Common examples of these mechanisms include patients removing themselves from a house fire and a flash burn from an explosion or fireworks injury. Due to the blink reflex and the protective nature of the ocular adnexa, the skin of the eyelids may receive most of the damage from thermal injuries. Direct thermal burns to the ocular surface typically cause superficial injury due to brief contact time. Common causes of thermal ocular burns include hot water, hot cooking oil, curling irons, and a flame, as seen in an explosion or a fire. These thermal burns can be expectantly managed like other superficial corneal injuries.

Chemical burns to the eye require more aggressive initial management. The tissue damage may persist and extend deeper into the ocular structures as long as the chemical remains in contact with the eye and ocular adnexa. Therefore, chemical ocular burns require intervention to remove the insult and prevent ongoing damage to the ocular surface and deeper structures. Chemical burns may occur from exposure to everyday household items such as drain or oven cleaner, laundry or dish detergent, bleach, and ammonia. Injuries also occur with industrial exposures to substances such as fertilizers, industrial acids, lye, lime, and cement. Fireworks and other explosions can cause both thermal and chemical injuries.