Hydroxocobalamin is given parenterally, either as an intramuscular or intravenous injection. Cyanocobalmin administration can be via the oral, sublingual, intramuscular, or subcutaneous routes. Cyanocobalamin use is common in the United States, whereas hydroxocobalamin is the more preferred formulation in Europe for the treatment of vitamin B12 deficiency. Hydroxocobalamin requires less frequent administration (every three months) compared to oral cyanocobalamin supplementation. The parenteral method of administration is particularly useful to treat vitamin B12 deficiency caused by malabsorption states in which oral administration is ineffective.

When treating vitamin B12 deficiency anemia with hydroxocobalamin, the dosage of each intramuscular injection of hydroxocobalamin is usually 1 mg given as a total of 5 to 10 doses administered every other day (3 times a week over two weeks) followed by every three months after that for maintenance. The duration of treatment is assessed based on the patient’s therapeutic response.

The recommendation is to take the following precautions when treating B12 or folate deficiency.

In a patient with folate deficiency, evaluation for coexistent B12 deficiency is necessary. If folate alone is supplemented in a B12 deficient patient, the B12 associated hematologic abnormalities may improve; however, neurological symptoms can worsen.

One of the neurological disorders associated with B12 deficiency is subacute combined degeneration of the cord (SCD), a condition characterized by demyelination of the dorsal and lateral columns of the spinal cord. B12 plays a vital role in myelin production. The active form of B12 (adenosylcobalamin) serves as a cofactor in converting methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA, an essential step in lipid synthesis. Without adenosylcobalamin, abnormal fatty acids incorporate into neuronal lipids interfering with normal myelin formation. Additionally, B12 deficiency can cause abnormal DNA synthesis, potentially hindering oligodendrocyte growth, adversely affecting myelin production.

Alternatively, it is also essential to recognize that folate deficiency indirectly leads to a B12 deficient state. In the cells, folate converts to its active form methyltetrahydrofolate (MTHF). MTHF acts as a donor of methyl groups to B12 (cobalamin), forming methylcobalamin. In the absence of this methylation, methylcobalamin (active form) is not produced and is unavailable for use leading to signs and symptoms of B12 deficiency.

In cyanide poisoning, intravenous (IV) hydroxocobalamin should be used. The FDA approves the immediate use of an injection kit for this purpose.