**Vitamin A**

Vitamin A levels are tested by measuring serum retinol. Testing is indicated in patients who exhibit signs of vitamin-A deficiency such as night blindness, xerophthalmia, and Bitot spots. The World Health Organization (WHO) states that serum retinol accurately estimates hepatic vitamin A stores in states of extreme deficiency and excess. Low serum retinol levels are considered to be less than 0.70 micromole/L and can evaluate the extent of vitamin A deficiency. Plasma retinol levels in vitamin A-toxicity are generally greater than 3.5 micromole/L.

**Vitamin D**

Vitamin D is measurable in the serum in two forms, 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D. 25-hydroxyvitamin D is the principal circulating form (levels in ng/ml). It has a half-life of 2 weeks and is the best measure of vitamin-D status. Testing is indicated in populations at high risk for fractures, including those with osteoporosis, osteopenia, and the elderly. Treatment initiation depends on the extent of the deficiency. The Endocrine Society states that levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D below 20 ng/ml are considered insufficient. According to The US Institute of Medicine, a 25-hydroxyvitamin D level of 20 ng/mL or greater is optimal for bone strength. Levels exceeding 100 ng/ml are considered toxic and puts the patient at risk for hypercalcemia, calculi, and renal damage. Hence, optimum levels appear to be between 20 to 30 ng/ml, with levels over 50 ng/ml avoided. Testing levels of 1,25-hydroxyvitamin D may also be indicated in patients with kidney failure or suspected hypercalcemia from granulomas in sarcoidosis or suspected hyperparathyroidism. Low levels of the active metabolite are commonly observed in early renal failure, while increased levels may present in sarcoidosis and primary hyperparathyroidism. The RDA for vitamin D is 600 IU per day. In individuals older than 70 years, the RDA is 800 IU per day.

**Vitamin E**

The best indicator of the vitamin E level is serum alpha-tocopherol. The recommended level of vitamin E ranges from 5 to 17 microgram/mL in adults and 3 to 18.4 microgram/mL in children. In patients with hyperlipidemia, it is preferable to report standardized lipid levels. Testing may be necessary for patients suffering from sensorimotor neuropathy or a fat malabsorption disorder such as cystic fibrosis. The RDA for vitamin E is 15 mg per day.

**Vitamin K**

According to the Food and Nutrition Board, a healthy intake of Vitamin K ranges from 70 to 140 micrograms daily. Vitamin-K deficiency and toxicity are rare in the US population, and thus, dietary vitamin-K testing is not generally indicated. The principal test utilized to evaluate bleeding due to a possible vitamin-K deficiency is prothrombin time (PT). In the case of prolonged PT, vitamin K injections or oral supplements may be necessary. Vitamin-K deficiency can be confirmed as the cause of bleeding if PT/INR normalizes in response to the injection or oral supplementation of vitamin K. The RDA for vitamin K in individuals less than six months is 2 mcg per day. The RDA in adult males and females is 120 mcg per day and 90 mcg per day, respectively.