**Medical Management**

**Hyperosmotic Agents**

Topical sodium chloride- 2% drops and 5% ointment. These agents help by forming a hypertonic tear film by imbibing water out of the cornea. The drops are usually prescribed 4 times per day and ointment at bedtime to reduce early morning corneal edema due to accumulation of fluid overnight.

**Antiglaucoma Drugs**

The drugs commonly employed are beta-blockers and alpha agonists—these work by reducing the intraocular pressure, which reduces corneal edema and thickness in the postoperative period. Miotics and prostaglandins are avoided because they usually aggravate inflammation. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are also avoided as they are epitheliotoxic.

**Steroids**

Steroids are usually employed to reduce acute inflammation or postoperative uveitis immediately after cataract surgery. Before starting steroids, the cornea must always be stained with fluorescein to rule out any epithelial defect or infectious keratitis.

**Lubricants**

They are used to lubricate the ocular surface and cornea to prevent surface irritation and dryness.

**Contact Lens**

Extended wear of soft contact lenses plays a huge role in the management of patients with PBK. The various added advantages of contact lens are that they alleviate pain associate with epithelial bullae, protect infectious keratitis again when bullae are ruptured, and there is an epithelial defect, help to improve visual acuity when used in conjunction with hypertonic saline, and also prevents the formation of new bullae due to its barrier effect.

**Surgical Management**

**Gunderson Conjunctival Flap**

In this technique, a thin flap of the conjunctiva, usually from the superior bulbar conjunctiva, is transposed over the cornea with intact nasal and temporal bridges. It meets the metabolic demands of the cornea, increases local blood supply, helps in healing, and replaces the dead and denuded epithelium

**Amniotic Membrane Grafting (AMG)**

In this technique, first, the loose epithelium is removed with the help of a sponge or a blade. This results in a large epithelial defect, usually sparing the limbus. A required amniotic membrane is cut and placed over the cornea with the stromal side towards the cornea, which is sticky compared to the basement membrane. The AMG is then attached to the cornea with the help of interrupted stay sutures. If needed, a BCL can also be placed.

**Bowman’s Membrane Cautery**

This procedure helps in pain relief by forming a tight barrier between epithelium and stroma. This prevents fluid migration to the epithelium and prevents bullae formation

**Anterior Stromal Puncture**

In this technique, multiple stromal punctures are created with the help of a 26G needle sparing the corneal periphery. This helps in pain and symptomatic relief. It results in subepithelial scarring and fibrosis in all cases.

**Annular Keratotomy**

This technique helps in pain relief in symptomatic patients without visual potential. A partial-thickness trephination of the cornea is performed in an annular fashion. This helps in pain relief by severing the branches corneal ciliary nerve and reduce corneal sensations.

**Basement Membrane Polishing**

It is done with the help of a diamond burr. After removing the epithelium, a 4.5 to 5 mm diamond burr can be used to gently polish the basement membrane across the area of epithelial debridement.

**Phototherapeutic Keratectomy (PTK)**

The laser used for PTK is Nidek EC 500 excimer laser. This is of three types:

- Superficial PTK-  Ablation of 8 to 25 um stroma with 62% success rate

- Intermediate PTK- Ablation of 50 to 100 um stroma with 42% success rate

- Deep PTK- Ablation of 25% stroma with 60% success rate

Thoman et al., in their analysis, proposed that superficial PTK is an effective procedure for pain relief and bullae resolution in the majority of the patients. They also highlighted that deep ablation has a better effect in reducing the pain by ablation of the preterminal neural plexus of the cornea located deep to the bowman’s membrane. It also reduces stromal edema by reducing the quantity of mucopolysaccharide and results in increased scarring with improved stability of the epithelium.

**Corneal Collagen Crosslinking with Riboflavin (C3R)**

C3R is a new treatment tool for the temporary reduction of corneal edema in patients with PBK. The free radical generated by the action of riboflavin with UVA light induces cross-linking of stroma and strengthens the bonds. It has been found useful to reduce edema, thickness, improve corneal transparency and alleviate pain after surgery.

**Corneal Transplantation**

**Penetrating Keratoplasty**

This is the gold standard surgery. In this technique, full-thickness host cornea is replaced by a donor cornea which is opposed to the host cornea with interrupted or continuous running sutures. The visual recovery takes some time. The graft size is usually 7 to 7.5 mm to avoid complications of small and large grafts, such as astigmatism and secondary glaucoma.

**Descemet Stripping Endothelial Keratoplasty (DSEK) or Descemet Stripping Automated Endothelial Keratoplasty (DSAEK)**

DSAEK was first introduced and popularised by Melles and colleagues, which has revolutionized PBK management off late. In this technique, the Descemet membrane is stripped off from the host and replaced with donor Descemet membrane along with some part of the posterior stroma. Then an air bubble is introduced for 20 minutes to ensure a perfect opposition. Before completing the surgery, 10 to 20 percent of the air bubble is removed to prevent postoperative pupillary block glaucoma. If the donor is prepared manually, it is called DSEK, and if the automated anterior chamber is employed, it is called DSAEK.

**Descemet Membrane Endothelial Keratoplasty (DMEK)**

This technique is a further refinement over DSEK. In this, the Descemet and endothelium of the host are replaced with the endothelium without any stromal tissue. Hence, this technique offers quicker visual recovery, better corrected distant visual acuity, and reduced risk of graft rejection. DMEK has a steep learning curve and requires more skill and expertise to get the desired outcome

Hence, in a nutshell, endothelial keratoplasty offers a lot of advantages over traditional penetrating keratoplasty. The few advantages are reduced risk of graft rejection, being a closed globe procedure, there is minimal chance of expulsive choroidal hemorrhage, the suture related complications are avoided, the corneal contour and topography are preserved, there is less induced astigmatism, there is no need for long term steroid use, and more wound strength due to smaller incision. The various disadvantages are interphase haze, steep learning curve, and graft/ lenticule dislocation, which may require rebubbling.