# Continuing Education Activity

Corneal topography evaluates the anterior curvature of the cornea while corneal tomography includes the posterior curvature and corneal thickness. This article compares and contrasts the various methods of obtaining corneal data. Corneal imaging is most applicable when evaluating keratorefractive surgery candidacy and keratoconus-risk. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and improving care for patients with corneal pathologies.

**Objectives:**
- Review the principles of corneal topography and tomography, and the standard maps produced by such techniques.
- Identify the most definitive test for evaluating corneal pathologies for the intended purpose.
- Outline the risk factors for developing keratoconus or keratorefractive surgery complications.
- Review the importance of collaboration and communication among health care professionals to enhance the delivery of care for patients receiving the ophthalmic evaluation.

# Introduction

Corneal imaging is widely used by ophthalmologists to understand the shape and curvature of the cornea. Corneal topography evaluates the anterior surface of the cornea and displays the information using a color-coded map. On the other hand, corneal tomography takes into account the thickness of the cornea, allowing the posterior surface of the cornea to be elucidated.

# Indications

Indications of corneal imaging are as follow:

- To determine properties of the cornea including elevation, shape, curvature, and thickness (topography)

- To determine properties of the posterior surface of the cornea and anterior chamber (optical coherence tomography)

- To evaluate and inform pre- and post-operative clinical treatment decision making

- To evaluate and monitor corneal disease progression or improvement

# Contraindications

There are no contraindications to corneal topography or tomography, as these are non-invasive. Artificial tears instillation before image acquisition is cautioned, as the tear film produced can be inaccurately read as the cornea’s topography.

# Equipment

**Topography**

Placido Disc Topography

Placido disc was developed in the 1880s and was one of the first methods developed to measure the anterior corneal surface.

**Tomography**

Slit-Scanning Elevation Topography

Slit-scanning elevation can image both the anterior and posterior surfaces. A slit beam of light is directed onto the cornea, and the different refractions from the anterior and posterior surface create two reflections. These two reflections, plus the original beam of light, forms a triangle, called ray-tracing triangulation, which can be interpreted using mathematical equations to recreate the surfaces of the cornea. Also, because the light reflections have the same reference point, slit-scanning elevation topography can calculate the thickness of the cornea, called corneal pachymetry.

Scheimpflug Imaging

One limitation of slit-scanning topography is that the peripheral measurement of the cornea loses its accuracy because the object, light, and image planes are no longer parallel. This issue was addressed by taking into account the Scheimpflug principle. First used in photography, Scheimpflug noted that by extrapolating the plane on which the object and image lie, the planes would intersect at a point, producing better image resolution.

There are two types of devices operating with either one camera (e.g., Pentacam, Orbscan II) or with two cameras (e.g., Galilei Dual Scheimpflug Analyzer). Two cameras allow measurements to be averaged and minimize decentration, such as in the case of involuntary eye movement

Anterior-Segment Optical Coherence Tomography (AS-OCT)

Anterior-segment OCT produces cross-sectional images of the anterior segment, analogous to ultrasound, but instead of utilizing sound waves, it uses infrared light. A beam of light is split, one to the reference mirror at a known distance, and the second to the sample. Light scatters differently when it encounters various structures, and the OCT, called low-coherence interferometry, picks up the time delay.

Time-domain (TD) OCT has a reference mirror that moves around to scan the cornea, taking a series of light samples. Visante OCT and Heidelberg slit-lamp OCT are examples of time-domain OCTs.

Fourier-domain (FD) OCT, or spectral-domain, has a fixed reference mirror and takes all the measurements simultaneously.

A newer type of OCT, swept-source, scans faster and can penetrate more dense cataracts and measure axial length inaccessible to other OCTs.

It is standard of care to use OCT when requiring precise corneal measurements. OCT has reproducible central corneal thickness measurements but less consistent epithelial thickness.

# Technique or Treatment

**Interpretation**

Topographic maps are color-coded and can be used to interpret shape, curvature, and elevation.

Axial or Sagittal Map:

Axial maps display the distance from a particular point of the corneal surface to a reference plane in which the lens is located (i.e., if a line were to be drawn, it would cross the reference plane at a 90-degree angle).

Instantaneous or Tangential Map:

This map displays the slope of the corneal surface, determined by a tangential line to that point. Compared to the axial map, the instantaneous map better elucidates the changes of curvature in comparison to the rest of its surroundings and gives a better overall sense of shape.

Elevation Map:

Elevation maps compare the corneal data to a best-fit sphere (BFS) in relation to diameter and position. An 8 to 9 mm diameter is usually chosen when evaluating for refractive surgery as a smaller or larger diameter will skew the results to be more steep or flat, respectively.

Pachymetry Map:

Corneal thickness is shown on pachymetry maps. With a similar color map to the elevation map, green are the areas that are within normal limits of pachymetry. Red and warmer colors are thinner, while blue and cooler colors are thicker areas of the cornea.

Refractive Power Map:

Refractive power maps correlate the curvature of the corneal surface to the refractive function by using Snell’s Law of Refraction.

Scheimpflug Imaging

Pentacam and Galilei are Scheimpflug imaging commonly used to identify subclinical and clinical keratoconus. There are many indices used to interpret the data and stage the degree of keratoconus. More information regarding their different specifications is discussed below under clinical significance.

AS-OCT

Rather than a coronal view, AS-OCT allows viewing of the anterior segment through the cross-section. Anatomy more posterior to the cornea can be appreciated, including the iris, pupil, and anterior chamber at different orientations. It gives a higher resolution image and can distinguish tear film, and various layers of the cornea, including the epithelial thickness.

**Limitations**

Evaluation using tomography and topography is non-invasive and carries no risk. However, it does require the patient to maintain a fixed gaze and can be inaccurate with eye movement.

In regards to the different methods of corneal imaging, each imaging device has its purpose and should not be used interchangeably, but are complimentary. Topography can only measure the anterior curvature of the cornea, while tomography can capture the posterior surface as well.

For example, AS-OCT is more accurate for visualizing the posterior surface of the cornea and should be used for preoperative imaging in determining surgical procedures. Slit-scanning machines, like the Orbscan, are inaccurate when measuring the posterior surface post-LASIK due to the disruption of the corneal interface, causing light scatter.

Ultrasound is a gold standard when measuring central corneal thickness, and a meta-analysis found Pentacam to be clinically equivalent.

Pentacam had lower precision when measuring axial, tangential, and refractive power maps, and pupil center corneal thickness but is still superior to Placido-disc analysis.

Numerous studies compare these imaging methods from different manufacturers. These imaging instruments have their benefits and drawbacks and should be chosen based on its intended purpose.

# Complications

Corneal topography and tomography are non-invasive procedures and do not have significant complications.

# Clinical Significance

**Keratorefractive Surgery**:

AS-OCT can be used to determine eligibility for keratorefractive surgery, such as laser-assisted in-situ keratomileusis (LASIK) or photorefractive keratectomy (PRK). Patients eligible for keratorefractive surgery must be 18 years or older, have stable refraction for a year or longer, and absent ocular and corneal pathology.

Central corneal thickness (CCT) < 480 μm is two standard deviations below that of a normal cornea and is contraindicated in both LASIK and PRK.

Corneal topography and tomography are also used post-surgically to evaluate residual corneal structure, complications, and if reoperation would be beneficial for a patient with unsatisfactory results.

Galilei is a dual Scheimpflug system commonly used in keratorefractive surgery. By combining corneal surface data and elevation data from Placido disc topography and Scheimpflug imaging, respectively, Galilei can obtain all necessary preoperative keratorefractive surgery measurements. It also delivers excellent accuracy and has the most repeatability than other Scheimpflug devices.

**Keratoconus**:

Keratoconus (KC) is the most common etiology of non-inflammatory thinning of the cornea, called corneal ectasia, causing distortion and conical bulging.

Amsler-Krumeich is an older classification system that was created before many modern, frequently used imaging techniques were developed. A new grading system, ABCD, incorporates anterior (A) and posterior (B) radii of corneal curvature, thinnest pachymetry (C), and visual acuity best-corrected for distance (D). Because the posterior elevation is included as one of its criteria for classification, it serves as a potential grading system in identifying subclinical or at-risk KC.

Before clinical keratoconus is diagnosed (Figures 3A-D), there are signs of subclinical keratoconus (Figures 4A-D). However, differentiating between pre-keratoconus and normal eyes is challenging. There are no widely accepted criteria for establishing such a diagnosis. Keratoconus suspect refers to patients deemed high risk for developing keratoconus based on clinical suspicion alone. Subclinical keratoconus has more tangible evidence in regards to pachymetry, curvature, and elevation though there are no standard cutoff values.  Forme fruste keratoconus (FFK) has an asymmetric bowtie pattern with stable refraction and corneal curvature.

When looking at the anterior surface of the cornea, the cone location and magnitude index (CLMI) uses axial and tangential maps to compare the steepest part of the cornea to the rest to evaluate for KC. The average outside the circle subtracts a 2-mm diameter circle of the steepest average of the cornea (C1), and the difference is called M1. Another 2-mm circle (C2), with the same distance from the center of the cornea as C1 (called r) 180 degrees away, is averaged and subtracted from the average outside circle C2 (labeled as M2). CLMI is then calculated as M1 – M2 if the center of C1 is located outside a 2-mm diameter circumference from the center of the cornea. If not, then CLMI is M1 – (r 3 M2). CLMI using the axial map was the strongest predictor of KC, at a threshold of 0.45.

Corneal tomography is superior to slit-lamp examination alone in the diagnosis of both clinical and subclinical pathology.

When using the Pentacam system, there are many keratorefractive indices to determine keratoconus diagnosis (see Table 2, adapted from Motlagh et al.).

Belin/Ambrósio Enhanced Ectasia Display (BAD) is available on Pentacam and optimizes the concept of the best fit sphere or best fit toric ellipsoid, for keratoconus detection. Called “enhanced BFS,” BAD ignores a 4 mm optical zone containing the thinnest section of the cornea and best fits the remainder of the cornea. In keratoconus, the thinnest section protrudes out and can erroneously skew results to be steeper. By excluding this zone, BAD can focus on the surrounding areas which are at risk for ectasia.

Galilei is also used to evaluate keratoconus, and its measurements are listed in Table 3. However, cutoff values for distinguishing subclinical KC is less accurate than those for clinical KC.

Asphericity asymmetry index (AAI) is the absolute difference between the maximum negative and maximum positive elevation value in relation to the best fit toric aspheric (BFTA) reference surface. AAI’s closer to zero means the corneal surface curvature is roughly equivalent and has little variability. AAI of the posterior corneal curvature is very reliable in detecting clinical KC, with a 100% sensitivity and 99.5% specificity. Normal posterior AAI is generally thought to be less than 20-25 μm. Though there is no standard cutoff for subclinical KC, previous studies have shown posterior AAI to be a promising index, one with a cutoff of 21.5 μm and another of 13.5 μm. However, there needs to be research to validate posterior AAI for ectasia screening further. Anterior AAI is not reliable for neither KC nor subclinical KC. AAI is also known as the Kranemann-Arce index.

**Cataract Surgery**:

For cataract surgery, the defective cataract is removed and replaced with an artificial intraocular lens (IOL). If there is astigmatism, the patient will require a toric IOL to offset that corneal defect. Which toric lens and at which angle of implantation can be determined using corneal tomography. Postoperatively, corneal imaging can be used to detect complications such as Descemet membrane detachment and incorrect incision site closures.

**Glaucoma Assessment**:

Using AS-OCT, information regarding the anterior chamber angle, depth, and anatomy can be obtained and potentially be used to evaluate for glaucoma risk. However, clinical evaluation and gonioscopy remain the standard.

**Corneal Surface Disorders**:

Corneal topography is useful in tracking surface changes such as pterygiums and scars. AS-OCT, in particular, helps evaluate deeper changes to the cornea, such as foreign bodies.

**Corneal Transplant**:

Tomography can be used to evaluate the thickness and health of the donor tissue, essential for a successful transplant. In the recipient, clear knowledge of the precise diseased layer allows less unnecessary tissue removal, resulting in a better rate of graft survival and fewer complications.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Corneal surface assessment is useful in nearly all ophthalmic evaluations. Placido disc can be used in primary care to get a general understanding of the anterior surface of the cornea and allow a large number of low-risk patients to be screened. Those with more complex pathologies can be referred to an ophthalmologist, decreasing the cost and resource usage.

Corneal pachymetry is essential in determining candidacy for keratorefractive surgery and is employed by optometrists and ophthalmologists to screen for corneal ectasia risk. Careful screening cuts down on adverse events following operation and better patient outcomes.