The differential diagnosis of fat embolism and fat embolism syndrome are related to each system that this system disease affects

**Respiratory**

fat embolism syndrome and fat embolism should be distinguished from

- Pulmonary Contusion

- Pulmonary edema

- Aspiration pneumonia

- Pulmonary Thromboembolism.

CT of the chest can aid in distinguishing fat embolism syndrome from other pathologies of the lung.

Pulmonary contusion – Typically develops after about 6 to 10 hours of a chest injury, on CT of the chest, there is a localized ground glass opacification on the lung.

Pulmonary edema – In pulmonary edema, there is symmetrical vascular engorgement with pleural effusion and ground-glass opacification.

Thromboembolism – The gold standard for diagnosis is CT angiogram of the chest where classically a filling defect will be present.

**Central Nervous System**

Clinical conditions affecting the central nervous system that should be factored in the differential diagnosis:

- Meningitis

- Encephalitis

- Brain tumor

- Epidural

- Subdural

- Subarachnoid bleed

All the conditions listed above can cause altered mental status with a change in Glasgow Coma Scale mimicking fat embolism syndrome. CAT scan of the brain can help delineate a bleed or tumor. Meningitis and encephalitis can be ruled out with a lumbar puncture and cerebrospinal fluid analysis

**Skin Rash**

The following conditions can present with petechial skin rashes

- Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura,

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura,

- Leukemia

All of these blood disorders should be considered in the presence of skin rash and other associated clinical signs and symptoms. Consultation with a hematologist/oncologist and dermatologist can help in the clinical diagnosis.