Every patient should be interviewed, examined, and investigated for potential malnutrition or overnutrition. Patients with dehydration may present with low blood pressure and increased heart rate. Nursing staff should be cautious and should work in collaboration with the physician to administer the right type and quantity of fluid. In severely dehydrated patients, it is necessary to have two wide bore cannulas in place. 0.9% normal saline is the fluid of choice.

In children, a bolus of 20 ml/kg of 0.9% normal saline should be administered in 10 to 20 minutes. If the vitals do not improve, the bolus dose can be given again. In adults, a 500 ml bolus of crystalloid fluid e.g., 0.9% normal saline, should be administered in 10 to 20 minutes. If no improvement occurs even after the administration of 2000 ml of fluid, then expert help should be taken.

Primary care providers should keep an eye on the nutritional status and development of new signs and symptoms in their patients. Clinicians practicing emergency medicine often get to see patients with a history of alcohol abuse. They can diagnose nutritional deficiency and the diseases related to it. Gynecologists and primary care physicians should pay special attention to females planning to conceive; multivitamin supplements, which include folic acid, iron, and calcium, should be prescribed. In children or elderly with severe malnutrition, cautious refeeding should be started, electrolyte abnormalities should be corrected, and the clinical team should initate activity to prevent hypoglycemia.