TMJ derives from the first pharyngeal arch, where we can recognize a mesodermal part (muscles and vessels) and mesenchyme (from neural crests) for bones and cartilages. The development of TMJ divides into three stages: the blastemic stage; the cavitation stage and lastly, the maturation stage.

- Blastemic stage. It begins in the seventh/eighth week of gestation, where the formation of the glenoid fossa and condylar blastema occurs (a group of cells that remain long undifferentiated and, proliferating, give rise to sketches of organs)

- Cavitation stage. The formation of the lower joint space begins. The blastemas start to differentiate into multiple layers, to form the lower synovial layer and what will become the joint disk; this happens between the ninth and tenth weeks of gestation

- Maturation stage. The upper joint space begins to form towards the eleventh week of gestation. TMJ will continue to form until the baby is born. Around 17 weeks the joint capsule is formed, while at 19 to 20 weeks the development of the cartilage inside the capsule can be recognized.

The morphology of the glenoid fossa and the condyle will be under the influence of the mechanical forces of the vessels and neighboring muscles. At birth, TMJ, compared to other types of synovial joints, is not fully developed. The jaw will begin to develop from the fourth week. TMJ develops simultaneously with the ear.

The child has a more obtuse mandibular arch, compared to the adult, which has a more angular shape; in the baby, the glenoid fossa is looser and, the cartilage is not yet present, but there will be a fibrous connective tissue. Between 5 and 10 years of age, the condyles grow in a posterior, lateral, and upward direction; the joint shape will be further managed by the mechanical forces of the teeth and the chewing muscles.