Although the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) proposed the Accountable Care Organization model, currently, there are several different varieties of an Accountable  Care Organization available for patients. Typically, Accountable Care Organizations consist of a large payer, like an insurance company, coupled with a large group of healthcare providers. In addition, there are large employers that are taking advantage of the shared savings, partnering with healthcare systems, and removing the insurers altogether. The design of an Accountable Care Organization is based on the principle that each provider will be held accountable for the cost and quality of the care provided, prevention of disease, and avoidance of waste.

There are challenges with Accountable Care Organizations, which include the lack of how Accountable  Care organizations should be implemented. The American Hospital Association estimated that Accountable Care Organization formation incurs high startup costs and enormous annual expenses. Accountable Care Organizations risk violating antitrust laws if they drive up costs by reducing competition. To address the antitrust violation concern, the US Department of Justice offered a voluntary antitrust review process for Accountable Care Organization.

Significant challenges face primary-care physicians who join an Accountable Care Organization via a group practice, hospital-medical practice alignment, or another joint venture such as an independent practice association. Physician groups need a robust Electronic Health Record system with advanced reporting, disease registries, and patient population care management. Organizations that achieve Patient-Centered Medical Home accreditation have mastered these functions and are further along the road to meeting Accountable Care Organization metrics.