The equipment needed to perform an adequate colposcopy involves a vaginal speculum, a colposcope, 5% acetic acid, Lugol’s solution, biopsy forceps, an endocervical speculum, a Kevorkian curette or endocervical brush, and a solution or method to stem bleeding. The colposcope is a dissecting microscope that can magnify the cervical, vaginal, or vulvar tissue.  There are multiple options for colposcopes with lens types, computer-generated images, light filters, and even cameras to capture images or videos. Colposcopes should have 2 settings, low power and a high power magnification for evaluation of a lesion.

Most scopes have interchangeable magnifications at 10x and 18x. The scope should have a normal light filter as well as a green filter in order to identify vascular patterns that can be difficult to recognize with white light.

There are different methods to stop the bleeding after a biopsy has been taken, including applying Monsel’s solution, using silver nitrate, or even Bovie cauterization can be employed. There is also a new method called digital video colposcopy, it provides magnification and illumination with the help of an inbuilt camera and strong light source (LED). Binocular eyepieces are not required, and the colposcopic image is viewed on a high-resolution video monitor. It has several advantages such as easy manipulation, co-visualization of images simultaneously by several viewers, including trainees, as well as the patient. It obtains a permanent record of the findings in the form of a replica of the image being seen by the examiner.