The etiology of acute laryngitis can be classified as either **infectious**or**non-infectious**. The infectious form is more common and usually follows an upper respiratory tract infection.

Viral agents such as rhinovirus, parainfluenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus, coronavirus, adenovirus, and influenza are all potential etiologic agents (listed in roughly descending order of frequency). It is possible for bacterial superinfection to occur in the setting of viral laryngitis, this classically occurs approximately seven days after symptoms begin.

The most commonly encountered bacterial organisms are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis, in that order. Exanthematous febrile illnesses such as measles, chickenpox, and whooping cough are also associated with acute laryngitis symptoms, so it is prudent to obtain an accurate immunization history. Laryngitis caused by fungal infection is very rare in immunocompetent individuals, and more often presents as chronic laryngitis in the immunocompromised or in patients using inhaled steroid medications.

**Acute infectious laryngitis**in adults is most commonly caused by the viral organisms listed above. These same agents are common in pediatric acute laryngitis, though it is important to remember croup (laryngotracheobronchitis) in children, which is due to parainfluenza virus (most commonly parainfluenza-1). This may present with isolated vocal symptoms, but classically includes a characteristic "barking" cough and may progress to inspiratory or biphasic stridor

**Acute non-infectious laryngitis**can be due to vocal trauma/abuse/misuse, allergy, gastroesophageal reflux disease, asthma, environmental pollution, smoking, inhalational injuries, or functional/conversion disorders.

Vocal misuse or abuse can be acute in onset, as seen after a day or days of shouting/yelling. This is common in coaches, fans, and athletes after an event. This can also be seen in vocal performers, particularly those whose performance intensity or frequency has increased recently, and who have not had formal voice or singing coaching.

Gastroesophageal reflux (GERD), more specifically extra-esophageal GERD, termed laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR), is an exceptionally common cause of voice symptoms and laryngitis. These symptoms can be acute or chronic and may be episodic. They may not follow or accompany the classic GERD symptoms, and 1/3 of patients with GERD will experience **only**laryngeal/voice symptoms. Hallmarks include a history of GERD, frequent throat-clearing or coughing, globus pharyngeus sensation, or coarseness to the voice. Singers may note a loss of their higher range.

Asthma may predispose to laryngitis due to chemical irritation from inhaler use, and chronic steroid inhaler use can predispose to fungal laryngitis, particularly if patients are not drinking plain water after their steroid inhaler use as instructed. There is also cough-variant asthma that may cause a repetitive injury to the vocal cords, leading to voice changes that mimic acute laryngitis.

Environmental causes such as seasonal and environmental allergies, or seasonal or constant air pollution, can cause irritation to the vocal cords that may trigger acute laryngeal symptoms.

Inhalation of noxious substances, whether intentional from smoking or other drug use or from unintentional exposure, irritates the larynx and can cause edema of the vocal folds and voice symptoms. Certain patients may be sensitive to perfumes, colognes, detergents, or other commonly-used aromatics in daily life.

Functional dysphonia is a term for a group of true conversion disorders and encompasses a wide range of voice symptoms and physical examination findings. This is a diagnosis of exclusion, but recent major life stressors such as loss of a job or loved one are well-known triggers.