Nebivolol is administered by the oral route, and no intravenous form is available. Oral tablets are available as nebivolol hydrochloride salt equivalent to 2.5, 5, 10, and 20 mg of nebivolol.

**Hypertension**

In a patient with hypertension, the dose of nebivolol should be recommended based on the patient's individual needs. The recommended starting dose for most patients is 5 mg once daily, and patients can take it without respect to food. If further reduction in blood pressure is necessary, the dose can be titrated up at 2 to 4-week intervals based on the clinical response. The maximum dose is 40 mg once daily. Nebivolol is a CYP2D6 substrate, and drug-drug interaction should be considered before prescribing nebivolol. A recent review suggests that nebivolol is also effective in African-American patients with hypertension, who have been identified as a population who respond less to beta-blockers than people of other ethnicities.

Nebivolol should never be stopped abruptly, and taper-off medicine is recommended if the patient needs to stop using nebivolol. Rebound hypertension, tachycardia, exacerbation of cardiac arrhythmia, and hospitalization are reported when beta-blockers are stopped abruptly.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

- Pregnancy Considerations: Nebivolol is a former FDA pregnancy Category C medicine. If required to use in pregnant women with a history of hypertension, then fetal monitoring is needed. Right after the birth baby should be monitored for the first 48 hours for possible hypoglycemia, bradycardia, and respiratory depression.

- Breastfeeding Considerations: There is no information on using nebivolol while breastfeeding infants. The risk of beta-blockers causing bradycardia in breastfed infants should be considered, and an alternate drug with safer profiles should be used.

- Patients with Hepatic Impairment: Per product labeling, the initial recommended dose is 2.5 mg orally once daily and titrated up slowly if needed in patients with moderate hepatic impairment. No data is available on nebivolol use in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

- Patients with Renal Impairment: Per product labeling, in patients with severe renal impairment (CrCl less than 30 mL/min), the initial recommended dose is 2.5 mg orally once daily and titrated up slowly if needed. There is no data available on nebivolol use in patients on dialysis.