Several mechanisms can cause Fanconi syndrome, some of which may not be fully known. These mechanisms include decreased influx of solute into the blood from the tubular epithelium, increased back flux of solute across the tight junctions separating the cells that line the tubular epithelium from the blood to the glomerular filtrate, defective solute influx into the tubular epithelium, and leakage of the solute back into the lumen from the tubular epithelium. This could be due to a larger problem associated with generating the energy that is needed by the cells to accomplish the task of bringing solutes in through the brush border membrane or in transferring solutes out through the basolateral membrane. For example, heavy metal poisoning can compromise the utilization of energy by mitochondria.

Fanconi syndrome requires that distal segments of the nephron do not absorb the solutes that are reabsorbed primarily by the proximal convoluted tubule. Malabsorption of these substances could be due to altered permeability of tubule membranes or problems with transport carriers. The substances they do not absorb, include amino acids, bicarbonate, glucose, phosphate, proteins, and uric acid and are considered to be associated with low ATP levels. As for which mechanism is at play in which acquired or inherited cause of Fanconi syndrome, these vary and are under investigation. It is important to note that type 2 renal tubular acidosis is not always associated with Fanconi syndrome, but Fanconi syndrome does present with type 2 renal tubular acidosis in the setting of excessive excretion of bicarbonate.