# Continuing Education Activity

Yellow nail syndrome (YNS) is a rare condition defined by a presence of two of the following: (1) slow-growing, hard, yellow, and dystrophic nails, (2) lymphedema, and (3) respiratory tract disease. The earliest case of YNS was reported by Heller in 1927. However, in 1947, Samman and White published the first case series of YNS in patients with nail discoloration and lymphedema. Pulmonary disease, specifically pleural effusion, was added to the diagnostic criteria by Emerson in 1966. In general, the syndrome is acquired and affects adults over age 50. However, there are case reports of YNS occurring in children and even newborns. This activity describes the evaluation and management of yellow nail syndrome and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the common presentation of a patient with yellow nail syndrome.
- Explain the common physical exam findings associated with yellow nail syndrome.
- Review the reasons for a delayed diagnosis of yellow nail syndrome.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance yellow nail syndrome and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Yellow nail syndrome (YNS) is a rare condition defined by a presence of two of the following: (1) slow-growing, hard, yellow, and dystrophic nails, (2) lymphedema, and (3) respiratory tract disease.

Anatomically, YNS affects the fingernails, toenails, the respiratory tract, and gravity-dependent areas that can accumulate fluid (typically lower extremities). These signs and symptoms are believed to be due to dysfunction in lymphatic drainage.

**Nails**

As the name suggests, xanthonychia (yellow nail coloration) is a common feature of YNS; however, yellow nails are not required if two of the other clinical signs are present. Discoloration varies from pale yellow to dark green; nails can be opaque or translucent.

**Respiratory Tract**

The respiratory tract is involved in more than half of patients with YNS.

**Lymphedema**

Lymphedema typically manifests in the bilateral lower extremities and does not differ in appearance from primary lymphedema.

**Natural History**

The diagnosis of YNS can be difficult because patients rarely present concurrently with all three clinical criteria. Lymphedema is the initial symptom in approximately one-third of YNS diagnoses.

# Etiology

The specific cause of yellow nail syndrome (YNS) is unclear. The most widely accepted explanation for the signs and symptoms associated with YNS is a dysfunction of the lymphatic system, specifically, lymphatic drainage.

While cases of familial and congenital YNS have been reported, in the majority of cases, YNS is an acquired disorder of the lymphatic system that presents later in life.

# Epidemiology

The exact prevalence of YNS is unknown, and the majority of the literature pertaining to YNS involves case reports. The estimated prevalence is less than 1/1,000,000.

# Pathophysiology

As the underlying cause of YNS is unknown, the pathophysiology is also unclear. The most widely accepted cause of YNS is thought to be related to abnormalities in lymphatic flow. Based on their investigations involving quantitative lymphoscintigraphy, Bull et al. argue that unlike primary lymphedema, which is due to permanent structural lymphatic abnormalities, the abnormalities observed in YNS appears to be functional and potentially reversible.

# Histopathology

Histopathological examination of nails is important to rule out other more common causes of yellow nails, such as onychomycosis. The appearance of nails in YNS is varied. Changes include a thickened nail plate with exaggerated curvature, xanthonychia (yellow discoloration), scleronychia (hardening of the nail), onycholysis (separation of the nail plate and nail bed), and slow growth.

When a pleural effusion is present, thoracentesis and examination of the fluid typically reveal a serous exudative effusion.

# History and Physical

**History**

A thorough history is crucial to diagnosing YNS. Open-ended questioning and a detailed review of the pulmonary, vascular, and integumentary systems can reveal clues that may lead to the diagnosis of this rare syndrome. The pulmonary findings in YNS vary widely. It is important to ask about persistent cough, congestion, and recurrent respiratory infections. Review of past medical history, social history (i.e., smoking status, exposures to respiratory irritants), and previous chest imaging are essential. Remember that symptoms can be mild, intermittent, and may not present concurrently.

**Physical Exam**

Special attention should be paid to analyzing fingernails and toenails and removing polish if necessary. Nail findings can be subtle, the discoloration can range in intensity from pale yellow to green.

The physical appearance of lymphedema in YNS is no different than what is seen in primary lymphedema. Based on case reports, lymphedema is the initial symptom of YNS in approximately one-third of patients, and it is present in approximately 30% to 80% of those diagnosed with the syndrome.

Respiratory tract manifestations in YNS occur in 60% to 70% of patients, the most common of which is a chronic cough.

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of YNS is clinical, and no specific test is required or diagnostic. More commonly encountered diagnoses, such as heart failure, primary lymphedema, and onychomycosis, should be ruled out. This can be done through a thorough investigation of the patient's history and physical exam or may require additional tests. Potential testing may include the following:

- Echocardiography to rule out heart failure

- Chest radiography to identify pneumonia or other pulmonary pathology

- CT of the sinuses to assess for chronic sinusitis

- Testing for infection, such as sputum analysis or CBC

- Analysis of nail scrapings or clippings to rule out onychomycosis

- Thoracentesis with an evaluation of pleural fluid

- Lymphoscintigraphy to identify lymphatic insufficiency

# Treatment / Management

The management of yellow nail syndrome (YNS) focuses on treating symptoms. If thought to be a paraneoplastic syndrome, the treatment of underlying cancer may lead to resolution.

**Pulmonary Symptoms**

Pleural effusions are usually treated with thoracentesis. Octreotide has been shown to be effective in some cases of chylous effusions associated with YNS.

**Dystrophic and Discolored Nails**

Nail disease in YNS can resolve spontaneously. Evidence for using oral vitamin E to treat nail discoloration has mixed success.

**Lymphedema**

Lymphedema observed in YNS is treated with the same interventions used in primary lymphedema. Generally, non-surgical interventions are used, including compression garments and bandaging used in combination with skincare, manual lymph drainage, and exercises.

# Differential Diagnosis

Because YNS involves multiple symptoms from various organ systems, the differential diagnosis is broad.

The pulmonary manifestations of YNS, such as pleural plaques and pleural thickening, have similar characteristics to asbestos-related lung disease.

# Prognosis

Prognosis in YNS is dependent on the specific symptoms of the patient and co-existing illnesses. Symptoms range from mild (poor nail cosmesis and chronic cough) to severe (marked and recurring edema, persistent pulmonary infections). There is no cure for YNS. Treatment is aimed at improving symptoms.

# Complications

Because YNS involves multiple organ systems, complications depend on which specific symptoms the patient exhibits. Dystrophic and discolored nails can cause psychological distress from embarrassment, and onycholysis can be painful.

**Pulmonary**

Large and persistent pleural effusions are uncomfortable and can cause a significant decline in functional status. Effusions are associated with other potentially fatal complications, such as infection and respiratory distress.

**Lymphatic**

Significant edema usually affects the bilateral lower extremities leading to difficulty with ambulation and deconditioning. Furthermore, longstanding lymphedema leads to changes in skin texture and color, which can be esthetically unappealing and can lead to cellulitis and other infections.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Yellow nail syndrome is an extremely rare diagnosis. It can go undiagnosed for misdiagnosed for years before other more common conditions are ruled out. The interprofessional team and caretakers must advocate for further investigation and consideration of differential diagnoses if standard therapy is not successful. There is no specific treatment for YNS; therefore, patients must be aware of the potential harms and limited success of any intervention.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- The diagnosis of YNS requires two of the following: yellow nails, lymphedema, and pulmonary disease.

- YNS is often misdiagnosed as onychomycosis; however, histopathological analysis of nail samples is negative for fungus. Similarly, examination under Wood's lamp is typically negative.

- YNS can mimic heart failure, a far more common condition, as it also can present with dyspnea on exertion, pleural effusion, and lower extremity edema.

- Treatment for YNS is generally supportive and focused on treating symptoms. Oftentimes, symptoms improve regardless of intervention but usually recur.

- Lymphoscintigraphy is a method used to assess lymphatic function. Testing is typically abnormal in patients with YNS but is less severe than those with primary lymphedema.

- The exact mechanism of YNS is unknown, but it is thought to be due to functional impairment in the lymphatic system that leads to changes in capillary permeability.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Yellow nail syndrome (YNS) frequently goes undiagnosed or misdiagnosed for many years. These patients may exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms including cough, recurrent infection, lower extremity edema, and nail discoloration, which are present in conditions far more prevalent than YNS, such as heart failure, venous insufficiency, infection, or medication side-effect. It can lead to patients being referred to a myriad of specialists in the fields of cardiology, infectious disease, endocrinology, and pulmonology. Although a more common illness is more likely in patients who present with 2 or 3 signs and symptoms of the triad of YNS, health professionals must communicate effectively and rule out these other illnesses in a way that limits unnecessary testing, treatment, and consultation. Health care providers need to keep YNS on the differential as it is a clinical diagnosis.

Approximately one-third of patients with YNS have all three signs/symptoms simultaneously.