The differential diagnoses of TLE include lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner, polymorphic light eruption, pseudolymphoma of the skin, reticular erythematous mucinosis, and granuloma faciale. Jessner's lymphocytic infiltrate presents very similarly to tumid lupus with erythematous papular or nodular lesions without scale, on the upper back or the face. Histopathology also shows dermal mucin deposition.

Polymorphic light eruption (PMLE) presents as skin-colored or erythematous plaques or papules that are pruritic in the sun-exposed areas of the body. Lesions typically occur within hours of photo exposure and resolve soon than tumid lupus lesions. With progressive exposure to UV light, PMLE lesions do not get worse(hardening effect), which differentiates them from TLE.

Reticular erythematous mucinosis presents as erythematous, reticular macules, or plaques, usually on the upper back and chest. Dermal mucin deposition is more superficial. Lymphocytes are more dispersed and superficial.

Pseudolymphoma of the skin presents as erythematous nodules in the dermis, usually on the chest, arms, and face. Lesions are not photosensitive. Histopathology differentiates it from TLE, due to the presence of histiocytes and plasma cells along with lymphocytes.

Granuloma faciale presents as a violaceous nodule or plaque on the face. Lesions are usually asymptomatic. Grenz zone is the characteristic histologic finding that distinguishes it from TLE. A thin zone of the uninvolved papillary dermis that divides the dermal inflammatory infiltrate (lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils) from the epidermis is called the Grenz zone.