Tizanidine is administrated orally as 2 mg, 4 mg, and 6 mg capsules or as 2 mg and 4 mg tablets. Dosage starts with 2 mg orally and may repeat every 6 to 8 hours as needed. The dosage may gradually increase by 2 to 4 mg per dose for 1 to 4 days in between until there is a noticeably significant reduction of spasticity. Maximum dosing is three doses every 24 hours, up to 36 mg daily.

If tizanidine is used for more than nine weeks or given in high doses ranging from 20 mg to 36 mg daily, taper the dose gradually. The recommendation is to taper the dose to 2 to 4 mg daily to reduce the risk of tachycardia, rebound hypertension, and increased spasticity.

The patient may open the capsule and sprinkle the contents into food. Patients can take tizanidine with food or on an empty stomach. It is important to note that the extent of absorption is greater when taken with food. The tablet and capsule dosage forms are not bioequivalent when administered with food. Hence, the clinician should counsel the patient to take tizanidine with or without food but be consistent to avoid fluctuations in concentration.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**The consequence of Hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of tizanidine has not been evaluated. However, tizanidine is extensively metabolized by the liver; therefore, hepatic impairment would significantly influence the pharmacokinetics of tizanidine. Therefore, tizanidine should be avoided or used with extreme caution in patients with hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Tizanidine should be used cautiously in patients with renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 25 mL/min), as clearance is decreased by more than 50%. Start with a low dose, evaluate the response to therapy, and if a higher dose is needed, the dose can be increased rather than increasing the frequency of administration. The clinician should monitor the patient closely for adverse drug reactions such as dry mouth, drowsiness, asthenia, and dizziness as indicators of toxicity.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**The use of tizanidine in managing spinal cord injury during pregnancy has been described in case reports.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Tizanidine is a lipid-soluble drug; hypothetically, it may be present in breast milk; its use during lactation is not advised.