Complications related to TAP blocks are rare. Some complications have been reported in the literature, including:

- Bowel perforation

- Hematoma

- Liver/Spleen laceration

- Intrahepatic injection

- Intraperitoneal injection of local anesthetic

- Retroperitoneal hematoma due to vascular injury

- Transient femoral nerve blockage

- Local infection

- Intravascular injection

- Local Anesthetic systemic toxicity

It is recommended to utilize ultrasound guidance rather than anatomical landmarks to increase the success rate and minimize these complications. There have been minimal reported complications after the universal implementation of the ultrasound-guided technique for the TAP block.

Neurological injury is rare in TAP blocks, because these are field blocks, relying on the high volume of the local anesthetic injected to facilitate adequate blockade of the nerves that are located in the compartment, rather than targeting a specific nerve. If a neurologic injury occurs might be from direct nerve trauma from the needle, hematoma, or local infection. Excessive needle insertion, especially in thin, elderly, or deconditioned patients may also lead to complications such as visceral trauma, vascular injury, intraperitoneal injection, or intrahepatic injection.

Case reports have also described transient femoral nerve palsy where some of the local anesthetic injected for the TAP block could trail on the fascia iliaca below the inguinal ligament, producing an inadvertent blockage of the femoral nerve. If this incident happens, the surgical team should be made aware and the patient has to be advised regarding the potential risk for falls.