The precise neural circuit mapping of the grasp reflex has not been characterized. Research has shown that ulnar and median nerve stimulation at the wrist will yield a grasp reflex response in 40 milliseconds, suggesting that the reflex gets mediated at the spinal cord level.

Several conditions are associated with the reemergence of the grasp reflex in later life, including Parkinson disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, dementia with Lewy bodies frontotemporal dementia, and normal pressure hydrocephalus.

Although the grasp reflex may be present in a range of neurological disorders, its presence is not always pathologic. Like all primitive reflexes, the grasp reflex is normally present in infancy. The grasp reflex has been reportedly observed as early as the 16th week of gestation and is generally observable by the third trimester.

A paucity of scholarship exists specifically looking at treating the grasp reflex in adults. Instead, research has largely focused on treating the overlying neurological disorders likely responsible for the reemergence of the grasp reflex. However, the presence of the grasp reflex can contribute to disability in patients with neurodegenerative conditions and can hinder their abilities to complete activities of daily living.

A case study of three patients who had alcohol dependence and were already receiving treatment with benzodiazepines reported some success in eliminating the grasp reflex by treating with acamprosate.

Other suggested treatments involve injecting botulinum toxin into the muscles involved in the grasp reflex.

Orthotics such as splints represent another suggested therapy.