Stercoral colitis is an uncommon disease that is relatively under-documented; therefore, medical professionals should become educated on the signs, symptoms, and management of this condition. These patients often require an interprofessional group of physicians, including an internist, surgeon, gastroenterologist, pharmacist, infectious disease specialist, radiologist, intensivist, and dietitian. A surgical consult should be placed early. The patient's disposition is largely determined by their clinical presentation, and even patients that are initially stable should be monitored closely, given the high fatality associated with complications of this disease.

Blood cultures and sensitivity profiles should be monitored, and antibiotics adjusted accordingly. Infectious disease consult may be beneficial in some cases. Patients should be closely monitored after intervention as complications of operative and non-operative management carry a high risk of mortality.

There should be an investigation into the cause of impaction that led to this condition. If the patient suffered from chronic constipation, which led to the development of stercoral colitis, a bowel regimen should be started, and outpatient gastroenterology follow-up arranged upon discharge to prevent disease recurrence. If other factors led to the development of this condition, such as neuropsychiatric disorders or opioid use, these issues should be addressed with social services, psychiatry, or pain management to optimize them for safe discharge.

This is a rare and complex disease that carries high morbidity and mortality and therefore requires communication between a team of interprofessional physicians, nurses, dieticians, and social workers to optimize outcomes.