Stunned myocardium is a temporary state, and routine diagnostic for its evaluation is not recommended. There is no therapeutic management geared towards its management. Since stunned myocardium occurs mostly after reperfusion of ischemic myocardium, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional health care team approach, including doctors, nurses, pharmacists, physiotherapists, dietitians, physical trainers, and psychologists.

Asymptomatic patients should continue to get annual exams, and underlying risk factors should be treated appropriately. Patients with underlying hypertension, heart failure, coronary artery diseases need strict blood pressure control, medical management, and lifestyle modification. Patients who undergo reperfusion therapy require antiplatelet therapy to avoid any cardiovascular thrombotic events. Pharmacists can help ensure patients get all their medications in a timely fashion. They can also recommend medication selection, dosing, and reconciliation to avoid any drug interactions. Pharmacists can also help report any adverse drug reaction to the health care team and assist in subsequent medication changes and patient counseling. Nurses are an integral part of patient care, especially while patients remain inpatient. Their role is integral in emphasizing and monitoring medication compliance and providing counseling. A fully collaborative, interprofessional team approach can help achieve optimal results in patients with stunned myocardium. [Level 5]