Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most common identifiable cause of hypercalcemia and is typically found most frequently in postmenopausal women.

Risk factors associated with hyperparathyroidism include specific germline and somatic mutations, chronically low dietary calcium, obesity, prolonged use of furosemide, history of neck radiation therapy, lithium therapy, hypertension, and physical inactivity.

Once considered a relatively rare disease associated with significant morbidity, primary hyperparathyroidism is now considered a relatively common endocrine disorder, often asymptomatic. Prior to 1970, the diagnosis went unsuspected until patients presented with specific symptoms, typically nephrolithiasis or bone pain. Since then, most patients are diagnosed with hyperparathyroidism when serum calcium is incidentally discovered to be elevated on a chemistry profile ordered as screening tests or for an unrelated problem. The current incidence in the United States has been estimated at a mean of 66 per 100,000 person-years in women and from 13 to 36 per 100,000 person-years in men.

Primary hyperparathyroidism is typically asymptomatic in most Western countries, where biochemical blood screening is commonly performed. In those global regions where vitamin D deficiency is widespread and biochemical screening is not a common or routine part of the healthcare system, symptomatic disease with skeletal abnormalities and nephrolithiasis are the more likely presentations.

Parathyroid cancer is quite rare as it constitutes less than 0.5% of all cases of primary hyperparathyroidism. Higher serum calcium levels and parathyroid hormone are commonly seen compared to benign primary hyperparathyroidism.