Controlled substances are prescribable by a variety of clinicians: physicians, dentists, mid-level providers, podiatrists, etc. The prescribing practitioner must possess authorization from the DEA and have practicing rights within the given location of the prescription origin.

If there is any confusion for the pharmacist as to the reason for a prescription, or there are any other questions for the provider, then the pharmacist should contact the provider directly. A 2017 study showed that of prescriptions requiring clarification, 74% were new prescriptions, and only 36% of those needing clarification were electronically prescribed.  The most frequent reasons for the pharmacist to contact the prescriber were for prior authorization approvals and missing prescription information. The study found that the most efficient means to correct these miscommunications was telephone contact.

Pharmacists play a crucial role in helping to limit the fraud that may occur, examples of potentially fraudulent activity are

- Stealing a clinician’s prescription pad

- Calling in medications pretending to be a clinician

- Altering a pre-existing prescription

It is important to remember that individual states may pass laws that alter how they govern the requirements of a prescription for different medications. An example of this is for marijuana, which at a federal level is considered a Schedule I drug, whereas some states permit its medical use and distribution. Pharmacists and practitioners should be familiar with the legislation within their practicing jurisdiction to provide the most appropriate patient care.

However, in many instances, state law is more stringent than federal law. An example is drug monitoring systems for opioid prescriptions. Prescription drug monitoring programs are conducted on a state-by-state basis and are an electronic database of information on prescriptions filled within that state. The purpose of these monitoring programs is to limit drug abuse and addiction. Not all states at the time of writing this article have a fully operating monitoring program.