Although many injuries involving the annular ligament can be managed conservatively with physical therapy, activity modifications, bracing, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs), there are many indications for surgical intervention.

**Radial head instability**

Healthcare providers must recognize that, in general, isolated radial head instability is extremely uncommon.

Patients with congenital radial head dislocations will present with a separate chief complaint, and the dislocation may be discovered incidentally. These patients may be asymptomatic, and the following factors support congenital dislocation over an acute, traumatic dislocation:

- Bilateral radial head dislocations

- Hypoplastic capitellum and convex radial head

- Other congenital abnormalities

- No history of trauma

- Inability to reduce

There have been case reports of a portion of the annular ligament band interposing between the humeroradial interface as the band slips over the radial head during elbow flexion and extension. This "snapping" or "locking" can be thought of as analogous to a bucket handle tear of the meniscus in the knee. Patients are managed based on the severity of symptoms and the degree of disability that is attributable to these mechanical symptoms. Persistent mechanical symptoms may warrant surgery to remove the interposed fragment.

**Annular ligament reconstruction techniques**

The annular ligament is typically reconstructed using any of the following techniques.

- Bell-Tawse technique

- 
              
- Utilizes the central portion of the triceps tendon to create a strip of tissue to pass around the radial neck and through a single drill hole in the ulna
              
              
- Modifications of the original technique have included either an additional ulnar shortening osteotomy or in using the lateral portion of the triceps tendon with a transcapitellar pin for stability

- Two-hole technique

- 
              
- Seel and Peterson drilled two holes in the proximal ulna at the original sites of the normal attachment of the annular ligament

- A third technique was described utilizing small bone staples and bone-anchoring devices as an alternative to transosseous drill holes

Rehabilitation protocols depend on the specific surgical technique used for the reconstruction and follow surgeon preference. General rehabilitation phases include early range of motion to mitigate the risks of postoperative stiffness. Patients should return to full range-of-motion by 6 weeks after surgery. Strengthening exercises begin at about 8 to 12 weeks postop. Most patients can return to normal activities by six months to one year. Overhead athletes may take over a year to return to sport.