# Continuing Education Activity

Esophageal cysts are rare congenital malformations that categorize as being epithelial-lined or duplication in nature. They are usually diagnosed in childhood but can also present in adults. They can be asymptomatic or present with symptoms of respiratory distress, dysphagia, and/or chest pain. This activity reviews the evaluation, management, and treatment of esophageal cysts and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of esophageal cysts.
- Summarize the appropriate history, physical, and evaluation of esophageal cysts.
- Describe the management and treatment options available for esophageal cysts.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination between interprofessional team members to improve the outcomes of those affected with esophageal cysts.

# Introduction

Esophageal cysts are rare congenital malformations first described by Blasius in 1711.

# Etiology

The etiology of esophageal cysts is not clearly understood. The development of esophageal cysts is believed to result from a failure of vacuolization and budding of the primitive esophagus between weeks 4 to 8 of gestation, although no single unifying hypothesis has been able to elucidate why cysts occur at varying locations throughout the gastrointestinal tract.

# Epidemiology

Esophageal cysts are rare entities, as their incidence is reported to be 1 in 8200 live births with a 2 to 1 male predominance.

# Pathophysiology

As a result of the aberrant development of the posterior division of the primitive foregut during embryogenesis, esophageal cysts can occur anywhere along the esophagus. Approximately 60 percent of the cysts occur in the lower third of the esophagus, which results in compressive dysphagia being the most common presenting symptom. Posterior cysts, located in the lower third of the esophagus, have also been seen to cause cardiac arrhythmias.

Approximately 90 percent of esophageal cysts do not communicate with the esophageal lumen; the others tend to run parallel to and communicate with the esophageal lumen.

# Histopathology

Duplication cysts may be cystic, tubular, or present as a diverticulum with the cystic type being more common.

# History and Physical

Most esophageal cysts are diagnosed in early childhood but can also present in adults. Some esophageal duplication cysts may have correlations with concurrent vertebral abnormalities.

The differentials for esophageal duplication cysts include mediastinal cysts like bronchogenic cysts, pericardial cysts or cystic degeneration of mediastinal tumors or other cysts including hydatid cyst, Mullerian cysts.

# Evaluation

The workup and evaluation of esophageal cysts include imaging/diagnostic procedures guided by history and physical examination findings and specific histopathologic characteristics. Imaging studies such as chest radiographs and barium swallow studies can reveal a mediastinal mass with esophageal compression along with tracheal displacement and narrowing.

Computed tomography (CT) of an esophageal cyst can reveal a fluid-filled cystic structure arising from the esophagus that does not enhance after intravenous administration of contrast material. A benefit of CT includes the ability to rule out a lung and thoracic vertebral pathology along with providing anatomical landmarks if pursuing surgical intervention.

Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is the modality of choice to evaluate esophageal cysts. EUS can further characterize the echogenicity of the lesion.

The criteria for classifying an esophageal cyst include the following

- The cyst is within or attached to the esophageal wall.

- Two muscle layers cover the cyst.

- The lining is squamous, columnar, cuboidal, pseudostratified, or ciliated epithelium.

The combination of imaging and histopathology contributes to the diagnosis of esophageal cysts.

# Treatment / Management

Medical therapy serves no role in the management of esophageal cysts. Surgical removal is the treatment of choice in most symptomatic cases. Simple cysts show enucleation, whereas duplications get excised. Traditionally, a posterolateral thoracotomy was performed to remove the cyst. However, more recently, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) and robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (RATS) are available to perform enucleation and resection with better cosmetic outcomes.

In asymptomatic cases, there are currently no clear guidelines on whether or not treatment is warranted. Surgery can be an option to prevent cases of ulceration, perforation, and rare instances of malignancy.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Bronchogenic cyst

- Cervical duplication cyst

- Thyroglossal duct cyst

- Neuroenteric cyst

- Lipoma

- Lymphangioma

- Hemangioma

- Anterior meningocele

- Pericardial cyst

# Prognosis

After treatment with full surgical enucleation and/or excision, patients overall do well both in the short term and long term. Recurrence is rare, but has been reported.

# Complications

The complications associated with esophageal cysts include heartburn, reflux esophagitis, rupture, obstruction, hemorrhage, infection, and malignancy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients and family members should receive education about recognizing symptoms associated with esophageal cysts. If undergoing surgical intervention, patients should be informed and educated on any potential complications and have a follow-up visit scheduled with their physician.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The evaluation of esophageal cysts includes a thorough history, examination, diagnostic, and pathological testing. An interprofessional team, including primary care physicians, pharmacists, radiologists, gastroenterologists, surgeons, and specialty-trained nurses, can facilitate better recognition and management of esophageal cysts to prevent harmful outcomes and complications. The role of the nurse in the postoperative period is vital. Patients need both DVT and bedsore prophylaxis; nursing staff will be crucial in this regard, and must report any concerns to the treating clinician and interprofessional team. To prevent atelectasis, incentive spirometry should be encouraged. If the patient has a chest drain, the amount of air and fluid leak requires monitoring. [Level 5] Patient education is paramount. Length of follow-up after enucleation or excision varies, and there are no clear guidelines on whether or not surveillance imaging is necessary at this time.