An array of devices are used in thrombectomy. These include guide catheters, stent-retrievers, microcatheters, aspiration catheters, and aspiration pump systems.

**Aspiration Catheters**

Large-bore catheters suction out the thrombus using negative pressure aspiration. The selection of aspiration catheters includes a large variety of devices from different manufacturers.

**Aspiration Pump
**

An aspiration pump machine or a 16 to 20 mL syringe serves to apply negative pressure to suction the thrombus.

**Microcatheters/ Guidewires
**

These are small catheters advanced into a guiding catheter through a system where the catheter passes over the wire, which aids in the more complex and complete occlusions in the coronary and peripheral vasculature.

**Stent Retrieval Tool
**

Solitaire utilizes a stent retrieval tool, by which an expandable stent is deployed, secures itself to the thrombus, and then can extract the clot. A systematic review revealed no significant difference in efficacy or safety between two different stent retrieval devices.

**Other Devices Used
**

Other innovative thrombectomy devices remove clots in large vessels through high-flow volume capped aspiration and self-expanding mesh discs. The device is indicated for use in the peripheral vasculature and pulmonary arteries. The FLARE trial provided evidence for the safety and efficacy of such devices in acute, intermediate-risk PE patients.

Over the wire systems are used to remove a significant clot burden from large diameter vessels and involve functions such as coring out clot from vein walls. Such systems are composed of a catheter and a sheath. The catheter consists of a coring element and a collecting bag. Once the catheter is advanced to the occlusion level, it is further advanced through the clot and is unsheathed and expanded. Upon retraction of the catheter, the coring element releases the clot from the vessel walls, while the proximal collecting bag serves to prevent the spread of any embolic clot material.