Patients usually present with an asymptomatic area of darkening and thickening of the skin, pruritus, and lesions that are velvety, hyperpigmented macules and patches and progress to palpable plaques. In approximately one-third of cases, malignant acanthosis nigricans presents with skin changes before any signs of cancer. In another one-third of cases, lesions arise simultaneously with the neoplasm. In the remaining one-third of cases, the skin findings manifest some time after the diagnosis of cancer.

In nearly one-third of patients with malignant acanthosis nigricans, the skin changes usually occur before any clinical signs of the malignancy. In another one-third of patients, the skin lesions develop at the same time as the presentation of cancer. In the remaining patients, the skin features occur after cancer has developed. Malignant acanthosis nigricans can appear suddenly and often is associated with intense pruritus.

The lesions of acanthosis nigricans typically occur in areas of skin folds like the groin, axilla, or posterior neck. In children, the most common site of acanthosis nigricans is the posterior neck. Rarely, acanthosis nigricans may occur on the mucous membranes of the nose, oral cavity, esophagus, or larynx. Women also may develop lesions on the nipple. Rare cases of acanthosis nigricans have been reported in the conjunctiva.

In some patients, there also may be associated with skin tags in the same area. Nail changes like hyperkeratosis and leukonychia may be present. Clinically, it is not possible to differentiate the lesions of benign versus malignant acanthosis nigricans.