**Synthesis of the Neurotransmitter Acetylcholine**

Cholinergic crisis is caused by overstimulation of the postsynaptic membrane by the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh). ACh is a chemical substance that was first proven to be a neurotransmitter by Loewi in 1921. ACh is found in at the synapses of ganglia, the neuromuscular junction, and the muscular system of the visceral organs. It is synthesized at the nerve terminal from acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA).

Acetyl CoA is derived from glucose and choline by a reaction catalyzed by choline acetyltransferase (CAT). ACh is then packaged in the presynaptic membrane in vesicles. Each vesicle can contain up to about 10,000 molecules of ACh which is subsequently released upon stimulation. Calcium ion stimulates the release of ACh. The action of ACh at the postsynaptic membrane is not terminated by reuptake of the neurotransmitter but rather by the action of a powerful hydrolytic enzyme acetylcholine esterase AChE. This enzyme is found in the synaptic cleft. The action of this enzyme breaks up ACh into choline and acetate. The cholinergic nerve terminal has a sodium choline transporter that takes up choline produced from hydrolysis of ACh

ACh acts on both muscarinic and nicotinic receptors.

Muscarinic receptors are located throughout the body. They are activated by the action of muscarine and ACh. These receptors are part of the G protein-coupled receptors. On activation, there is an increase in intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP). Activation of cyclic AMP triggers the action of protein kinase. The muscarinic receptors form part of the parasympathetic that helps with the regulation of secretions (both in the bronchial tree and the gastrointestinal tract), heart rate, pupillary response, and urination.

**Muscarinic Effects of ACh**

- Eye miosis and blurry vision,

- Gastrointestinal system: nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea

- Respiratory system: low lung compliance, bronchoconstriction, and bronchorrhea

- Secretory system: increased secretions in the tracheobronchial and gastrointestinal system

- Cardiovascular system: bradycardia

- Genitourinary: urinary frequency and urgency

Nicotinic receptors belong to the ligand-gated ion family of receptors. They are stimulated by ACh and nicotine. They are located in muscle fiber at the neuromuscular junctions and autonomic ganglia for both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems

**Nicotinic Effects of ACh**

ACh binds to the endplate of skeletal muscle and synaptic ganglia causing the following effects

- Voluntary muscle fasciculation: flaccid paralysis

- Cardiovascular effects: tachycardia that may progress to bradycardia from the opposing effects of the stimulation of muscarinic and nicotinic receptors.