Intrathecal thecal therapy was introduced in the 1980s as a means to treat chronic refractory pain. More commonly used medications include opioid analgesics such as morphine and local anesthetics such as bupivacaine. The medication is delivered by an implantable intrathecal drug-delivery system that consists of a drug reservoir and electronic system to deliver medication through a connected catheter that ultimately delivers medication into the intrathecal space. Medication is delivered directly to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, enhancing the potency and efficacy of analgesic medications. Since lower doses of medication are necessary, patients tend to have decreased side effects with this therapy.

Ziconotide can only be administered intrathecally by an intrathecal drug-delivery system. There are several pump systems available on the market. It is recommended to trial ziconotide first by single-shot bolus into the intrathecal space prior to implanting an intrathecal pain pump. The patient should be monitored in a clinical setting for at least 8 hours. The initial single-shot bolus should be between 1 mcg to 2 mcg. Boluses of up to 8 mcg have been reported. It is not recommended to increase the ziconotide dose by more than 1.2 mcg per day if it is administered by continuous infusion. Recommended starting doses range between 1.2 mcg and 2.4 mcg/day. The maximum recommended dose of ziconotide is 19.2 mcg/day. Ziconotide can be coadministered with other intrathecal medications.

Ziconotide is formulated as a preservative-free isotonic solution in 1 mL, 2 mL, or 5 mL vials as a 100 mcg/mL concentration. There is also a 20 mL formulation at 25 mcg/mL.