# Continuing Education Activity

Epidural morphine is a medication used for analgesia, as an adjunct to general anesthesia, or as a sole technique for surgical anesthesia. Morphine was the first opioid approved for neuraxial administration by the US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA), and it has been the most widely used opioid in clinical practice via this route. This activity describes the indications, action, and contraindications for epidural morphine as a valuable agent for acute and chronic moderate to severe pain. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other vital factors (dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, toxicity) pertinent for interprofessional team members in managing patients receiving epidural morphine.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the indications for the administration of morphine via the epidural route.
- Summarize the risks associated with epidural morphine.
- Identify the most common and most severe adverse events associated with epidural morphine.
- Outline the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance care delivery for patients with opioid-induced respiratory depression or opioid toxicity after epidural morphine administration.

# Indications

Morphine was the first opioid approved for spinal administration by the US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA), and it has been the most widely used opioid in clinical practice via this route.

**Clinical Uses of Epidural Morphine**

- Perioperative analgesia for several procedures:

- Abdominal surgeries
- Thoracic surgeries
- Vascular surgeries
- Gynecological surgeries
- Orthopedic procedures of the lower extremities (knee replacement surgery, hip arthroplasty, etc.)

- Obstetrics:

- Cesarean section
- Labor pain

- Moderate to severe chronic pain refractory to conservative treatment

# Mechanism of Action

Opioids produce analgesia by binding to the mu-opioid receptors distributed throughout the central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS) and in many peripheral regions. More specifically, CNS mu-opioid receptors are present in the cerebellum, nucleus accumbens, caudate nucleus of the brain, putamen, cerebral cortex, substantia nigra, and spinal cord.

# Administration

Epidural morphine can be administered as a single bolus or as a continuous infusion via a catheter. Placing an epidural catheter allows for easier drug titration and seems to induce better quality analgesia.

# Adverse Effects

Respiratory depression is the most potentially dangerous adverse reaction of opioid administration. The incidence is low with commonly used doses, being dose-dependent for both hydrophilic and lipophilic opioids. The overall risk of respiratory depression after neuraxial opioids is less than 1%, very similar to that of opioids administered via the parenteral route.

# Contraindications

CLinicians using epidural morphine and intravenous morphine should exercise extreme caution in patients with respiratory conditions such as COPD, acute bronchial asthma, or upper airway obstruction since it can further decrease the respiratory drive. Additionally, practitioners should avoid using morphine in cases of previous allergy or hypersensitivity reaction to morphine or other opioids. Since the epidural administration of morphine reduces gastroduodenal motility, clinicians should avoid using it in patients with confirmed or suspected paralytic ileus. Any absolute contraindication to neuraxial anesthesia, including coagulopathy, infection at the puncture site, or patient refusal, are also contraindications to spinal or epidural opioids.

# Monitoring

The therapeutic effect of epidural morphine is assessable through subjective and objective findings. Although the ultimate goal of morphine is pain control, it is important to monitor other parameters like mental status, blood pressure, or respiratory drive. Detection of opioid-induced respiratory depression after neuraxial morphine may be challenging since the respiratory rate may or may not decrease.

# Toxicity

A morphine overdose can be potentially lethal due to the risk of respiratory depression. When administered via the epidural route, morphine can cause delayed respiratory depression up to 24 hours after a single injection. If suspected, immediately stop opioids or sedatives and administer intravenous naloxone to reverse the effects of morphine. Naloxone is an opioid antagonist, and its effective dose depends on the opioid dose received. In the postoperative patient population, the starting dose of naloxone is 0.04 mg, with increments every 2 minutes if needed to a maximum of 15 mg.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The administration of morphine via the epidural route requires an interprofessional healthcare team that includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), nurses, and pharmacists. Epidural morphine administration is by an anesthesiologist, nurse anesthetist, or pain specialist for perioperative pain control or chronic refractory pain. A focused history and physical examination are necessary before administering neuraxial opioids to identify patients at risk of respiratory depression. Given its long duration of action, patients require close monitoring for 18 to 24 hours for the adequacy of ventilation, oxygenation, and level of consciousness. [Level 1]

Nursing should receive proper training to identify signs of respiratory depression or opioid toxicity so they can alert the physicians when there is a need for intervention. Reversal agents like naloxone should always be available for administration in case of respiratory depression after neuraxial opioid administration. [Level I] The pharmacist should verify dosing, make recommendations for reversal agents, perform medication reconciliation, check for drug-drug interactions, and report their findings to the team. The above highlights the necessity of a properly functioning and collaborative interprofessional team approach to ensure optimal patient care while avoiding adverse events when administering and monitoring epidural morphine. [Level 5]