High cholesterol can be defined as a LDL-cholesterol greater than 190 mg/dL, greater than 160 mg/dL with one major risk factor, or greater than 130 mg/dL with two cardiovascular risk factors. The important risk factors include:

- Age; male 45 years or older, female 55 years or older

- A positive family history of premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (younger than 55 years in a male and younger than 65yrs in a female)

- Hypertension

- Diabetes

- Smoking

- Low HDL-cholesterol levels (less than 40 mg/dl in male and less than 55 mg/dl in a female).

There are genetic and acquired causes of hypercholesterolemia. The classical genetic disorder is familial hypercholesterolemia due to mutations in the LDL-receptor gene resulting in LDL-C greater than 190 mg/dl in heterozygotes and greater than 450 mg/dl in homozygotes. This defect in the LDL receptor accounts for at least 85% of familial hypercholesterolemia.****Familial hypercholesterolemia is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the LDL receptor. The reduction in LDL receptor activity in the liver results in a reduced rate of clearance of LDL from the circulation. The plasma level of LDL increases to a level such that the rate of LDL production equals the rate of LDL clearance by residual LDL receptors as well as non-LDL receptor mechanisms. More than 1600 mutations have been reported in association with familial hypercholesterolemia. The elevated levels of LDL-C in familial hypercholesterolemia are primarily due to a delayed removal of LDL from the blood. Because the removal of IDL is also delayed, the production of LDL from IDL is also increased. Individuals with two mutated LDL receptor alleles (familial hypercholesterolemia homozygotes or compound heterozygotes) have much higher LDL-C levels than those with one mutant allele (familial hypercholesterolemia heterozygotes).

Other genetic causes of familial hypercholesterolemia include:

- Defective apolipoprotein B (most common with a mutation at position 3500) resulting in a loss of ligand binding to the LDL receptor

- A gain-of-function mutation in proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (**PCSK9**) gene leading to increased affinity ofPCSK9 for the LDL-receptor which results in a more rapid clearance of the LDL-receptor by targeting it to the lysosome for degradation in the liver, thus resulting in high plasma LDL-C.

All of the above genetic causes are transmitted in an autosomal dominant mode. Another rare genetic cause is autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia, due to a mutation in the LDL receptor adaptor protein resulting in defective endocytosis of the LDL receptors.  However, the commonest cause is polygenic**hypercholesterolemia**which results from an interaction of unidentified genetic factors compounded by a sedentary lifestyle and an increased intake of saturated and trans-fatty acids. Secondary causes include hypothyroidism, nephrotic syndrome, cholestasis, pregnancy, and certain drugs like cyclosporine, thiazide, and diuretics. These can easily be excluded by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests. It is believed that the elevated LDL particles permeate the vascular intima and get trapped by proteoglycans in the intima. In the intima, LDL is oxidatively modified and promote inflammation and fatty streak formation. Atherogenesis evolves through a fibrous plaque to the mature lesion with plaque rupture culminating in a CV event.