Treatment is rarely initiated if a child is less than 7-years-old.

**Non-Pharmacologic Treatment**

- Reassurance that the enuresis will improve is the first piece of education to be given to parents about their child's enuresis. When parents in a study were explained options of treatment versus no treatment, no treatment was selected by more (23%) as parents wanted reassurance.

- the bell and pad method is the most effective first-line treatment, with a success rate of 75%. It is recommended that the method be continued until there are 21 to 28 dry nights. For the bell and pad method to be effective, a child must be able to wake to the pad alarm. In a 1-year follow-up study comparing outcomes of children whose parents chose various treatment modalities, those who chose the alarm were more likely completely dry at follow-up.

- Planned nighttime awakenings are useful for patients who are unable to awake to an alarm.

- Restricting fluids before bedtime is also helpful in decreasing nighttime enuresis.

- Bladder training consists of teaching the patient to hold their urine for an increased amount of time. Bladder training is useful for patients with nocturnal and diurnal enuresis.

- Motivational therapy for the patient and caregiver may be required before initiating the behavioral interventions listed. If a patient is not motivated for treatment, they can have motivational therapy, or the treatment postponed until motivation improves.

**Pharmacologic Treatment**

- There is a higher rate of relapse with pharmacologic treatment compared to the bell and pad method.

- It is important to treat underlying etiologies, such as constipation, as these patients may be less responsive to desmopressin or imipramine.

- **Desmopressin**is an anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) analog FDA approved for enuresis that decreases the production of urine. The oral form can be given in doses between 0.1 to 0.6 mg/day. The oral form only should be administered, as the intranasal formulation has an FDA alert for hyponatremia-induced seizures. Studies indicate that 50% of patients treated with desmopressin improve, and 25% obtain total dryness. The medication is given 1 hour before bedtime. Due to the risk of relapse with discontinuation of desmopressin, a gradual taper is recommended.

- **Imipramine**is a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) that is FDA approved for the treatment of enuresis in children at least 6-years-old. The medication causes relaxation of the detrusor muscle of the bladder due to its anticholinergic effects. Relaxation of the detrusor muscle leads to decreased bladder contractility and decreased enuretic episodes. The medication also increases vasopressin. The starting dose is 25 mg, and the medication is increased every seven days to a goal dose between 75 to 125 mg/day. Studies indicate that 60% of patients treated with imipramine experience an effect. Once an effect is obtained, a taper should be tried every three months. The response is found in studies to correlate with the side effect of dry mouth. The medication is given 1 hour before bedtime.

- Off-label treatments include oxybutynin, clonidine, propranolol, and other tricyclic antidepressants.

A study of various treatment modalities (behavioral strategies, desmopressin) found that some participants improved in the first week of the study before treatment started. The study demonstrated that the process of obtaining medical help itself could improve enuresis in some cases.