Published discussions of procedural techniques recommend that balloon angioplasty or stent placement in the treatment of coarctation of the aorta be performed under general anesthesia. The rationale for this preference is that dilatation of the coarcted segment elicits pain in the patient leading to patient movement adding additional challenges to the procedure. Access is via the femoral artery with a retrograde approach. The arterial puncture site is localized at the level of the compressible site of the femoral head, and an angiogram is obtained afterward to confirm appropriate positioning. The preclosure device is then placed. If the coarcted segment is unable to be crossed in a retrograde fashion, radial or brachial access can be used to facilitate anterograde catheterization.

Femoral venous access is also performed in a complete right heart catheterization and allows for placement of a transvenous pacemaker to be used if necessary during stent placement for rapid right ventricular pacing. Intravenous heparin is then administered to achieve an activated clotting time (ACT) of greater than 250 ms. A multipurpose or Judkins right catheter is advanced over the guidewire to the descending aorta, and a soft-tipped wire is crossed through the coarcted segment. Peak to peak systolic pressures are recorded across this stenotic region. After the lesion is crossed from the retrograde approach, the catheter is exchanged for a pigtail catheter, and it is positioned just proximal to the proximal coarcted segment. At this point, biplane angiography is performed. This angiogram allows for the visualization of the coarctated region, whole transverse aortic arch anatomy with the location of the brachiocephalic vessel, and the diameter with dimensions of the descending aorta down the level of the diaphragm.

After angiography, measurements are made to appropriately size the balloon or stent. Stent sizing is according to the diameter of the proximal arch and does not exceed the diameter of the diaphragmatic descending aorta. In addition, the ratio of final stent diameter to the most stenotic region of the coarcted segment should measure less than 3.5.

After performing angiography with the pigtail catheter, a wire (typically J-tipped Amplatzer guide wire) stiffer than the soft-tipped wire is used to exchange the pigtail catheter. The tip of the guidewire is left positioned in the right subclavian artery. A long blue Cook or Mullins sheath is advanced over the guidewire across the coarcted segment of the aorta. The sizing of the sheath when using ballon in ballon (BIB) catheters is one French greater than what is needed by the BIB catheter. BIB catheters are preferred by most centers as they allow for controlled stent expansion and most often prevent complications, including balloon rupture and stent migration. The dilator is then removed after the tip of the sheath is placed proximal to the site of the lesion. The appropriately sized stent is hand-crimped onto the balloon with the additional support of umbilical tape. This apparatus, including the BIB catheter and the crimped stent, is advanced through the valve of the introducer sheath. The stent is placed across the coarcted segment with position confirmed by angiography. When the position is confirmed and is appropriate, the proximal balloon is covered by the delivery sheath, and the distal segment of the stent is dilated to its complete size. The sheath is subsequently removed from the balloon catheter, and the rest of the stent is placed across the stenotic lesion. A pigtail catheter is advanced over the guidewire to obtain simultaneous pressures across the stent. A successful intervention is confirmed with a gradient of less than 10 mmHg across the implanted stent.