Patients suffering from renal calculi due to hyperoxaluria should receive counsel regarding all the different preventive measures to which they should adhere to avoid recurrent stone formation. The diagnosis and counseling are the responsibility of both the physician and the nurse practitioner. The dietician is responsible for carefully crafting their diet whilst keeping in mind their dietary restrictions on oxalate-rich food, along with an increase in fluid intake. Patients with recurrent episodes and children with early-onset nephrolithiasis are examples of patient groups that would understandably require a high level of motivation to follow the fairly strict recommended preventive measures. If followed diligently, they can significantly decrease the recurrence rate of calcium oxalate stones in nephrolithiasis patients. This requires a combined effort of patients, physicians, nursing staff, and dieticians.

A good nephrolithiasis preventive program should be combined with a regular evaluation for systemic symptoms along with kidney and liver function monitoring. For aggressive curative interventions like liver-kidney transplants, a transplant surgeon should be consulted. The role of oral citrate to reduce urinary calcium oxalate saturation and precipitation has been studied, and long-term administration to patients with hyperoxaluria has been advised to further reduce the recurrence of calcium oxalate stones.

Collaboration, communication, and shared decision-making are key elements for a good outcome. This requires an interprofessional healthcare team consisting of clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nursing staff, pharmacists, and various tech staff (radiology, lab, etc.) The interprofessional care provided to the patient must use an integrated care pathway combined with an evidence-based approach to planning and evaluation of all joint activities. [Level 2] This will result in optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]