AAT deficiency is inherited by the autosomal co-dominant transmission which means that affected individuals have inherited an abnormal AAT gene from each parent. The gene that encodes AAT is called SERPINA1 and is located on the long arm of chromosome 14.

At least 150 alleles of AAT (SERPINA1) have been identified, and each has a letter code based upon electrophoretic mobility of the protein produced. The normal allele is referred to as “M,” and it is the most common version (allele) of the SERPINA1 gene. Most people in the general population have two copies of the M allele (MM) in each cell. Other versions of the SERPINA1 gene lead to reduced levels of alpha-1 antitrypsin. For instance, the S allele produces moderately low levels of this protein, and the Z allele produces very little AAT. Individuals with two copies of the Z allele (ZZ) in each cell are likely to have AAT deficiency. Those with the SZ combination have a higher risk of developing lung diseases (such as emphysema), particularly if they smoke.

Worldwide, it is estimated that 161 million people have one copy of the S or Z allele and one copy of the M allele in each cell (MS or MZ). Individuals with an MS (or SS) combination usually produce enough alpha-1 antitrypsin to protect their lungs. People with MZ alleles have a slightly increased risk of impaired lung or liver function.

AAT phenotypes are based on the electrophoretic mobility of the proteins produced by the various abnormal AAT alleles. Genotyping is performed by identifying specific alleles in DNA.

Based on this, variants of AAT can be categorized into four basic groups:

- Normal that is associated with normal levels of AAT and normal function. The family of normal alleles is referred to as M, and the normal genotype is MM.

- Deficient that is associated with plasma AAT levels less than 35% of the average normal level. The most common deficient allele associated with emphysema is the Z allele, which is carried by about two to three percent of the Caucasian population in the United States.

- Null alleles that lead to no detectable AAT protein in the plasma. Individuals with the null genotype are the least common and are at risk for the most severe form of associated lung disease but not liver disease.

- Dysfunctional alleles produce a normal quantity of AAT protein, but the protein does not function properly.

Environmental factors, such as exposure to tobacco smoke, chemicals, and dust, likely impact the severity of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Severe deficiency of AAT has a strong risk factor for early-onset emphysema, but not every severely deficient individual would develop emphysema. Risk factors for emphysema include cigarette smoking, dusty occupational exposure, parental history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and a personal history of asthma, chronic bronchitis, or pneumonia.