Myofascial pain syndrome comprises both acute and chronic pain. The pain experienced in this syndrome is usually dull aching and poorly localized, indistinguishable from other causes of somatic and visceral pain. Sensory paresthesias or dysesthesias may accompany myofascial pain occasionally. Sometimes, the pain produced by this condition can be felt at a point away from the actual disease process. It may persist many months or years after the insult was caused, even if the initiating event is resolved. Constricting myofascial taut bands may cause entrapment of the nervous component of the myofascial system, leading to further pain and disability.

Myofascial pain syndrome is diagnosed by the presence of myofascial trigger points and associated pain. Myofascial trigger points are located by palpation of the tender or painful areas of the patient. A trigger point is defined by the presence of a tight band that is palpable within the muscle tissue, which through practice and experience can be palpated easily, usually in all types of muscles, either superficial or deep.  Such muscles that contain trigger points are non-uniform, having heterogeneous areas consisting of soft, firm, or hard consistency rather than uniform homogeneous consistency. On contraction of the trigger points during daily activity, the pain experienced by the patient is usually exquisite and localized. Sometimes taut bands are not painful to palpation but can alter the normal sequence of muscle activation. The correct method of palpation of the trigger points consists of palpating the muscle perpendicular to the direction of the muscle fibers.

A Delphi study conducted in 2017 proposed that at least two of the following criteria must be positive for trigger point diagnosis: the presence of a taut band, a hypersensitive spot, and referred pain. The pain referred from a myofascial trigger point causes different sensory sensations that include pain traveling to a distant area, deep pain, dull aching, tingling, or burning pain.