The most common STI in the United States by far is the human papillomavirus or HPV. At any given time, it is estimated that 80% of sexually active people are infected, including 42% of adults 18 to 59 years, while 7% will have oral HPV, and roughly 14 million new cases will be reported yearly. It is so common that the CDC estimates that virtually all sexually active persons who are not vaccinated will become infected at some point. HPV is often asymptomatic, especially in men, but it may cause venereal and anogenital warts. HPV is a known cause of cervical and oropharyngeal cancer, but it has also been linked to other, relatively uncommon malignancies such as cancer of the anus, penis, vagina, and vulva. HPV types 6 and 11 are very common and are most closely associated with the formation of anogenital warts, while HPV types 16 and 18 are linked to the development of malignancy. Worldwide, at least 291 million women have been infected with HPV.

The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has determined that roughly 2.4 million non-HPV-related STIs were reported in the US in 2020. Chlamydia was the most common of these at 1.6 million cases, down 1.2% from 2016. Next, 677,769 cases of gonorrhea were reported in 2020, up 45% from 2016, and 133,945 cases of primary and secondary syphilis, up 52% over the same period. In 2020, congenital syphilis was identified in 2,148 infants, up 235% from 2016.

The majority of the reported cases of primary and secondary syphilis, over 80%, are found in men. Gay and bisexual men account for almost half (47%) of the reported cases in males. The CDC also estimates that 44% of gay and bisexual men who test positive for syphilis will also have HIV.

In general, the overall rate of STIs is increasing in the US, with 2.5 million STD cases or more expected when the final data is reported for 2022.

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), global epidemiological data for STIs indicates:

- Worldwide, over 1 million new potentially curable STIs are acquired daily, most of which are asymptomatic.

- It is estimated that there are 376 million new infections annually, with one of the four curable STIs (chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, and trichomoniasis).

- Of these, trichomonas is the most common, with 156 million new cases yearly, followed by chlamydia at 127 million, gonorrhea at 87 million, and syphilis at 6.3 million.

- The overall incidence is rising. There was close to a 30% increase in reportable STIs in the US between 2015 and 2019.

- In the United States, about 12% of the population between 14 and 49 years is estimated to be infected with herpes.

- Herpes simplex virus type 2 has a global prevalence estimated at over 500 million people.

- About one million pregnant women were estimated to have an STI in 2016, causing over 350,000 birthing and/or neonatal complications.

- HPV infections have been linked to over 310,000 cervical cancer deaths annually.

- Syphilis is the second leading cause of stillbirths worldwide.

- HIV/AIDS affected about 37 million people worldwide in 2016.

- It is estimated that 15% of HIV-infected individuals in the US are unaware they have the infection and are responsible for 40% of all new HIV infections.

- According to the CDC, there are approximately 35,000 new cases of HIV in the US annually.

- Mycoplasma genitalium causes 15% - 20% of all non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU), 20% - 25% of all non-chlamydial NGU cases, and about 40% of all recurrent or persistent urethritis infections.

In an ideal world, physicians, public health officials, political leaders, international and regional healthcare organizations, and other healthcare professionals would have a centralized data collection system to be able to analyze and fully assess the incidence, distribution, progression, and treatment of all sexually transmitted infections. As health professionals, the best available sources include various published studies and official government agencies or healthcare organizations to assess STI's statistical importance, such as geographic areas of increasing incidence or particular demographics of affected populations and similar data.

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) have a high incidence in most countries, especially between the ages of 15 to 50 years of age, including infants.