The overall goals of speech and language treatment are to facilitate the recovery of communication, to assist patients in developing strategies to compensate for communication disorders, and to counsel and educate people in the patient's environment on assistive communication supports to facilitate communication, decrease isolation, and meet the patient's wants and needs.

When developing the plan, it is essential to consider dysarthria's cause, severity, and underlying co-morbidities. Speech-language pathologists and physicians work together to formulate an individualized approach for the patient. Recent studies indicate that speech rehabilitation significantly improves speech in adults with stroke-related dysarthria and that interventions such as Lee Silverman Voice Treatment are effective for hypokinetic dysarthria in individuals with PD.

Broadly, types of therapy could be grouped as follows:

- Therapy targeting the speech-production subsystems

- Communication strategies

- Environmental adaptations

- Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC)

- Medical/surgical interventions.

**Targeting the Speech-Production Subsystems**

Speech pathologists can target the five individual subcomponents that produce speech.

Lee Silverman Voice Treatment and Pitch Limiting Voice Treatment target phonation; the former is a program that improves loudness and intelligibility and has been widely studied in PD, while the latter increases vocal loudness without increasing pitch.

**Communication Strategies**

Providing feedback, clarifying, and encouraging are practical approaches for the partner. For the patient, setting up the conversation by gaining the partner's attention, slowing and repeating the phrases, and using nonverbal gestures, such as eye contact and facial expressions, are helpful strategies.

Speech supplementation, such as alphabet, syntactic, and topic, are helpful strategies. In alphabet supplementation, the speaker uses an alphabet board to identify the first letter of the spoken word. In topic supplementation, a phrase or cue word is uttered before speaking. Information about the grammar or word class is provided with each spoken word in the syntactic supplementation.

Behavioral communication intervention techniques such as biofeedback are shown to improve intelligibility. In stroke patients, biofeedback techniques increased the volume, decreased the speed, and improved the intelligibility.

**Environmental Adaptations**

Setting up optimal environmental conditions to increase understandability includes ensuring a quiet conversation background, intimate seating, and face-to-face interaction.

**Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC)**

AAC may include low-tech aids, such as picture boards or pen and paper, or high-tech aids, such as smartphones, voice synthesizers, digital records, and speech-generating devices.

Computer-based interventions offer an exciting step toward dysarthria management. Some examples are:

- A mobile application for PD patients. It includes an assessment of the speech in addition to various other aspects of disease management

- Feedback and individual practice using computers were as effective as traditional therapy in patients with stable dysarthria

- Improvement in articulation and intelligibility was assessed in Virtual articulation therapy

These small studies hold good promise for further expansion of computer-based interventions.

**Medical/Surgical Interventions**

Medical therapy should target the underlying neurological cause. In dysarthria arising from PD, therapy should focus on repleting dopaminergic therapy. The effects of PD drugs on dysarthria are variable. Subthalamic nucleus stimulation has some efficacy among surgical treatments, but speech intelligibility worsens, as with most surgical interventions in PD.

Laryngoplasty is an option if hoarseness is associated with recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy and does not improve with conservative management. Palatal lift improves resonance by surgically lifting the weak palate. Since the 2019 COVID pandemic, telehealth has become more relevant than ever. Telerehab (TR) is less expensive and equally effective in improving functional stroke outcomes, including speech, compared to traditional rehab.

In another review of speech therapy administered via teletherapy in patients with PD, the patient reported overall increased satisfaction due to increased convenience and accessibility. Further research is needed, however, as the studies lacked double blinding, and there was heterogeneity in the protocol.