Xanthine oxidase (XO) is an enzyme found in many species, including humans, and primarily functions in the catabolism of purine nucleic acids. Through a series of reactions, the purines, guanine monophosphate (GMP), and adenosine monophosphate (AMP) get converted into either hypoxanthine or xanthine. The breakdown reaction of hypoxanthine and xanthine is catalyzed by xanthine oxidase into the uric acid. Uric acid then gets converted by the enzyme uricase into allantoin, a water-soluble molecule excreted in the urine. This enzyme is vital to mammalian cells as cell turnover is a constant process throughout the body, and endogenous or ingested purines are continually being degraded and renewed. Another form of xanthine oxidase is xanthine dehydrogenase (XD). Both forms are inter-convertible and catalyze the same reactions. However, they do differ in the cofactors used; where XO uses oxygen as a substrate, XD requires NADH to carry out the same reaction.

The reaction carried out by XO reduces oxygen into a superoxide anion which eventually progresses into hydrogen peroxide. Hydrogen peroxide is a reactive oxygen species (ROS), the excess of which is toxic to individual cells. It also has links to aging and a multitude of conditions such as diabetes and neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer disease.

The product of xanthine oxidase activity, uric acid, has also proven to be harmful in previous literature. The urate behaves as a pro-oxidant and induces the formation of other radicals that have a tendency to oxidize lipid membranes, which explains the correlation between hyperuricemia and obesity. Reactive oxygen species naturally tend to damage cellular structures, DNA, and proteins, and consequently, oxidative stress caused by uric acid also has links to hypertension, diabetes, kidney disease, and cardiovascular diseases. Cardiovascular health, being endemic in North America, is currently being studied extensively for the risk level associated with xanthine oxidase activity. The activity of xanthine oxidase can also be monitored in corneal epithelium. As such, the deduction is that free radical damage is related to an oxidate eye injury that may result from the overactivity of xanthine oxidase.