Group B streptococcus (GBS) is a bacterium commonly present in the lower gastrointestinal and genital tracts of up to 35% of healthy women. Although most women colonized with GBS are healthy and have no symptoms, few develop GBS disease when the bacterium invades the body. In pregnant women, this can be critical and life-threatening to both the infant and/or mother. In expecting mothers, GBS disease may cause urinary tract infections, infection of the amniotic fluid surrounding the baby, or infection of the uterus after delivery. GBS infections may even lead to preterm labor or stillbirth.

Pregnant women who carry GBS can also pass on the bacteria to their newborns, and some of those babies may then develop early-onset disease. Although most infants infected with GBS typically present with symptoms immediately after birth, some will develop an infection months following birth. Symptoms include but are not limited to difficulty breathing, grunting sounds, fussiness, sleepiness, poor feeding, low blood pressure, low or high temperatures, or even seizures.

To prevent transmission of GBS from mother to infant, all pregnant women should be screened for GBS colonization as part of their routine prenatal care late in their third trimester (usually between 35 and 37 weeks of gestation). Those who test positive for GBS will receive IV antibiotics during labor to lower the risk of transmission to the baby. Penicillin is the most common and most effective antibiotic given for GBS. However, if a patient is allergic to penicillin, other antibiotics are also available and effective. If the GBS status is unknown at delivery, certain risk factors will determine whether to use antibiotic prophylaxis. Keep in mind; some babies will still get GBS disease even with testing and prophylactic treatment.