Psychosis is a common, yet extremely, distressing set of symptoms that healthcare providers will undoubtedly face at some point in their training or practice. As discussed, there is a myriad of underlying causes for a patient presenting with a psychotic episode, including a primary psychiatric disorder, substance-induced, neurologic, or medical induced. A proper medical workup, along with a psychiatric evaluation, is always warranted.

While it is possible to treat the initial symptoms of a patient experiencing an episode of psychosis, individual patients, especially those with primary psychotic disorders, will generally require ongoing care for the remainder of their lifetime. Many times, the standard treatment is not enough and does not address the subjective psychosocial stressors a patient may be experiencing. Patients with severe mental illness experience high treatment dropout rates. New, emerging studies focus on how healthcare providers can enhance healthcare team outcomes through community engagement.

Specific subgroups of patients experiencing mental illness have been historically difficult to engage: those with first-episode psychosis, homeless populations, and those with comorbid substance use. Poor treatment engagement correlates with poor clinical outcomes, relapse, and re-hospitalization. A recent emphasis on “interpersonal” care has emerged in mental health treatment, putting the context of the individual’s needs, wants, hopes, dreams, culture, and spirituality above those of their specific symptoms. The promulgation of this concept centers on training of “treating the whole patient,” and it firmly holds for patients with mental illness. This activity will focus below on three emerging, innovative, recovery-oriented techniques for engagement.

**Implementing Technology**

Technology can serve as a medium for more significant lines of communication among people. It may assist in helping to connect with others experiencing a similar illness or hardship without facing the potential shame or guilt of seeking help in person. Some people would like to seek assistance in person, but due to limited access due to geographical location, may be unable to. Communication through technology may also be more feasible economically, particularly in the uninsured population, or those lacking funds for transportation. Online support groups or forums may also provide for a 24/7 safe haven for patients as well as creating a sense of belonging. The majority of young adults use social media and may be more amenable to seeking help in this fashion. Being able to touch base with a healthcare professional may decrease unnecessary hospitalizations.

**Peer Support**

Some studies report some patients who have difficulty complying with treatment and may be untrustworthy of authority figures. Other patients may feel judged, marginalized, or stigmatized when engaging in traditional healthcare settings. Peer provider networks have emerged as a way to engage with patients and address their particular needs as well provide them with a relatable social network. Patients have noted to experience an increased sense of self-determination, self-awareness, and positive effects on engagement. Patients also feel like they finally have someone advocating for them. Studies have shown that patients receiving peer support, in the beginning, had been more engaged and motivated with treatment six months from the start. Peer support groups were shown to be particularly crucial for Army and combat veterans, specifically decreasing internal and external stigma.

**Cultural Formulation**

Mentally ill from ethnic minority groups are less likely to engage in mental health treatment than non-Hispanic whites. A patient’s cultural background may shape the way they perceive mental illness and may hinder their desire to seek treatment. Thus, providing culturally sensitive care is of utmost importance. The cultural formulation interview (CFI) is a 16 item questionnaire new to the DSM-V that not only seeks to understand cultural and social structures but individual circumstances as well. This approach may enhance cross-cultural communication and may help providers understand the precise needs/goals of the patient.

Evaluation and treatment/management of psychosis requires an entire interprofessional team approach. While clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs) may be the first to evaluate the patient, specialists will almost of necessity be involved also. This group would include psychiatrists and other mental health providers. They must communicate with each other as well as with the patient's family if there is one. Given the extensive adverse event and numerous drug-drug interactions of many antipsychotic medications, pharmacists will also need extensive input into the patient's therapy regimen and must have access to the clinicians and nurses on the case to report any concerns or findings. Nursing will often assume a caretaker role, especially with institutionalized patients, and may often have the most one on one contact daily than anyone else on the team. They need to be alert for signs of medication concerns, as well as therapeutic failure and have an open communication line to the pharmacist and especially the treating physicians. The entire interprofessional team must communicate and collaborate to bring about optimal outcomes in cases of psychosis. [Level V]