**Skin Graft Harvest**

Split-thickness skin grafts are harvestable in several ways, including with a surgical knife, oscillating Goulian knife, and most commonly with an air or electric powered dermatome. Manually harvesting a uniform depth skin graft is challenging and may result in irregularities in the donor site as well as a skin graft. Thus, powered dermatomes are a frequent choice as they offer harvest consistency, as well as adjustability in graft thickness (on the order of thousandths per inch) and width (1-inch, 2-inch, 3-inch, and 4-inch guards).

**Skin Graft Meshing**

Meshing methodologies vary from manual perforations in the skin graft with a surgical scalp to a hand-powered meshing device (mesher). Surgeons frequently utilize meshing devices as they apply multiple slits at regular intervals and in preset ratios. Commonly used ratios include 3/8 to 1, 1 to 1, 2 to 1, 3 to 1, and even 6 to 1. The split-thickness skin graft gets placed into the mesher and hand-cranked through the machine. Meshing a skin graft allows the graft to stretch, increasing the area that can be covered by the skin graft. The higher the meshing ratio, the further a skin graft can stretch; however, the longer it will take for the skin graft to heal completely due to the increased area to epithelialize. The holes between skin bridges act as drainage holes to prevent fluid, blood, or seroma build-up between the recipient wound bed and skin graft, which would cause graft failure.

**Other Equipment**

Mineral oil is used to lubricate the donor site before skin graft harvest and allows for improved sliding of the dermatome. An epinephrine soaked sponge (1 vial of 1:1000 epinephrine in 500 milliliters of 0.9% normal saline) is placed on the donor site following harvest to minimize blood loss. Surgical pick-ups (Adson tissue forceps) are used to retrieve the skin graft from the dermatome.

**Securing the Skin Graft**

The STSG gets secured to the recipient site with skin staples or a running simple interrupted suture. The application of skin staples is must faster than suture; however, it does require eventual removal of staples once the skin graft has healed. Skin staples are applied at regular intervals around the extent of the skin graft. Typically dissolvable suture like chromic is utilized for securing the skin graft as it dissolves around the same time the skin graft becomes adherent and does not require removal. Securing split-thickness skin grafts with fast-clotting fibrin glue with high-concentration fibrin has also been reported.

**Dressings**

A tie over bolster of petroleum-infused gauze, cotton balls, and non-dissolvable suture is frequently placed on smaller STSG recipient sites. A negative pressure wound vacuum is another viable option for areas that are difficult to bolster. In cases of large volume STSGs, petroleum-infused gauze and bulky gauze/kerlix are placed over the grafts. The grafts should not be left open to the air. The STSG donor site gets covered with petroleum-infused gauze and clear adhesive, followed by several layers of kerlix and an ACE wrap. Alternatively, the donor site can be covered with an anti-microbial foam dressing, kerlix, and ACE wrap.