The anesthesiologist needs to balance blood pressure, fluid management, oxygenation, and acid-base physiology throughout the procedure. Unfortunately, even with the best efforts, complications may arise. These can include acute right heart failure, arrhythmias, systemic hypotension, and even death. With right heart failure, the right heart is not adequately pumping blood through the pulmonary vasculature and the left heart, decreasing cardiac output. It is managed by fluid administration, afterload reduction, and improved contractility.

If the patient has depleted intravascular volume due to excessive blood loss or insensible losses, the heart cannot maintain cardiac output because of inadequate right-sided filling pressures. In this situation, fluid administration would be appropriate to increase filling pressures and thus cardiac output. To reduce right ventricle afterload, first correct any hypercapnia, hypoxia, or acidemia present. If those are corrected and there is no improvement, then pulmonary vasodilators should be added. Lastly, improving right ventricle contractility with inotropic agents such as norepinephrine may be beneficial.

Systemic hypotension is not well tolerated in these patients and needs to be aggressively treated with vasoconstrictors such as vasopressin or phenylephrine, an alpha one agonist. To avoid exacerbations, treatment with inhaled vasodilators such as nitric oxide or iloprost, a synthetic analog of prostacyclin PGI2, may be beneficial.

The most common arrhythmias are supraventricular tachycardia, and they can trigger right heart decompensation. The goal is to restore sinus rhythm with either electrical cardioversion, radiofrequency ablation, or drug therapy such as amiodarone. If the patient undergoes a cardioversion or ablation without success, then rate control with beta-blockers or calcium channel blockers must be considered.