Evaluation of patients with malignant pleural effusion (MPE) starts with a detailed history, physical examination, and ancillary studies. Eliciting the time of the onset of the symptoms is important. Family history of malignancy might also help in the diagnostic work.

**Ancillary Studies**

**Chest X-ray
**

In most cases, a chest x-ray can help to confirm the size and location of the pleural effusion. It might not be able to delineate a small effusion. A chest x-ray might also show lobulated pleural thickening, atelectasis, consolidation, and mediastinal widening. These radiological findings are highly suggestive of malignancy.

**Chest Ultrasonography
**

This has close to 100% sensitivity in the detection of pleural effusion. The presence of pleural wall thickening of more than 10 mm, nodularity, and diaphragmatic wall thickening of greater than 7 mm has high specificity in diagnosing MPE.

**CAT Scan
**

CAT scan is a useful imaging study for MPE. It can determine the size, location, and extent of the effusion. CAT scan can also help identify the primary or metastatic tumor causing the effusion. It is superior in imaging quality to chest x-ray and chest ultrasonography.

**MRI
**

MRI has a limited role in the diagnostic imaging studies for pleural effusion, probably because of poor spatial resolution.

**Pleural Thoracentesis
**

This is a useful test that can serve both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. If the drainage is hemorrhagic or exudative, a high index of suspicion should be entertained for malignancy. The pleural fluid should be analyzed for the following:

- pH

- Protein

- Glucose

- Lactate dehydrogenase

- Red blood cells

- White blood cells

- Neutrophils

- Basophils

- Eosinophils

- pleural fluid adenosine deaminase (pADA) and pleural fluid carcinoembryonic antigen (pCEA)

**Cytology
**

In about 50% of cases, malignant cells might be detected in pleural fluids. The diagnostic yield is about 40% to 87%.

Using Lights criteria for pleural fluids, MPE is usually an exudate. In some rare cases, MPE might present as a transudate. In MPE, a parapneumonic effusion might develop, and the pleural fluid pH is usually below 7.3 with glucose levels less than 60 mg/dl.

**Lights Criteria
**

Lights criteria for exudative pleural fluid:

- A ratio of the pleural protein to serum protein that is more than 0.5

- A ratio of the pleural lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) to serum LDH that is more than 0.6

- LDH of the pleural fluid that is more  than two-thirds the upper limit of serum LDH

**Exudative Pleural Effusion
**

Common causes are malignancy, parapneumonic effusion, and tuberculosis.

**Transudative Pleural Effusion
**

Common causes are left ventricular failure, liver cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome.

**Pleural Fluid Cytology
**

The diagnostic yield of cytology is dependent on several factors.

- Number of specimens taken

- Type of fixative solutions

- Time for specimen transportation

- Expertise of cytopathologist

- Histopathology of the specimen

- Nature and type of primary malignancy

- Extent of disease

- The use of cell blocks

The pleural fluid can also be analyzed for tumor markers. This is more commonly done in adults with pulmonary, breast, colon, ovary, and prostate cancer. Tumor markers are substances with a high molecular mass presence which in the pleural fluid is associated with primary or metastatic malignancy. Tumor markers are useful as:

- An adjunct in clinical diagnosis

- Identification of metastases in the pleural cavity

- Identification of the malignancy's primary origin

**Common Tumor Markers**

- Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)

- Cancer antigens 15-3 (CA 15-3)

- CA 72-4

- CA 125

- Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9)

- Cyfra 21-1

- Cytokeratin fragment-21-1

- Stage-specific embryonic antigen-1

- Nonspecific enolase

**Pleural Biopsy**

This can be considered a diagnostic tool. Needle biopsy of pleural tissue combined with fluid cytology of MPE can aid in diagnosis. The procedure can be done under local or general anesthesia.

**Thoracoscopy**

Thoracoscopy or pleuroscopy can be done using video-assisted thoracoscopy. The technique is relatively simple, and the procedure can be done under local or general anesthesia. Under local anesthesia, the procedure can be done with a semi-rigid or rigid thoracoscope.

The diagnostic yield is around 95% to 97%. Endoscopy findings suggest malignancy are pleural ulceration, multiple nodules, and polypoidal masses.

**Bronchoscopy**

This method is indicated in a patient with MPE with hemoptysis or suspicion of the primary tumor originating from the bronchopulmonary tree.