Turner Syndrome

- Turner Syndrome results in at least part of the cells of the body lacking a secondary X chromosome. However, normal female cells undergo X inactivation, where there is the utilization of the genes of only one of the X chromosomes. The inactivated X chromosome is turned into heterochromatin that is inactive. This process gets completed by genes in the X inactivation center near the long arm of the X chromosome Xq

- Multiple genes have now been implicated as candidates to be involved in Turner syndrome. SHOX/PHOG is one of the first genes in the Xp Yp pseudoautosomal region implicated and is believed to be involved in linear growth. Researchers found a German family with a point mutation in SHOX/PHOG to all have short stature, further implicating this gene in the short stature of Turner syndrome

- Another gene linked to Turner syndrome is RPS4X/RPS4Y; although the data remains inconclusive regarding this gene, it is thought to possibly be a factor in lymphedema and lymphatic abnormalities noted in Turner syndrome. This gene resides in the Yp region of the Y chromosome and has an X-linked homolog that escapes X inactivation

- Another gene linked to Turner syndrome is ZFX/ZFY; it is not thought to be the sole cause of Turner syndrome but part of the gonadal dysgenesis symptoms. Mice studies have revealed that ZFX knockout mice had reduced germ cell numbers and heterozygous female mice showed a reduction in oocytes in comparison to their wild type counterparts but a reduction that was less than what was present in the knockout mice. This pattern of reduction in germ cell/oocyte number is similar to what appears in 45, X Turner syndrome patients versus their mosaic counterparts

- Additionally, recent studies utilizing embryonic stem cells with Turner syndrome have shown additional genes that might have involvement, including pseudoautosomal genes ASMTL and PPP2R3B, which were found to have decreased expression in Turner syndrome cells, and CSF2RA, which the Turner cells showed reduced upregulation. These genes are involved in processes affecting DNA methylation, the cell cycle, and placentation

46, XX Pure Gonadal Dysgenesis

- 46, XX complete gonadal dysgenesis is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, and several loci and genes have been implicated; however, the exact intricacies of what causes this type of gonadal dysgenesis is unclear.

- Inactivating mutations in the FSHR gene coding for the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor is linked to 46, XX dysgenesis, mainly in the Finnish population. Mutation in this receptor leads to blocks in follicular development that cause the follicles to remain in the primary or antral stage. The depletion of the follicles is also seen with this mutation

- Additionally, studies have tried to find other genes that might have specific links to 46, XX gonadal dysgenesis, and the gene BMP15 appears to be a possible candidate. However, a definite link to gonadal dysgenesis remains unaffirmed. BMP15 is a gene that codes for proteins apart from the transforming growth factor-beta family made by oocytes. A rare amino acid substitution at p.A180T in BMP15 was present in a small number of patients with ovarian failure in several studies; additional studies have found that this amino acid substitution may be a rare polymorphism

- The cases linked to congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency have direct links to over 100 different mutations in the CYP21A2 gene

46, XY Pure Gonadal Dysgenesis

- The SRY gene on the Y chromosome essentially is a switch that turns on the processes of testicular development. The other main gene involved in male reproductive development is SOX9, which is involved in the action of Mullerian inhibiting substance. The Mullerian inhibiting substance is involved in inhibiting the development of female internal genitalia and allows for the male development to take place. Additionally, MAP3K1 is also a common gene linked to 46, XY gonadal dysgenesis, and has been reported to be involved in 13 to 18% of patients. MAP3K1 expression downregulates SOX9, which then causes signaling to mirror what occurs in ovarian development leading to abnormal testicular development. The downregulation of the testicular development pathway leads to impaired gonadal development