Placing the patient on high-flow oxygen via a non-rebreather mask is paramount in the treatment of suspected or confirmed CO poisoning and removal from the source of the CO.  If the patient is comatose or unable to protect their airway because neurologic impairment is severe, then the patient should be intubated and placed on 100% oxygen. Close monitoring is mandatory for cardiac dysrhythmia, and the treatment of concomitant conditions is essential to maximizing good outcomes. For example, smoke inhalation and suspected cyanide poisoning should be treated with a hydroxocobalamin kit or an emergency cyanide kit (note that hydroxocobalamin can interfere with the measurement of the COHb, but one should err on the side of treating for CO poisoning knowing that the result may be inaccurate). It is critical to differentiate intentional from unintentional poisoning, but if the reason for poisoning is unknown, it is better to be suspicious of a potential suicide attempt. If the patient is conscious, an attempt at assessing suicidal ideation should be done. This will help with patient management after the acute toxicity has been addressed. The decision to treat the patient with hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBO2) can be controversial, but most experts agree that if there is loss of consciousness at the scene or in hospital, new neurologic deficits or mental status changes, end-organ ischemia (ECG changes, pH less than 7.1), or if the patient is pregnant (especially if COHb more than 20%), then treatment is indicated.

Do not treat based only on how high the COHb is because levels do not always correlate with clinical symptoms, but if the COHb is greater than 25%, this is considered severe poisoning, and most experts agree that treatment is justified. It is reasonable to err on the side of treating with HBO2 because it is difficult to predict which patients will go on to develop delayed neuropsychiatric syndrome (DNS), which is a significant problem in 40% of severe cases. This syndrome can arise in usually about 20 days after poisoning (range three to 240 days) and manifests as cognitive deficits, personality changes, movement disorders, and focal neurologic deficits. The deficits usually resolve after one year but may become permanent. HBO2 helps at reducing the risk of DNS by helping with the ischemia-reperfusion injury in the central nervous system. The mechanism of action of HBO2 is not only to cause more rapid displacement of the CO from hemoglobin and generate normal oxyhemoglobin in the red blood cell but the oxygen delivery to the tissue is also increased by the oxygen that is dissolved in the plasma. The other benefit of HBO2 is to reduce the adherence of neutrophils on the damaged endothelium of the blood vessels in the brain, which reduces tissue edema and reduces lipid peroxidation. The extra oxygen that is delivered to the tissue also helps to reduce the CO bound to the cytochrome proteins in the mitochondria of the cells and contributes to restoring oxidative phosphorylation, which neurons are especially dependent upon for normal function and survival from the ischemic insult. It is also controversial as to the number of HBO2 treatments and what is the best treatment profile. Most hyperbaric oxygen practitioners would treat by the Weaver protocol or modification of this protocol.

Whichever treatment profile (dive table) is used, the goal of the therapy is the same: provide 100% oxygen under two to three atmospheres absolute pressure (ATA) for 60 to 90 minutes to clear the carbon monoxide faster and to help with an ischemia-reperfusion injury. With more severe cases of CO poisoning, treat with two to three treatments on a twice-a-day basis to help resolve the reperfusion injury. In moderately severe cases with milder neurologic deficits and symptoms, then one treatment is sufficient. The timing of HBO2 is important and derives the most benefit if done within the first 6 hours after exposure. Once the patient has been adequately medically treated, then the disposition will depend on the clinical circumstances. Most patients with unintentional poisoning can be sent home with instructions to return if neurological defects develop. Have the patient follow up with their primary care physician to do formal neurologic testing if deficits persist or recur. Patients with suicide attempts need a referral for formal psychiatric care. Most of the time, this is done as inpatient care under involuntary retention.