Similar to their adult counterparts, aneurysms of childhood have associations and links with a variety of systemic and intracranial disorders.  Whereas some may represent purely coincidental occurrences, other conditions such as aortic coarctation are generally acknowledged as bearing an increased risk for a cerebral aneurysm. The most common of such conditions include coarctation of the aorta, polycystic renal disease, fibromuscular dysplasia, tuberous sclerosis, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,  Marfan syndrome, and familial syndromes. Aside from the more common arteriopathies already mentioned, both syphilis and pseudoxanthoma elasticum have also been involved in cases of childhood SAH. Azarelli reported the case of a child with a history of prior curative irradiation for intracranial germinoma who subsequently developed multiple aneurysms and expired from a ruptured fusiform lesion of the ICA.   Moyamoya disease also has correlations with an increased risk of multiple childhood aneurysms.

Intracranial aneurysms also correlate with various hematologic diseases in children.  Several cases of infants and young children with maternally acquired human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have developed aneurysms of the proximal circulation. Whether these lesions represent direct vessel wall injury from the retrovirus itself or associated infectious conditions remains unclear.  There is an unusually high incidence of reports of multiple aneurysms in HIV cases.  There are also observations of aneurysms associated with non-infectious hematological disorders such as thalassemia minor, sickle-cell disease, and glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency.

Isolated case reports of cerebral aneurysms in children with concurrent cerebral tumors are also present in the literature.  From our current series, Zee reported a fascinating case of a young boy with a temporal MCA aneurysm encased in an anaplastic sarcoma of the temporal lobe.  Along with several other authors, we have also observed a child whose aneurysm was diagnosed upon evaluation for hypopituitarism secondary to a pituitary adenoma. Reports also exist of patients with cardiac myxoma and multiple intracranial aneurysms.

Traumatic Aneurysms

Traumatic aneurysms typically develop from a direct penetrating injury or in association with a closed head injury.  Classically, the location of these lesions in children is related to the direct path of the penetrating missile, to vascular suspensory regions of the brain, or in areas of vascular contiguity with dural margins.  Peripheral cortical vessels are often directly involved below the edges of a fracture of the cranium.  Ventureya subdivided traumatic aneurysms into four major groups.  The first group represents lesions of the internal carotid artery which were sub-classified into cavernous, supraclinoid, and petrous types. These were the most commonly seen.  Supraclinoid aneurysms were rare.  The second group was comprised of lesions of the anterior cerebral artery circulation, typically distal to the anterior communicating artery.  The third group included middle cerebral artery distribution aneurysms which were usually near or distal to its bifurcation.  Finally, there were those aneurysms located near the vertebrobasilar confluence.  Traumatic multiple aneurysms occurred with the least frequency.

Giant Aneurysms

Saccular aneurysms exceeding 25 mm in their maximal diameter have traditionally been classified as “giant” in size.  Whether these lesions result as a dynamic evolution from smaller lesions with an intermittent breakdown of the aneurysmal wall remains unclear.  From aneurysmal series covering all age groups, giant lesions comprise approximately 2 to 5 percent of all cases.  Giant aneurysms of children occur with far greater frequency.  Several authors have reported remarkably high proportions of large or giant lesions in their series: Amacher & Drake 45%, Meyer & Sundt 54%, Gerosa et al. 20%, and Humphreys 28.5%.  In a large review of 500 cases of childhood aneurysms, 20 percent were giant in nature.  For aneurysms of children younger than five years of age, the proportion of large (50%) and giant (30%) aneurysms is even higher.  Anecdotal cases of massive aneurysms in very young infants also are present in the literature.  Although several of these series reflect the referral bias of their practice, the frequency of giant aneurysms does seem to increase with younger age in the literature.

It is also a known fact that adult giant intracranial aneurysms are different in their localizations as compared to that of smaller aneurysms.  Approximately 40 percent present in the carotid distribution, 25 percent in the anterior and middle cerebral artery distribution, and 30 percent in the vertebrobasilar territory; this represents a six-fold increase in the proportion of posterior fossa lesions usually seen in the adult population.  Giant intracranial aneurysms of children share this predilection for the posterior circulation but to a much greater degree.  From Hacker’s review of 500 literature cases, he noted that “there is approximately an equal distribution between the anterior and posterior system” of giant aneurysms.  Our series of 52 children included 12 giant aneurysms of which 6 (50%) were in the vertebrobasilar territory, and 8 (67%) were male.  Whereas 60% of adult giant aneurysms are in women, 62% of giant childhood aneurysms occur in males.

Coarctation of the aorta

As discussed earlier, one of the first descriptions of a ruptured pediatric aneurysm was that of a 15-year-old boy with a stenotic lesion of his aortic isthmus.  As Matson noted, the relationship of aortic coarctation and ruptured cerebral aneurysms in children has been repeatedly echoed throughout the past century’s literature.  In 1927. Postmortem examinations performed on 32 children with aortic coarctation implicated cerebral hemorrhage as the cause of death in 37.5% of cases.  The following year, Abbott found that 7 of 20 cases with cerebral hemorrhage and aortic coarctation had a confirmed ruptured cerebral aneurysm on autopsy.

The actual incidence of cerebral aneurysms in children with aortic coarctation is difficult to estimate as the majority of afflicted children do not become symptomatic until later in life.  Tyler and Clark in their review of 200 patients with aortic coarctation reported only five patients diagnosed in life with cerebral aneurysms.  They reported an average age of rupture at 25 years from their literature review.  Often, neurologic manifestations may provide the first clues towards the diagnosis of aortic coarctation.  LeBlanc wrote, “in young, hypertensive, non-cyanosed patients, intermittent neurological symptoms or sudden cerebral insult may suggest the existence of aortic coarctation ” (80).  He went on to confirm the association of aortic coarctation with ruptured cerebral aneurysm and also pointed out the predilection for multiple aneurysms in such patients.  In patients with this clinical picture, a continuous murmur, arterial hypertension in the vasculature proximal to the stenosis, and diminished pulses with hypotension in the distal extremities should be sought.

Along with ruptured aneurysms, patients with coarctation may also suffer complications reduced to direct arterial hypertension and resultant intracerebral hemorrhage, emboli arising from associated aortic aneurysms or surgical sites with a resultant stroke, and cerebral abscess arising from infected emboli.  Alleviating the aortic stenosis usually results in a reduction of the blood pressure proximal to the coarctation, and may reduce the risk of intracerebral hemorrhage and aneurysmal rupture. Some authors have even recommended surgery for a cerebral aneurysm prior to correction of the aortic coarctation in stable patients.  Patel and Richardson reported 7 of their 58 aneurysm patients as having coarctation of the aorta.   In our own series, we have encountered two children with aortic stenosis and symptomatic cerebral aneurysm.  Whenever possible, we recommend a magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) or spinal CT angiogram with three-dimensional reconstructions before adolescence for patients with aortic coarctation.  Although less sensitive than standard arteriography, MRA and CT have been shown to be safe, noninvasive, and effective screening modalities for cerebral aneurysms.  If normal, repeat surveillance scans are obtainable at the clinician’s discretion.  For patients with clinical evidence of aneurysmal rupture or in cases where the MRA is questionable,  four-vessel cerebral angiography is advisable.  It is essential that an experienced neuroradiologist be available to perform specialized techniques such as brachial catheterization as severe stenoses may preclude standard femoral catheterization and patient age increases the potential complexity of catheter placement and contrast load.

Polycystic Kidney Disease

There are two distinct forms of polycystic renal disease.  The first is an autosomal dominant form of the disorder that afflicts multiple organs including the heart, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys.  Affected patients also demonstrate an increased risk of harboring an intracranial aneurysm although reported prevalence rates vary from 0 to 41 percent.  This broad range is due in part to the fact that the diagnosis of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is often delayed until adulthood.   Indeed, the majority of ADPKD patients with aneurysms experience rupture after the second decade of life.  The inconsistent use of angiography, fine-cut computed tomography (CT), and MRI/MRA has made calculating the incidence of aneurysms an even more difficult task.  Isolated case reports have confirmed the presence of cerebral aneurysms in infants with this form of the disease. Through linkage studies, adult polycystic kidney disease has been mapped to a 100kb locus on chromosome 16 entitled PKD1.  Genetic studies have shown up to an 18% incidence of aneurysms in patients of PKD1 families with at least one affected family member.   The PKD1 gene also correlates in other conditions associated with renal cysts such as tuberous sclerosis (TS).  Several authors have reported similar arteriopathic findings in ADPKD, fibromuscular dysplasia, and TS patients and thus postulate a common role for PKD1 in vessel wall development.

The second type, infantile polycystic kidney disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and typically presents early in life as a flank mass or enlarged abdomen.  The life expectancy of these patients is typically quite short, and as such, aneurysms in this population are extremely rare (44).  In a series of 14 patients with the infantile form of the disease, 12 expired before adolescence with no evidence of intracranial aneurysm.  Only one long-term survivor has been reported to develop a basilar aneurysm at age 18.

Chapman in his study of 92 patients with ADPKD quoted a 4 percent frequency of unruptured aneurysms in affected patients as opposed to the 1 percent frequency typically seen in the general population (P<0.04, 95 percent confidence interval).  Of note is that fine cut CT with multi-planar reconstruction was their primary screening modality with angiography used to confirm only suspicious findings.   Although cerebral angiography is the most sensitive and specific test for intracranial aneurysms, most clinicians do not routinely obtain angiograms in all patients with polycystic kidney disease due to cost, risk, and outcome issues.  Indeed, several authors have reported an increased risk of complications when performing angiography in polycystic kidney patients, and have recommended its cautious use in such cases.  From the few series of angiographic studies available, a higher frequency of unruptured aneurysms reports exists as compared to when CT is the screening modality: 41% of 17 subjects without neurologic symptoms and 37% of 19 patients with symptoms.

Based on these observations,  one cannot make a definitive statement as to the exact risk of ADPKD patients for harboring an intracranial aneurysm.  Cerebral angiography, on the other hand, does carry a clear amount of risk in ADPKD patients.  As such, our current recommendations are that either a fine-cut CT or MRI / MRA is necessary for patients diagnosed with ADPKD.  As in patients with aortic coarctation, those presenting with neurological symptoms or with abnormal noninvasive imaging should undergo four-vessel cerebral angiography.  As other authors have recommended, we do not routinely screen for aneurysms in patients with the infantile form of the disease as their risk is low and their life-expectancy short.

Tuberous Sclerosis (TS)

Bourneville’s disease (TS) also correlates with multiple intracranial aneurysms and renal cysts.   Tuberous sclerosis is a disorder with protean manifestations involving multiple organ systems, and the best explanation is that it is a developmental tissue dysplasia involving both ectodermal and mesodermal elements.  Its characteristic clinical presentation is by a classic triad of mental retardation, epilepsy, and adenoma sebaceum.  The putative gene for TS also shares a common location with the polycystic kidney disease gene PKD1 (100kb) on chromosome 16.  Blumenkopf in his review of this subject discovered only five cases of TS with associated intracranial aneurysms.  The tissue dysplasia of TS is felt to be partly responsible for a congenital defect of the arterial wall thus explaining the clinical observation of an increased number of multiple and fusiform aneurysms.

Interestingly, the histological findings in renal cysts of TS are identical to those found in the cysts of ADPKD patients.  Both diseases have been known to co-exist in the same patient and can often be difficult to differentiate in cases exhibiting non-classic phenotypes.  A central role for the PKD1 gene pertaining to these histological changes has been postulated but remains to be proven. Other congenital syndromes associated with renal cysts such as Zellweger disease or Meckel-Gruber syndrome do not demonstrate an increased risk for cerebral aneurysms.  Screening angiograms in patients with tuberous sclerosis (TS) have been ineffective as children typically go on to bleed from lesions not initially documented on screening angiography.

Fibromuscular Dysplasia

Described primarily as an angiopathy often associated with hypertension, fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is characterized by dysplastic vessel wall changes that spread multifocally within branches of the aorta.  Found primarily in hypertensive middle-aged women, FMD has been associated with an increased number of intracranial aneurysms as well as with multiple other congenital anomalies.  Although the establishment of this linkage between FMD and cerebral aneurysms is clear in adult patients, cases of subarachnoid hemorrhage and aneurysms in children with FMD are exceedingly rare.

Ehlers-Danlos and Marfan syndrome

Intracranial aneurysms are most frequently associated with patients having type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.  As an autosomal dominant defect in collagen synthesis, Ehlers-Danlos patients classically have hyperplastic skin and hyperextensible joints.  As a clinical entity, it further separates into several clinical types (I-IV) with differences in the specific collagen synthesis defect, clinical features, and inheritance pattern evident.   The classic phenotypical features are not typically seen in patients with type IV disease and thus can cause delayed diagnosis until rupture of the cerebral aneurysm occurs, usually in adulthood. Obtaining an MRI / MRA or CT of a child with known type IV disease would not be unwarranted.  Intracranial aneurysms have also been occasionally reported in patients with Ehlers-Danlos type I and type VI as well.

Whereas the existence of large dissecting aneurysms of the aorta is a well-recognized feature of Marfan Syndrome, less clear is the association between Marfans and intracerebral aneurysms.  A review of the literature reveals that no definitive conclusion has been reached concerning the relationship of berry aneurysms to Marfan’s syndrome.

Familial aneurysm occurrence

Given the rare incidence of intracranial aneurysms in children as a whole, it is not surprising to discover that familial cases are even more uncommon.  Although most of these patients remain asymptomatic until adulthood, familial aneurysms do tend to rupture at an earlier age than would be expected.   Additionally, familial lesions show a propensity for the peripheral vasculature especially that of the middle cerebral artery territory. Reports of an increased incidence of multiple aneurysms also exist with familial cases, especially in cases associated with Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, polycystic kidney disease, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, cavernous angiomas, Von-Hippel-Lindau disease, arteriovenous malformations, and Sturge-Weber syndrome.

It has been challenging to develop a rational, safe, and cost-effective method of screening children with a familial history. Angiography in children carries with it a quantifiable amount of risk.  Given recent advances in imaging, we recommend screening MRI/MRA or CT for such patients.  We do not routinely screen asymptomatic children with a single parent who has an aneurysm as the risk is relatively low.  In cases where a large number of younger family members are affected, a more aggressive evaluation may be necessary.  Standard angiography should be obtained in all clinically or radiographically suspicious cases.