Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is the commonest form of retinopathy as well as the most common cause of adult vision loss and blindness.

Hypertensive retinopathy is also very prevalent and important since its prime driving factor, hypertension is present in about one-third of USA adults and is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease.

Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a major worldwide cause of blindness and vision loss in premature, low birth weight and extremely low birth weight newborns.  Although rare, ROP “like” signs can also occur is full-term newborns.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a key role in many retinopathies. Hypoxia induces VEGF expression, and VEGF stimulates angiogenesis.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) results in impairment of central (but not peripheral) vision and is caused by damage to the macula.  There are two major variants of AMD, “wet” (or exudative) and “dry” (or atrophic) with “dry” accounting for about 80 to 90% of all AMD cases.  Although accounting for only the remaining 10 to 20% of all AMD cases, wet AMD is responsible for about 90% of severe vision loss.

Similarly, the extracellular accumulation of drusen between the RPE and the Bruch’s membrane is also a risk factor for AMD.   Drusen, like lipofuscin, is a complex chemical mixture containing oxidatively modified proteins.  Some of the oxidatively modified proteins in drusen crosslink to oxidative products of docosahexaenoic (22:6n3) which is polyunsaturated fatty acid with a high content in rod outer segment phospholipids.