HBSE can provide a framework for collaborative care and interprofessional teams to provide optimal patient care. In these situations, healthcare professionals of different disciplines may have different means of formulating an understanding of the patient. Interprofessional teams can thus use HBSE concepts to understand cross-discipline formulations and treatment plans. Given the limitations of the current healthcare system and system pressures on individual providers, each individual provider might consider focusing on addressing one aspect of the individual's care while maintaining an understanding of the greater contributors to the patient's presentation. Of primary importance is assessing and evaluating a trained social worker that can identify factors hindering patient care and outline in depth the patient's expectation from treatment. Communicating these factors to the trained specialty nurse can help in patient education and improve compliance with care. Identifying detrimental factors as well as adverse reactions and notifying the clinicians of these findings can help improve clinical outcomes and prevent complications. Electronic medical records could assist with this through a computer-assisted identification of major factors or deficits in the patient's life that may limit adherence, healthcare literacy, or communication. Through a greater understanding of HBSE, a more integrated healthcare team and a resulting healthcare system are achievable. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research identified ten principles for healthcare integration to occur successfully, and this included "Standardized Care Delivery through Interprofessional Teams."

One of the identified factors under this principle included "one standard-of-care." In this regard, a comprehensive view of each individual, using an understanding of HBSE, would allow for a universal standard-of-care to be developed across healthcare systems. Also, emphasis on well-being and health promotion was recognized, which again can be facilitated through an understanding of HBSE. [Level 3]