The skin is composed of three layers: the epidermis, the dermis (composed of the superficial papillary and deeper reticular dermis), and the hypodermis. The skin has structural differences among the different areas of the body in terms of epidermal and dermal thickness, distribution of appendages, and pigmentation. The epidermis is composed of multiple layers of maturing keratinocytes: the basal layer (stratum basale), the squamous layer (stratum spinosum), the granular layer (stratum granulosum), and the cornified layer (stratum corneum). This stratified epithelium is in a constant process of self-renewing and exfoliation that takes 20-40 days to complete. The cells in the outer layer are the most differentiated in the keratinocyte line, composed almost entirely of keratin lamels of high molecular weight, and those are the ones that undergo desquamation, completing the maturation cycle.

When the epidermis is exposed to repetitive injury, it usually elicits an increased proliferative rate of the keratinocytes and accelerates their maturation. Keratinocytes also tend to produce more keratin, thus increasing the stratum corneum's thickness.

Injury to the epidermis, if acute, tends to result in edema, also called spongiosis. This is seen as a clear space between keratinocytes. Severe edema can cause the formation of intraepidermal vesicles as extracellular fluid accumulation between keratinocytes. If the process becomes chronic, the edema regresses, and the epidermis becomes hyperplastic as a response to the chronic insult. Epidermal hyperplasia is seen as a thickening of the epidermis and elongation of the rete ridges (called acanthosis), accompanied by ortho or para-hyperkeratosis. These are the typical transition phases of acute to chronic spongiotic dermatitis such as eczema.

Genetic mutations resulting in hyperkeratosis is seen in ichthyoses and keratoderma. There are several damages in keratin-encoding genes such as KRT1 and KRT10, which cause defects in keratin structure. Defective keratin causes irregular aggregates of intermediate filaments, which leads to cellular collapse and blistering. The barrier function is then compromised, and the skin reacts with compensatory hyperproliferation, which leads to hyperkeratosis.