**Parathyroid**

Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) is the most common and the first clinical manifestation of MEN1. It affects approximately 90% of MEN1 patients and is commonly diagnosed during the second decade of life.

Multi-gland, nodular hyperplasia is typical in MEN1 hyperparathyroidism and presents as hypercalcemia or its corresponding complications.

MEN1-related PHPT is associated with more severe bone disease despite a milder biochemical presentation (PTH value in the normal range) when compared with sporadic PHPT.

Parathyroid cancer is sporadic in MEN1. Di Meo et al. reported 17 cases of parathyroid cancer, of which 59% were seen in men, and the median age of diagnosis was 50.

Treatment of PHPT in MEN1 involving subtotal parathyroidectomy versus total parathyroidectomy remains controversial. Total parathyroidectomy with forearm transplantation is associated with a lower chance of persistent hyperparathyroidism; however, there is a higher risk of hypoparathyroidism of 22% to 36% compared to 10% with subtotal parathyroidectomy.

**Non-Functioning Gastro-Entero-Pancreatic Tumors**

Non-functioning pancreatic NETs are the most common gastro-entero-pancreatic tumors.

Radiological screening for diagnosis of pancreatic NET in MEN1 is recommended at the age of 10 years.

Treatment of a non-functioning pancreatic NET is challenging and controversial because of the lack of consensus on surgical indications. Triponez et al. reported that tumor size in non-functioning pancreatic NET correlates with the risk of metastasis and death

**Functioning Gastro-Entero-Pancreatic Tumors**

The neuroendocrine tumor (NET) of gastro-entero-pancreatic tissues occurs in approximately 30% to 75% of cases, yet post-mortem studies have shown a prevalence of 80% to 100%.

Pancreaticoduodenal NET in MEN1 presents early in life, it is almost always present in multiple, and it has an uncertain behavior with a risk of malignancy. Somatostatin analogs have been used with some success in any stage of the disease and can be a reasonable choice in treating any neuroendocrine tumor.

Functioning NET-secreting gastrin can cause peptic ulcer disease because of increased gastric acid secretion, known as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Functioning NET can also cause hypoglycemia by secreting an excessive amount of insulin. However, tumors secreting pancreatic polypeptide may not cause any clinical manifestations.

**Gastrinoma**

The most frequent islet cell neoplasm is gastrinoma. Gastrinomas in MEN1 can be pancreatic or duodenal and are most often diagnosed in the third or fourth decade of life. A detailed history, physical examination, and biochemical evaluation should be performed in patients with gastrinoma, as one-third of patients with gastrinomas have MEN1. These patients have elevated gastrin levels or hypergastrinemia and increased gastric acid output.

Duodenal gastrinomas in MEN1 syndrome are usually small (less than 1 cm), multifocal, and occur primarily in the proximal duodenum. Lymph node metastasis occurs in 45% to 95% of pancreatic and duodenal gastrinoma, with liver metastases less common in duodenal NETs.

**Insulinoma**

Insulinoma is the second most common functional pancreatic NET. It represents 10% to 30% of patients with pancreatic NET in MEN1. These tumors secrete a significant amount of insulin which can cause the clinical manifestation of hypoglycemia, including neuroglycopenic symptoms and sometimes seizures or loss of consciousness. Patients with insulinoma due to MEN1 are mostly younger than 40 years old when compared with insulinoma patients without MEN1 that are older than 40 years old.

Fasting hypoglycemia with a glucose level of less than 45 mg/dl and concomitant hyperinsulinemia, defined as an insulin level greater than 6 uU/mL, are diagnostic of insulinoma.

Surgical treatment is necessary for insulinoma patients. Preoperative tumor localization with different modalities, including transhepatic portal venous sampling, can improve the success rate of surgery. Surgical treatment can vary from the enucleation of a single lesion to partial pancreatectomy. These patients can be managed medically with diazoxide or octreotide; frequent carbohydrate meals may also help lower the hypoglycemia risk.

Tonelli et al. reported 12 MEN1 insulinoma patients who underwent surgery; distal pancreatic resection was performed in 8 patients, and the remaining four underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy. Enucleation of another macroadenoma in the remnant pancreas was performed in 9 out of 12 patients. There were no clinical recurrences at a mean follow-up of 85 months, but recurrence of non-functioning pancreatic macroadenoma occurred in 1 out of 12 patients.

Chemotherapy can be used in patients with metastatic insulinoma.

**Glucagonoma**

Glucagonoma occurs in less than 3% of MEN1 patients. The typical manifestations include necrolytic migratory erythema, weight loss, anemia, and stomatitis. Glucagon levels are significantly elevated in these patients, usually greater than 500 pg/ml.

**VIPoma**

VIPomas are not common in MEN1—these patients present with watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and achlorhydria, also known as Verner-Morrison syndrome. Stool volume of more than 0.5 to 1 L per day during a fast is typical. The use of laxatives and diuretics should be ruled out before confirming the diagnosis of VIPoma. Like glucagonoma, the most common site of involvement is the tail of the pancreas. Surgical resection can be curative in the absence of metastatic disease. Medical treatment includes somatostatin analogs, metoclopramide, or chemotherapy agents like 5-fluorouracil or streptozotocin.

**Pituitary Tumors**

The prevalence of anterior pituitary tumors in MEN1 syndrome is approximately 20% to 60%, and the anterior pituitary tumor can be an initial presentation in about 25% of MEN1 patients.

Anterior pituitary tumors in MEN1 are more common in women and are predominantly macroadenomas.

Medical management includes the use of cabergoline or bromocriptine in patients with prolactinoma. Octreotide or lanreotide are used in GH-producing tumors.

Studies have shown that anterior pituitary tumors in MEN1 patients are more aggressive and less likely to respond to medical management; thus, they may require surgical management more often. Radiation treatment is used for patients with residual unresectable tumors.

Surgical management is performed in patients with large pituitary tumors with compression of the optic nerve, tumors more than 1 cm, or tumors which do not improve with medical management.

**Carcinoid**

Carcinoid tumors affect 3% of MEN1 patients. Common sites of involvement are the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, bronchi, pancreas, and thymus. Somatostatin analogs such as octreotide or lanreotide have been shown to cause regression of gastric carcinoids.

Bronchial carcinoid tumors are more common in women, but thymic carcinoid tumors in European patients occur predominantly in men. Thymic carcinoids are aggressive in MEN1 patients. Goudet et al. reported a survival rate of only 9.5 years after diagnosing a thymic tumor, with 70% mortality linked directly to the tumor.

Screening for these patients is performed with radiologic imaging such as a CT scan and MRI every 1 to 2 years. Biochemical evaluation is not done routinely due to a lack of any specific biochemical abnormality or hormone production.

Surgical removal is the treatment of choice. Thymic carcinoid has been recognized and identified even in patients who underwent prophylactic thymectomy. Therefore, surveillance with imaging is required. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy can be employed in patients with unresectable tumors or metastatic disease.

**Adrenal Tumors**

Asymptomatic adrenal tumors occur in approximately 20% to 73% of MEN1 patients. Compared to adrenal incidentalomas, there is more likelihood of hyperaldosteronism and adrenocortical cancer but less likelihood of pheochromocytoma in those patients.

The incidence of adrenocortical cancer is approximately 1% in MEN1 patients, but this value can increase up to 13% with an adrenal tumor larger than 1 cm.

Biochemical evaluation of adrenal tumors includes measurement of plasma-free metanephrines, 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test, 24-hour urine collection for free cortisol, and late evening salivary cortisol. Additionally, plasma renin and aldosterone levels should be obtained. Increased aldosterone:renin ratio (greater than 20) and increased urinary aldosterone secretion are diagnostic for an aldosteronoma.

There is no consensus about managing non-functioning adrenal tumors in MEN1 patients. Nevertheless, due to the increased risk of adrenocortical cancer, surgery is recommended if the tumor size is larger than 4 cm or if a tumor sized between 1 and 4 cm has significant, measurable growth over six months with suspicious radiological features.

LeBodic et al. reported an immunohistochemical study of 100 pancreatic tumors in 28 MEN1 patients. They found that out of 100 tumors, 83 produced a predominant hormone, 10 were pluri-hormonal, and multiple tumors had a different predominant hormonal secretion in the same patient in 23 out of 28 patients.

**Breast**

Breast cancer is more common in female MEN1 patients and occurs at an early age. Rachel et al. found that the median age of breast cancer in women with MEN1 was 45 compared to 57.5 years in female relatives without MEN1 and 61.2 in the Dutch reference population.