The main reason to test the UAE level is to evaluate the patient for possible future complications. However, providers should not merely view microalbuminuria as a kidney damage marker but as a predictor of kidney dysfunction progression rate and reflect the effect of systemic disorders on the kidney.

It is well known that the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is useful in staging chronic kidney disease. In comparison to microalbuminuria, GFR is a pure kidney damage marker. Several studies have demonstrated that there is a continuous correlation between microalbuminuria and developing end-stage renal disease. Therefore, when presented with a patient with a reduced GFR classified under stage 3 or 4, the patient with microalbuminuria should be considered very high risk instead of high risk as per the GFR. This classification ensures that prompt action is taken to prevent further complications, such as macroalbuminuria, diabetic kidney disease, proteinuria, and chronic kidney disease.

Microalbuminuria has links with a high rate of atherosclerotic cardiovascular events (such as coronary artery disease, stroke, and peripheral vascular disease) and subsequently increased morbidity and mortality. The evidence reveals in adults, it is a four to six-fold increase, whereas, in patients with diabetes, it is only two-fold.

Among patients with essential hypertension, microalbuminuria can predict kidney function decline, coronary artery stenosis, and hypertensive retinopathy. Importantly, the latter two are reversible with adequate treatment.