1. Avoiding infections by practicing hand hygiene, drinking treated water, and having adequate respiratory protection.

2. IV Immunoglobulin replacement therapy has limitations as it only replaces IgG but not IgM or IgA. Immunoglobulin levels need to monitor every 6 months, and the dose should be adjusted based on the patient’s IgG production and weight. Immunoglobulin therapy is not indicated in THI or conditions with normal B cells but specific antibody impairment. Patients with high IgG and mild impairment in response to vaccination can be followed closely. Side effects with IVIG administration may range from inflammatory reactions to rarely anaphylaxis. Headache, AKI, hemolytic anemia, and neutropenia can also be seen. Patients receiving IVIG should be screened for anti-IgA antibodies to prevent anaphylactic reactions caused by a patient’s IgE antibodies to the IgA in the IVIG preparation in patients with CVID or IgA deficiency. Patients with IgA deficiency make IgG antibodies normally and therefore do not need IVIG with >99% IgG. Administration of IVIG with IgA deficient patients may cause anaphylaxis.

3. Antibiotics for active infections or prophylaxis and monitoring for chronic lung problems due to recurrent pneumonia.

4. Systemic glucocorticoids can be used for cytopenias, high dose IVIG, and rituximab as a steroid-sparing adjunctive agent have also shown benefits.

5. Hematopoietic stem cell transplant can also be done when weighing for cost and IVIG availability. In cases with no response to the above treatment, a splenectomy can be considered.

6. Vaccination recommendations: seasonal influenza vaccine for high-risk patients. The recommendations vary according to the severity of antibody deficiency. In severe deficiency, live attenuated vaccines are not recommended but routine vaccination with inactivated vaccines like Influenza, HPV, Anthrax, and Rabies can be given. The vaccination schedule for inactivated or subunit vaccines is the same as the general population in mild antibody deficiency but its important to weigh the benefit and possible harm in administering live-attenuated vaccines to this population.

7. Allergy testing/ PFT  in children with continued sinopulmonary symptoms. They may need allergy testing to rule out asthma or allergic triggers contributing to these symptoms.

8. Repeated ear infections may lead to sensorineural hearing loss and need audio examinations for concerns of impaired hearing or poor school performance.