African trypanosomiasis is seen in up to 30 countries across sub-Saharan Africa, and over 7000 cases of the disease were reported in 2012.T. brucei gambiense. It is often chronic and deadly if untreated. The east/southern African infection caused by T. brucei rhodesiense and in addition to humans is often found in cattle.T. brucei gambiense. Geographical distribution has demonstrated progressive overlap as T. brucei rhodesiense has moved northwest.

Historically, T. brucei have been responsible fo**r**epidemics in the late 1800s and early 1900s, killing near a million people. Colonial countries started early vector control and disease surveillance, and the disease was nearly eradicated in the 1960s. Governmental independence and ceased surveillance led to recurrence with a peak incidence in the late 1990s.

African trypanosomiasis is mainly seen in rural communities and impoverished areas. This distribution is underreported, and although the World Health Organization (WHO) has attempted to re-institute control programs, not all countries report disease or implement these measures.

The chronic form of African trypanosomiasis from T. brucei gambiense is rare in short-term tourists and visitors but is seen in refugees and immigrants. In contrast T. brucei rhodesiense has been seen in tourists to East Africa, mainly in Tanzania.

Longitudinally, the WHO's goal is to eliminate African trypanosomiasis by 2020. Multiple screening methods, therapeutic delivery plans, and disease reporting programs are being implemented in an attempt to make this a reality.

Chagas disease, although originally discovered in 1909, is still a major cause of morbidity and mortality in endemic Central and South America, and up to 10 million individuals are thought to be infected worldwide. While the United States is not an endemic area, the disease has been seen in the southern states such as Texas and Arizona.