Simulation-based CRM can provide results translatable to patient outcomes.  This fact is exemplified in the results of the prospective evaluation of the Medical Team Training program utilized by the Veterans Administration.  Investigators identified a dose-response relationship between training and mortality**.**For every three months of training, there was a commensurate reduction of 0.5 deaths per thousand operations.

In an observational study of the impact of ward culture on the escalation of care, debriefing sessions revealed that explicit"permission to act" empowered staff to facilitate this process. By protecting training time, participant attendance at these sessions was greater than 95%.  The cost-benefit analysis revealed a reduction in PICU bed associated costs by £801,600 per year (£2400 per day x 334 PICU bed days).  Furthermore, these savings substantially exceeded the costs of regular team training. Investigators suggested that future research should include the financial impact on providers of "failure to rescue."****

In a multicenter study evaluating training for IHCA response, survival rates were significantly higher for patients in hospitals with more active participation in simulation training (42.8% versus 31.8%; P less than 0.0001). This effect was true for large and medium-sized hospitals and did not significantly change after adjusting hospital expected mortality through logistic regression. The adjusted OR of 0.62 (CI 0.54- 0.71; P less than 0.001), represented an additional 151 potential lives saved - a substantial benefit given a cost of only 1.1 additional simulation/100 beds/year/life saved.