**A total of Seven Basic Slit Lamp Illumination Techniques are Used to Examine the Eye**

**Diffuse Illumination**

In this technique, the angle between the illumination beam and microscope is kept at 30 to 45 degrees. The slit width is maintained as the widest, diffuse filter illumination; magnification should be low to medium, and illumination is controlled from medium to high.

**Uses**

- Gross examination of the anterior segment of the eye

- Examination of the sclera, upper tarsal, lower tarsal, and palpebral conjunctiva

**Direct Focal Illumination**

In this technique, the slit lamp beam is modified until it coincides with the correct focus of the microscope. The illumination is kept as a narrow slit at an oblique angle. The corneal and the lens tissue disperse light and become visible as bright objects against the dark background. The technique of direct focal illumination has three subcategories of examination.

**Conical Beam**

In this technique, the slit beam is kept as a small circular pattern, the light source is at 45 to 60 degrees, and the beam is directed into the pupil. The slit lamp biomicroscope is kept in front of the eye, and magnification is high with 16-20 X. The focusing beam is between the cornea and the anterior lens surface, and a dark zone is usually noticed between the cornea and the lens. This zone appears black and is generally optically empty. The aqueous flare makes this zone turbid, and anterior chamber cells are seen as white dots. The cells are located by gently moving or oscillating the beam.

**Uses**

The conical beam is used to see aqueous cells and flare.

**Parallelopiped**

This corneal section is observed using a 2 to 3-mm wide focussed slit.

**Uses**

- Pathologies of corneal epithelium and stroma.

- Corneal scar or infiltrate (because of higher density than the surrounding

- Cells and flare in the anterior chamber

**Optical Section**

This section is produced by a very narrow slit lamp beam focussed obliquely. The optical section produced appears like a knife on the histological section.

**Corneal Optical Section**

- This consists of a segment of the arc with concentric zones.

- The tear film layer is observed as a bright anteriormost layer

- Epithelium appears as a dark zone below the tear film

- The Bowman's layer is seen as a bright white layer

- Stroma appears as a widened granular and gray layer

- Descemet and endothelial layers appear as bright zone posteriorly

**Uses**

- This helps in delineating the cornea, lens, and anterior vitreous face

- Corneal thickness

- Corneal curvature

- Corneal foreign body depth and location

- Anterior chamber angle grading- Van Herrick method

**Lens Optical Section**

- The lenticular layer can be seen stratified as

- Anterior lens capsule

- Subcapsular clear zone

- Scattering zone of discontinuity which appears as bright

- Second cortical clear zone

- Deeper cortex clear zone

- Nuclear area

A slit beam is used progressively to focus on the deeper layers of the lens. This optical section can also delineate the anterior one-third of the vitreous face.

**Indirect Illumination**

In this, the slip lamp light is focussed adjacent to the area to be examined. The angle between the slit-lamp light source and the viewing arm should be between 30 to 45 degrees. A moderate-width beam is used, and illumination can be set as low, medium, or high based on the need. The indirect illumination examines corneal infiltrates, corneal microcysts, vacuoles, or epithelial cells.

**Retroillumination**

In this technique, the microscope is focused on the cornea, while the light is reflected from the iris or the retina. Retroillumination has been further classified as direct or indirect.

**Direct Retroillumination**

In this, the observer is in the direct path of the light reflected from the ocular structures. The pathology is focused on an illuminated background.

**Indirect Retroillumination**

In this method, the observer is at a right angle to the observed pathology or ocular structure. The pathology is seen against a dark, non-illuminated background.

The pathologies can be divided based on the optical properties as obstructive, dispersive, or refractile.

**Obstructive**

These are seen as dark objects against a bright background: Eg, blood vessels.

**Respersive**

These scatter the light and do not obstruct the light completely. The pathology is seen as a bright object against a dark background: Eg, epithelial edema and keratic precipitates.

The infiltrates are seen as relucent by direct focal illumination, but on retro illumination, they appear as respersive.

**Refractile**

The difference in the refractive indices between the pathology and the surroundings is seen as distortion from the junction between the illuminated and dark areas—e.g., vacuole. A solid or opaque precipitate usually appears as a dark area under direct retro illumination, but the illumination is reversed in indirect illumination. Retroillumination helps provide details of an object related to the pathology and gives an idea regarding the refractive index and the form and consistency of the pathology.

**Fundus Retroillumination**

In this technique, the first pupil is dilated, and the slip lamp beam and the microscope are kept co-axial. This technique helps in assessing the media clarity and opacities. The principal is that when the light passes through the pupil and strikes the fundus, it creates a glow posterior to the opacity in the media. Hence, the media opacity creates a shadow. Under high magnification (10 to 16X), the microscope is focused on delineating the pathology. This technique is also helpful in assessing the cornea, lenticular or vitreous pathology. An important application is to grade cataracts, especially the cortical and posterior subcapsular ones, using the LOCS 2 and 3 classification (lens opacity classification system).

**Specular Reflection**

A light reflection occurs when a light beam strikes an optical surface, called a zone of discontinuity. These zones can be observed in the cornea as well as the lens. When an observer is kept in the pathway of reflective light, a glittering reflex will be seen, called specular reflection. The reflected surface is called the zone of specular reflection.

Pathologies on the ocular surface can scatter the light and, in turn, create dark areas in the reflex beam. For obtaining a specular reflex, the patient is instructed to look 30 degrees temporally while the light beam is focused from the opposite side. The optical block is focussed under higher magnification at a distance of 3 to 4 mm from the limbus. A shining reflex is observed on the cornea from the light source.

The optical block will approach the reflex as the light source is moved temporally. When the angle between the slit and microscope is 60 degrees, the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. At this stage, the reflex shows irregulates at the meniscus. The deeper, less illuminated glow will be seen, focussed on showing the endothelial mosaic of cells. With this technique, the endothelial cells can be counted and measured.

**Sclerotic Scatter**

This technique is used to locate even the smallest and faintest corneal irregularities. The light ray is directed towards the limbus. Because of total internal reflection, the light rays are passed through the cornea and illuminate the opposite side of the limbus. In the case of corneal opacity, the details become visible because light rays are scattered. A magnification of 6 to 10 X is used.

**Oscillating Illumination of Koeppe**

In this technique, the slit lamp is given an oscillatory movement by which it is easy to detect filaments or minute objects in the aqueous, which can easily escape detection.