Although gluconeogenesis can be broadly considered the reversal of glycolysis, it is not an identical pathway running in the opposite direction. Several enzymes catalyze reactions with small changes in free-energy, meaning they are easily reversible and function well in both pathways. However, three reactions of glycolysis are highly exergonic, resulting in largely negative free-energy changes that are irreversible and must be bypassed by different enzymes. The enzymes unique to gluconeogenesis are pyruvate carboxylase, PEP carboxykinase, fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, and glucose 6-phosphatase.

Starting from pyruvate, the reactions of gluconeogenesis are as follows:

- In the mitochondrion, pyruvate is carboxylated to form oxaloacetate via the enzyme pyruvate carboxylase. Pyruvate carboxylase requires ATP as an activating molecule as well as biotin as a coenzyme. This reaction is unique to gluconeogenesis and is the first of two steps required to bypass the irreversible reaction catalyzed by the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase.

- In the cytosol, oxaloacetate is decarboxylated and rearranged to form phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) via the enzyme PEP carboxykinase. PEP carboxykinase requires GTP as an activating molecule and magnesium ion as a cofactor. This reaction is unique to gluconeogenesis and is the second of two steps required to bypass the irreversible reaction catalyzed by the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase.

- PEP is hydrated to form 2-phosphoglycerate via the enzyme enolase.

- 2-phosphoglycerate converts to 3-phosphoglycerate via the enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase.

- 3-phosphoglycerate is phosphorylated via the enzyme phosphoglycerate kinase to form 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. This reaction requires ATP as an activating molecule.

- 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is reduced to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate via the enzyme glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. NADH is the electron donor.

- Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is isomerized to form dihydroxyacetone phosphate via the enzyme triose phosphate isomerase.

- Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate are combined to form fructose 1,6-bisphosphate via the enzyme aldolase.

- Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is dephosphorylated to form fructose 6-phosphate via the enzyme fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase or FBPase-1. This reaction is unique to gluconeogenesis and bypasses the irreversible reaction catalyzed by the glycolytic enzyme phosphofructokinase-1.

- Fructose 6-phosphate converts to glucose 6-phosphate via phosphohexose isomerase.

- Glucose 6-phosphate is dephosphorylated by glucose 6-phosphatase to form glucose, which is free to enter the bloodstream. This reaction is unique to gluconeogenesis and bypasses the irreversible reaction catalyzed by the glycolytic enzyme hexokinase.

The major substrates of gluconeogenesis are lactate, glycerol, and glucogenic amino acids.

- **Lactate is a product of anaerobic glycolysis.**When oxygen is limited (such as during vigorous exercise or in low perfusion states) cells must perform anaerobic glycolysis to produce ATP. Cells that lack mitochondria (e.g., erythrocytes) cannot perform oxidative phosphorylation, and as a result rely strictly on anaerobic glycolysis to meet energy demands. Lactate generated from anaerobic glycolysis gets shunted to the liver, where it can be converted back to glucose through gluconeogenesis. Glucose gets released into the bloodstream, where it travels back to erythrocytes and exercising the skeletal muscle to be broken down again by anaerobic glycolysis, forming lactate. This process is called the Cori cycle.

- **Glycerol comes from adipose tissue.**The breakdown of triacylglycerols in adipose tissue yields free fatty acids and glycerol molecules, the latter of which can circulate freely in the bloodstream until it reaches the liverglycerol kinase to yield glycerol phosphate. Next, the enzyme glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase oxidizes glycerol phosphate to yield dihydroxyacetone phosphate, a glycolytic intermediate.

- **Glucogenic amino acids enter gluconeogenesis via the citric acid cycle.**Glucogenic amino acids are catabolized into citric acid cycle metabolites such as alpha-ketoglutarate, succinyl CoA, and fumarate. Through the citric acid cycle, these alpha-ketoacids converts to oxaloacetate, the substrate for the gluconeogenic enzymePEP carboxykinase.

Due to the highly endergonic nature of gluconeogenesis, its reactions are regulated at a variety of levels. The bulk of regulation occurs through alterations in circulating glucagon levels and availability of gluconeogenic substrates. However, fluctuations in catecholamines, growth hormone, and cortisol levels also play a role.

- Glucagon is produced by pancreatic alpha cells in response to falling blood glucose levels. It regulates glucose production by altering the activity of both glycolytic and gluconeogenic enzymes. In response to glucagon, fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase activity is upregulated while its glycolytic counterpart, phosphofructokinase-1, is suppressed.cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which then phosphorylates and inactivates the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase. Pyruvate kinase is the enzyme responsible for converting PEP to pyruvate, one of the irreversible reactions of glycolysis. Lastly, glucagon upregulates expression of the gene encoding PEP-carboxykinase, further increasing PEP concentrations and favoring glucose production.

- Insulin is a potent inhibitor of gluconeogenesis.