Under physiological conditions, the retinal interstitial spaces are kept dry by several forces which work together to move fluid out of the retinal and subretinal spaces. Firstly, the resistance offered by the relatively rigid macular framework limits the fluid-driven into the retina from the vitreous cavity due to the intraocular pressure (IOP). Secondly, the osmotic and hydrostatic forces of the retinal tissue and capillaries balance each other. Thirdly, the strong choroidal osmotic pressure draws fluid out of the subretinal space. Lastly, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) actively pumps fluid out of the subretinal space towards the choroid.

The most important factor for maintaining this delicate balance is the blood-retinal barrier (BRB). The barrier prevents the entry of large molecules like proteins into the retinal tissue. Hence, the retinal tissue is devoid of proteins under physiological conditions. The inner BRB is formed by the tight junctions (zonulae occludentes) between the retinal capillary endothelial cells. The outer BRB is formed by the tight junctions between the RPE cells, adherens junctions, and desmosomes (maculae adherentes). The zonulae adherentes between the photoreceptors and the external limiting membrane (ELM) are not completely impermeable to proteins but do not allow free protein movement. Hence, the proteins (if they enter) inside the retinal tissue are retained for a certain period. Thus, the pathological conditions which cause BRB breakdown, leading to macular edema as proteins enter the retinal tissue, and subsequently, fluid retention starts in the retinal tissue secondary to osmosis.

The fluid does not usually collect in the subretinal space as the RPE pumps actively transport out. Hence, the presence of subretinal fluid (SRF) usually indicates a combination of BRB breakdown and RPE pump damage. In the diseases like exudative age-related macular degeneration (choroidal neovascularization/ CNVM, Polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy/ PCV, retinal angiomatosis proliferation/ RAP), active exudation occurs within the subretinal space due to the abnormal choroidal vessels. Hence, the SRF accumulation is higher compared to diseases damaging the BRB.

Intracellular edema develops when the cell membrane transport systems, responsible for maintaining the delicate ion-water movement across the cell membrane, are damaged. This leads to cell death and the release of multiple excitotoxins and free radicals, leading to the disruption of the BRB. Such damage occurs secondary to any metabolic insult (e.g., ischemia).

Understanding the basic mechanisms responsible for causing macular edema is important to change the therapeutic approach from broad-symptomatic treatment to a targeted treatment. Hence, it may be possible to develop drugs that target the specific molecules involved in the pathophysiology of a particular disease. Several mechanisms are involved in vascular leakage; inflammation of the vessel walls plays a central role. Several inflammatory mediators produce a complex chain of reactions leading to vascular leakage. These mediators include vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiotensin II, prostaglandins, cytokines, chemokines, interleukins, matrix-metalloproteinases, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), P-selectin, E-selectin, and inflammatory cells like macrophages and neutrophils.

Angiotensin is produced in the inflamed vessel wall through the renin-angiotensin pathway. Angiotensin II is responsible for causing the breakdown of the BRB via several mechanisms, including leukocyte infiltration, increase in vascular permeability, and extracellular matrix remodeling. VEGF is expressed primarily in endothelial cells. Its release is stimulated by retinal ischemia, angiotensin II, inflammation, and other growth factors. It induces BRB breakdown by leucocyte infiltration, producing conformational changes and dissolution of endothelial cell tight junctions by phosphorylating the protein occludin; activation of protein kinase C; and induction of fenestrations. Similarly, prostaglandin E1 causes BRB breakdown by opening the tight junctions.