The opening located between the upper and lower eyelid is elliptical and termed the palpebral fissure. The upper eyelid curvature is maximum at a point just nasal to the mid pupillary point, which is an important point to mark before surgery to get the best cosmetic results. The upper lid covers 1 to 2mm of the superior limbus, while the lower lid lies at the lower limbus.

**Structures forming the eyelid**

- Skin and subcutaneous tissue

- Orbicularis oculi

- Orbital septum

- Preaponeurotic fat pad

- Tarsal plate

- Levator aponeurosis and Muller’s muscle

- Conjunctiva

**Skin**

The eyelid skin is the thinnest layer of skin in the entire body. The eyelid crease forms due to attachment of levator aponeurosis to the skin.

**Orbicularis oculi**

It is a circular muscle and consists of three parts namely: preseptal, pretarsal, and orbital orbicularis. Contraction is responsible for gentle and forced closure of the eyelid.

**Orbital septum**

It is a multi-layered structure of thin fibrous connective tissue. The septum inserts superiorly to the periosteum over the superior orbital rim. Inferiorly it merges with the fibers of levator aponeurosis above the superior tarsal border.

In ptosis surgery, the septum is opened to gain access to the levator muscle. Care should be taken to separate septal attachments to the levator muscle to avoid post-operative lid retraction.

**Preaponeurotic fat pad**

The fat pad is posterior to the septum and anterior to the levator. This pad of fat can be identified intraoperatively by applying pressure over the globe which causes it to prolapse forward. It helps in identifying the levator muscle which lies immediately posterior to it.

**Tarsal plate**

Tarsal plate forms the structural skeleton of the eyelid and is made up of dense connective tissue. The vertical height is 10 to 12 mm in the upper eyelid and 4 to 5 mm in the lower lid. The tarsal plates contain the Meibomian glands, the orifices of which open posterior to the grey line.

**Levator Palpebrae superioris muscle (LPS)**

LPS is the main elevator of the eyelid. It originates at the orbital apex from the periosteum over the lesser wing of sphenoid. It travels forward below the roof of the orbit. At the superior orbital rim, it changes direction from horizontal to vertical and forms the tendinous sheath called levator aponeurosis. At this transition, lies the Whitnall’s ligament which is seen as a dense white band of connective tissue and acts as a pulley. It lies 10 to 12 mm above the tarsal plate.

The levator aponeurosis has several insertions. Anteriorly, it inserts into the upper lid skin forming the lid crease. Inferiorly, it inserts onto the anterior surface of the superior one-third of the tarsus. Posteriorly, it has attachments to the superior conjunctival fornix. Medially and laterally, it forms the medial and lateral horns which then insert into the posterior lacrimal crest and Whitnall’s tubercle along with the canthal tendons.

The levator receives nerve supply by the superior division of the oculomotor nerve.

**Muller’s muscle**

It is a sympathetically innervated smooth muscle. It originates from the under surface of the levator aponeurosis at the level of the Whitnall ligament and inserts into the superior border of the tarsus. It contributes to 2 mm of eyelid elevation.

**Conjunctiva**

It is the innermost layer of the eyelid formed by non-keratinizing squamous epithelium. It continues over the anterior surface of the globe. It contains goblet cells, the secretions of which hour of utmost importance in keeping the eyes moist.