**Mechanical Function**

Normal movement of the body is allowed because of the presence of the fascial tissues and their inseparable interconnection, which allow the sliding of the muscular structure, the sliding of nerves and vessels between contractile fields and joints, and the ability of all organs to slide and move with each other as influenced by the position of the body. One of the fundamental characteristics of the fascia is the ability to adapt to mechanical stress, remodeling the cellular/tissue structure and mirroring the functional necessity of the environment where the tissue lays.  For example, the plantar fascia in the foot adopts a mechanical model known as the "windlass mechanism" in order to provide dynamic support for the medial longitudinal arch while the limb transitions from the heel strike to toe-off phases of the gait cycle

The fascial continuum allows the proper distribution of tension information produced by different tissues covered or supported by the fascia so that the entire body system can interact in real-time, including the epidermis.

**Emotional Function**

The fascial unity influences not only movement but also emotions. Dysfunction of the fascial system that is perpetuated in everyday movements can cause an emotional alteration of the person. This emotional alteration could be established originating from constant myofascial nonphysiological afferents, which would bring the emotional state and the myofascial pathology to the same level. In fact, the position of the body stimulates areas of emotionality, and the presence of myofascial alterations leads to postural alterations.

The myofascial system has a very fine, wide, diversified, and ever-present innervation. In particular, we can find the myelinated proprioceptive terminations (Ruffini, Golgi, and Pacini) inside or near the connective tissue in close relationship with the muscles where a multitude of very fine, unmyelinated-free terminations are in contact with the periosteum, the layers such as endomysium and perimysium, and in the connective tissue of all the viscera. These receptors are deputies to the functions of proprioception, nociception, and interoception. The afferent pathways of the interception project to the autonomic and medullary centers and to the brainstem, where they are sorted by the anterior cingulate cortex and the posterior dorsal insula, thanks to the thalamocortical extension. Interoception can modulate the exteroceptive representation of the body as well as pain tolerance; dysregulation of the pathways that manage or stimulate the interoception could cause a distortion of one's body image and influence emotionality.