Dosing and administration of dextromethorphan are mostly via the oral route. There are many formulations for administration:

- Combination liquid cough syrups; the common OTC formulation contains 15 mg/5mL of DM; recommended adult dosing is 2 tsp (10ml) every 4 hours.

- Sustained-release cough syrup suspensions; another OTC product contains 30 mg/5mL

- Liquid filled capsules containing 15 or 30 mg of DM

- Oral strips containing 7.5 or 15mg of DM

- Lozenges containing 5, 7.5, 10 mg of DM

The recommended dosing for DM is 0.5 mg/kg up to 30 mg, administered three or four times a day.

Some animal studies have suggested that to reach the potential neuroprotective effects requires the ingestion of doses higher than typically used for antitussive effects (60 to 120 mg/d).

For PBA, the FDA has approved the use of DM in combination with quinidine, a CYP2D6 inhibitor. The approved dose is 20 DM and 10mg quinidine in capsule form.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment.

- **Pregnant Women:**It is considered as pregnancy category C medicine. It is mainly metabolized in the liver via CYP2D6 and CYP3A enzymes. Activities of these enzymes increased in pregnant women.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**There is a very low amount of dextromethorphan and its active metabolite excreted in breastmilk. It is not expected to have any adverse effect on the infant in this amount. However, it is recommended to avoid Dextromethorphan products that contain high alcohol levels.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of dextromethorphan on infants and very young children (less than 4 years) are not established by any systemic clinical trials in pediatric patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**There is no specific dose adjustment needed for geriatric patients.