Factor V deficiency can present with a wide array of bleeding symptoms ranging from mild to life-threatening hemorrhages. The inherited form can present in infants, and obtaining an accurate family history of bleeding diathesis and assessing for consanguinity within the family may be key to early diagnosis.

The acquired form can present at any age, including adulthood, and may be more elusive to diagnose. Critical history would include recent surgical procedures with bovine thrombin exposure, malignancies, infections, liver disease, use of antibiotics (particularly the beta-lactam group), and/or autoimmune diseases.

Bleeding due to inherited factor V deficiency is indistinguishable from other coagulation disorders. In patients with a known family history, cord blood sampling at the time of birth can lead to early diagnosis and intervention. Signs and symptoms that have been reported include umbilical stump and nipple bleeding, epistaxis, gum bleeding, and subcutaneous hematomas. Life-threatening intracranial hemorrhages can also occur and often initially present as hydrocephalus and seizures in infants, warranting an immediate workup to prevent significant morbidity and mortality.

Clinical findings in children and adults with both the inherited or acquired form can range from asymptomatic to severe. When inherited, the symptoms usually ensue before the age of six years; however, milder cases may present in adulthood. Heavy menses, recurrent epistaxis, or prolonged bleeding after surgery or trauma may yield the suspicion of a bleeding disorder.

Manifestations of factor V deficiency often include mucocutaneous and soft tissue bleeding such as ecchymosis, easy bruising, petechiae, epistaxis, hemoptysis, hematemesis, melena, hemarthrosis, hematuria, and menorrhagia in females.