Despite multiple studies on malnutrition and the knowledge that malnutrition affects clinical outcomes, the term malnutrition still has different interpretations and usages. In the consensus statement focusing on undernutrition by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics and ASPEN, adult malnutrition was used interchangeably with adult undernutrition for discussion.

Also, there is no single best test that can give a complete picture of an individual's nutritional status. Additionally, various factors may affect the interpretation of individual tests or examinations, or the tests may have some shortcomings. Furthermore, the nutritional status of individuals itself is affected by multiple interdependent factors discussed below. Hence a holistic, team-based approach that takes into consideration overall data from clinical examination, dietary assessment, and diagnostic tests is necessary to determine the comprehensive nutritional status of a patient. At the same time, different nutritional screening or assessment tools may be required for different types of patient populations (i.e., children vs. elderly) or settings (i.e., hospital vs. outpatient).

Specialized tests may also be required in any patient, based on the underlying pathology. Another challenge with nutrition evaluation is dual manifestations of malnutrition, in which overnutrition and undernutrition can coexist. This further complicates the diagnostic process. The entire team of healthcare providers should be aware of these concerns to enhance the outcomes of nutritional screening and assessment.

**Factors Affecting Nutritional Status**

It is important to consider the following factors affecting the nutritional status of individuals while performing a comprehensive nutritional assessment. It is also crucial to remember that these factors can be interdependent. The factors can be classified as physiological, pathological, and psychosocial factors.

**Physiological factors:**Physiological factors such as age, sex, growth, pregnancy, and lactation can influence nutritional needs and should be considered while performing a nutritional assessment. For example, as a child grows, its nutritional requirements will increase. The recommended nutritional requirements for male and female children of the same age are equal early in life, but as they approach adolescence, males require additional nutritional intake. On reaching adulthood, the rise in nutritional requirements of individuals plateaus off in their respective ranges. However, the caloric and nutritional needs of females increase during pregnancy and lactation. Hence, along with a balanced diet, a pregnant or lactating mother may also require additional supplementation of micronutrients, such as iron, folic acid, calcium, and vitamin D.

**Pathological factors:**While performing nutritional assessment, it is important to understand how underlying pathologies can affect nutritional status. Some of these factors are discussed below.

- Genetics: Genetics play a significant role in maintaining an individual's nutritional status. Genetic predisposition combined with lack of physical activity and a high-energy diet can lead to obesity and metabolic syndrome, thus putting individuals at higher risk of developing cardiometabolic diseases. In various genetic disorders, multiple factors could be responsible for the pathogenesis of malnutrition. For example, in cystic fibrosis, malabsorption of nutrients results from decreased uptake by the intestines and reduced secretion of pancreatic enzymes. This, coupled with increased energy needs, can contribute to malnutrition in these patients.

- Infections: Malnourished individuals are more susceptible to infections and related complications. Interestingly, both acute and chronic infections adversely affect the nutritional status of individuals and can precipitate malnutrition. For example, in measles, an acute viral infection, severe deterioration of the nutritional status of children is observed due to acute inflammatory response, increased energy needs, and decreased intake of nutrients due to sore throat or oral lesions. The coexistence of malnutrition increases the severity of measles infection, susceptibility to secondary infections, and mortality rate. Measles is also associated with vitamin A deficiency, which can lead to xerosis, keratomalacia, and corneal ulceration, contributing to ophthalmological complications.

- Medical and surgical illnesses: Various medical and surgical illnesses affect the nutritional status of individuals through multiple mechanisms and may lead to malnutrition. An important mechanism that leads to malnutrition in patients with systemic disorders is the underlying inflammatory response. Many conditions like cardiovascular diseases, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorders, rheumatoid arthritis, chronic pancreatitis, neuromuscular disorders, etc., have some underlying chronic inflammatory response, which leads to an altered metabolic state. Another mechanism that could lead to nutritional disturbances is malabsorption. Many gastrointestinal pathologies such as inflammatory bowel disease, pernicious anemia, celiac disease, gastrointestinal obstruction, pancreatitis, and liver cirrhosis can lead to malnutrition through this mechanism. Malabsorption can also occur because of conditions affecting other organ systems. For example, right-sided congestive cardiac failure may be associated with intestinal edema, resulting in malabsorption and malnutrition in these patients. The next mechanism is metabolic disturbances observed in conditions characterized by dysfunction of the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas and endocrine disorders like diabetes mellitus, Cushing syndrome, and hyperthyroidism. Malnutrition also occurs due to decreased nutrient intake or loss of nutrients. Poor intake of nutrients can be seen in local pathologies affecting ingestion of food, as well as diseases that have dementia as one of the clinical features, such as Parkinson and Alzheimer diseases.

- Surgery: Malnutrition before surgery can increase the risk of complications, including increased need for ICU admission, longer recovery time, infections, and higher rates of morbidity and mortality. Hence, a nutritional assessment before surgery is crucial. Surgery alone can be a risk factor for malnutrition due to various factors, such as pre- and post-operative fasting, hypermetabolism, adverse effects due to drugs, pain, and other factors specific to the type of surgery.

- Trauma: Severe trauma cases, including head injuries, burns, and multiple fractures, can put patients at high risk of malnutrition. The initial acute inflammatory response and increased energy needs following trauma lead to a hypermetabolic phase.

- Malignancies: Malnutrition in malignancies is multi-factorial. Inflammatory mediators, increased energy needs, adverse effects of drugs/therapy (like mouth ulceration, nausea, and vomiting), mental stress, anxiety, and depression can lead to deterioration of nutritional status. Furthermore, malnutrition can inhibit the effectiveness of therapy and worsen the prognosis of the disease.

- Medications: Adverse effects of various drugs, such as nausea, gastric irritation, or loss of appetite, can contribute to decreased food/nutrient intake. Commonly taken over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, such as NSAIDs, can lead to gastrointestinal irritation. Similarly, iron tablets can also cause gastrointestinal irritation and constipation as side effects. Some medications can lead to specific deficiencies, such as the drug isoniazid, which can lead to vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) deficiency. Hence, detailed drug-related history is needed as some drugs can cause drug-nutrient interactions.

**Psychosocial factors:**Often, the above-mentioned physiological and pathological factors may coexist with psychosocial elements, resulting in further deterioration of nutritional status and eventually leading to malnutrition.

- Factors such as socioeconomic conditions, natural and man-made calamities, cultural norms, religious beliefs, etc., can affect nutritional intake. Undernutrition is the major concern in impoverished areas, famine-stricken, war zones, or refugee camps. Though it may seem obvious that overnutrition is mainly observed in affluent groups due to access to resources, the relationship between obesity and socioeconomic status is complicated. While undernutrition is one of the outcomes of lower socioeconomic status, paradoxically, individuals from these groups are also susceptible to developing obesity. This is due to limited access to fresh, nutrient-dense, and relatively more expensive food on the one hand and easy availability of less expensive, energy-dense food on the other hand. Malnutrition with dual manifestation may especially be seen in these groups of individuals.

- Other factors such as eating disorders, mental illnesses, and unhealthy diet trends can also drastically affect nutritional status and increase the risk of malnutrition.

- Alcohol and substance use are other major factors that need to be considered. Excessive alcohol consumption affects macronutrient and micronutrient metabolism, leading to nutritional deficiencies.