Patients with severe corneal opacity that are bilaterally blind where otherwise conventional corneal and stem cell transplantation would fail can be considered for artificial corneal transplant in one eye if that eye has a reasonable retina optic disc. The degree of ocular surface scarring or keratinization and inflammation, any shortening of the fornices, baseline tear secretion, blink reflex, and lid abnormalities will need to be assessed. These will influence the surgical approach and choice of the keratoprosthesis.

**Boston KPro Type I**

For KPro Type I patients need to have an adequate blink reflex and tear production with a minimum Schirmer 1 out of 5 mm test. Any type of anterior segment pathology can be acceptable. However, the severity and type of posterior segment disease will impact suitability and clinical outcomes. Examples would include previous multiple failed grafts, corneal opacities with extensive vascularisation, certain conditions such as aniridia, corneal dystrophies, herpetic keratitis, previous corneal infections. The patient will need to apply and retain a soft contact lens if the type I KPro is being considered.

**OOKP**

Patients with dry eyes, defective blinking and lid abnormalities, keratinization and inflammation of the ocular surface such as Sjogren's syndrome, graft versus host disease, Steven Johnson Syndrome, mucous membrane pemphigoid (stage 3 and 4), chemical burns, Lyell syndrome, and trachoma (stage C0 WHO classification) with at least light perception vision may be suitable for OOKP surgery.