The blood supply of the lower limb originates from the common femoral artery that divides into deep (profunda femoral) and superficial branches. The superficial femoral artery traverses through the adductor hiatus and continues into the popliteal fossa as the popliteal artery. The popliteal artery sits behind the knee in the popliteal fossa and bifurcates into the anterior and posterior tibial arteries near the distal border of the popliteus muscle. The anterior tibial artery passes anterior to the popliteus muscles and passes between the tibia and fibula through the interosseous membrane. Once through the interosseous membrane, the anterior tibial artery travels between the tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum longus muscles. The anterior tibial artery is responsible for the blood supply of the anterior crural compartment. At the anterior aspect of the ankle joint, the anterior tibial artery becomes the dorsalis pedis artery. When assessing patients for peripheral vascular disease, physicians often palpate the dorsalis pedis artery over the navicular bone of the foot.

The posterior tibial artery passes posterior to the popliteus muscle and pierces the soleus muscle. The posterior tibial artery then descends between the tibialis posterior and flexor digitorum longus muscles. The posterior tibial artery supplies blood to the posterior crural compartment. The artery can be palpated posterior to the medial malleolus to examine for peripheral artery disease.

The peroneal artery, a division of the posterior tibial artery, supplies blood to the lateral crural compartment. The peroneal artery usually branches from the posterior tibial artery (tibioperoneal trunk) a few centimeters below the lower border of the popliteus muscle. The peroneal artery then travels over the tibialis posterior muscle and descends on the medial side of the fibula, between the tibialis posterior and flexor hallucis longus muscles.