For spot treatment of cutaneous lesions, pulses of 10 μm in depth and 10 to 40 pulses per second are employed. Reepithelialization of treated areas typically occurs within 4 to 7 days. For larger lesions, full field laser skin resurfacing can be applied to a subregion (such as for small areas of acne scarring), an entire facial aesthetic subunit (such as for the cheeks and forehead), or the entire face.

Increasing the duration of individual pulses during Er:YAG treatment results in increased tissue heating below the zone of ablation. While this can lead to improved clinical results, increased heating has also been associated with an increased risk of adverse effects. Greater treatment density while maintaining short pulse widths, however, can produce more effective skin rejuvenation with fewer treatments. This is usually achieved by increasing the overlap of pulse areas or passing over the treatment more than once during the treatment session.

The coagulation capability of the Er:YAG laser - sometimes also known as "CO2 emulation" because of the CO2 laser's tendency to coagulate tissue - allows for greater skin tightening with reduced bleeding. When multiple passes are used, the first pass is done in the "ablate" mode to remove the superficial layers of the epidermis and dermis and expose the underlying collagen in the dermis. Subsequent passes in the "coagulation" mode can achieve greater depth of ablation and thermal injury to the upper and mid-papillary dermis.

Superficial resurfacing can be achieved with a fluence of 5 to 10 J/cm^2 or a treatment depth of fewer than 250 μm. This approach removes part or all of the epidermis and can result in mild improvement in the appearance of photoaging with a shorter "down-time" and recovery period, as well as a decreased requirement for anesthesia. Increasing the fluence from 5 to 10 J/cm^2 can result in more erythema and discomfort but also achieves a greater clinical result. Ablation with Er:YAG laser is carried out until the clinical endpoint is reached, indicating adequate treatment. Er:YAG laser endpoints include the appearance of petechial bleeding (indicating ablation entering the papillary dermis), a yellow color (termed chamois color), which indicates ablation of the midpapillary dermis, and visual effacement of rhytids.

Using local, regional, or general anesthesia can significantly decrease patient discomfort. General anesthesia or intravenous sedation may be required for larger treatment areas or more aggressive resurfacing treatments, particularly full-field ablation. Resurfacing of smaller regions, fractionated treatments, or treatments that are more superficial in depth can be accomplished with regional nerve blocks or local anesthetic infiltration. A topical anesthetic is used for nearly all treatments, with additional modalities added as needed.

Post-procedure care involves covering the treatment area with a saline-moistened gauze immediately, followed by occlusive dressings with ointment or hydrocolloid to promote a moist wound healing environment until skin reepithelialization is completed 5 to 7 days post-treatment. Erythema will persist beyond the time it takes for skin to reepithelialize, with erythema from fractionated treatments taking less time to resolve than that from full field ablation, which may last as long as 3 or 4 months.