The hallmarks of adrenocortical carcinoma include the large size with irregular margins, invasion of surrounding structures, and the presence of distant metastases. The surface of the tumor ranges in color from brown to orange to yellow depending on the lipid content of their cells. Necrosis is almost always present. Importantly, tumor invasion of the capsule, the extra-adrenal soft tissue or direct invasion of lymphatic channels/blood vessels is a common feature of ACC. However, these are relatively nonspecific characteristics and are frequently absent in early disease, making it challenging to discriminate ACC from benign adrenal tumors. In 1984, Louis Weiss,

- Nuclear grade (III or IV)

- High mitotic rate (more than five mitoses per 50 high-power field -HPF-)

- Presence of atypical mitoses

- Percentage of clear cells (less than or equal to 25% of tumor)

- Diffuse architecture

- Microscopic necrosis

- Venous invasion

- Sinusoidal invasion

- Capsular invasion

The presence of more than three or more features is consistent with adrenocortical carcinoma.

Despite the widespread use of this grading system, poorly differentiated ACC may still be confused with renal cell carcinoma, small cell lung carcinoma, melanoma, or hepatocellular carcinoma.  There are many diagnostic algorithms proposed in the previous WHO edition to differentiate cortical carcinoma from adenoma. However, the Weiss score, although imperfect, is the system adopted by the current WHO classification as a primary determinant of malignancy.

Apart from conventional adrenocortical carcinoma, the latest WHO classification also recognizes some histological variants. They are, in the order of decreasing frequency— oncocytic, myxoid, and sarcomatoid carcinomas. Adrenal myxoid carcinomas and sarcomatoid carcinomas are rare. Myxoid carcinoma has abundant extracellular mucin in the stroma. Using the Weiss score, a patient with this subtype of adrenal cortical carcinoma may be underdiagnosed. Sarcomatoid carcinoma reveals the loss of cortical differentiation. The carcinoma may have a common cortical carcinoma area (biphasic). Sarcomatoid carcinoma needs to be differentiated from retroperitoneal sarcoma involving the adrenal gland, especially when the typical cortical carcinoma area is monophasic. In these instances, a battery of immunostains can provide evidence of adrenocortical differentiation,

Adrenal oncocytic carcinoma is termed the oncocytic variant because the predominant cell type is an oncocyte, which is a cell with abundant, granular cytoplasm related to the accumulation of mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. The Weiss score does not apply in the differentiation of oncocytic adenoma from oncocytic carcinoma. This reason is that three of the criteria in the Weiss score—high nuclear grade, less than 25% clear cells, and diffuse architecture are characteristics of adrenal oncocytic tumors. Thus, the Lin-Weiss-Bisceglia system is recommended for the differentiation of oncocytic adenoma from oncocytic carcinoma.

In addition to the accepted diagnostic algorithms, immunostaining to assess the proliferation of Ki-67 can be used to help to differentiate adrenocortical adenoma from cortical carcinoma. A consensus has emerged that ACCs have a Ki67 labeling index of over 5%. Conversely, ACA generally shows a much lower index, although there is a level of overlap observed depending on the study examined. Although the ACC diagnosis should not rest solely on any one immunomarker, proliferation markers, as a rule, correlate with mitotic accounts and do play a role in the evaluation of these tumors.

Adrenocortical carcinomas are gradable into low- and high-grade carcinoma groups based on their mitotic rates (fewer than 20 mitoses per HPFs vs. more than 20 mitoses per 50 HPFs), an observation initially made via examining the individual parts of the Weiss score for prognostic significance.