The approach to the management of conjoined twins is complicated. Conjoined twins can be separated into the following groups with regards to prognosis:

- Those who do not survive in-utero

- Those who survive pregnancy but do not survive past infancy

- Those who survive infancy, but cannot be separated

- Those who survive infancy and can be surgically separated

This type of classification may be preferred over anatomic classification because it directs the management specifically. It is also helpful because surgical separation, if applicable, should be performed in infancy. [Level V]

There is also an ethical dilemma associated with the management of conjoined twins. Ethical considerations should be kept in mind as they relate to prognosis. The following clinical /ethical scenarios can be observed:

- Survival time is 6 months or less

- Both twins survive after separation

- Both twins survive without separation

- One twin dies after separation

- Both twins die the following separation

- Both twins die without separation

Keeping these considerations in mind, the interprofessional medical team can make decisions regarding surgical treatment and palliative care.

Obstetric consideration:

Timing and mode of delivery should be individualized, taking into consideration any antenatal complications and the altered anatomy based on prenatal imaging. Cesarean delivery is often required, as vaginal delivery may not be possible depending on where the twins are joined. An interprofessional team is important to address the challenges of a complicated pregnancy and birth process.

Medical consideration:****

Nutrition support is very important in the management of conjoined twins during the neonatal period.

Surgical consideration:

Identification of the anatomical structures is accomplished with postnatal imaging, preferably MRI, keeping prenatal imaging in mind.

Conjoined twins should be cared for at specialized centers with MFM, neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and pediatric subspecialty availability. ****Nursing care (maternal) considerations include privacy, grief counseling, if necessary, and providing emotional support to the patient and family.

The management of conjoined twins requires the intimate cooperation of an interprofessional team.