**Intravenous Immunoglobulins (IVIG)**

IVIG is a product made from fractionation pools of thousands of plasma donations collected in blood transfusion services. Traces of IgM and IgA and cytokines are present in IVIG.  IVIGs have several proposed mechanisms of actions to achieve their therapeutic effects, including

- Effects of IVIG on activated B lymphocytes

- Infusion of IVIG results in auto-IgG suppression

- Interaction of Fc fragment with Fc receptors

- Interaction of infused IgG with complement proteins

- Modulation of synthesis of cytokines

- Modulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis

- Remyelinisation

- Neutralizes pathogenic autoantibodies

- Interferes with antigen presentation

- Functional blockade of Fc receptors on splenic macrophages

- Selection of immune repertoires

- Neutralization of bacterial toxins and superantigens

- Hindrance of natural killer cell activity

- Inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase-9

- Suppression of NF-kB activation and IkB degradation

- G1 cell cycle arrest

- Prevention of tumor growth

- Enhances the expansion of Tregs

IVIG has been used with some success to improve the symptoms and clinical signs of immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), Guillain-Barre syndrome, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), idiopathic inflammatory myopathies, ANCA-associated vasculitis, multiple motor neuropathy, multiple sclerosis, Myasthenia gravis, Kawasaki disease, autoimmune uveitis, dermatomyositis, systemic sclerosis, Sjogren syndrome, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, Still disease, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, diabetic neuropathy, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, Opsoclonus-myoclonus, pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections, polymyositis, Rasmussen encephalitis, Stiff person syndrome, primary immunodeficiency disorders, secondary immunodeficiency disorder, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, bone marrow transplantation, Treatment-induced neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, AIDS, autoimmune thyroiditis, inclusion-body myositis, graft versus host disease, recurrent pregnancy loss, cancer, severe infections, toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and neonatal hemochromatosis.

**Transfer Factor**

It is a dialysable extract of leukocytes and can transfer cell-mediated immunity from one individual to another. It may use in several pathologies, including immunodeficiencies, viral infections, malignancies, and recurrent fungal infections. Some patients with type I hypersensitivity disorders have reacted to this product.

**Immunosuppressors**

Steroids inhibit cytokine synthesis, affect cell migration, and inhibit the production of leukocytes. Cyclophosphamide acts by covalent alkylation, together with chlorambucil, exert an immunomodulatory effect. They inhibit strand separation of DNA during replication. Methotrexate is an analog of folic acid and blocks pathways essential for DNA synthesis. Azathioprine is a drug that can convert to 6-mercaptopurine, and its effect is incorporation into DNA as a fraudulent base.

**Transplantation**

It is a promising solution for many rare diseases that can manifest as primary immunodeficiencies, including severe-combined immunodeficiency disorder (SCID), DiGeorge syndrome, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and X-linked agammaglobulinemia.

**Several Immunotherapy Modalities Used in Cancer Treatment**

The use of monoclonal antibodies can use in cancer immunotherapy, for example, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), including pembrolizumab and atezolizumab. These ICI unlock the immune system, which is then able to recognize tumors and kill them.

The use of cytokines to successfully treat certain malignancies is a reality; for example, IL-2 combined with interferon-gamma for renal carcinoma, interferon-alpha and beta for hairy leukemia, and TNF-alpha used in various tumors caused a notable reduction of the mass. These cytokines upregulated the immune system by stimulating T cell and NK cell activation and increased MHC class I expression.