**Supportive and Sympathetic Reassurance**

The primary step after ruling out physiological halitosis is a thorough examination of the oral cavity to know whether it is tongue biofilm, deep carious lesions or large interdental areas with entrapped necrotic food debris, exposed necrotic pulp, ill-fitted prosthesis or dentures, mucosal lesions like tuberculosis, syphilis or even malignancies like carcinoma of the cheek or tongue, and treat accordingly.

**Mechanical Debridement of Tongue Biofilm**

The commonest cause of halitosis is poor dental hygiene. Hence, it is imperative to educate the patient about the importance of removing the tongue biofilm, which is the source of malodor generating bacteria and plaque control.

This is best done by tongue scrapers than toothbrushes. Flossing teeth is also very important to keep the interdental spaces free of plaque and food debris, thereby controlling halitosis.

**Mouth Rinses**

For effective control of halitosis, antibacterial agents such as chlorhexidine, zinc, triclosan, and cetylpyridinium chloride are recommended for usage. These have different mechanisms of action. Although chlorhexidine is undoubtedly the best for inhibition of the production of VSCs, it may have an unpleasant side effect of the unsightly staining of teeth.

**Other Ancillary Measures**

- Tea tree oil has been used effectively to control malodor caused by the bacterium Solobacterium moorei strain, according to one study.

- The reduction of VSCs has been noted in certain cases by the usage of photodynamic waves from a photosensitizer.

- Masking agents like mint or fluoride in toothpaste or flavored chewing gum can be recommended, but it has only a brief effect.

- Lifestyle modifications including avoidance of smoking, tobacco, alcohol, cutting down onions, garlic, and spices in the diet are recommended.

- Patients should be encouraged to increase their fluid intake.

Extraoral causes of halitosis are to be investigated in the absence of intraoral pathology, in consultation with the concerned faculty and treated accordingly. Antibiotics for respiratory infections, antacids for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), or surgical intervention if adenoids are enlarged and infected.