The autoimmune theory was given by Keltner et al. in 1983. Suggesting this theory, the antibodies against the retinal photoreceptors were present in the serum of lymphoma patients who developed acute loss of vision and retinal degeneration. The pathological changes seen in CAR result from an interaction between the retinal antigen expression in the cancerous tissues and their systemic immune response. These antigens trigger an autoimmune response within the host to form antibodies that cross-react with the retinal antigen, ultimately causing cell death/apoptosis with retinal degeneration. Thirkill and colleagues, in 1987, first observed the appearance of autoantibodies against the 23 kDa retinal protein in patients of small cell carcinoma of the lung with CAR. The 23 kDa protein implicated as the CAR-antigen was noted to be a 'photoreceptor cell-specific protein' or 'recoverin-like protein.'

Recoverin is regarded as the most commonly involved antigen seen in CAR patients.

In cancer, the level of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) increases, which causes retinal pericyte loss.

Ohguro and colleagues demonstrated that recoverin dysfunction leads to increased phosphorylation of rhodopsin and opening of cGMP-gated channels, causing a rise in the intracellular calcium.

The gene for recoverin is present on chromosome 17p13.1.

Recoverin may aid in cancer treatment by causing cancer cells to become more sensitive to the chemotherapy or by itself becoming the target for cancer treatment. Bazhin AV et al. analyzed serial samples of tumor tissues and sera from 143 patients with lung cancer and showed that on account of a high occurrence of aberrant expression of recoverin in lung tumors, targeting recoverin as a paraneoplastic antigen may play a role in immunotherapy of lung cancer.

Adamus et al. showed that anti-recoverin antibodies can be detected in only 10% of patients with visual symptoms and identified the presence of auto-antibodies against α-enolase (46 kDa) and transducin-α (40 kDa) in the serum of patients with CAR and non-neoplastic retinopathy.

Vision loss in enolase-associated retinopathy is less severe as compared to recoverin-associated retinopathy. Recoverin-associated retinopathy has an acute onset with faster progression. Anti-enolase antibodies have been associated with breast, prostate, and hematologic cancers.

Ohguro and colleagues suggested that humoral autoimmunity against recoverin and heat shock cognate protein 70 (65 kDa) may play a role in the pathogenesis of CAR.

- Anti-Carbonic anhydrase II (30 kDa)

- Anti-GAPDH (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase)

- Interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein (145 kDa)

- Neurofilament proteins

- Tubby-like protein 1 [TULP1]

- Arrestin

- Heat shock cognate protein HSC 70

- GCAP 1 and 2 (guanylyl cyclase-activating proteins)

- PNR photoreceptor cell-specific nuclear receptor

- Rab6A GTPase (Rab6A), and other unidentified antibodies formed against the retinal proteins

T cells are also involved in the pathogenesis of CAR. Enhancement of CAR occurs by blockade of the negative T-cell signaling via the CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4).