Toxicity associated with parasympathomimetic agents is the result of cholinergic excess. Muscarinic effects of cholinergic toxidrome include diarrhea, urination, miosis, bronchospasm, bradycardia, emesis, lacrimation, sweating, and salivation (commonly remembered using the mnemonic “DUMBBELSS”). In the case of overdosage of direct-acting agents, parenteral administration of atropine, a muscarinic antagonist, is used to reverse symptoms via competitive inhibition. Cholinergic toxicity can result from the ingestion of some varieties of mushrooms containing muscarine, particularly those in the genera Inocybe and Clitocybe.

Acute intoxication by indirect-acting agents initially presents with the aforementioned signs of muscarinic excess. The effects of central nervous system involvement may include altered mental status, convulsions, and coma. Additionally, overstimulation of nicotinic receptors at neuromuscular junctions results in muscle weakness and fasciculations.

Initial management involves the stabilization of the patient. If rapid sequence intubation is required, clinicians should avoid using succinylcholine, which can cause prolonged neuromuscular blockade due to inactivation by acetylcholinesterase. Patients may need to be decontaminated to reduce residual exposure. Rapid administration of atropine in progressively increasing doses is necessary to reverse the effects of muscarinic toxicity. Pralidoxime may work to reactivate the inhibited acetylcholinesterase enzyme and reverse nicotinic effects. Benzodiazepines help to control seizure activity in patients.

Acute anticholinesterase toxicity often occurs in the context of accidental exposure to organophosphate compounds used in agricultural pesticides.