As active transport is an integral process for cells throughout the body, a wide plethora of diseases have a component of abnormal active transport, often in the form of a mutation that impairs or augments function.

Type I (distal) renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is a prime example of impaired active transport, whereby hydrogen ions are unable to be secreted into the urine from the kidney's alpha-intercalated cells (which contain hydrogen ion ATPases and hydrogen-potassium ATPases).[11] As a consequence of increased urinary alkalinity, distal RTA increases the likelihood of developing kidney stones.

Another renal tubular defect is Bartter syndrome, an autosomal recessive reabsorption defect in the sodium-potassium-chloride-chloride (NKCC) cotransporter in the kidneys, ultimately leading to hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Normally, the NKCC protein utilizes the movement of sodium along its concentration gradient (established by a sodium-potassium ATPase on the other side) to cotransport potassium and chloride, so this defect prevents the reabsorption of all these three ions.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder common among Caucasians, whereby CFTR (Cystic Fibrosis Conductance Regulator gene), which normally encodes for an ATP-gated chloride channel, is mutated, causing the protein to misfold and not be transported to the cell membrane to perform its functions. The CFTR protein allows chloride to move out of cells with sodium and water molecules following. This movement of water out of cells hydrates the mucosal surface and thins the secretions so they can get cleared from the tubular structures such as bronchial passage and secretary ducts. In cystic fibrosis, the dehydrated mucosal surface with little chloride and water will lead to thick mucus, which allows bacteria to grow and digestive enzymes to move along the pancreatic ducts. As a result, there are recurrent pulmonary infections, pancreatic insufficiency, malabsorption, and steatorrhea.

Also indirectly stimulating the CFTR channel is the cholera toxin, commonly consumed from contaminated water or uncooked food, which drastically decreases absorption in the intestinal lumen and thereby results in voluminous watery diarrhea.