Applanation tonometry is based on the applanation principle described by Imbert and Fick in the late 1800s.

The first applanation tonometer was built by Adolph Weber in 1867, which was later improved and used in clinics in 1885 by Alexei Maklaloff.

Most of these early instruments did not gain widespread use because of several limitations, which included measurements subject to various errors, difficulties in using the instrument, non-practicability in a clinical setting, etc.

Hans Goldmann invented GAT in 1948, and to this date, it remains the gold standard technique for measuring IOP. Although the Imbert-Fick principle assumes that the sphere is thin-walled without rigidity and elasticity, Goldmann was convinced that corneal elastic properties and thickness were not significantly variable amongst individuals.

Much later, numerous clinical studies showed that corneal properties, including thickness, elasticity, rigidity, and hysteresis, can influence IOP measurements with GAT.

Eyes with thick corneas tend to show overestimated GAT readings, while those with thin corneas give rise to underestimated IOP readings with GAT, in addition to being a risk for developing glaucoma.

The Goldmann tonometer (See tonometer image) needs to be mounted on a slit lamp, and measurements are taken in an upright position (See slit-lamp image).

Applanation tonometry can be classified as either contact or non-contact. GAT and Perkins are considered as contact applanation tonometers. Air-puff tonometry and ocular response analyzer are defined as non-contact tonometry (NCT). These NCT instruments generate force by air as opposed to direct contact with the cornea and do not require fluorescein and local topical anesthesia.

**Goldmann Applanation Tonometer (GAT)**

The GAT instrument is composed of a small metal device weighing less than a kilogram, with a height of about 18 cm, a width of 10 cm, and a depth of 4 cm (See tonometer image). The tonometer is made up of a prism holder, a thin metal sensor arm, and a metal weight housing that has a measuring drum equipped with a rotating dial with a range of measurements from 0 to 80 mmHg (See tonometer with dial image).

The tonometer needs to be positioned on a slit-lamp (See slit-lamp image), which can either be permanently fastened and pivoted in front of the eye with a rotating swiveling arm or placed on a metal guided base-plate and used in the retractable version. The tonometer should be calibrated periodically with a control weight bar to ensure accurate measurements.

A truncated plastic cone with an embedded doubling measuring prism (See tip images) having a diameter of 7 mm is mounted on the tip of the rod and used to take the IOP measurements; thus, proper cleaning and disinfection are essential when using GAT. Tonosafe disposable prisms are currently available to limit cross-infection risks in patients.

**Perkins Applanation Tonometer**

The Perkins tonometer, first described by ES Perkins in 1965, uses the same principles as GAT with the advantage of being portable, thus can be used in patients that cannot be positioned in front of a slit-lamp or in a supine potion (i.e., bedridden subjects or patients under general anesthesia).

The device is equipped with an adjustable forehead rest, prism holder for the same type of cone used in GAT, illumination source, viewing lens, milled thumb-wheel with a scale for IOP measurement, and a battery charging port for wireless use. The instrument, however, is rather difficult to use, has limited positioning stability during use, and has a high learning curve to obtain accurate and precise IOP measurements.

**Air-Puff Tonometer (non-contact)**

NCT was first proposed in the 1970s.

There is no direct contact with the eye, and measuring prisms are not used; thus, anesthesia drops and fluorescein are not required. Several desktop tonometers exist, like the Pulsair model, while others are built-in together with refractometers and pachymeters. The Pulsair and Keeler Air-Puff instruments are also available in portable handheld models. The advantages of NCT include the ease of use and the fact that anesthesia, fluorescein, and slit-lamp are not required, making this type of instrument potentially useful in screening settings, in children and patients with limited collaboration, and administered by paramedical staff.

The disadvantages, however, are that IOP measurements tend to be less accurate than those taken with GAT, giving rise to underestimated and overestimated IOP measurements in higher and lower levels of IOP, respectively.

**Ocular Response Analyzer (ORA, non-contact)**

The ORA is a newer version of NCT proposed by Luce in 2005.

The instrument uses air impulses to assess IOP and corneal biomechanics based on corneal deformation. The force of the column of air used in this NCT keeps increasing until the cornea is indented in an inward motion, then decreases slowly until the cornea is again flattened as it moves outwardly.

Corneal elasticity or hysteresis is assessed based on the differences between the forces at the initial and rebound applanation points using internal mathematical calculations. The ORA provides two corneal parameters known as corneal hysteresis and corneal resistance factor, which theoretically provide information regarding the viscoelastic mechanical properties of the cornea.

The ORA provides corneal compensated IOP measurements based on individual biomechanics results that have been reported to be less influenced by corneal properties and thickness measurements when compared to GAT; however, several studies have shown that ORA tends to overestimate IOP at elevated levels, and measurements are affected by corneal thickness and other properties.

Future studies are needed to determine whether or not these new parameters provided by ORA will prove to be of clinical interest in the management of glaucoma, which remains debatable and of little use in current routine practice.