Voice disorders are a significant issue in the general population, with a prevalence of 16.9% in a Stockholm public health cohort. Prevalence increases in female and elderly populations, among individuals who are in high-stress positions and those who use their voice significantly as part of their profession.

Speech-language pathologists (SLPs) and otolaryngologists/laryngologists play an important role in making a diagnosis, educating patients about their diagnosis, and providing management options. SLPs may serve as the first line of treatment for patients in whom conservative measures, such as speech therapy and vocal hygiene, are indicated. As the patient progresses through their care, shared decision making, and revisiting progress goals will direct the future of care. Once a decision is made to employ invasive treatments such as laryngeal botulinum toxin, the laryngologist must work closely with an assistant to provide high-quality care. The assistant, typically a trained nurse, may steady and advance the flexible video laryngoscope while the surgeon maneuvers the botulinum toxin needle. With EMG-guided injections, the assistant is typically a neurologist, trained to read the EMG monitor and advise the otolaryngologist on how they should maneuver.

Laryngeal botulinum toxin is unique in that the procedure can be both diagnostic and therapeutic. They should effectively communicate this to the patient. It is important to relay that, although temporary, laryngeal botulinum toxin can help guide future decision making. The patient and provider may agree on repeat botulinum toxin injections vs. more definitive treatment with a shared decision-making process. Considerations for continued care may include patient tolerability of the procedure and the likelihood of tolerating repeat injections every 6 to 12 months. The time to recurrence of symptoms is another factor to consider.