Treatment of myotonia resulting from the dystrophic and non-dystrophic myotonias is not well established. However, mexiletine has been demonstrated to have efficacy in the relief of myotonia in myotonic dystrophy type I and non-dystrophic myotonias. The recommended dosage is 200 mg three times daily, with an ECG evaluation of QT interval before administration. Other medications have been suggested for the treatment of myotonia, including imipramine, taurine, and clomipramine, but the evidence is too weak to recommend at this time.

In addition to pharmacologic management of myotonia, trigger avoidance in non-dystrophic myotonias such as avoiding cold exposure and strenuous exercise can provide significant patient relief. In dystrophic myotonias, targeted therapies designed to reduce the systemic symptoms of the disease can significantly alleviate patient discomfort. Given that systemic systems in dystrophic myotonias vary widely by patient, treatment choice will vary as well and will depend on the particular system involved.

Treatment of patients with periodic paralysis should focus on avoiding known triggers and stabilizing serum potassium. Patients should reduce stressful situations such as nightshift work, irregular meals, abnormal sleep-wake cycles, high-carbohydrate meals, and prolonged rest after exercise. In hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, patients should adhere to a diet low in potassium-rich foods and diuretic use. In hypokalemic periodic paralysis, patients should increase potassium intake by adhering to a diet rich in potassium-rich foods. If conservative management fails, both types of periodic paralysis can be treated with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as dichlorphenamide or acetazolamide, with dichlorphenamide as first-line due to fewer side effects.