PA-IVS is the third most common form of cyanotic CHD, with incidence varying anywhere between 4 to 8 per 100000 live births. In the United Kingdom and Eire collaborative study published in 1998, the incidence of this disorder was reported to be close to 4 per 100000 live births.

With the widespread availability and use of fetal echocardiography, the number of patients with complex forms of CHD, including PA-IVS, being diagnosed during pregnancy across the world is increasing. This fact has not only helped the physicians with planning the care of these neonates ahead of time but also increased the rates of elective termination of pregnancies following the diagnosis of complex CHD. This elective abortions of pregnancies with complex CHD has led to an overall reduction in the incidence of various forms of CHD. When including these elective terminations, the incidence of PA-IVS will be significantly higher than reported.

There is no predilection to either sex. Also, there has been no identified association with genetic disorders, even though De Stefano et al. in 2008 reported PA-IVS in monozygotic twins.

**Developmental Considerations and Anatomical Characteristics:**

With regards to the timing of occurrence, in 1983, Kusche and Van Mierop suggested that the insult that leads to PA-IVS happens later in gestation when compared to pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect (PA-VSD).

Atresia of the pulmonary valve classifies into membranous and muscular forms. It is essential to distinguish between these two types, as a membranous form of PA has better long term prognosis when compared to muscular PA due to the higher incidence of abnormal connections (discussed in the latter part of this section) between the RV and coronary arteries. Due to high pressures in the RV, the tricuspid valve is generally abnormal. The tricuspid valve can be hypoplastic, dysplastic, and can have malformed chordal apparatus.

Another characteristic feature, if present, of PA-IVS, are the abnormal connections between the RV and coronary arteries. The RV, especially in patients with a competent tricuspid valve, is hypertensive due to lack of egress for the blood. Due to which the RV develop these abnormal connections with the epicardial coronary arteries, which help to decompress the ventricle. These abnormal connections, when present over time, leads to progressive stenosis of the coronary arteries related to high-velocity blood flowing through these abnormal connections. Due to progressive stenosis of the coronary arteries over time, some parts of the myocardium depends on right ventricle for the perfusion and is known as right ventricular dependent coronary circulation  (RVDCC). Due to the progressive nature of RVDCC, it correlates with poor prognosis.