Patients with pes anserine bursitis likely will complain of pain on the inside (medial aspect) of the knee, particularly with rising from a seated position, going upstairs, or sitting with their legs crossed. The semitendinosus, gracilis, and sartorius function in unison in the act of crossing one leg over the other; thus, this motion typically will elicit the pain seen in pes anserine bursitis.

Additionally, there may be subjective complaints of muscle weakness and decreased range of motion of the knee joint. Tenderness is invariably present over at the insertion of the pes anserine tendons, “goose’s foot,” at the medial knee and upper medial tibia. Swelling may or may not be present due to edema or fluid collection at the site of insertion. In patients with osteoarthritis, the clinician should have heightened suspicion for the possibility of pes anserine pain.

On physical examination, the affected knee should initially be evaluated in full extension. Tenderness will likely be present in the medial knee joint and may extend along the proximal, medial tibial region. With knee flexion to 90 degrees, tenderness may be palpated along the medial tendinous structures of the pes anserine group as they travel to insert along the medial tibial region. The pes anserine bursa lies directly beneath the tendons at their insertion.

The patient can also present with neuropathic pain due to saphenous compression by pes anserinus bursitis. It can cause pain and paresthesia even in the lateral tibial region and simulates a tibial stress fracture.

In 1985, a group of criteria was set by Larson and Baum to diagnose pes anserinus bursitis, which includes:

- Anteromedial knee pain, especially with ascending or descending stairs.

- Morning pain and stiffness that lasts more than an hour.

- Difficulty in rising from a seated position or getting out of a car

- Local sensitivity and edema at the anatomical location of the anserine bursa