Childhood anxiety disorders are associated with school absenteeism and educational underachievement as young adults. Anxiety disorders also confer considerable functional impairment and economic costs due to lost caregiver productivity and treatment.

A recent study reported higher impairment in visuospatial working memory, semantic memory, oral language, and word writing in children with anxiety disorders. Approximately 83% of the children studied in this group had a diagnosis of SAD (after a formal diagnostic interview with a clinician), but most of the children had more than one anxiety-related disorder. Children with higher anxiety severity performed poorly in all tested fields, which included visuospatial working memory, inferential processing, word reading, writing comprehension, copied writing, and semantic verbal fluency. This study suggests memory and language deficits are present in some children with anxiety disorders, and the severity and number of anxiety diagnoses correlate with lower performance in memory and language domains.

Recent studies have also suggested a link between SAD and adult personality disorders. One study found that adult patients with SAD and heightened early separation anxiety had higher rates of Cluster C personality disorder when compared to those without elevated early separation anxiety.

An anxiety disorder is also reported as a risk factor for suicidality, even after controlling for co-occurring mental health disorders and life stress.