Treatment for mitral stenosis involves medical therapy, percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty, and surgical therapy. Currently, no medical therapy can relieve a fixed obstruction of the mitral valve. Medical therapy is focused on preventing endocarditis, decreasing new cases of rheumatic fever, improving symptoms, and decreasing the thromboembolic risk.

Endocarditis prophylaxis should only be given to high-risk patients before dental procedures involving gingival tissue manipulation or perforation of the oral mucosa. High-risk patients are those patients with a prosthetic heart valve or prosthetic material used for valve repair, previous history of infective endocarditis, and cardiac valvuloplasty.

Rheumatic fever prophylaxis with Benzathine penicillin is the primary prevention treatment in patients with streptococcal pharyngitis.

If the rhythm is normal sinus, medical therapy is used to improve symptoms. Diuretics are utilized to help relieve congestion. Beta-blockers and/or calcium channel blockers help with exertional symptoms associated with elevated heart rate.

If the rhythm is atrial fibrillation, the first step is to control the rate using AV node blocking agents such as beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and/or digitalis. In an unstable patient, perform direct current cardioversion. If one cannot convert atrial fibrillation to normal sinus rhythm, then the primary goal is rate control. In a stable patient, restoring normal sinus rhythm is preferred over rate control to improve functional capacity and quality of life.

Anticoagulation prevents thromboembolic events. Anticoagulation is indicated in patients with mitral stenosis and atrial fibrillation (paroxysmal, persistent, or permanent), previous embolic events, and the presence of left atrial thrombus. At present, Warfarin is the anticoagulation of choice. Aspirin or other antiplatelet drugs are not approved to decrease thromboembolic risk in mitral stenosis. Warfarin should be monitored using the international normalized ratio (INR) to target 2.5.

Percutaneous mitral balloon valvuloplasty (PMBV) is an invasive procedure to manage mitral stenosis. PMBV improves symptoms by increasing mitral valve area and reducing mitral valve gradient. PMBV is indicated in symptomatic patients (New York Heart Association functional class greater than II) or asymptomatic patients with pulmonary hypertension with moderate or severe stenosis and favorable valve morphology in the absence of left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe mitral regurgitation.

Mitral valve replacement surgery is indicated in patients with symptomatic moderate or severe mitral stenosis when percutaneous mitral balloon valvuloplasty is contraindicated or unfavorable valve morphology (Class I, Level of Evidence B).