**Pharmacological Treament**

- Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI)— Recent data approves serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) as the first-line treatment for depression in dementia as cholinergic side effects (including cognitive impairment) have been less prominent with SSRIs. Adverse effects commonly seen in the elderly are decreased sodium levels, akathisia, markedly decreased appetite, and bradycardia. Other side effects include gastrointestinal discomfort (nausea, vomiting, loose stools), anxiety, and sleep abnormalities.

- Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI)— These act as the next-line of treatment after SSRIs. It comprises venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, and duloxetine. This class of drug is believed to be safe in older people. The commonly seen adverse effects are nausea, dizziness, insomnia, and constipation.

- Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)— These drugs should be avoided in patients with cognitive impairment as these increase susceptibility to anticholinergic effects, including cognitive deficits, by blockage of muscarinic receptors.

- Zolmitriptan— It is a 5-HT-1B agonist found to be effective in the treatment for depression and associated cognitive impairment. It acts by modifying the serotonergic receptors. The adverse effects commonly seen in the elderly are numbness, tingling, and drowsiness.

- Vortioxetine— It has a multimodal mechanism of action: agonist at 5-HT1A receptors, 5-HT1B partial agonist, and 5-HT3 receptor antagonist. Recent data confirm its effectiveness in the treatment of depression with cognitive deficits. Adverse effects are similar to SSRIs.

- Cholinesterase Inhibitors (Donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine)— These medications have been found to ameliorate subsyndromal depression in patients with dementia. These have a positive effect on the behavioral symptoms of dementia in addition to the effect on improving cognition.

**Non-Pharmacological Treament**

- Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)— It is safe and beneficial in depression and other disorders leading to cognitive deficits. ECT limits cognitive injury related to a major depressive disorder associated with dementia in the elderly. In depressed patients with dementia, it showed substantial refinements in both mood and cognition.  Though it causes confusion as a side effect, it could be decreased by reducing the frequency of administering ECT to one to two times weekly.

- Interpersonal/Behavioral Approaches— Both strategies are associated with considerable improvement in depressive symptoms in patients and their family members. Therapy of the caretaker is a critical factor in the treatment of the patient with depression associated with cognitive impairment.

- Healthy habits

- Diet: Researchers have ascertained that people who follow a 'healthy' diet routine are less likely to be depressed.

- Regular workout: Meditation and yoga are guarding against depressing disorders. A plausible reason seems to be the impact of everyday work out on brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).

- Omega-3 fatty acids: It regulates the serotonergic and dopaminergic neurotransmitters, leading to mood regulation. It also has an anti-inflammatory effect.