Epidemiology has undoubtedly been a critical player in the continued wellness of today's society. There are, however, some potential concerns with this discipline, namely in the application or misuse of epidemiological data. Information intended to help make informed decisions, prepare for future adverse health events, or advance the general population's knowledge can be otherwise used for propaganda or scare tactics, especially in today's heavily connected society. The knowledge of laypeople can be taken advantage of by using excerpts from research papers taken out of context. For example, during the Ebola outbreak, early communication characterized the ensuing effort as lacking preparation, while later communication was mired in government mistrust.

Misinformation or incomplete information can also complicate the interpretation and application of epidemiological research. Morbidity and mortality face many challenges similar to other population-based statistical measures. These include language barriers, variations in methodologies and definitions, and sampling and reporting biases.

Government mistrust can also play a role in the formulation of inaccuracies. For example, research has shown that about 40% of the undocumented Latino immigrants in the United States report a fear of accessing care due to concerns about being deported, which are only made worse by the limited health services and financial resources to which undocumented immigrants legally have access.

Furthermore, continued education from epidemiologists needs to be a priority. Through educational activism, epidemiologists can present their research and equip their audiences with the necessary background information to effectively understand and apply the epidemiology of a health event. Educational interactions also provide an opportunity for epidemiologists to qualify their claims as well as the limitations of a study. This approach ultimately ensures that the data produced is utilized in its intended manner. Continued educational activism not only empowers the general population, but it also keeps organizations, people in power, and other epidemiologists in check. In fact, within the epidemiology department of CDC, their epidemic intelligence service (EIS) is not only responsible for research, field investigation, and surveillance, but also education via presentations on complex scientific topics, writing peer-reviewed journals and updating public health information.