In general, tumors are embolized with particles, which are more likely than coils or glue to reach arterioles and capillaries and induce tissue necrosis.  Several types of particles are available, including tris-acryl gelatin (TAG) spheres, non-spherical polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), and spherical PVA.

Regarding the size of particles used, no clinical difference was found between the use of 500 micron or smaller PVA compared to 500 to 700 micron PVA particles in a RCT.  However, it is generally believed that smaller particles result in better infarction rates.  This can be desireable or undesireable depending on the situation, because particles can reflux within an artery and cause "inadvertent" embolization of other nearby tissues (such as the ovary).  Therefore, large (700 to 900 micron) particles may be chosen if there is a visualized ovarian artery anastomosis, whereas small (300 to 500 micron) particles may be chosen when the microcatheter has been successfully placed deep within the uterine artery without a visualized uterine artery-ovarian artery anastomosis to attempt better fibroid infarction.  A RCT comparing TAG microspheres to nonspherical PVA particles found no difference in short-term clinical outcomes.  A follow-up RCT by the same physicians found a statistically significant increase in fibroid infarction rates with TAG compared to PVA and a trend toward improved short-term clinical outcome with TAG.  A third RCT comparing PVA and TAG had eight treatment failures in 27 patients with PVA and one treatment failure in 26 patients TAG, but the physicians used smaller particle sizes for TAG than for PVA, and the study was performed under the conflict of interest that the TAG manufacturers paid for the study.  There has not been a RCT comparing clinical symptoms after using TAG and PVA of the same size particles.