**Factors Influencing the Adverse Effects of Glucocorticoids**

Given the diversity in the mechanism of action of glucocorticoids, they can cause a wide array of adverse effects ranging from mild to severe, some of which are unavoidable. Of all the factors influencing the adverse effects of glucocorticoids, dose and duration of therapy are the most important independent and well-documented risk factors. It is usually at “supra-physiologic” doses of corticosteroid administration where multiple and especially severe adverse effects of glucocorticoids occur, ranging from mild suppression of hypothalamic-pituitary axis to severe, life-threatening infections.

Several other factors may influence the adverse effects of glucocorticoids. Older age, comorbid conditions (such as diabetes mellitus), concomitant use of other immunosuppressive agents, severity and nature of the underlying disease, and poor nutritional status can all influence the occurrence and magnitude of side effects.

**Musculoskeletal Adverse Effects**

Glucocorticoids induced Osteoporosis is one of the well-known and devastating adverse effects of long-term use of glucocorticoids. Up to 40% of patients on long-term glucocorticoids develop bone loss leading to fractures.

Steroid-induced myopathy, which is a reversible painless myopathy and is a direct result of muscle breakdown, can occur in both the upper and lower extremities, usually with high-dose long-term use of glucocorticoids. Muscle enzymes (CK and Aldolase) are typically normal, and findings on electromyography are non-specific. Muscle biopsy reveals Type-II fiber atrophy without inflammation. Withdrawal of glucocorticoids and exercises usually results in the resolution of myopathy. “Critical illness myopathy” may also develop in patients admitted in the intensive care unit (ICU) requiring large doses of IV glucocorticoids and neuromuscular blocking agents. It characteristically presents with a severe, diffuse, proximal, and distal weakness that develops over several days. Although it is usually reversible, critical illness myopathy can lead to prolonged ICU admissions, increased length of hospital stays, severe necrotizing myopathy, and increased mortality.

Osteonecrosis can be seen especially with long-term use of prednisone more than 20 mg daily. Patients with SLE and children are at higher risk. Hips and knees are the most commonly involved joints with less common involvement of shoulders and ankles. Pain is the initial feature, which may eventually become severe and debilitating. Magnetic resonance imaging is the most sensitive test, especially for early detection. Plain radiographs may be negative initially but can be useful for follow-up. Treatment is by decreased weight-bearing and immobilization initially, but surgery and/or joint replacement may be necessary if severe.

**Metabolic and Endocrine Adverse Effects**

Systemic glucocorticoids cause a dose-dependent increase in fasting glucose levels and a more significant increase in postprandial values in patients without preexisting diabetes mellitus, but the development of de novo diabetes in a patient with initially normal glucose tolerance is uncommon. Risk factors for new-onset hyperglycemia during glucocorticoid therapy appear to be the same as those for other patients. However, patients with diabetes mellitus or glucose intolerance exhibit higher blood glucose levels while taking glucocorticoids, leading to increased difficulty with glycemic control.

The development of cushingoid features (redistribution of body fat with truncal obesity, buffalo hump, and moon face) and weight gain are dose and duration-dependent and can develop early. Cushingoid features showed a linear increase in frequency with dosing. Glucocorticoid therapy is the most common cause of Cushing syndrome. The clinical presentation in the pediatric population is similar to that in adults and includes truncal obesity, skin changes, and hypertension. In children, growth deceleration is also a feature.

Administration of glucocorticoids can suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis decreasing corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the hypothalamus, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary gland, and endogenous cortisol. Prolonged ACTH suppression cause atrophy of adrenal glands, and abrupt cessation or rapid withdrawal of Glucocorticoids in such patients may cause symptoms of adrenal insufficiency. The clinical presentation of adrenal suppression is variable. Many of the signs and symptoms are non-specific and can be mistaken for symptoms of intercurrent illness or the underlying condition that is receiving treatment (weakness/fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, headache usually in the morning, fever, anorexia/weight loss, myalgia, arthralgia, psychiatric symptoms, poor growth and weight gain in children). Adrenal suppression is the most common cause of adrenal insufficiency in children and is associated with higher mortality in the pediatric population. In adults, the symptoms of adrenal suppression are non-specific; therefore, the condition may go unrecognized until exposure to physiological stress (illness, surgery, or injury), resulting in an adrenal crisis. Children with adrenal crisis secondary to adrenal suppression may present with hypotension, shock, decreased consciousness, lethargy, unexplained hypoglycemia, seizures, and even death.

The impairment of growth in young children and delay in puberty commonly presents in children receiving glucocorticoids for chronic illnesses like nephrotic syndrome and asthma. The effect is most pronounced with daily therapy and less marked with an alternate-day regimen and can also occur with inhaled glucocorticoids. Although growth impairment can be an independent adverse effect of corticosteroid therapy, it can also be a sign of adrenal suppression.

**Infections**

Moderate to high dose use of glucocorticoids poses a significant risk of infections, including common mild infections as well as serious life-threatening infections. There is a linear increase in the risk with dose and duration of therapy, especially with common bacterial, viral, and fungal pathogens. Concomitant use of other immunosuppressive agents and the elderly age further increases the risk of infections.

**Cardiovascular Adverse Effects**

Mineralocorticoid effects, especially as seen with cortisol and cortisone, can lead to fluid retention, edema, weight gain, hypertension, and arrhythmias by increasing renal excretion of potassium, calcium, and phosphate. Hypertension usually occurs with higher doses only.

**Dermatologic Adverse Effects**

Several cutaneous adverse effects can occur even at a low dose use of glucocorticoids, although the risk increases linearly with the increasing dose and duration of glucocorticoid therapy. Although cutaneous adverse effects appear to be clinically significant by physicians, they are usually of most concern to the patients.

**Ophthalmologic Adverse Effects**

The risk of cataracts is significantly high in patients taking prednisone more than 10 mg daily for more than one year, with a dose-dependence in a linear fashion. However, an increased risk of cataracts has been reported even with low-dose glucocorticoids.

**Gastrointestinal (GI) Adverse Effects**

Glucocorticoids increase the risk of adverse GI effects, such as gastritis, gastric ulcer formation, and GI  bleeding.

**Neuropsychiatric Adverse Effects**

Patients receiving glucocorticoids often experience an improved sense of well-being within several days of starting the medications; mild euphoria or anxiety may also occur. Hypomanic reactions and activated states are more common early in the therapy than depression, but the prevalence of depression is greater in patients on more longstanding therapy. Psychosis can occur but does so almost exclusively at doses of prednisone above 20 mg per day given for a prolonged period. Disturbances in sleep are reported, especially with split doses that may interfere with the normal pattern of diurnal cortisol production. Akathisia (motor restlessness) is a common glucocorticoid side effect. The risk of developing a given neuropsychiatric disorder following glucocorticoid therapy may increase among patients with a history of the condition. Rare cases of pseudotumor cerebri have also correlated with glucocorticoid use.

There is specific documentation of neuropsychiatric adverse effects with glucocorticoid therapy in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) receiving dexamethasone or prednisone for the induction and maintenance of treatment.