Pernicious anemia develops slowly, with a progression time to apparent clinical B12 deficiency of 2 to 5 years.

- Constitutional: fatigue, lethargy, anorexia, weight loss

- Neurological: headache, confusion, difficulty concentrating, memory loss, cognitive decline, paraesthesias, numbness, imbalance

- Psychiatric: emotional lability, depression, personality changes, psychosis

- Otolaryngologic: hypogeusia/ageusia, glossitis

- Cardiopulmonary: palpitations, dyspnea

- Gastrointestinal: dyspepsia, diarrhea, decreased appetite

The physical examination may be notable for pallor, dry skin, jaundice, glossitis (tender, smooth, red tongue), and tachycardia. In patients of European ancestry, “the melding of severe pallor with jaundice caused by hemolysis produces a peculiar lemon-yellow skin color.”

Peripheral neuropathy is an early neurological manifestation, which may be followed by subacute combined degeneration (SCD) of the spinal cord in later stages. It is typically symmetric and affects the legs more than the arms. Examination shows a decrease in sensitivity to light touch, pinprick, and vibration. Patients with severe loss of position sense may demonstrate a positive Romberg test. Deep tendon ankle reflexes are commonly hypoactive or absent, while more proximal reflexes may still be intact. Importantly, neurologic findings may be present in the absence of anemia. Examination of a patient with SCD will likely demonstrate limb weakness and ataxia, and they may report visual disturbances. The prompt recognition of SCD is important because early diagnosis and treatment improve the chances of recovery.

A neuropsychiatric evaluation may be required.