**Transport of Lysosomal Proteins (Enzymes)**

Lysosomal hydrolases are made in the RER and then carried through several organelles before reaching their target.cis-Golgi along with N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase.cis-Golgi to the trans-Golgi.

G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase is a hexameric enzyme complex composed of two alpha and two beta subunits encoded by the GNPTAB gene and two gamma subunits encoded by GNPTG. The alpha and beta subunits are synthesized as alpha/beta precursors. The enzyme subunits are assembled in the RER and are then sent to the Golgi apparatus. The alpha/beta precursor is then disassembled into individual alpha and beta subunits by a site-1 protease. The gamma-subunit enhances the M6P post-translational modification activity of G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase by binding to the alpha-subunit.

The mannose residue on newly formed hydrolase enzymes acquires a phosphomannosyl targeting signal in the cis-Golgi by transferring G1cNAc phosphate from UDP-N-acetylglucosamine. To expose the M6P in the TGN, the outer phosphodiester-linked N-acetylglucosamine is removed by N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphodiester alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase, which is an uncovering enzyme.

There are two types of MPRs named according to their molecular mass. MPR46 (cation dependent/CD) and MPR300 (cation independent/CI) are 46 and 300 kDa, respectively. MPR300 is identical to the human insulin-like growth factor (IGF) II receptor, and therefore it is also referred to as the M6P/IGF II receptor. MPRs is a type 1 integral membrane proteins. Initially, the receptor-enzyme complex is sent to a prelysosomal compartment and then to the lysosome. Upon reaching the lysosome, the acidic intralysosomal pH assists in dissociating the enzymes from the attached MPRs. The detached MPRs are then recycled back to the Golgi for later use.

Retromer, Rab9, and TIP47 mediate the recycling process.

In the study by DiCioccio et al., which focused on pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy and ICD, there were normal intracellular and intralysosomal concentrations of specific lysosomal enzymes. This led to the investigation of alternate trafficking pathways, including the M6P-independent path. Both diseases are due to decreased levels of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. DiCioccio et al. found that most enzymes in ICD and pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy cells, which did not have the M6P signal, were still localized to the lysosome.

Lysosomal integral membrane protein type 2 (LIMP-2/SCARB2) is the MPR-independent trafficking receptor responsible for beta-glucocerebrosidase transport.cis-Golgi to the trans-Golgi and is taken to the lysosome, where the acidic pH disconnects the complex.

LIMP types I, III,10, 12, and 39 also cross the Golgi in an anterograde fashion. The lack of involvement of beta-glucocerebrosidase in the M6P-dependent trafficking pathway accounts for its normal serum levels in ICD. The identification that LIMPs can transport to lysosomes in the presence of tunicamycin, a drug that blocks the traditional transport of hydrolases, further adds evidence that LIMP transport is not coupled with that of soluble hydrolases and to the fact of the existence of an MPR-independent pathway.

Cathepsin D, alpha-glucosidase, and acid phosphatase are other enzymes using this lesser-used delivery system.

**Protein Targeting and the Signal Recognition Particle**

The signal recognition particle (SRP) is a cytoplasmic protein-targeting device that targets the hydrophobic signal sequences of newly forming proteins from ribosomes and brings them to the RER.****SRP is composed of a 7S RNA and a signal sequence recognizing protein; therefore, it is deemed a ribonucleoprotein.****SRP is regulated by GTPases present within itself and its receptor. After the SRP binds to the signal peptide of the translating protein from the ribosome, a complex cumulatively termed ribosome nascent chain complex (RNC), the RNC then interacts with the SRP receptor on the RER membrane. The binding of SRP with the RNC results in the halting of further peptide elongation.****After the translation of the protein is complete, a signal peptidase separates the signal peptide leaving the completely translated protein in the RER lumen.

**Protein Targeting to Other Organelles**

Macromolecules enter and leave the nucleus through gaps called nuclear pore complexes (NPC).

The peroxisomal proteins are trafficked post-translationally from the cytosol since the peroxisome has no DNA.

PTS1 and PTS2 proteins are then carried inside the peroxisomes. The PTS and Pex complex dissociates, leading to the Pex receptor being recycled back to the cytoplasm for later use. To leave the peroxisome, ubiquitin is first added to Pex5 by E3 ligase.

Cytoplasmic ribosomes translate mRNA into proteins which then target the mitochondria. These proteins need to have an amino-terminal targeting sequence to target the mitochondria. These protein sequences then allow for the localization of the protein to either the outer membrane, intermembrane space, or across the inner membrane into the mitochondrial matrix.

A TOM complex, present in the outer membrane, is a translocase responsible for the translocation of proteins into the mitochondria by recognizing the amino-terminal targeting sequence by the TOM receptors (Tom20 and Tom22). The TIM23 complex, present in the inner membrane, handles the import of proteins that localize to and cross the inner membrane.

Tim21 is a subunit of TIM23 that regulates TIM23 and is involved with tethering the TOM and TIM23 complexes. Tim21 is not necessary for the early stages of tethering; therefore, TIM23 complexes without Tim21 function with subunits of the PAM complex instead. Components of the PAM complex include Hsp70 and Pam18. Pam18, through interactions with the Tim17 subunit, links the PAM and TIM23 complexes. Once the protein has entered the mitochondrial matrix, Tim21 replaces the PAM complex. The PAM complex does not completely dissociate from the inner mitochondrial membrane, and it is assumed to tightly binds alternate tight-sites on Tim17 with Tim21 binding in between.