Ciprofloxacin can be less costly and more cost-effective than traditional parenteral regimens in selected clinical settings with appropriate use. Additional well-designed studies would be helpful in further defining the most cost-efficient use of this antimicrobial agent. However, in E. coli-associated urinary tract infections, there has been an increase in ciprofloxacin resistance, more so in the hospital versus the community setting.

Ciprofloxacin is a common antibiotic prescribed and usually well-tolerated. Interprofessional health care team members must use antibiotics as targeted therapy, effectively managing infections and conferring a societal benefit in addressing drug-resistant microbes. Clinicians need to consider that the drug's pharmacokinetics can undergo alteration in patients with renal or hepatic dysfunction and order the tests to monitor patient status when used for a prolonged period. Pharmacists can review the antibiogram and verify the dosing and duration of ciprofloxacin. Nursing can counsel the patient on taking the medication, monitor patient compliance and therapeutic effectiveness, answer any questions, and report any concerns to the prescriber. Ciprofloxacin therapy requires the collaborative approach of an interprofessional healthcare team, including infectious disease specialists, clinicians (MD, DO, NP, PA), pharmacists, and specialty-trained nurses working together to achieve optimal patient outcomes. All team members must be vigilant for adverse events or therapeutic failure and immediately report any patient status changes to other team members. A study shows that hospital-based antimicrobial stewardship interventions are associated with fewer fluoroquinolone (including ciprofloxacin) prescriptions during hospitalization.