Atrioventricular block (AV block) of varying degrees is the most frequent manifestation of Lyme carditis. Therefore, if a patient presents with the characteristic demographic and clinical manifestations, including bradycardia, the next step is to evaluate an electrocardiogram (ECG) carefully. AV block in Lyme carditis may range from first degree to complete heart block, also known as third-degree AV block. In these patients, the degree of AV block may change over minutes, hours, or days.

AV block denotes an abnormal relationship between the P wave and the QRS complex. THE first-degree AV block characteristically demonstrates a fixed prolongation of the PR interval (greater than 200 milliseconds). Second-degree AV block displays a progressive prolongation of the PR interval followed by a nonconductive P wave (Mobitz type I) or presents with an unchanged PR interval followed by a single non-conducted P wave (Mobitz type II). In the highest degree of AV block, third degree, there is no atrioventricular conduction, and the ECG shows a dissociation between P waves and QRS complexes.

Supplementary studies play a more important role when suspecting valvular disease or myocarditis. A chest X-ray may show bilateral infiltrates or pleural effusions.

The gold standard to diagnose infectious diseases continues to be the isolation of the offending pathogen; this is not the case with B. burgdorferi, which, like some other spirochetes, cannot be cultivated. The diagnosis is based on indirect serologic tests in addition to clinical suspicion and supporting laboratory and imaging tests. In many cases, clinical suspicion alone may warrant antibiotic treatment. However, many patients may not present the typical manifestations or symptoms may be ambiguous. A two-step method of serologic testing is suggested as the approach to follow. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is the first test to be considered. If IgM or IgG is positive or borderline, a Western blot assay is required to confirm the diagnosis.B. burgdorferi DNA has been detected in heart tissue by PCR. PCR can be obtained if the suspected cause of myocarditis or endocarditis is Lyme disease and if the serologic tests for this condition are negative or equivocal when the suspicion is high.