This medication may be administered in oral form (tablets, solution, or dissolvable M-TABs) or as a long-acting injection. Patients should not cut or chew the orally disintegrating tablet formulation. It is also available in injectable form.

Dosing based on indications follows:

- Schizophrenia:

- For the first episode, age under 65 years: 1 to 3 mg/day orally divided into one or two doses. Stat at 1 mg daily, then increase the dose by 0.5 mg daily every six to seven days to target 2 mg daily. The maximum dose is 16 mg daily, but doses exceeding 4 mg per day are rarely more effective.
- Maintenance dosing, age under 65 years: 1 to 4 mg/day orally divided into one or two doses. Stat at 1 to 2 mg daily, then increase the dose by 0.5 mg per day every three to seven days to target 4 mg daily. The maximum dose is 16 mg daily, but doses exceeding 4 mg per day are rarely more effective.
- Age 65 and older: 1 to 4 mg/day orally divided into one or two doses. Stat at 0.25 to 0.5 mg daily, then increase the dose by 0.5 mg per day every six to seven days to target 2 mg daily. The maximum dose is 16 mg daily, but doses exceeding 4 mg per day are rarely more effective.

- Acute manic/mixed bipolar disorder:

- 1 to 6 mg/day orally divided into one or two doses. Stat at 2 to 3 mg daily, then increase the dose by 1 mg per day no more frequently than every 24 hours to target 2 mg daily. The maximum dose is 6 mg daily.

- Tourette syndrome (off-label):

- 0.2 to 3 mg daily by mouth divided once or twice daily. The maximum dose is 6 mg daily.

Renal dosing: If CrCl is less than 30, start at 0.5 mg orally twice daily; maybe increase by up to 0.5 mg twice daily until 1.5 mg twice a day, after which dosing should not increase more frequently than weekly.

Hepatic dosing: For Child-Pugh Class C, start at 0.5 mg orally twice daily; maybe increase by up to 0.5 mg twice daily until 1.5 mg twice a day, after which dosing should not increase more frequently than weekly.