Avoidance of triggers, especially in those with seasonal symptoms, is encouraged, although it is not always practical. Precautions can be taken to avoid dust mites, animal dander, and upholstery, though this can require significant lifestyle changes that may not be acceptable to the patient. If removing a pet from the home is not feasible, isolating the pet to a single room in the house may be an option to minimize dander exposure. It may take up to 20 weeks to eliminate cat dander from the home, even after removing the animal.  Allergen-impermeable bedding covers, washing sheets in hot water, and the use of a vacuum cleaner with high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters may also lessen symptoms.

Pharmacological options include antihistamines, intranasal steroids, leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs), and immunotherapy.

Intranasal corticosteroid therapy can be as monotherapy or in combination with oral antihistamines in patients in patients with mild, moderate, or severe symptoms. Studies have shown intranasal corticosteroids are superior to antihistamines in effectively reducing nasal inflammation and improving mucosal pathology. Thus a topical intranasal steroid should be the first-line treatment for AR.

First-generation antihistamines include diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, and hydroxyzine, whereas fexofenadine, loratadine, desloratadine, and cetirizine are examples of second-generation antihistamines. Both first- and second-generation antihistamines are effective at controlling symptoms of AR. Still, first-generation antihistamines can be quite sedating due to their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier. These agents also act on muscarinic receptors, causing side effects of dry mouth, urinary retention, constipation, and/or tachycardia. Second-generation antihistamines have improved H1 selectivity, are less sedating, and have longer half-lives (12 to 24 hours) than those of the first-generation. Fexofenadine has no sedating effects, but loratadine and desloratadine may be sedating at higher doses. Cetirizine has the most potential for sedation of all second-generation antihistamines. There is no one agent recommended over others, as all have shown similar efficacy and safety profiles in terms of symptom relief.

Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs) such as montelukast and zafirlukast can be beneficial in patients with AR, but they are not as efficacious as intranasal corticosteroids.

Oral decongestants such as pseudoephedrine are useful in relieving symptoms but are not recommended for extended daily use due to their side-effect profile. Intranasal decongestants such as xylometazoline are alpha-agonists that are delivered directly to nasal tissue to produce vasoconstriction. Prolonged use of intranasal decongestants has a risk of causing rebound nasal congestion (rhinitis medicamentosa) and, therefore, should not be used for more than a week.