Sacubitril/valsartan is the first agent to be approved in a new class of drugs called angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI). The medication is FDA-approved to treat patients with chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) with NYHA class II, III, or IV. Sacubitril/valsartan is to be used in place of an ACEI or angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) and in conjunction with other standard heart-failure treatments (beta-blocker, aldosterone antagonist). Healthcare workers, including nurse practitioners who prescribe this agent, should be aware that patients must show that they can tolerate ACEI or ARB before initiating sacubitril/valsartan therapy.

Once the drug is started, the patient must be monitored for signs and symptoms of heart failure. Regarding safety, renal function and serum potassium should be monitored, especially at the initiation of therapy and in patients with risk factors that would predispose them to renal impairment and hyperkalemia. The patient also needs education regarding the signs and symptoms of angioedema. Because sacubitril/valsartan therapy affects several biomarkers and specifically inhibits the breakdown of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), BNP will be elevated in patients taking this drug. Therefore, BNP will not be a reliable marker of heart failure exacerbations in these patients. The ACC/AHA Heart Failure Stages were developed jointly by expert consensus by the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association (AHA), and clinicians should use ACC/AHA Heart Failure Staging to make recommendations regarding therapy.

Given the above monitoring requirements, it is clear that an interprofessional healthcare team approach to sacubitril/valsartan therapy is necessary. This team can include clinicians, specialists, mid-level providers (MD and DO), nursing staff, and pharmacists. All these disciplines need to coordinate their activity and share data so that the entire team operates from the same information and can monitor and adjust therapy as needed. Educate patients about the symptoms of worsening heart failure and adverse drug reactions of sacubitril/valsartan therapy. This will result in optimal patient results while minimizing potential adverse effects. [Level 5]