Our current understanding of the mechanisms of signal transduction pathways stems from the work of Earl W. Sutherland, a professor at Vanderbilt University. His research led to a Nobel Prize in 1971. The general mechanism involved in cellular communication has been described. However, two, main signal transduction pathways involve GPCRs that can be discussed in more detail. These two pathways are the cAMP signal pathway and the phosphatidylinositol signal pathway.

An example of the cAMP pathway can be illustrated in the mechanism of glycogen breakdown. In skeletal muscles, adrenaline acts as a stimulator molecule and binds to a GPCR. This activated receptor, in turn, activates a G-protein and the alpha subunit of this protein activates adenylate cyclase. This enzyme boosts the production of cAMP from ATP, and this leads to an enormous amplification of the original signal. The cAMP is a second messenger, a small intracellular signaling molecule amplified or generated in response to an extracellular signal. The cAMP activates Protein Kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates and activates another enzyme called phosphorylase kinase. This kinase, in turn, activates the glycogen phosphorylase and glycogen can be broken down. It is apparent that the activation of many enzymes is involved in this signal transduction pathway. Since changes in gene expression and protein synthesis do not occur, the pathway occurs very rapidly.

The phosphatidylinositol signal pathway begins in a similar way to the cAMP pathway. A signaling molecule binds to a GPCR and activates it, which in turn activates a G-protein. This activated G-protein, however, activates Phospholipase C. The function of this phospholipase is to cleave a plasma membrane phospholipid PIP into DAG and IP. Both DAG and IP become second messengers in different pathways. IP rapidly diffuses through the cytoplasm and binds to a gated calcium channel on the endoplasmic reticulum, causing it to open. Calcium ion flow down their concentration gradient from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol. The calcium ions activate further pathways. In this pathway, calcium ions can be thought of as third messengers because IP was the second messenger. However, the term second messenger is used for all small, non-protein components in a signal transduction pathway.