Potential complications of bronchoscopy include hypoxemia, airway obstruction, laryngospasm, cough, bleeding, airway fire, pneumothorax, tension pneumothorax, and air emboli.

Bronchoscopy patients require extensive suctioning as secretions build up in the oral airway. A common complication of bronchoscopy is aspiration pneumonia, in which gastric and/or oropharyngeal fluids enter the lungs. Rapid onset fever, cough, dyspnea, and crackles on lung auscultation are common clinical features.

Oxygen delivery during bronchoscopy is a special consideration due to the instruments introduced during the procedure that necessitates a shared airway. Oxygen is typically delivered via a nasal cannula, but an LMA or ETT can be used. Foreign bodies present in the upper airway are often an indication for a bronchoscopy, and a pre-operative assessment should be done with additional emphasis on the timing, the precise location, and the shape of the foreign object. A preoperative chest radiograph, computed tomography scan, and/or magnetic resonance imaging are helpful, but often the urgency of the airway obstruction precludes imaging before intervention.

For routine bronchoscopy, careful attention must be paid to patient comorbidities.  Patients with pulmonary hypertension, morbid obesity, severe deconditioning, pulmonary fibrosis, severe valvular disorders, poorly controlled asthma, interstitial lung disease, certain autoimmune disorders, and severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (among many other disease states) tend to have poor oxygen reserves, and short periods of apnea are not well tolerated. Careful consideration in patient selection is important because patients with comorbidities that are not stable enough to tolerate brief periods of apnea should not undergo routine diagnostic bronchoscopy where alternative diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may exist.