Once the clinical manifestations suggest cardiac origin, imaging modalities such as an echocardiogram may be utilized to investigate structural and inflammatory etiologies. If a coronary vessel dysfunction is suspected, a large and small vessel dysfunction should be thoroughly analyzed and specified. Vasospastic angina is a common large vessel dysfunction of the myocardium that typically presents with anginal chest pain at rest.

Coronary spasms may be induced with ergonovine or acetylcholine. They may also occur involuntarily during angiography. Mechanical irritation from catheter introduction into the coronary vessels may result in catheter-induced spasms. Exhibition of non-ischemic changes such as reversible ST-elevations can be detected on an electrocardiogram (ECG).

For patients reporting cardiac pain during catheterization of the coronary vessels, catheter-induced spasm is highly likely, and a diagnosis of vasospastic angina is probable. Appropriate management with epicardial vasodilators like nitroglycerin may be initiated. It is vital to distinguish the presence of ostial atherosclerosis from catheter-induced spasms, as damped or ventricularized coronary arterial pressure waveforms may appear due to narrowing of ostial diameter.

Patients with clinical characteristics of cardiac ischemia without evidence of obstructive coronary artery disease on angiography indicate microvascular dysfunction of the coronary vessels and require assessment as a potential cause for chest pain. All other ailments associated with microvascular dysfunction of the coronary vessels such as heart disease attributed to hypertension, amyloid induced cardiac disease, Takotsubo heart disease, Anderson Fabry disease, coronary slow-flow phenomenon (CSFP), also known as cardiac syndrome Y, a no-reflow phenomenon during a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) should be ruled out prior to concluding a CSX diagnosis.

Non-cardiac origins of chest pain should also be ruled out. Differentials include psychological (anxiety and depressive illnesses), gastrointestinal disease, hepatic causes, pulmonary ailments, musculoskeletal causes, and other entities such as Tietze syndrome.