**Mechanism of Action**

The mechanism of action of HPSCT in leukemia is based on the effect of the graft and donor immunity against malignant cells in recipients. These findings were demonstrated in a study that involved over 2000 patients with different leukemias treated with HPSCT. The study showed the lowest relapse rates were in patients who received non-T-cell-depleted bone marrow cells and those who developed GVHD compared to patients who received T-cell-depleted stem cells, those who did not develop GVHD, and patients who received syngeneic grafts. These findings support the notion that donor cellular immunity is central to engraftment efficacy against tumor cells.

The mechanism of action of HPSCT in autoimmune diseases is believed to be secondary to the increase in T-cell regulatory function, which promotes immune tolerance. However, more studies are needed to determine the exact physiology.

In hemoglobinopathies, the transplanted stem cells produce functional cells after engraftment that replace the diseased cells.

**Administration**

**HLA Typing**

HLA typing is essential to determine the most suitable donor for stem cell collection. In theory, matched, related donors are the best candidates, followed by matched unrelated donors, cord blood, and haploidentical donors. HLA typing is analyzed at either an intermediate-resolution level, which entails detecting a small number of matched alleles between the donor serum and the recipient, or at a high-resolution level to determine the specific number of polymorphic alleles at a higher level. Polymerase chain reaction and next-generation sequencing are used for HLA typing, and the results are reported as a score correlating with a match of two alleles for a specific HLA type. Different institutions use a different number of HLA subtypes for the eligibility of donors. However, studies that showed high-resolution matching for HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, and HLA-DRB1 were associated with improved survival and outcomes.

The process may vary depending on the source of the stem cell site collection, whether it is bone marrow, peripheral blood, or cord blood. Moreover, there is a slight difference based on whether it is autologous, allogeneic, or syngeneic HPSCT. For example, the procedure consists of the initial mobilization of stem cells, in which peripheral blood stem cells are collected, given the low number and the need for high levels of progeny cells. This is then followed by a preparative regimen and, finally, infusion.

**Mobilization and Collection**

Mobilization and collection procedures involve using medication to increase the number of stem cells in the peripheral blood, given that there are insufficient stem cells in the peripheral blood. Medications include granulocyte colony-stimulating factors (G-CSF) or chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) blockers like plerixafor. G-CSF is believed to enhance neutrophils to release serine proteases, which break vascular adhesion molecules and promote the release of hematopoietic stem cells from the bone marrow. Plerixafor blocks the binding of stromal cell-derived factor-1-alpha (SDF-1) to CXCR, leading to stem cell mobilization to the peripheral blood.

The usual site of bone marrow collection is the anterior or posterior iliac crest. The aspiration procedure can be performed under local or general anesthesia. Common complications include pain and fever; serious iatrogenic complications occur in less than 1% of cases. Each aspiration contains 15 mL, and multiple aspirations are done. The goal is to collect 1 to 1.5 L of bone marrow product from the aspirations. The dose of nucleated cells from bone marrow should range between 2 to 4 x 10 cells/kg; overall survival and long-term engraftment are strongly influenced by cell dose in allogeneic HPSCT.

**Preparative Regimen**

The preparative regimen consists of the administration of chemotherapy with or without total body irradiation for the eradication of malignant cells and induction of immune tolerance for the transfused cells to engraft properly. This process is not limited to patients with malignancies. It extends to cases like aplastic anemia and hemoglobinopathies, given that these patients have intact immune systems that could cause graft failure if there is no conditioning.

The administration of the preparative regimen should immediately precede the HPSCT. As a general rule, the effect of the regimen should produce bone marrow suppression within 1 to 3 weeks of administration. The preparative regimen is divided into myeloablative conditioning and reduced-intensity conditioning. Different combination regimens are used in the preparative period, depending on the disease being treated, existing comorbidities, previous radiation exposure, and the source of the harvested hematopoietic stem cells.

Reduced-intensity conditioning is preferred in patients who are older, have had prior radiotherapy, have comorbidities, and have a history of extensive chemotherapy before HPSCT.

Most chemotherapies used in preparative regimens consist of potent immunosuppressive agents like high doses of cyclophosphamide, alkylating agents like busulfan, nucleoside analogs like fludarabine, and many other agents like melphalan, anti-thymocyte globulin, rituximab, and gemcitabine. Total body irradiation is performed using fractionated doses; there is less pulmonary toxicity than with a one-dose regimen.

Reinfusion of either fresh or cryopreserved stem cells can occur in an ambulatory setting and takes up to two hours. Before the infusion begins, quality measures are performed to ensure the number of CD34+ cells is sufficient.

In the particular case of SCID, there is no need for a preparative regimen in patients receiving cells from HLA-matched siblings. This is because no abnormal cells need to be eliminated, and the immunosuppression caused by SCID can prevent graft rejection.

**Advantages and Disadvantages of Different Hematopoietic Stem Cells**

One advantage of peripheral blood stem cell transplant (PBSCT) is a more rapid engraftment rate than the bone marrow-derived stem cells; recovery in the former is two weeks and is delayed for five days more in the latter. Using a post-transplant immunosuppressive regimen to prevent GVHD can prolong the increase in bone marrow products.

The advantages of cord blood transplant include the rapid collection and administration times, which facilitate treating urgent conditions, less frequent infections, lower rates of GVHD with the same rate of GVT, and less need for a stringent identical HLA. The disadvantages include delayed engraftment, a higher possibility of graft rejection, and higher rates of disease relapses. The cord blood transplant is most commonly used in patients without matched-related or unrelated donors. One major study demonstrated the utility of cord blood transplants in patients with thalassemia-major and sickle cell disease, indicating similar 6-year overall survival rates compared to the bone marrow-derived transplants.

The most important factors affecting the success of cord blood transplant are the total nucleated cell dose and HLA matching; the recommended minimum dose of total nucleated cells for successful engraftment is 2 x 10^7 cells/kg. Theoretically, strict HLA matching is not required in the case of cord blood transplant as cord blood is devoid of mature T cells, but studies have shown better outcomes when matching recipients at HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, and HLA-DRB1.

Haploidentical stem cell transplantation involves administering bone marrow products from a first-degree related haplotype-mismatched donor.