Although uncommon, it is important to be aware of several potential procedural complications in patients with severe RV dysfunction, the combination of pulmonary regurgitation and a stiff wire traversing the tricuspid valve potentially causing tricuspid regurgitation, hypotension, and hemodynamic instability may occur. More significantly, severe hemodynamic compromise may result from valve dislodgment into the PA, causing obstruction of the pulmonary blood flow, coronary compression causing coronary ischemia, and conduit rupture causing major hemorrhage. However, these are fortunately rare. Heavy calcification and the presence of homograft conduits have been identified as risk factors for rupture.

Longer-term complications include the risk of stent fracture, which remains the most common reason for re-intervention with the first-generation valve, even despite pre-stenting (5% to 16%). Younger age, higher pre-and procedural RVOT gradient, smaller angiographic conduit diameter, valve position directly under the sternum, stent recoil, or compression after deployment is the risk factors.

More recently, the development of infective endocarditis has emerged as a significant risk, with an incidence of approximately 2.4% per patient-year. Male gender, multiple stents, unprotected dental treatment, previous history of endocarditis, and non-compliance of aspirin constitute the risk factors.Streptococcus viridans and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common causes. Occasionally this can be treated and cleared medically. However, due to the significant dysfunction of the valve post-infection, many patients require surgical replacement of the valve even if the bloodstream is able to be cleared of infection.