**Alginates in Wound Dressings**

Alginate hydrogels have extensive utilization as wound interfaces in dressings intended to support healing following burns, pressure ulcers, venous ulcers, and other exudative cutaneous wounds. While the indications of alginate wound dressings are different in each of these contexts, a few underlying principles are generally relevant. Because alginates allow for the relatively free diffusion of water and solutes, alginate dressings are thought to generate a relatively physiologic environment at the wound interface that encourages healing. Additionally, some research postulates that calcium release from alginate hydrogels crosslinked with calcium stimulates coagulative pathways and which results in a healing response. While alginate dressings see extensive use in wound healing, few well-controlled studies definitively link their usage to improvements in outcomes.

**Alginates in Encapsulation**

Modern drug delivery systems often utilize a “carrier” construct that protects and facilitates the delivery of the intended therapeutic compound(s). Because of their flexibility, modifiability, and well-studied biocompatibility, alginate-based hydrogels are often candidates for this application.

For patients with extensive cutaneous wounds, healthcare staff should consider alginate dressings as a means of maintaining a moist and semi-physiologic wound environment. However, it bears mentioning that a systematic review has failed to substantiate the superiority of alginate dressings over other dressing types.