Complex renal cysts need to be differentiated based on imaging criteria to assess the risk of malignancy. In 1986, Morton Bosniak developed a classification of renal cysts based on CT findings that have become the standard to ascertain which complex cysts have a high incidence of malignancy and require surgery or close follow-up imaging. The Bosniak classification is currently used by both radiologists and urologists to manage complex renal cysts. It was originally based on CT findings but has been expanded to MR imaging findings as well. Simple cysts fall into the Bosniak category 1 and do not require further workup or imaging.

To evaluate complex renal cysts by CT scan or MRI, it is imperative to obtain the scan through the kidneys before IV contrast and after IV contrast during the same exam with the same parameters. The Bosniak classification system is used to guide treatment.

**Bosniak I Lesions**

- Simple cysts

- Water density is 0 to 20 Hounsfield units

- Homogenous

- Have a thin wall

- No enhancement after IV contrast

Treatment: Bosniak lesions in category I are benign cysts and do not require further imaging or intervention.

**Bosniak II Lesions**

- Complex cysts

- It can have thin hairline septa and thin calcification in the septa or wall.

- No demonstrable enhancement after IV contrast on CT or MRI.

- It can have a homogenously high attenuation on CT scan

- It can have a uniformly high signal intensity on T1 weighted images and a uniformly low signal intensity on T2 weighted images.

- Lesions measure less than 3 cm in diameter.

Treatment: Bosniak lesions in category II are benign cysts and do not require further imaging or intervention.

**Bosniak IIF lesions**

- Complex renal cysts with multiple thin enhancing septations

- Can have thick nodular calcifications

- Can have minimal (10-15 Hounsfield unit) enhancement on CT scan after IV contrast

Treatment: For Bosniak lesions category IIF, the F stands for follow-up. Follow-up cross-sectional imaging with IV contrast is recommended at 6 months, 12 months, and then yearly for 5 years. If the lesions grow in size and develop internal enhancing soft tissue, they become category III lesions and require surgical treatment or ablation therapy.

**Bosniak III lesions**

- Renal lesions which show internal enhancement after IV contrast on CT scan

- Typically enhancing greater than 15 Hounsfield units

- Thick, irregular enhancing walls and/or

- Thick enhancing internal septations.

Treatment: Bosniak lesions category III require excision or can be treated with ablation therapy. They have a 50% to 80% chance of malignancy.

**Bosniak IV lesions**

- Distinctly malignant

- Clearly enhancing internal soft tissue

Treatment: Bosniak lesions category IV require excision or can be treated with ablation therapy. Bosniak category IV lesions have a greater than 90% chance of malignancy.