Maintenance of weight loss in patients with obesity or who are overweight is difficult due to the physical and psychological effort required to maintain a sustained calorie deficit over long periods. While increasing PA levels have been shown to improve weight loss and weight maintenance, it is associated with worse patient adherence, restricting the effectiveness of programs. The recommended 200-300 minutes of exercise a week remains a large commitment for patients.

Poor adherence is common after long periods of intensive diet and PA programs with an apparent lack of results. Unrealistic goal setting, including prescription of unsustainable PA or calorie restriction levels, often leads to poor patient adherence, lack of results, and subsequent disillusionment and mistrust.

Patients with obesity or who are overweight, especially those with other co-morbidities, may find PA difficult. Walking is often recommended as an accessible form of PA. However, patients with an ongoing musculoskeletal disorder or other disabling comorbidities may not be able to walk for the necessary time to promote significant energy expenditure.

The psychological component of maintaining a significant weight loss is crucial. Mood and eating disorders can greatly impact patients’ weight and can be a limiting factor in successful weight loss. Management of eating disorders or body dysmorphia by appropriate specialists is essential to promote weight loss and weight loss maintenance. In addition, effective management of concordant mental health issues by appropriate specialist consultation can promote successful maintenance of weight loss. et al. describe its negative effects on mental health. They advised careful consideration of the possible negative psychological and emotional effects that regular self-weighing can have on patients before recommending self-monitoring.