An interplay of physiologic and endocrine changes occurs in pregnancy, aiming at adequate nurturing of the developing fetus. The primary underlying pathophysiology of macrosomia could be broadly divided into maternal and fetal risk factors. However, maternal hyperglycemia appears to be the most significant factor in the pathogenesis of macrosomia. In the second trimester of pregnancy, an increase in the levels of the stress hormones such as cortisone, human placenta lactogen (HPL), and prolactin leads to modest degrees of maternal insulin resistance. This, however, is countered by physiologic postprandial hyperinsulinemia. Patients with metabolic syndrome or other existing risk factors may be unable to mount an adequate hyperinsulinemic response leading to the development of hyperglycemia. Glucose transfer through the placenta occurs through facilitated diffusion that results in fetal hyperglycemia. This, in turn, brings about the hyperplasia of the beta islet cells of the fetal pancreas leading to overutilization of glucose by the fetus and hence an abnormal increase in fetal growth.

Findings from the Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes study show a strong linear relationship between maternal glucose concentration and large for gestational age (LGA) fetuses, fetal adiposity, and fetal hyperinsulinemia.**Type****A1****GDM**: Patients typically have an abnormal glucose tolerance test but can keep blood glucose levels in the normal range with dietary changes alone.**Type****A2****GDM**: Patients usually have an abnormal glucose tolerance test and abnormal glucose levels during fasting and after meals.