The majority of patients presenting with psychosis for the first time have some substance abuse. A detailed history is important in the evaluation of alcohol-related psychosis. Specifically, it is imperative to determine the patient's alcohol use history. It may be difficult to determine whether a patient’s psychotic symptoms are due to a primary psychotic disorder or due to substance use, including alcohol. This may be especially difficult in the emergency department where the history is frequently lacking. No family history of psychotic disorder in a patient who has a clear history of alcohol use supports the diagnosis of alcohol-related psychosis. Alcohol-related psychosis must be differentiated from other causes of psychosis and specifically from schizophrenia. When compared to schizophrenia, patients with alcohol-related psychosis tend to have significantly lower education levels, an onset of psychosis at an older age, more intense depressive and anxiety symptoms, and fewer negative and disorganized symptoms. Patients with alcohol-related psychosis also usually have better insight and judgment.

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V) states that the diagnosis of substance-induced psychotic disorder requires the presence of significant hallucinations or delusions. There must be evidence that the hallucinations or delusions started during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal or the substance used is known to cause the disturbance. The symptoms are not better explained by a psychotic disorder unrelated to substance use. The psychosis does not occur only with delirium. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or difficulty with normal activity such as work or social interactions.

A detailed physical exam is also important. Stability of the patient, including airway, breathing, and vital signs must be assessed first. Special attention needs to be paid to general appearance including if the patient is unkempt, has a flat affect, smells of alcohol, or appears to be responding to internal stimuli. Additionally, the patient should be evaluated thoroughly for any sign of trauma, especially head trauma. Other causes of altered mental status must also be evaluated, including infection, trauma, metabolic causes such as liver disease, and electrolyte abnormalities. Therefore, CT imaging of the brain, urinalysis, urine drug screen, lab evaluation including electrolytes, liver function tests, ammonia, and toxicology screening may be indicated.