Despite advances in technology, the time from symptom onset to diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension remains at more than two years; hence a high index of suspicion is required.****Patients with unexplained shortness of breath or symptoms/signs concerning for pulmonary hypertension should be thoroughly evaluated with a comprehensive medical and family history, physical examination, monitoring of blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen saturation, and blood tests, including brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)/ N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP) with a resting electrocardiogram. This first step helps in raising suspicion of a cardiopulmonary cause. The second step involves assessment of the heart with echocardiography and the lungs (if history is suggestive) using pulmonary function tests, chest imaging including X-ray and/or computed tomography, and in certain cases, cardiopulmonary exercise testing.

The echocardiogram can help grade the probability of PH into low/intermediate/high categories, which are explained in detail below. Patients with intermediate/high probability of PH on echocardiogram and those with risk factors of PAH/CTEPH but with low probability and no other causes other than PH identified should be referred to a PH center for further comprehensive testing and confirmation of PH. The tests commonly used are mentioned below.

Risk factors for PAH include CTD, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), family history of PAH, portal hypertension, and risk factors for CTEPH include a history of pulmonary embolism, permanent intravascular devices, malignancy, inflammatory bowel diseases, essential thrombocythemia, and high dose thyroid replacement.

During any time, if there are warning signs, including rapidly evolving clinical symptoms of RV failure, syncope, signs of low CO, decompensating hemodynamic status, or poorly tolerated arrhythmias, a fast-track referral should be made to a PH center.

**1. Laboratory testing:**In all patients with PH, routine hematology studies, renal function tests, hepatic function tests, iron profiles, as well as thyroid studies should be performed. Thyroid dysfunction should always be suspected in cases with abrupt deterioration, as it is common in PAH and can occur during the course of the disease. Patients may also have abnormalities with liver function tests either due to congestive hepatopathy from right failure, liver disease, and/or endothelin receptor antagonist (ERA) therapy; such cases should be evaluated with hepatitis serologies.

In addition, routine screening for HIV, serologies for hepatitis viruses, and CTD should be done. Patients with scleroderma have a high prevalence of PAH and should be routinely screened with ANA immunofluorescence. If the clinical index of suspicion is high, anticentromere, antitopoisomerase, anti-RNA polymerase III, double-stranded DNA, anti-Ro, anti-La, and U1-RNP antibodies should be obtained. Patients with CTEPH and those with CTD associated with thrombophilic states should be screened for coagulopathies, and thrombophilias, including lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, and anti-β2-glycoprotein antibodies.

Levels of BNP and NT-proBNP are independent predictors of outcomes and should be obtained in these patients.

**2. Electrocardiogram (ECG):**A normal ECG does not exclude the diagnosis of PH, while an abnormal ECG may point towards severe disease, especially prolongation of the QRS complex and the QTc.****ECG abnormalities may include signs of right-sided heart strain and chamber enlargement, including P pulmonale, right axis deviation, RV strain, RV hypertrophy, right bundle branch block, and prolongation of the QTc. In advanced disease, supraventricular tachycardias, including atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation, can occur, while ventricular arrhythmias are rare.

**3. Chest radiography:**Chest radiography may hold clues to underlying pulmonary hypertension, such as right heart enlargement, PA enlargement, pruning of peripheral vessels, and water bottle-shaped cardiac silhouette. Additionally, there may be signs of left heart disease****such as Kerley B lines, pleural effusions, enlargement of the left heart, and signs of lung disease such as flattening of the diaphragm (COPD), hyperlucency (COPD), volume loss, and reticular opacifications (fibrotic lung disease). A normal chest X-ray does not rule out PH.

**4. Pulmonary Function Testing (PFT) and arterial blood gases:**A complete set of PFTs can give diagnostic and prognostic information. Most patients with PAH have decreased diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO), and a low DLCO of < 45% is associated with poor outcomes.

Patients with PAH usually have low normal or slightly low partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2). A severely reduced PaO2 should raise suspicion for shunting, such as in patent foramen ovale and hepatic disease. These patients also have alveolar hyperventilation, and as a result, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) is low to low normal.****Unfavorable outcomes have been reported in patients with low PaCO2 at diagnosis and follow-up.****An elevated PaCO2 is unusual and should raise suspicion of sleep-disordered breathing or hypoventilation.

**5. Chest computed tomography (CT) and digital subtraction angiography (DSA):**Chest CT is an important tool to identify interstitial lung diseases and thus helps in discriminating between various groups of PH. It also provides additional information which raises suspicion of PH, such as enlarged PA****diameter, main PA/ascending aorta diameter ratio >0.9, and enlarged right heart chambers. A PA diameter ≥ 30 mm, right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) thickness ≥ 6 mm, and septal deviation greater than 140 degrees (or right ventricle/left ventricle ratio ≥ 1) is highly predictive of PH.

Contrast CT pulmonary angiography can demonstrate signs of CTEPH such as webs, bands, filling defects, enlarged bronchial arteries, and mosaic perfusion. When high-quality multi-detector CT scanners are coupled with experienced readers, CT pulmonary angiography can have high diagnostic accuracy for CTEPH.****Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) with conventional two or three-planar imaging is used in most centers to confirm CTEPH diagnosis and assess operability for endarterectomy or balloon pulmonary angioplasty.

**6. Echocardiogram:**Transthoracic echocardiography remains the single most important noninvasive assessment tool for PH. However, echocardiographic assessment should only be used to estimate the probability of PH, and an RHC****is needed for confirmation of diagnosis as well as to guide therapy. Based on the data obtained from normal adults, the ESC/ERS guidelines came up with the following criteria that can be used to assign a low, intermediate, or high probability of PH. Tables 3 and 4 provide information about echocardiographic probability and signs suggestive of PH, respectively.

**Table 3:****Echocardiographic probability of PH**

**Table 4:****Signs on echocardiography suggestive of PH**

PA>AR  diameter

PA diameter >25mm

**AR:**aortic root;**IVC:**inferior vena cava;**LV:**left ventricle;**LVEI:**left ventricular eccentricity index;**PA:**pulmonary artery;**RV:**right ventricle;**RVOT AT:**right ventricular outflow tract acceleration time;**sPAP:**systolic pulmonary artery pressure;**TAPSE:**tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion;**TRV:**tricuspid regurgitation velocity

In patients with a high probability of PH on echocardiography with or without risk factors for PAH or CTEPH, an RHC should be done. In patients with risk factors for PAH/CTEPH and a low probability of PH on echocardiography, follow-up imaging should be considered. In similar patients with a medium probability of pulmonary hypertension, an RHC should be considered. In patients without risk factors for PAH or CTEPH and a low probability of PH on echocardiography, an alternative diagnosis should be considered, while in those with medium probability, an alternative diagnosis or further investigations can be considered.

Apart from assessing the probability of PH, echocardiography can also help detect the cause of PH, including congenital heart disease, valvular heart disease, as well as left-sided heart dysfunction.

**7. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET):**In patients with symptoms induced by exercise, CPET is an important tool to assess the underlying cause. In patients with PAH, a low end-tidal partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PETCO2), high ventilatory equivalent for carbon dioxide (VE/VECO2), low oxygen pulse (VO2/HR), and low peak oxygen uptake (VO2) is typically seen.****In patients with systemic sclerosis, a normal peak VO2 can exclude the diagnosis of PAH.

**8. Ventilation/perfusion scanning (V/Q):**In patients with PH, a V/Q scan should be performed to rule out CTEPH, and it remains the preferred modality since a normal scan can exclude CTEPH with a sensitivity of 90-100% and a specificity of 94-100%.****With recent advances in computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and single photon emission CT (SPECT), the gap is narrowing between V/Q scans and these other modalities. The V/Q SPECT is superior to planar V/Q scan and should be the preferred modality if available.

**9. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI)**: This is an incredibly powerful tool that accurately assesses the function of the atria and ventricles as well as their morphology. It can also measure blood flow through the vena cava, PA, and aorta, allowing for the quantification of stroke volume. However, there is no reliable method to estimate pulmonary artery pressures**.**The cost and availability are huge barriers to using cMRI, which is sensitive in detecting early PH.

**10. Abdominal ultrasound:**The major reason to obtain an abdominal ultrasound is to detect liver abnormalities and/or portal hypertension. As pulmonary hypertension progresses, secondary damage to the liver and kidneys may occur, and this imaging modality will help in assessing the extent of the damage.

**11. Genetic testing and counseling:**A trained PAH provider or geneticist should counsel patients with familial PAH, IPAH, HPAH, anorexigenic-associated PAH, pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, and pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis that the family members could carry a mutation that increases their risk of PAH.

**12. Right heart catheterization (RHC)**: To confirm the diagnosis of PH, an RHC is mandatory. This should ideally be done at an expert center which tends to have low morbidity/mortality rates as well as the technical expertise to obtain high-quality data.****The procedure can yield enormous data, including right and left-sided filling pressures, PA pressure, PAWP, PVR, and CO. A few nuances regarding RHC measurements

- External pressure transducers must be zeroed at the level of the left atrium.

- PAWP should be measured at the end of normal expiration.

- Cardiac output should be measured using the thermodilution method in triplicate. Thermodilution may be inaccurate in patients with intracardiac shunts, and direct Fick estimation may be needed.

Another component of RHC is vasoreactivity testing which should only be done in patients with IPAH, HPAP, and drug-induced IPAH**.**Inhaled nitric oxide at 10-20 parts per million is usually preferred, but intravenous epoprostenol, intravenous adenosine, or inhaled iloprost can also be used. If there is a reduction in mPAP****≥10 mmHg to the point where the absolute mPAP ≤40 mmHg with either unchanged or increased CO, it is considered a positive test. Patients who test positive are suitable for high-dose calcium channel blocker treatments.

Other maneuvers, such as fluid challenge, can be used to discriminate IPAH from left ventricular diastolic dysfunction, but this needs to be further studied before it becomes the standard of care.****In patients with clinical risk factors for coronary artery disease or echocardiographic signs of left heart systolic/diastolic dysfunction, a left heart catheterization should also be performed.

Contraindications to RHC include a recently implanted pacemaker (<1 month), known right atrial/ventricular thrombus, mechanical right heart valve, tricuspid valve clip, and acute infection. The most feared complication of the procedure is the rupture of the PA.