Management of IIC patterns incorporates two broad considerations, the first of which focuses on whether the pattern truly reflects an ictal process consistent with non-convulsive status epilepticus, and the second of which focuses on treatable and reversible causes of these rhythmic or periodic patterns. As with all potentially life-threatening conditions, vital signs and airway should be assessed, and a low threshold for intubation, mechanical ventilation, and vasopressor support should be considered if there is a concern for hemodynamic instability or airway compromise.

Head imaging may be indicated, mainly if there are focal findings, although this is often acquired before the connection of continuous video EEG. In addition, blood glucose, CBC, CMP, toxicology screen, and antiseizure medication drug levels (if indicated) should be obtained. Not all patients with IIC patterns require hemodynamic or respiratory support, and some patients with severe epilepsy syndromes, particularly those with static encephalopathy, may exhibit the persistence of an IIC EEG pattern at their clinical baseline.

Although several algorithms have been posited to assist with clinical decision-making, there is no evidence-based treatment algorithm. The decision to administer antiseizure medications should be made in the context of the patient’s clinical trajectory and underlying comorbidities.

A benzodiazepine with rapid onset, such as intramuscular midazolam, intravenous lorazepam, or intravenous diazepam, can be considered a first-line treatment. Alternatively, the introduction of a nonsedating antiseizure medication that can be rapidly loaded intravenously, such as levetiracetam or valproic acid, may be used.

Doses should be adequate to decisively answer the question as to whether the pattern is ictal and may require mirroring doses used in the American Epilepsy Society convulsive status epilepticus algorithm.