# Introduction

The abducens nuclei appear as paired nuclei, located within the pons at the pontomedullary junction of the brainstem, comprised primarily of motor neurons and interneurons.

# Structure and Function

The paired abducens nuclei are in the medial and dorsal brainstem within the pons at the level of the pontomedullary junction, immediately lateral to the medial longitudinal fasciculus.

# Embryology

As early as 20 weeks gestation, the abducens nucleus is identifiable as a mass of cells located lateral to the facial nerve genu and medial to the medial vestibular nucleus in an area that will later become the mature pons.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The blood supply of the abducens nucleus is from the paramedian branches of the basilar artery.

# Nerves

The abducens nucleus consists of motor neurons, interneurons, and a small percentage of neurons projecting to the cerebellar flocculus. Signaling pathways through the nucleus allow for gaze holding and conjugate horizontal gaze during the vestibulo-ocular reflex and for the generation of saccades.

Motor nerve fibers course ventrally through the pons after exiting the abducens nucleus and form the abducens nerve fascicle.

The abducens nucleus plays a significant role in coordinating the conjugate gaze, and the generation of rapid saccades conjugate eye movements that allow the center of gaze to shift from one part of the visual field to another.

Different afferent inputs are involved in the control of the twitch and non-twitch muscle fibers of the lateral rectus muscle.

During the horizontal vestibulo-ocular reflex, axons of second-order neurons in the medial vestibular nuclei (MVN) transmit velocity commands to excite the contralateral abducens nucleus and coordinate eye movement with head movement.

# Muscles

The abducens nucleus sends abducens nerve fibers to innervate the lateral rectus muscle directly. More recent work by the group at UCLA suggests that the lateral rectus muscle has superior and inferior compartments, innervated by superior and inferior divisions of the abducens nerve.

# Physiologic Variants

A hypothesis exists that variations in abducens nerve morphology may result from aberrant growth from the abducens nucleus.

# Clinical Significance

Damage to the abducens nuclei can occur from brainstem trauma, infiltration, ischemia, inflammation, compression, demyelination, or metabolic insult.

Abducens nerve paresis may serve as a non-localizing sign of increased intracranial pressure due to the long subarachnoid course of the nerve between the brainstem and clivus, where it can get stretched at the sharp edge of the petrous bone or compressed between the pons and the basilar artery.

Paresis of the abducens nerve produces an isolated ipsilateral abduction deficit. However, because of the intranuclear connections, lesions that damage the abducens nucleus produce a conjugate gaze palsy toward the side of the lesion, rather than just an ipsilateral abduction weakness that would occur from isolated damage to the abducens nerve.

In many cases of injury to the abducens nuclei or fascicles, an ipsilateral facial nerve palsy will also be present, since the genu of the facial nerve fascicle passes around the abducens nucleus before exiting the brainstem.

The one-and-a-half syndrome consists of an ipsilateral horizontal gaze palsy combined with an ipsilateral internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO).

Congenital absence or hypoplasia of the abducens nucleus may occur with Mobius syndrome and Duane retraction syndrome.

Electromyography (EMG) may assist in distinguishing nuclear or infranuclear involvement from other causes of abduction defect due to a pathology of the lateral rectus muscle.