Sebum production, together with sweat production, is highly androgen-sensitive; the activity and size of sebaceous glands are different according to age and circulating hormone levels. The number of sebaceous gland units remains approximately the same throughout life, but their metabolic rate differs during different life stages. Sebocytes contain androgen-metabolizing enzymes (5-alpha-reductase type I, 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II) which metabolize weak circulating androgens into potent androgens; a typical conversion is dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate into dihydrotestosterone. The latter binding to androgen-specific receptors of the sebocytes increases their size and metabolic rate. Scalp and face are areas where the 5-alpha-reductase has the highest activity in conversion towards testosterone and dihydrotestosterone, stimulating sebaceous gland proliferation. The opposite effect occurred for estrogens, which decrease sebaceous gland activity.

Although SGH etiology has shown links to both intrinsic and extrinsic factors, the principal genetic changes remain unknown. Leopold et al. support the hypothesis that mutations in the EGFR-RASMAPK pathway play an important role in the pathogenesis of SGH.

Sebaceous hyperplasia occasionally occurs in areas of the body without UV exposure, including the buccal mucosa, vulva, and areolae; otherwise, UV rays are considered as a cofactor.

Muir–Torre syndrome (MTS), described by Muir et al. in 1967 and Torre in 1968, is characterized by the presence of both sebaceous neoplasms and visceral malignancies.

The presence of germ-line mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes affects the proteins MLH1 or MSH2 and the microsatellite instability complex. About 35% of the cases are microsatellite stable, some associated with biallelic inactivation of MYH. Loss of the mismatch repair complex can be demonstrated by immunohistochemistry against MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. Loss of MSH2 and MSH6 staining is the most common pattern (63% of cases). Loss of the proteins MLH1 and PMS2 accounts for 19% of cases, while MSH6 loss accounts for the other 15% of cases. It is crucial to consider the cost-effectiveness of the test and its ethical implications. Also, identification of somatic mutation is more important than finding a germ-line mutation in individual lesions, because germ-line mutations can occur within lesions, without patients having MTS.