Adnexal involvement in HIV-infected persons may include herpes zoster ophthalmicus (HZO), Kaposi sarcoma, molluscum contagiosum, and conjunctival microvasculopathy. HZO is a vesiculobullous dermatitis in the course of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve caused by the Varicella zoster virus (VZV). It is seen in 5% to 15% of HIV patients and may be associated with a simultaneous occurrence of keratitis, scleritis, uveitis, retinitis, or encephalitis. Kaposi sarcoma is a highly-vascularized, mesenchymal tumor and may present as painless, violaceous lesions on the eyelid skin or conjunctiva. Molluscum contagiosum is a dermatitis caused by a poxvirus and characterized by multiple, small, painless umbilicated lesions on the eyelid skin. Seventy percent to 80% of HIV patients may present with conjunctival microvasculopathy, characterized by segmental dilatation and narrowing of blood vessels, comma-shaped vascular segments, and sludging of blood column. The cause is thought to be either immune complex deposition, increased plasma viscosity or invasion of vascular endothelium by HIV and is found to correlate with retinal microangiopathy.

Anterior segment involvement in HIV includes keratoconjunctivitis sicca, keratitis, and iridocyclitis. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or dry eyes, are seen in approximately 20% of HIV patients and are thought to be an HIV-mediated inflammatory destruction of lacrimal glands. Keratitis in HIV is rare, seen in less than 5% of cases, but can lead to loss of vision. Herpes simplex virus and varicella-zoster virus are the most common causes. They may be recurrent and resistant to treatment. Microsporidia are protozoa which can cause a punctuate epithelial keratopathy. Bacterial and fungal keratitis also may be seen. Iridocyclitis is fairly common in HIV; mild iridocyclitis may be seen in association with VZV or CMV retinitis and severe iridocyclitis in association with toxoplasmosis, syphilis, tuberculosis, and bacterial or fungal retinitis. Medications, like Rifabutin and Cidofovir, prescribed for HIV patients also may cause iridocyclitis. Clinical examination in cases of iridocyclitis may reveal KPs, cells in AC,  patches of iris necrosis, posterior synechiae, and hypopyon.

Posterior segment involvement in HIV is quite common and can cause visual loss. They include Retinal microangiopathy, CMV retinitis, VZV retinitis, toxoplasma retinchoroiditis, and bacterial and fungal retinitis.

Neurophthalmic manifestations are seen in 10% to 15 % of patients with HIV and include papilloedema, cranial nerve palsies, ocular motility disorders, and visual field defects. Cryptococcal meningitis, CNS lymphoma, neurosyphilis, and toxoplasmosis may cause these symptoms.

Orbital involvement is rare in HIV and includes orbital lymphoma and orbital cellulitis, usually caused by Aspergillus.

Ocular toxicities may develop in patients receiving medications for HIV or opportunistic infections. These include uveitis with Cidofovir and Rifabutin, retinal pigment epithelial abnormalities with high dose Didanosine, corneal epithelial inclusions with intravenous Cidofovir or Acyclovir, and corneal subepithelial deposits with Atovaquone. Patients with CMV retinitis on HAART may suffer from a condition called immune recovery uveitis which causes diminution of vision and is characterized by cataract, vitritis, macular edema, optic disc edema, and epiretinal membrane.

Ocular manifestations of HIV are different from that of adults. Children have a lower incidence of CMV retinitis, but they have a higher incidence of Keratitis sicca and ocular toxoplasmosis and also are at a risk of neurodevelopmental delay. A fetal AIDS-associated embryopathy also has been characterized by the downward obliquity of eyes, hypertelorism, prominent palpebral fissures, and blue sclera.