Osteoporosis is a major public health problem affecting millions of elderly individuals. Besides causing fractures, the disorder leads to severe psychosocial and financial consequences for the patient. The condition has many risk factors and is best managed by an interprofessional team of healthcare workers.

Patient education is vital as many are unaware of the serious consequences of the disorder. Early prevention can help reduce the high morbidity. Patients should be urged to modify their lifestyle and remain compliant with the medications prescribed. In addition, the patient should be urged to quit smoking and abstain from alcohol. The dietitian should educate the patient on a calcium-rich diet and the need to take vitamin D supplements. Enrollment in an exercise program is also recommended. The pharmacist should assist the team by educating the patient about the benefits of bisphosphonates and their adverse effects. Women over the age of 65 should be urged to have a bone density scan.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes in patients with osteoporosis are guarded. Close to 250,000 hip fractures occur each year due to osteoporosis, and once admitted, there is a mortality rate exceeding 20%. Men with a hip fracture, in general, have much higher mortality than women. Even after recovery, many patients lose their independence, and close to 30% require nursing home care. Full recovery rarely occurs, and the overall quality of life is poor. Many patients develop secondary complications like pressure sores, deep vein thrombosis, and nosocomial infections.