If left untreated, odontogenic infections that are easily treated as an outpatient with minimal intervention can progress to more serious infections requiring admission, invasive procedures, and moderate to severe morbidity.

**Deep Space Neck Infections**

Infections of the upper and lower jaws can quickly become cellulitis and abscesses of the surrounding soft tissues in the masticator and submandibular spaces, respectively.

**Osteomyelitis**

The proximity of teeth to bone permits frequent, low-grade infection of the alveolus and other portions of the upper and lower jaw bones, known as acute osteomyelitis. These infections often resolve and permit bony regrowth when recognized and treated promptly. However, delayed treatment, poor nutrition, poor oral hygiene, and tobacco use can promote the development of chronic osteomyelitis. The presentation of chronic osteomyelitis is typically insidious, longstanding jaw pain and can include fistula formation, paresthesia from nerve involvement, or pathologic fracture.

CT scan can identify sequestration of infected bone, osteolysis, and areas of frank necrosis. Treatment consists of long-term culture-directed antibiotic therapy with debridement of necrotic bone. In severe cases, reconstruction with bone grafts or free tissue transfer may be necessary.

**Emergencies Secondary to Odontogenic Infections**

Severe sequelae of dental infections are uncommon but require swift action by an interprofessional team. The most common emergent sequela of odontogenic infections is airway compromise, either from Ludwig’s angina or a variant thereof. Prompt recognition of respiratory distress and the level of airway obstruction by the emergency department can appropriately triage the patient and initiate aggressive and/or conservative strategies as appropriate.

There are many long-acting strategies to improve obstruction. Surveillance with continuous pulse oximetry, telemetry, and high-acuity nursing is critical. Securing intravenous access is imperative as these patients may require much intravenous fluid resuscitation and medication. Some patients may require immediate supplemental oxygen, and this should be readily available.

Intravenous administration of antibiotics and corticosteroids can improve airway edema and obstruction, but these medications require significant time to take effect.

Different levels of obstruction can be temporized readily with conservative measures; placement of a nasopharyngeal airway or (in the obtunded patient) an oropharyngeal airway can alleviate tongue base obstruction. Obstruction secondary to parapharyngeal or retropharyngeal spread may not be effectively treated by these methods.

Based on the overall clinical picture, it may be necessary to definitively secure the airway by intubation or by surgical intervention. Most patients with severe enough obstruction to cause respiratory distress will not be able to be intubated with direct laryngoscopy or video-assisted indirect laryngoscopy.

Rarely, odontogenic infections can progress to necrotizing soft tissue infections such as necrotizing fasciitis. As with any anatomic site, this is a true surgical emergency, and rapid airway assessment and surgical debridement should be performed. Necrotizing fasciitis is often caused by Group A Streptococcal species, but other anaerobic bacteria and oral flora have been implicated.