Standard radiographs remain the most important and frequently used modality in clinical imaging due to the relatively low radiation dose to the patient, low cost, universal availability, and ability to perform portable exams, thereby decreasing the risk to patients who are not easily transported to radiology. Imaging of the chest is helpful in the diagnosis of various entities such as atelectasis, consolidation seen in pneumonia, pulmonary edema and hemorrhage, and primary lung malignancies or metastatic disease.

Although the role of standard radiographs is limited in abdominal imaging, abdominal radiographs can evaluate for free air, small bowel obstruction, stool burden, and abnormal calcifications(such as in the setting of obstructing ureteroliths and gallstones).

Perhaps the most important role of radiographs in the clinical setting is its role in musculoskeletal imaging. Standard radiographs are used to evaluate for arthritis (degenerative and inflammatory processes), bone tumors (lytic and sclerotic primary and metastatic disease), infection, and fractures. Radiography also plays an important role in mammography with its use in screening and evaluation for breast cancer. The role of fluoroscopy in interventional radiology plays an important role in the evaluation of various vascular structures (both arterial and venous) as well as the biliary system, and various cavities and spaces of the human body using contrast agents. Fluoroscopy is also used for image-guided injections of the musculoskeletal system (therapeutic and diagnostic joint injections).

Although CTs have gained a strong role in clinical imaging, standard radiographs remain the mainstay in pediatric imaging due to their comparatively lower radiation dose. Radiographs are used in the evaluation of congenital malformations of various organs (and their respective complications) to include the heart, lungs, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary systems. The clinical uses of radiography in musculoskeletal imaging in pediatric patients mirror those of adults, with important applications in pediatric-specific pathologic entities such as hip dysplasia, child abuse, and Salter-Harris fractures.