The diagnosis of pemphigus vegetans is made based on clinical features, histologic examination, and identification of autoantibodies.  There are several methods to evaluate and identify autoantibodies.

Immunoblot or ELISA analysis of serum:

- Blood tests can identify patients with desmoglein 3 autoantibodies in their serum with a specificity and sensitivity of 98 to 100%, so nearly all patients with pemphigus will have detectable desmoglein 3 reactivity, and unaffected individuals will not.

Direct Immunofluorescence (DIF):

- Similar to pemphigus vulgaris, the direct immunofluorescence findings in pemphigus vegetans show intercellular deposition of IgG and C3 within the intraepidermal space and on the surface of keratinocytes. IgG4 and IgG1 are the predominant types of IgG involved. This deposition creates a characteristic “fishnet” or “chicken wire” pattern.

- 
              
- For optimal DIF evaluation, a punch biopsy or deep shave from normal-appearing peri-lesional skin should be submitted in Michel’s solution (or fixative appropriate for DIF).

Serum immunoglobulins: IgG and IgA titers are often correlated with disease activity and can be used to follow therapeutic response.

Less commonly used methods of evaluation include:

- Indirect immunofluorescence (IIF), a semi-quantitative method for identifying autoantibodies.

- Electron microscopy: Keratinocytes show a reduction of tonofilaments. Only rarely are there desmosomes identified. The basement membrane often appears damaged as a result of inflammatory infiltrate.

Additional methods for evaluation:

- Nikolsky Sign: Side pressure on blister leads to blister extension. Often positive; however, this test is non-specific and seen in several blistering skin diseases.

- Tzanck Test: Cutaneous cytology is useful to rule out pemphigus; however, the diagnosis should be by clinical exam, histopathology, and antibody identification. The reported sensitivity and specificity of a Tzanck smear is 85.0% and 83.33% for pemphigus.

- Complete Blood Count with Differential: May show peripheral eosinophilia.