The diagnosis of ARDS is based on the following criteria: acute onset, bilateral lung infiltrates on chest radiography of a non-cardiac origin, and a PaO/FiO ratio of less than 300 mmHg. It is further sub-classified into mild (PaO2/FiO2 200 to 300 mmHg), moderate (PaO2/FiO2 100 to 200 mmHg), and severe (PaO2/FiO2 less than 100 mmHg) subtypes. Mortality and ventilator-free days increase with severity. A CT scan of the chest may be required in pneumothorax cases, pleural effusions, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, or barotrauma to properly identify infiltrates as pulmonic in location.

Assessment of left ventricular function may be required to differentiate from or quantify the contribution of congestive heart failure to the overall clinical picture. This assessment can be achieved via invasive methods, such as pulmonary artery catheter measurements, or non-invasively, such as cardiac echocardiography or thoracic bioimpedance, or pulse contour analysis. However, using pulmonary artery catheters (PAC) is controversial and should be avoided if clinically possible. Noninvasive assessment measures should be exhausted first; the use of PAC is discouraged by the new definition. Using bronchoscopy may be required to assess pulmonary infections and obtain material for culture.

Other laboratory and/or radiographic tests will be guided by the underlying disease process, which has triggered the inflammatory process that has led to the development of ARDS. Also, laboratory tests will be needed as patients with ARDS are highly likely to develop or be affected by associated multi-organ failure, including but not limited to renal, hepatic, and hematopoietic failures. Regularly obtaining complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel, serum magnesium, serum ionized calcium, phosphorus levels, blood lactate level, coagulation panel, troponin, cardiac enzymes, and CKMB are recommended if clinically indicated.