**Duffy Antigens and Malaria:**The Duffy status plays a pivotal role in global survival from plasmodial infections.

The two most common Plasmodia globally are P. vivax and P. falciparum. P. falciparum manifestations are more severe, and the clinical outcomes are more baleful. P. vivax has more temperature tolerance and can adapt to a dormant (hypnozoite) form, ensuring relapses. Initially, patients are bitten by the Anopheles mosquito, after which sporozoites in the skin enter the circulation and eventually the liver. Within the liver, the sporozoites replicate into merozoites that enter the circulation and infect red blood cells, causing their lysis and renewing the infectious cycle again.  A dormant hypnozoite state can exist in the liver for weeks to months.

The Duffy blood group antigens are the portals by which the erythrocytes are infected. Primaquine and 8-Aminoquineline are useful antimalarials that can clear the hypnozoites and prevent relapses. However, they also cause hemolysis in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. DARC is considered an essential GPCR to enter malarial parasites, Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium knowlesi, in the red blood cells. The ligand-receptor interactions mediate the invasion of the red cell by Plasmodium between merozoites and host erythrocytes. The Duffy binding protein (DBP) on the merozoite surface interacts with DARC over the surface of the reticulocyte triggering the formation of a junction for parasitic invasion.

In the West African population, many peoples were resistant to Plasmodium vivax infection due to the expression of the Fy(a-b-) phenotype on red cells. This phenotype in the African population results from the point mutation in the GATA promoter region at the FY*B gene at (–67, T to C), which disrupts the binding site for the GATA-1 erythroid transcription factor. The ligand-receptor interactions mediate the invasion of plasmodia between merozoites and host erythrocytes.

The Duffy binding protein (DBP) on the merozoite surface interacts with DARC over the surface of the reticulocyte triggering the formation of a junction for parasitic invasion. The intraerythrocytic killing of malarial parasites by platelet factor-4 (PF4) is demonstrated in vitro in erythrocytes expressing DARC on their surface, leading to accumulation of PF4 by endocytosis which results in lysis of parasitic digestive vacuoles. The protective effect does not cover the P. falciparum parasites, which can infect all phenotypic variants of the Duffy blood group system.

Epidemiologically, the absence of the Duffy system (AKA "Duffy- negative or -null; Fy (a-b-) has been seen in many nations across the continents.Plasmodium vivax infection.  However, the prevalence of P. vivax infections in Duffy negative populations is still not zero.

There are likely Duffy-independent pathways that can secondarily promote infection. These alternatives are thought to include Transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1 or CD71) and CD98.  The lack of Duffy blood group antigens obstructs the invasion of Plasmodium vivax.  The absence of Duffy expression is believed to be a consequence of a point mutation (c.1-67, T>C; rs2814778) in the GATA-1 transcription binding site of the DACR gene promoter. This results in the "Duffy-null," the Duffy-negative variant.

A multitude of clinical studies exist, many under the auspices of the World Health Organization, to develop malarial vaccines. Research is presently underway to develop a malarial vaccine based on the Duffy system.

A vaccine has been created against region 2 of the Plasmodium vivax Duffy-binding protein (PvDBP2).  It has a recombinant format with a glucopyranosyl lipid adjuvant-stable emulsion (GLA-SE). The vaccine elicited antigen-specific binding -inhibitory antibodies.  The antibodies also have activity against a spectrum of PvDBP alleles. In a small phase I trial where malaria naive patients received a three-dose protocol, it was revealed that all patients developed inhibitory antibodies that were largely persistent. The vaccine, known as PvDBP2/GLA-SE, is safe and well-tolerated.

**Duffy Antigens and HIV:**The Duffy system is believed to affect HIV infections.

Similarly, HIV-1 adsorbs onto the DARC on erythrocyte surfaces and is transported to its target cells (CD4+/CCR5+ T-lymphocytes). With the transport, the virus still retains its viability.

Some clinical research has suggested that African-Americans harboring a Duffy-null genotype had malarial resistance and an HIV-survival advantage compared to the general population.

**Duffy Antigens and COVID:**The Duffy system is thought to play a role in the presence and severity of COVID infections.

In normal situations, the Duffy-null accounts for benign ethnic neutropenia amongst African-Americans, but it also exerts proinflammatory effects that can accentuate leukocyte migration into the lung.  With no Duffy system to hold or modulate cytokine activity, the effects of cytokines appear more pronounced than in a Duffy-positive state. This was the reason to suspect that Duffy-null states would promote COVID-19 pneumonia and accentuate the severity of the acute lung injury.  Relative to other patients, erythroid Duffy-null patients had a 17% higher risk of mortality as well as fewer ventilator-free and organ failure-free days.

**Duffy Antigens and Hematopoiesis:**Duffy antigen expression is associated with the hematopoiesis process. The hematopoietic stem cells and red cell precursors in bone marrow express DARC. Erythrocyte Fy dampens leukocyte activation. Endothelial (vascular) Fy concentrates chemokines, thereby promoting leukocyte diapedesis to and through the vessel border towards the inflammatory site. Phenotypically altered neutrophils (benign ethnic neutropenia with persistently lower leucocyte) are observed in otherwise healthy Africans without DARC on hematopoietic cells.

The Duffy negative or null trait does not affect neutrophil function.

**Role of DARC in organ transplantation:**In a mouse model study, it is observed that mice with DARC negative showed enhanced chemokine production and inflammatory response in the absence of DARC, which leads to immunological and non-immunological injuries due to excess leucocyte recruitment.

The UNOS database further confirms this in African Americans, who had more deleterious effects on delayed graft function than Caucasians due to the absence of DARC on renal tissues.

**DARC in Atherosclerosis;**ACKR1 has a role in the inflammatory process and atherosclerosis. ACKR1 on the Red cells controls inflammation, leukocyte migration, and endothelial function. ACKR1 presented CXCL2 enables unidirectional neutrophil diapedesis.

Recent studies have demonstrated the role of a high-fat diet in inducing endothelial dysfunction due to increased CCL2 bound with the red cells expressing ACKR1, which promotes interaction between endothelial cells and leukocytes which may favor in development of atherosclerosis plaque. Wan et al. showed that mice with absent ACKR1 after gene knockout had reduced atherosclerotic plaque size in an experimental animal model.