**Risk Factors**

Following are the risk factors that are considered causes of deep venous thrombosis:

- Reduced blood flow: Immobility (bed rest, general anesthesia, operations, stroke, long flights)

- Increased venous pressure: Mechanical compression or functional impairment leading to reduced flow in the veins (neoplasm, pregnancy, stenosis, or congenital anomaly which increases outflow resistance)

- Mechanical injury to the vein: Trauma, surgery, peripherally inserted venous catheters, previous DVT, intravenous drug abuse

- Increased blood viscosity: Polycythaemia rubra vera, thrombocytosis, dehydration

- Anatomic variations in venous anatomy can contribute to thrombosis.

**Increased Risk of Coagulation**

- Genetic deficiencies: Anticoagulation proteins C and S, antithrombin III deficiency, factor V Leiden mutation

- Acquired: Cancer, sepsis, myocardial infarction, heart failure, vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus anticoagulant, Inflammatory bowel disease, nephrotic syndrome, burns, oral estrogens, smoking, hypertension, diabetes

**Constitutional Factors**

Obesity, pregnancy, the advanced age of older than 60, surgery, critical care admission, dehydration, and cancer are the established causalities of DVT and VTE.

Obesity is associated with a hypercoagulability status via two mechanisms, 1. increased fibrinogen levels that may even surpass twofold the normal value, and 2. slower venous circulation flow in the infra diaphragmatic and especially in the lower limbs.

Potential risk factors of deep vein thrombosis might be categorized according to the transient, persistent or unprovoked criteria. Accordingly, transient risk factors are as follows; 1. surgery with general anesthetics, 2. hospitalization, 3. cesarean section, 4. hormone replacement therapy, 5. pregnancy and peripartum period, 6. lower extremity injury with limited mobility for more than 72 hours.

It should be noted that general anesthesia for longer than 30 minutes and hospitalization for longer than 72 hours is considered the transient risk factors of DVT.

However, active cancers and specific medical conditions that increase the risk of venous thromboembolism are categorized as persistent risk factors. Systemic lupus erythematosus and inflammatory bowel disease are among the predisposing medical conditions.

Any further etiological risk factors not categorized among either transient or persistent subgroups should be labeled as unprovoked venous thromboembolism. (VTE)