Patients with suspected active tuberculosis should be isolated with airborne precautions, requiring negative pressure room either through a high-efficiency particulate air filter or by exhausting the air outside. Any person entering the room should be wearing high-efficiency airborne masks (Eg N-95) to filter the tubercle bacillus. Isolation should continue until collected sputum smears are negative for three consecutive determinations, usually after approximately 2 to 4 weeks of treatment. Unfortunately, these measures are neither practical nor possible in developing countries where tuberculosis is a public health problem.

The treatment of an active tuberculosis infection requires a combination of drugs and includes intensive phase and the continuation phase. Monotherapy should never be used for the active disease to reduce the risk of the mycobacterium developing antibiotic resistance. First-line medications are the most commonly used regimens for active tuberculosis, including:

- Isoniazid: Used in combination with vitamin B6 to prevent neuropathies.

- Rifamycin: Patients should have baseline and follow-up liver function tests done as rifamycin is hepatotoxic.

- Ethambutol: Avoided in children whose visual acuity cannot be determined and monitored, as ethambutol can cause optic neuritis.

- Pyrazinamide: Patients should have periodic liver function tests, chest X-rays, serum uric acids, and sputum cultures done at 2 to 3 months and the completion of treatment.

The intensive phase includes a four-medication combination (isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide) is administered for two months, followed by a continuation phase consisting of a combination of isoniazid and rifampin for four months.

Directly observed therapy is recommended for patients receiving treatment. With this type of therapy, patients on the above regimens could be switched to 2 to 3 times per week dosing after completing an initial two weeks of daily dosing. Those taking medication two times per week must not miss any doses. Daily therapy should be prescribed for patients who are on self-administered medication.

Patients diagnosed with active tuberculosis should have sputum analysis done for M. tuberculosis every week until sputum conversion is documented.

Second-line medications include:

- Injectable Aminoglycoside: Streptomycin, amikacin, and kanamycin.

- Injectable polypeptides: Viomycin and capreomycin

- Fluoroquinolones: Levofloxacin, gatifloxacin, ofloxacin, and moxifloxacin

- Others: Para-aminosalicylic acid, ethionamide, cycloserine, prothionamide, terizidone, linezolid, and thioacetazone.

Third-line anti-tuberculosis medications are drugs with variable but unproven efficacy against the disease. They are the last resort for total drug-resistant tuberculosis infections and include:

- Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid

- Clarithromycin

- Clofazimine

- Linezolid

- Imipenem/cilastatin

Drug resistance

- Monoresistant - Resistance to anyone TB treatment

- Poly-resistant - Resistance to two TB drugs (but not both isoniazid and rifampin)

- Multidrug resistance - Resistant to isoniazid and rifampin

- Extensively drug-resistant - Resistant to isoniazid and rifampin, plus resistance to any fluoroquinolone and 1 of the 3 injectable second-line drugs

Any patient that grows resistant MTB should be referred to an infectious disease expert. Multiple-drug-resistant tuberculosis infections are becoming increasingly common. A high-dose combination of the first-line and second-line drugs is being used to treat this condition.