Spinal dysraphism results from abnormal cell migration and differentiation of the neural tube during the first trimester of pregnancy. The formation of the neural tube involves primary neurulation and a secondary neurulation process. During primary neurulation, the neuroectoderm folds with the last caudal portion closing approximately on day 27. At the same time, the mesoderm migrates and forms the posterior vertebral elements, and the ectoderm migrates, forming the skin.

The pathophysiology of myelomeningocele is a failed closure of neural tube during primary neurulation producing a cystic mass of neuronal elements including dural, arachnoid, spinal cord, nerve roots, cerebral spinal fluid through the bone and skin defect.

Several types of spinal dysraphisms are found. Spina bifida cystica is a type of spinal dysraphism in which a cyst protrudes through a bone defect of the posterior elements of the spine. The content of the cyst may include dura, arachnoid, spinal cord, and/or spinal nerves and associated spinal fluid. It occurs most commonly in the lumbar or lumbosacral spine. Myelomeningocele, meningocele, myeloschisis are the different types of spina bifida cystica, the former being the most common. Spina bifida occulta is a type of spinal dysraphism in which there is a bony defect in the spine, commonly in the lumbar spine, but usually, there is no visible skin anomaly. It is found in a significant number of healthy adults and is usually identified in imaging studies. Syringomeningocele is a type of spinal dysraphism in which there is a spinal fluid-filled central canal of the spinal cord surrounded by a thin membrane. Syringomyelocele is a spinal dysraphism in which the spinal cord tissue expands with a thin-walled central canal.

Isolated vertebral defects are the most common and least severe form of occult spinal dysraphism. Other examples include neurenteric cysts, split notochord syndrome, split spinal cord malformation, sacral meningeal cysts, spinal lipomas, caudal regression syndrome, dorsal dermal sinus tracts and cysts, and tethered cord syndrome.