The anterior part of the nasal septum consists of a thin cartilaginous layer with closely adherent mucosa and perichondrium. The nasal septum is about 3-4 mm thick and derives its blood supply from the anterior and posterior ethmoid arteries and the sphenopalatine artery. The area known as Kiesselbach plexus (little area) is found in the anterior inferior third of the nasal septum, where all the key blood vessels anastomose. When the nasal cartilage is fractured, blood can dissect and form hematoma, which may be bilateral.

The exact mechanism underlying the formation of nasal septal hematoma remains controversial.  Septal cartilage is an avascular structure, 2 mm to 4 mm thick, which receives its nutrients supply from the overlying perichondrium. Physicians hypothesize that trauma results in sharp buckling forces that pull the closely adherent mucoperichondrium from the underlying cartilage. This causes the rupture of submucosal vessels which ultimately causes a collection of blood between the cartilage and the perichondrium. Hematoma thus formed, results in pressure-related ischaemic changes and the subsequent necrosis of the septal cartilage.

If the trauma is severe enough, the septal cartilage gets fractured, and blood sweeps to the opposite side resulting in a bilateral septal hematoma. This situation is more hazardous as it doubles the compromise on the nutrient supply of septal cartilage and hastens the process of cartilage necrosis.

Hematoma acts as an ideal medium for bacterial proliferation and colonization. If left untreated, it gets infected within 72 hours leading to the formation of a septal abscess.