The goals of treatment are to limit atherosclerotic disease progression, prevent or reduce complications including death, and to near-completely eliminate ischemic symptoms with the aim of improving quality of life, and restoring functional capacity. In order to achieve that, three aspects must be addressed: (1) risk-modification, (2) guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT), and (3) revascularization.

**Risk modification**begins with individualized life-style changes such as dietary modification, weight reduction, smoking cessation, and frequent exercise. It is also reasonable to counsel patients to avoid stressors and develop coping mechanisms for depression and anxiety where applicable. Education regarding medication adherence and careful self-monitoring also is vital. Importantly, much attention should be directed towards optimizing hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia management since they can directly affect stable ischemic heart disease outcomes, and increase risk of future events.

**Guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT)**itself can be split into two categories. The first includes therapies that slow down the atherosclerotic disease, decrease future events of myocardial infarction, and longitudinally decrease mortality. They include anti-platelet agents, beta blockers, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone blockers and lipid-lowering drugs. The second category directly addresses symptoms, and attempts to eliminate angina (or angina-equivalent symptoms) through use of nitrates, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, and novel therapies. We will discuss the former category of GDMT first, then go through available anti-anginal therapies, and lastly address revascularization.

**Medical Therapy to Prevent Myocardial Infarction and Death**

Antiplatelet therapy is recommended for secondary prevention in patients with stable ischemic heart disease. The most commonly used agent is aspirin, which irreversibly acetylates platelet cyclooxygenase, and limits thromboxane A2 production thereby decreasing platelet aggregation. Studies have shown that aspirin use following acute coronary syndrome can decrease mortality, and improve outcomes in several trials such as CLARITY-TIMI (which studied patients post-fibrinolysis), and CURRENT OASIS which compared high-dose to low-dose therapy. Consequently, guidelines recommend aspirin 81 to 162 mg daily indefinitely to all patients who can tolerate it.

Controversy remains regarding the use of aspirin for primary prevention in patients at variable risk of coronary CAD. Major recent trials have shown no significant reduction in cardiovascular events, often with an increased risk of bleeding. The ARRIVE trial identified patients at moderate risk who received aspirin for primary prevention, and demonstrated no reduction in the primary outcomes of CV death, MI, unstable angina, stroke or transient ischemic attack. Furthermore, there was an increase in gastrointestinal bleeding (HR = 2.11, CI 95%, 1.36 - 3.28). Similar findings were found in the ASCEND trial, which studied diabetic patients, and the ASPREE trial which followed more than 19,000 patients at least 65 years of age, who were free from CVD or dementia. These findings may suggest that aspirin should not be routinely prescribed for the sole purpose of primary prevention, and that a careful risk-benefit assessment - as pertains to cardiovascular outcomes versus bleeding - needs to be performed before initiation of life-time therapy.

A relative contraindication exists for patients with an NSAIDs allergy and the Samter triad (asthma, nasal polyps, and aspirin sensitivity). In those circumstances, clopidogrel 75 mg daily, which works through irreversibly inhibiting P2Y12 receptors and has demonstrated favorable outcomes in the CAPRIE trial as compared to aspirin, can be used instead. Newer anti-platelet agents such as ticagrelor and prasugrel are not currently recommended for the treatment of stable ischemic heart disease unless patients have had a recent acute coronary event, due to unacceptably elevated risk of bleeding as compared to more traditional therapy in this cohort.

Beta blockers are the only anti-anginal drugs known to prevent infarction and impact mortality in ischemic cardiomyopathy as demonstrated in multiple studies. This is particularly true for patients with reduced LVEF, where trials such as CIBIS II and MERIT-HF showed improved survival. The CAPRICORN trial also studied patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy post myocardial infarction with LVEF less than 35% and showed similar outcomes. Subsequently, current guidelines recommend beta blocker use for at least 3 years after a myocardial infarction and indefinitely for all patients with LVEF of less than 40%, and heart failure symptoms.

The selective use of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone inhibitors is also recommended, and the strongest evidence exists for patients with reduced LVEF as well as those with high risk features. The 1992 survival and ventricular enlargement trial (SAVE), for example, demonstrated decreased mortality with use of captopril in patients with asymptomatic reduced LVEF after an acute myocardial infarction. While the more recent HOPE trial showed improved outcomes with the use of ramipril in patients with established CAD or known atherosclerotic risk factors. However, this is not universal to all patients with stable ischemic heart disease since several studies were unable to demonstrate the same benefits in lower risk populations. As it currently stands, ACE inhibitors are recommended for stable ischemic heart disease patients with reduced LVEF less than 40% and those with high-risk features such as hypertension, diabetes and chronic kidney disease. Angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs) also can be used for similar indications in ACE intolerant patients.

Mineralocorticoid antagonists also were studied post myocardial infarction in the EPHESUS (Eplerenone Post-Acute Myocardial Infarction Heart Failure Efficacy and Survival) trial, where patients with LVEF less than 40% were started on eplerenone and showed decreased cardiovascular mortality. Per current guidelines, spironolactone or eplerenone are recommended in the subset of patients with reduced LVEF after acute myocardial infarction if they have heart failure or DM.

The national recommendations regarding lipid-lowering therapy have generated much controversy in the past several years, but an agreement exists regarding the need for all patients to be on statin therapy if tolerated. The “2013 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Treatment of Blood Cholesterol to Reduce Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Risk in Adults” recommended an intensity-based approach, where all patients with established ASCVD (including SIHD) should be on high-intensity statin therapy, or the highest-intensity therapy tolerated, regardless of LDL target. Newer publications advocate a risk-assessment algorithm, where individual patient risk is assessed, and most patients with stable ischemic heart disease are targeted for an LDL less than 70 (or less than 55 for patients with the highest risk). The “2016 ACC Expert Consensus Decision Pathway on the Role of Non-Statin Therapies for LDL-Cholesterol Lowering in the Management of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk” also advocates the selective use of PCSK9 inhibitors, ezetimibe, bile acid sequestrants, nicotinic acid, and fibrates for patients who are intolerant of or have an inadequate response to statin therapy.

Currently, patients with very high ASCVD risk (those with recurrent events, or one ASCVD event in addition to multiple risk factors) are recommended to maintain an LDL level < 70. If patient are unable to achieve their LDL target goal, then Ezetimibe should be added. If goal target is still not achieved, or if patients are intolerant to statin therapy, then PCSK inhibitors should be initiated.

**Medical Therapy for Relief of Symptoms**

Beta blockers are considered first-line agents, as they are the only anti-anginal medication proven to impact survival. Past the initiation of beta-blocker therapy, the treatment strategy requires escalation of administered dosage or addition of second-line agents until complete or near-complete symptom relief is achieved. If medical therapy fails due to medication intolerance or intractable pain, then revascularization is pursued.

Nitrates are potent vasodilators and cause a combination of venodilation (decreasing preload), arterioral dilation (decreasing afterload), as well as coronary dilation. It is the decreased preload and ventricular wall stress, with resultant decreased oxygen demand that primarily mediates its anti-anginal effects, however. Nitrates are available in sublingual form, which bypasses the first-pass effect and can be used acutely, while more sustained oral or transdermal formulations may be added to beta-blocker therapy for prolonged anti-anginal effect. This requires that a nitrate-free interval of at least 10 to 12 hours be maintained, usually overnight, to prevent tachyphylaxis and diminishing effect.

Calcium channel blockers (CCB) are considered second-line therapy and can be used to augment beta-blocker therapy or as a substitute in patients who are intolerant to them. They are only recommended for uncontrolled ischemic symptoms since they do not affect long-term survival or reduce mortality. Nondihydropyridine CCB agents, such as verapamil and diltiazem, should be used with caution when combined with beta blockers, since that may cause combined negative inotropic and chronotropic effect, with severe hypotension and/or atrioventricular block. This is especially true in patients with reduced systolic function or baseline conduction impairment. Therefore, dihydropyridine agents such as amlodipine are more commonly used in this setting.

Ranolazine, a sodium-channel blocker, is a newer medication that may be used if all the former agents are unsuccessful in controlling chest pain. It may be used in combination with beta-blockers and CCBs. Rarely, alternative therapies such as enhanced external counterpulsation (EECP) or spinal stimulation may be utilized. However, the majority of patients that fail medical therapy would qualify for revascularization, if feasible, to improve symptoms.

**Revascularization**

In stable ischemic heart disease, there are two main aims of revascularization. The first is to improve symptoms and would require that angina be present despite optimal GDMT in a patient with favorable coronary anatomy for revascularization. The second aim is to improve survival, which is reliant on the presence of high risk anatomy often in the setting of high-risk clinical features. In that regard, revascularization is indicated in left-main (or left-main equivalent) disease, three-vessel disease, or two-vessel disease, including proximal left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery stenosis. Similar recommendations do not apply to single-vessel disease or two-vessel disease not including the proximal LAD in the absence of refractory symptoms.

While both CABG and primary cutaneous intervention (PCI) are reasonable for the intent of revascularization; the presence of complex anatomy, LV dysfunction, diabetes mellitus, anticipated low-surgical risk and/or high PCI procedural risk are indications to choose CABG over PCI. The literature evidence showing improved survival has also traditionally favored CABG, particularly where left internal mammary grafts were used to bypass proximal LAD stenosis. Clinically, less complex coronary anatomy in association with ischemic symptoms is often treated with PCI to achieve symptom relief. Several studies, including the landmark COURAGE and BARI 2D trials, failed to show mortality benefit in the latter population however.  Despite benefits of symptom relief, no evidence to date has shown survival benefit for revascularization in single-vessel disease, not including the proximal LAD.