Patients with trichomoniasis are best managed by an interprofessional team. While most patients are initially seen by the primary clinician, the role of the infectious disease expert and gynecologist are invaluable.

If a diagnosis of trichomoniasis is made in urgent care or emergency department, the patient's primary care clinician or obstetrics and gynecology clinician should be notified. This communication is helpful in care coordination and helps ensure a test of cure is completed. Patients diagnosed with trichomoniasis will also need to be tested for other STIs, including HIV. The patient's primary care provider may complete this testing, or the patient may seek testing at an STI clinic.

When completing a pelvic examination to collect vaginal swabs or completing a bimanual examination to determine if pelvic inflammatory disease is a concern, the recommendation is to have a chaperone, preferably a female. Often, in the emergency department, this will be a female nurse or technician. Clinicians should document the chaperone in the patient's health record.

Patient education is vital. The infectious disease nurse should educate the patient on the use of barrier contraception and be compliant with treatment. In addition, the sexual partner must be sought and treated otherwise the cycle of transmission continues. Finally, clinicians should rescreen sexually active women after 12 weeks to ensure a complete cure.

Open communication between the team members is vital to ensure that the patient receives the standard of care treatment and complete cure.