The procedure begins by making an incision in the postauricular sulcus; an incision made popular by Sir William Wilde.

The drill is brought into the field, and a cutting burr is used to mark the boundaries of the mastoidectomy. The boundaries include the tegmen superiorly, the sigmoid sinus posteriorly, the posterior bony external ear canal anteriorly, and the digastric ridge inferiorly. Bone is removed evenly from superficial to deep with the deepest portion of the dissection, both superior and anterior. Saucerization is encouraged to improve visualization and avoid working behind bony ledges. The identification of the lateral semicircular canal provides a landmark to notify the surgeon that the dissection has reached the depth of the facial nerve. The antrum is often identified at the deepest and most anterior part of the dissection. The tegmen can be followed anteriorly to assist with the identification of the antrum. Opening the antrum provides a ventilation pathway between the mastoid and the middle ear.

Cholesteatoma can extend from the middle ear to the mastoid through this area as well. A facial recess may or may not need to be created. The facial recess offers a second ventilation pathway between the mastoid and the middle ear. It also provides access for any middle ear work that needs to be done, such as cholesteatoma dissection, ossicular chain reconstruction, or cochlear implant insertion. The facial recess is a triangular-shaped opening into the middle ear delineated by the facial nerve posteriorly, the chorda tympani anteriorly, and the incus buttress superiorly. There are variations and modifications of the mastoidectomy, but once the lateral mastoid cells have been removed and the proper landmarks have been identified, the drilling can be concluded for a canal-wall-up mastoidectomy. A canal-wall-down procedure removes the posterior bony external auditory canal to create a large common cavity that is accessible in a non-surgical setting.

The wound is typically then closed with absorbable deep sutures to bring the periosteum back together. An additional layer of buried interrupted sutures is placed in the deep dermal layer. Finally, the epidermis can be approximated either by a superficial running layer or by a tissue adhesive. A Glasscock dressing can then be placed over the ear for one to two days.