Initial management of multiple myeloma should involve evaluation for any acute issues that must be stabilized immediately. Some of these may include administration of isotonic saline for volume expansion, calcitonin, and/or bisphosphonates to address severe hypercalcemia. If significant renal dysfunction is noted, medical optimization should be undertaken and possibly nephrology consultation to address fluid status, avoidance of nephrotoxic agents, renal dosage adjustments of necessary medications, and if severe dysfunction, discussion of hemodialysis. Spinal cord compression resulting from vertebral fracture or plasmacytoma can also be seen and is a medical emergency that should be managed aggressively by neurosurgery or orthopedic consultation and possible radiation therapy. In the rare instance that hyperviscosity is diagnosed, plasmapheresis should be completed.

Once stabilized, the patient's treatment plan is driven by risk stratification and transplant eligibility. A patient's disease can fall into one of two categories: high or standard-risk MM. High risk is defined as any of the following as seen on FISH: t(14:16), t(14:20), del17p13, t(4:14), or 1q gain. Standard risk will demonstrate either trisomies, t(11:14) or t(6:14). Transplant eligibility is made on a case-by-case basis, but typically, patients who are over 77 years old, have cirrhosis, have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 3 or 4, or have New York Heart Association class III or IV heart failure are typically deemed transplant ineligible.

Patients who are fit for transplant typically receive induction therapy over 3 or 4 months to decrease the tumor burden. This is followed by peripheral blood stem cell mobilization and harvesting and then an autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT), which improves overall and progression-free survival.

The ideal induction regimen is a nuanced decision, and many individual factors must be considered. In general, and based on the Mayo Stratification for Myeloma and Risk-adapted Therapy (mSMART) consensus opinion, for patients who are deemed high-risk disease and are transplant eligible, induction therapy would typically be started with four cycles of daratumumab, bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone followed by an early ASCT. Although debatable, long-term survival seems to favor an early transplant approach in high-risk disease.

In those patients with standard-risk disease who are transplant eligible, a similar algorithm is followed with a different drug regimen being used. Typically, induction therapy with four cycles of bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone (VRd) is completed, followed by ASCT and then maintenance therapy with lenalidomide until disease progression as tolerability permits.

For high-risk transplant-ineligible patients, there are several options. One approach would be to employ the VRd regimen for 8 to 12 cycles followed by maintenance bortezomib-based therapy. Another option could include daratumumab, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone (DRd) continued until disease progression based on the MAIA trial showing improved progression-free survival and overall survival compared to Lenalidomide and Dexamethasone.

For standard risk transplant-ineligible patients, options include VRd for 8 to 12 cycles followed by lenalidomide maintenance, or DRd continued until disease progression.