The high success rate in corneal transplantation is possible because the cornea is an immune-privileged organ in the human body. The other factors contributing to success are avascularity and lack of lymphatics. The avascularity prevents infiltration by inflammatory cells and immune-responsive cells. In the absence of lymphatics, the foreign antigen presentation is also limited. Moreover, the number of MHC antigens expressed on the other tissues is comparatively less, thus further enhancing immune privilege.

**Graft Rejection**

The specific immunological response of the host cornea to the donor corneal button/tissue is defined as corneal graft rejection. The diagnosis of graft rejection is made only when the graft has remained clear for at least 2 weeks after the corneal transplant. The challenge is to differentiate it from primary graft failure and the other caused by non-immunological graft failures. As per a detailed literature review, the incidence of graft rejection is maximum within the first 18 months and then reduces, although graft rejection has been reported even more than 20 years after the primary transplantation.

**Primary Graft Failure**

It is the presence of corneal edema on the first postoperative day after corneal transplantation. The probable reasons are iatrogenic or surgical trauma, deficiency in storage, transport, or improperly stored tissue, and inherent deficiency in the tissue. As per the recommendations by American Eye Bank Association, the minimal endothelial count for the donor tissue should be 2000 cells/and the storage time should be less than 7 days.