The complementary evaluation should be guided by clinical suspicion. Useful tests include:

**1) Laboratory studies**

- Complete blood count

- Blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine

- Electrolytes (sodium, magnesium, potassium, calcium, phosphorus)

- Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), y-glutamyltransferase (GGT)

- Creatine kinase (CK), myoglobin, and aldolase: CK the most useful blood test but levels may not correlate with the degree of muscle weakness. Myopathies with enhanced regeneration or spared myofibers, such as in antisynthetase syndrome, dermatomyositis, and critical care myopathy, may present with normal CK and selectively elevated aldolase.

- C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate

- Thyroid function tests

- Anti-nuclear antigen (ANA) and myositis associated antibody panel (importantly -Jo1, -PL7, -PL12, -OJ for antisynthetase syndrome; TIF1-gamma, - NXP2, -Mi2, -SAE, - MDA5 for dermatomyositis, - HMG-CoA, -SRP for immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy)

- Urinalysis: positive hemoglobin dipstick without erythrocytes on microscopic evaluation is a sign of myoglobinuria

**2) Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction study (NCS):**

In this context electrodiagnostic testing has many objectives:

- it is useful to exclude alternative diagnoses such as neuromuscular junction or motor neuron disorders.

- it can confirm the myopathic nature of the process if there is an identifiable pattern.

- it helps characterized and stratify the severity of the disease

- it can help to choose the best location to perform a muscle biopsy.

Motor NCS are usually normal unless there is a concomitant neuropathy. Exceptions to this include distal myopathies and critical care myopathy where low compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) with normal latencies and conduction velocities are seen. Sensory NCS are within normal range...Inclusion body myositis is the exception since it can cause sensory abnormalities.

Needle EMG is the most sensitive examination for myopathy. The presence of myotonic discharges and muscle membrane irritability (increased insertional activity, fibrillation potentials, and positive sharp waves) helps to narrow the differential diagnosis as it is generally present in necrotizing myopathies (inflammatory or toxic), myotonic dystrophies and a few metabolic and congenital myopathies. Repetitive stimulation and correlation with exercise may be needed in the special case of channelopathies.

Complex repetitive discharges and decreased insertional activity are signs of a chronic process.

In some metabolic, congenital, endocrine myopathies, electrodiagnostic tests may be normal.

Of note, electrodiagnostic testing is not always needed if there is a strong suspicion of a myopathic disorder (p.e. suggestive clinical features with elevated CK or positive family history), especially in the pediatric population.

**3) Electrocardiography****(ECG):**Findings suggestive of hypokalemia include the following:

- Diffuse nonspecific ST-T wave changes

- Increased PR interval

- U waves

- Wide QRS

**4) Muscle biopsy:**Muscle biopsies are categorized by three major components:

- Histological/histochemical

- Myopathic vs. neuropathic patterns of disease

- Presence of unique features that are clues to underlying pathophysiology and diagnosis

- Myopathic pattern

- Rounding and variation of myofiber size

- Internal nuclei, fiber atrophy, degeneration and regenerating myofibers

- Fatty replacement

- Neuropathic pattern

- Evidence of denervation and re-innervation

- Small, atrophic, angular fibers and target fibers

- Re-innovation results in fiber type grouping

**5) Muscle MRI:**Magnetic resonance imaging of the muscles:

- Increased signal intensity within muscle tissue

- May see muscle necrosis, degeneration, and/or inflammation

- May see fatty replacement, an indicator of chronic muscle damage

- Findings may help guide site selection for muscle biopsy

- MRI offers a less invasive assessment tool in pediatric populations