The mortality from gastric bypass is roughly 0.2%, higher than both sleeve gastrectomy and gastric banding - which has the lowest mortality of the three.

**Early Complications:**

An anastomotic leak from the gastrojejunal anastomosis is a potentially fatal complication. It typically manifests within 24 hours and can occur in as much as 3% of cases.

Hemorrhage from anastomoses and staple lines has a high chance of resolving spontaneously - but may require transfusion while awaiting resolution.

Bowel obstruction can occur early or late, the former due to Roux-en-O error, where the closed-loop obstruction is created by misidentification of Roux and BP limbs. Early bowel obstruction can also be due to iatrogenic stricture at the JJ anastomosis, port site hernia, and small bowel volvulus.

Deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism is the commonest cause of death following gastric bypass. Of all deaths occurring following bariatric surgery, the thrombo-embolic disease accounts for half. Prevention is critical, with intermittent calf pumps intra-operatively, compression stockings, and post-operatively pharmaceutical prophylaxis for at least one-week minimum.

**Late Complications:**

Internal herniation can occur in gastric bypass in one of three ways. A Peterson's hernia can occur following herniation of bowel through the defect created between the jejunal mesentery of the alimentary limb and the transverse mesocolon. The other two hernias can occur at the mesenteric defect created by the JJ anastomosis and through the mesocolic defect if the Roux limb passes retrocolic. As weight is lost, the bowel anatomy changes and mesenteric defects can become accentuated or created. The presentation is often sub-acute, with post-prandial pain or bloating; however, acute presentations with strangulation can also occur. Internal hernias can occur in up to 7% of cases if defects created in the mesentery are not closed.

Stricture at the GJ anastomosis can occur in 5% of patients. Contributing factors include excess tension and technical aspects of methods used to create the join.

Micronutrient deficiency can occur, and lifelong vitamin/mineral supplementation is essential for preventing these deficits caused by loss of absorption at the DJ region of the bowel.

Rapid weight loss increases the odds of gallstone formation, which can occur in 30% of patients. Common bile duct stones in patients with a bypass are not manageable by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Hence, on-table cholangiography is typically performed during laparoscopic cholecystectomy to exclude this. Otherwise, gallstone disease management should be as per established local protocols.

Dumping syndrome can present as post-prandial malaise precipitated by the rapid passage of food into the anastomosed jejunum at the GJ anastomosis.

Failure to lose weight may occur despite a surgically well-performed procedure. Maintenance of weight loss after bypass can be challenging for some, usually due to renewed binge-eating behaviors in patients.