The diagnosis of peripheral vascular disease can be sufficiently made based on patient risk factors, clinical presentation, and physical exam findings. Occasionally patients can present with atypical symptoms, and objective data can establish the diagnosis. Assessment begins with accounting for known PAD risk factors, including smoking, diabetes, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and obesity. Intermittent claudication must be distinguished from neurological, musculoskeletal, or vascular disorders, which may present similarly to PAD. Physical exam findings of the lower extremities may demonstrate shiny skin with coolness to palpation, reduced or absent pulses, abnormal capillary refill time, pallor with leg elevation, dependent rubor, and auscultation of bruits in major vessels including the femoral and popliteal arteries.

Measurement of the ankle-brachial index (ABI) is a cost-effective noninvasive objective measure for PAD diagnosis. The ABI is obtained by measuring the systolic ankle pressure ratio to the systolic brachial pressure. The test is performed by placing a blood pressure cuff above the level of the ankle and placing a Doppler ultrasonography probe on the dorsalis pedis or posterior tibialis and then inflating the cuff until the signal from the probe ceases. The cuff is then slowly deflated, and the return of the Doppler probe signal marks the systolic ankle pressure. The process is then repeated for the opposite leg. The ankle pressure of each leg is then divided by the highest systolic pressure of either brachial artery. A normal ABI ratio ranges from 0.9 to 1.2, and values less than 0.9 are diagnostic of PAD. Noncompressible vessels, as seen in people with diabetes and those with advanced kidney disease and may have falsely elevated ratios.

Duplex ultrasonography is a safe and cost-effective method of determining PAD location, stenosis severity, and length of stenosis or occlusion. 2-dimensional imaging, along with color Doppler, provides an accurate assessment of lesion stenosis, hemodynamic severity, and plaque characteristics. Doppler ultrasonography can be used in routine follow-up post-procedure for surveillance of patency. This diagnostic modality can assist in decision-making when further intervention is contemplated.

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) or computed tomography angiography (CTA) both provide excellent high-quality vascular imaging. The advantages of MRA include the ability to identify small runoff vessels that sometimes may not be seen with digital subtraction angiography (DSA). Compared with DSA, MRA has 90% sensitivity and 97% specificity in identifying hemodynamically significant lesions.