Over time the technical aspects of lobectomy have changed. The surgeon can perform the surgical approach by conventional open surgery, VATS, or robotics. Different methodologies for dissecting hilar structures exist. The most important aspects are focused on the hilum approach (anterior or posterior mediastinum) and the hilum dissection sequence (anterior or posterior), emphasizing in perform an isolated dissection and division of the hilar structures (vein, artery, and bronchus). The patient should be in lateral decubitus for open and VATS lobectomy.

**Conventional Open Lobectomy**

Posterolateral thoracotomy is the conventional open approach. Its uses have been decreasing over time; however, it is preferred under complex conditions (both in lung cancer and benign disease). Highlight complex conditions are; Centrally located tumors, tumors >6 cm, endobronchial tumors, thick adhesions due to inflammatory processes, complex congenital lung malformations. The hilum approach and hilum dissection sequence depend on the surgeon's preference (posterior to anterior, anterior to posterior). For hilar division and repair, staplers or hand-sewn techniques are the choices.

**VATS Lobectomy**

The Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) has settled down the most accepted definition for VATS lobectomy; the essential point is to perform an anterior utility port incision with 8 cm maximum length without rib spreading.

Proposals exist for different minimally invasive approaches. Currently, the most common minimally invasive techniques are Duke, Copenhagen, and uniportal VATS. The common denominators between these techniques are; Anterior utility port incision, anterior surgeon's position (patient abdomen), anterior hilum approach (anterior mediastinum), and anterior to posterior hilum dissection sequence. The anterior utility port is a 5 cm length incision performed in the fourth or fifth intercostal space between the anterior and middle axillary lines. It is constant in the five types of lobectomy (right superior, right middle, right lower, left superior, left lower lobectomies).

Differences between Duke's, Copenhagen's, and uniportal VATS  techniques are: the Duke approach has two incisions, the utility port and the camera port; the last is a 5 to 10 mm counter-incision adjacent to the posterior vertex of the utility port incision in the same intercostal space.

**Hilum Approach, Hilum Dissection Sequence, and Fissure Technique**

The cornerstone of lobectomy is the individual dissection of the vein, arteries, and airway for the lobe. Currently, the most popular is the anterior approach (anterior mediastinum). the dissection sequence is anterior to posterior in a single direction.

**Lobectomy Technical Aspects**

In this paper, the Copenhagen anterior approach designed for VATS will be described due to the various proposed surgical technics. It is essential to highlight that in the uniportal VATS technique, the order sequence of vascular dissection is different in some steps. The division of hilar structures uses staplers and vascular clips.

**Right Upper Lobectomy**

Hilum approach; Open the mediastinal pleura over the anterior hilum; the reference landmark is the azygos vein. The sequence dissection and division of hilar structures (anterior to posterior in a single direction) is; Superior portion of the pulmonary vein (superior and central vein), the anterior truncus of the pulmonary artery, anterior part of the minor fissure, ascending posterior artery and remaining arterial branches for the upper lobe, upper bronchus, and posterior part of the fissure. Pitfalls are: identify the lower portion of the upper pulmonary vein, identify the ascending posterior artery, differentiate it from the middle lobe artery (interlobar artery exposed after the division of the anterior part of the fissure), and identify anatomical variants (especially in the ascending posterior artery).

**Right Middle Lobectomy**

Hilum approach: Open the mediastinal pleura over the anterior hilum over the pulmonary veins. The sequence and division of hilar structures (anterior to posterior in a single direction) are as follows: middle lobe vein, anterior part of the mayor fissure, middle lobe bronchus, middle lobe artery, and the remaining fissures. Pitfalls are: identify vein and arterial anatomical variants.

**Right Lower Lobectomy**

First, transect the inferior ligament to expose and open the mediastinal pleura over the inferior pulmonary vein (superior traction of the lower lobe). The hilum approach: Open the mediastinal pleura over the inferior pulmonary vein. The sequence and division of hilar structures (anterior to posterior in a single direction) are the following: the inferior pulmonary vein, anterior part of the mayor fissure, inferior pulmonary artery, inferior lobe bronchus, and the remaining fissure. Pitfalls include the anatomical variations of the lower lobe arterial supply irrigation supply (superior segmentary artery); the inferior vein dissection takes place in the posterior hilum, which becomes exposed with the upper traction of the lower lobe, the rest hilum dissection uses the anterior approach.

**Left Upper Lobectomy**

Hilum approach: Open the mediastinal pleura over the anterior hilum over both artery (superior) and pulmonary vein (inferior). The sequence and division of hilar structures (anterior to posterior in a single direction) are: upper lobe vein, anterior truncus of the pulmonary artery, left upper bronchus, posterior arteries for the upper lobe, lingular artery, and fissure. Pitfalls include the left upper lobectomy being the most challenging lobe resection. The tunnel technique (fissure-first) is a good option. The superior and inferior pulmonary veins could share a common trunk; arterial anatomical variants for the upper lobe are common. The sequence of hilum dissection in the uniportal VATS  should be from anterior to the superior hilum and posterior to the inferior hilum; this is called the tangential sequence technique. Also, in uniportal VATS, the fissure-first technique permits an adequate exposure of arterial branches when these are short and are challenging to individualize.

**Left Inferior Lobectomy**

Hilum approach and hilum structures division sequence is the same for the right lower lobectomy; the highlighted difference is that the incision of the utility port is in the middle axillary line due to the hearth position.

**Lymph Node Management**

In lung cancer, lymph node management uses the IASLC (International Association of the Study of Lung Cancer) or NCCN recommendations.

**Postoperative Management**

The most important features following lobectomy are pain control, pulmonary physiotherapy, and chest tube management.