As UTI can present with severe, life-threatening sepsis and multiorgan involvement. Resuscitation often precedes definitive treatment. The severely septic patient might need aggressive fluid resuscitation and broad-spectrum antibiotics administered in the emergency department. Antibiotic choices should always be made according to local bacterial resistance patterns and guidelines.

Patients presenting with septic shock may not respond to fluid resuscitation alone, and there should be a low threshold to consider vasopressor support in light of a poor initial response to fluids.

Broad-spectrum, empiric antibiotics should always be switched to a targeted narrow-spectrum antibiotic, if possible, once culture results are available. Initial broad-spectrum choices tend to be penicillins or beta-lactams, cephalosporins, fluoroquinolones, and carbapenems (especially if dealing with an extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL) organism). The specific choice will depend on the individual hospital's microbiological spectrum and antibiogram.

Patients who present with repeat infections may also be initially treated as per their previous urine culture results until new cultures are available. Imaging to identify a source of infection, such as an abscess or stone, should be done with relapsing infections that involve the same organisms.

Treatment response should be evident in 24 to 48 hours in most cases. A poor response may indicate an inappropriate antibiotic selection, polymicrobial infections, atypical infections, hydronephrosis, obstructing stone causing pyonephrosis, complications such as a perinephric abscess or emphysematous UTI, fluid collections such as urinary retention or anatomical lesions leading to poor response (nephrocalcinosis acting like an infective nidus, obstructive urinary tract lesions, urinary calculi, or fistulas). A temporary Foley catheter, to guarantee good bladder drainage, is often recommended for these patients if they are septic and particularly if they have increased post-void residual volumes.

The duration of antibiotic therapy in complicated UTIs is typically 10 to 14 days. While technically, any UTI in a male is considered a "complicated UTI," many experts will treat what appears to be an unambiguous lower urinary tract infection in an otherwise healthy man with no known bladder dysfunction, stones, or other high-risk factors the same as a simple UTI with first-line antibiotic agents such as fosfomycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or nitrofurantoin. In recurrent infections, especially if the same organism is encountered, prostatitis should be suspected and treated accordingly.

The vast majority (97%) of patients with mild or moderate pyelonephritis without major comorbidities can be managed as outpatients after initial parenteral antimicrobial therapy and a short period of observation.

Men presenting with recurrent UTIs or bacterial prostatitis may require four to six weeks or longer to completely eradicate their infecting bacteria. Men with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and recurrent or intractable urinary tract infections should be considered for surgical therapy.

Failure to respond to appropriate antibiotics should suggest a possible urinary blockage, such as obstructive pyelonephritis. In such cases, a renal ultrasound or non-contrast CT scan should be done for diagnosis and immediate surgical drainage performed if an obstructed, infected kidney is found (either by double J stenting or a percutaneous nephrostomy).

The success of treatment involves proper antibiotic selection, appropriate dosage adjustment, and correct duration of therapy. Eradicating high-risk factors whenever possible is also warranted, such as removing infected stones or indwelling catheters.

Prophylactic antibiotics are seldom recommended routinely due to the rapid development of bacterial resistance. When the clinical situation requires prophylaxis, nitrofurantoin is usually the preferred agent at a 50 mg. daily dose, generally taken before bed.

Patients with permanent Foley catheters or suprapubic tubes should avoid prophylactic antibiotics and only be treated when symptomatic. More frequent changes of urinary catheters are recommended in chronically catheterized patients with recurrent or frequent infections. Patients with long-term Foley catheters tend to have fewer infections if converted to a suprapubic tube.

Mandelamine is a twice-daily medication that, in acidic urine, is converted to formaldehyde, a potent urinary antiseptic. This can be useful in patients with multi-drug resistant infections or persistently elevated post-void residuals instead of prophylactic antibiotics.

Cranberry supplements have been studied with conflicting evidence of any efficacy in treating complicated or recurrent UTIs.

Fosfomycin has shown good activity in patients with urinary tract stones.

**Intermittent bladder instillations of an antibiotic or antiseptic solution**have been used successfully in recurrent or relapsing UTI patients with renal failure, oliguria, pyocystis, or frequent recurrences, especially in patients already performing intermittent self-catheterization.Lactobacillus rhamnosus, povidone-iodine solution, or Neosporin can be used as alternatives.

Neomycin alone showed no efficacy in controlling bacteriuria, but chlorhexidine and povidone-iodine have been shown to reduce UTIs and bacteriuria.

**Empiric Initial Antibiotic Therapy for Patients With Urosepsis**

Initial antibiotic selection in septic or systemically ill patients prior to receiving specific culture results will depend on individual patient characteristics and local bacterial resistance antibiograms. For example, fluoroquinolones are generally not recommended for empiric use if the local resistance is 10% or higher. A discussion with a local infectious disease specialist can help determine the best initial empiric approach for that specific local community. In general, parenteral antibiotics are recommended for patients with systemic or severe illness until urine culture results can guide the antibiotic selection. If no such antibiotic is apparent, consider an infectious disease consultation.

- Ceftriaxone or piperacillin-tazobactam can be used in patients who are less severely ill. (Piperacillin-tazobactam is preferred if Enterococcus, Staphylococcus, or Pseudomonas is suspected due to its greater activity.)

- Vancomycin, linezolid, or daptomycin should be added if methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is suspected.

- If Pseudomonas is suspected, piperacillin-tazobactam, fluoroquinolones, cefepime, or ceftazidime should be used.

- Parenteral fosfomycin has also been used for complicated UTIs and has good activity against many highly resistive organisms, such as ESBL-producing bacteria (not available in the US).

- Quinolones should be considered whenever the local resistance patterns allow.

- Aminoglycosides are usually reserved for patients where other less nephrotoxic drugs cannot be used due to resistance or allergy.

- For maximum coverage in the sickest patients, consider using a carbapenem with anti-pseudomonal activity such as imipenem (which will cover extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing organisms) and vancomycin for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). (Not ertapenem, as it generally has little activity against Pseudomonas.)

**Newer Antibiotic Agents For Multi-drug Resistant Infections**

The development of multiple drug-resistant organisms has prompted the investigation of older antimicrobials (primarily aminoglycosides and tetracyclines) as well as the development of a number of new antibiotics and combinations, such as:

- Aztreonam/avibactam

- Cefepime-enmetazobactam

- Cefepime-zidebactam

- Cefiderocol

- Ceftazidime/avibactam

- Ceftolozane/tazobactam

- Eravacycline

- Glycylcyclines

- Imipenem/relebactam

- Meropenem/vaborbactam

- Omadacycline

- Plazomicin

- Tebipenem

**Ceftazidime/avibactam**combines a potent third-generation cephalosporin with a beta-lactamase inhibitor designed to treat complicated UTIs. It was FDA-approved in 2015 and is intended for use where other medications are not likely to be effective due to resistance.

**Cefiderocol**is a new, unique, FDA-approved synthetic siderophore-conjugated cephalosporin antibiotic that can be used for complicated UTIs involving highly resistant organisms. It uses the bacterial cell iron transport mechanism to facilitate the cellular introduction of drugs, providing very high intracellular concentrations of medications.

**Meropenem-vaborbactam**enhances the activity of meropenem against organisms that manufacture Klebsiella pneumonia-producing carbapenemase (KPC). It is FDA-approved for complicated UTIs, including pyelonephritis in susceptible organisms.

**Plazomicin**is a unique, FDA-approved injectable aminoglycoside specifically developed for multi-drug resistant organisms, including those that produce aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes (AMEs), extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs), and carbapenemases. Standard aminoglycosides have limited activity against bacteria that produce AMEs, and carbapenem-resistant organisms are emerging. Plazomicin was chemically designed to block the activity of most AMEs. It is effective against 90% of coliform bacteria except forProteus mirabilis and Morganella morganii. It is also effective against 90% of Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates, whether ESBL-producing or not. Like other aminoglycosides, it has some nephrotoxicity.

**Tebipenem**is an oral carbapenem that has shown equivalence (non-inferiority) to parenteral ertapenem in treating susceptible organisms causing pyelonephritis and other complicated urinary tract infections.

**Special Patient Risk Groups**

**Catheter-Associated UTIs (CAUTIs)**

The Infectious Disease Society of America (IFDSA) defines a CAUTI as:

- Having an indwelling catheter for at least two days after initial insertion.

- One UTI sign or symptom (urinary symptoms (dysuria, urgency, or frequency), fever, chills, suprapubic pain, costovertebral angle tenderness, or flank pain).

- Older patients may present with altered mental status or hypotension.

- Urine culture with at least 1,000 CFU/mL of a single bacterial species.

The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: National Health Safety Network defines CAUTI a little differently. They include the presence of a fever, suprapubic tenderness, or costovertebral angle pain, along with a colony count >100,000 with no more than two different organisms.

Between 15% and 25% of all hospitalized patients will have a urinary catheter during some period during their hospital stay. It is estimated that 21% to 50% of such catheters are unnecessary and do not meet guidelines for initial placement.

Twenty percent of hospital-acquired bacteremias in acute care facilities are attributed to urinary catheterization, and fifty percent are in long-term care centers.

Catheterized patients are expected to have bacteriuria due to colonization and the development of biofilms. The rate of bacterial colonization is approximately 3% to 10% per catheterization day. This translates into 100% bacterial colonization after the first 30 days. Besides the duration of Foley catheterization, other identified risk factors include female gender, older patient age, diabetes, bacterial colonization of the drainage bag, urethral catheterization (compared to suprapubic), and errors in sterile catheter insertion procedures or maintenance care.

Proper urine specimen collection is important in catheterized patients suspected of a CAUTI to avoid culturing of the biofilm. If possible, the optimal method is to remove the catheter and have the patient urinate for the specimen. If this is not possible, the catheter should be replaced prior to specimen collection. If it is necessary to collect a specimen without removing the catheter, the use of a designated drainage system side port access is suggested. If none of these techniques are possible, the last resort is to separate the catheter from the drainage system. Urine cultures should not be obtained from the drainage bag.

Bacterial inoculation of the bladder in catheterized patients may be extraluminal (through the external biofilm) or intraluminal (from catheter blockage or contamination of the drainage bag). Extraluminal is the more common method (66% vs. 34%).

The most common organisms causing CAUTIs include E. coli (24%), Candida or yeast (24%), Enterococcus (14%), Pseudomonas (10%), and Klebsiella (10%).

Routine instillation of various antiseptics into the urinary drainage bags can help reduce calcium phosphate precipitates and decrease bacterial counts. Hydrogen peroxide 3% and chlorhexidine have shown minimal to no effect in reducing urinary bag bacteriuria.

- Sterile technique for catheter insertion

- Use of antiseptic or antibiotic ointments for routine meatal care

- Antiseptic filters and anti-reflux mechanisms built into the urinary drainage bags

- Use of dual-chambered drainage bags

- Routine bladder or catheter irrigation

- More frequent changes of the urinary drainage bags (every 7 to 14 days)

- Placing antiseptic solutions in the drainage bags

The most effective strategy in reducing CAUTIs is to avoid indwelling catheters whenever possible, discontinue them as soon as clinically feasible, and use optimal sterile placement techniques and maintenance procedures.

Additional helpful measures to minimize CAUTIs include:

- Mandatory educational programs for all healthcare workers involved in urinary catheter insertion or care.

- Strict adherence to guidelines for indwelling catheter placement.

- Using alternative urinary control measures (pads, condom catheters, mechanical suction devices, suprapubic tubes, Cunningham clamps, intermittent catheterization, etc.) whenever possible.

- Use of a daily checklist to justify continuing all indwelling catheters.

- Implementing automatic catheter removal orders at the time of initial Foley insertion unless specifically instructed otherwise and justification is provided.

- Strict adherence to guidelines for diagnosing and treating CAUTIs to avoid overtreating asymptomatic bacteriuria.

- Minimizing unnecessary urine cultures, which often produce positive cultures even in uninfected patients that are strong temptations for inappropriate antibiotic use.

- Obtaining urine cultures when treating patients for a UTI so culture results are available if the initial treatment fails.

- Follow guidelines for correct specimen collection procedures for urinalyses and cultures.

- Carefully investigate all alternative sources of infections and fevers before diagnosing a CAUTI.

- Never using indwelling catheters solely for incontinence.

**Purple bag urine syndrome**is a rare disorder that occurs in patients with long-term catheters, usually older women with constipation. Dietary tryptophan is broken down in the intestinal tract into indole, which is absorbed and converted into indoxyl sulfate by the liver. This is eventually excreted into the urine, where the indoxyl sulfate is converted by bacterial enzymes (in alkaline urine) to indigo (blue) and indirubin (red), which causes the intense purple color.

**Spinal cord injury patients with catheters**offer unique challenges in the diagnosis, prophylaxis, and treatment of CAUTIs. Many of these patients require permanent or intermittent catheterization, which leads to a high incidence of asymptomatic bacteriuria that does not require treatment.

It is estimated that at least 35% of spinal cord injured patients diagnosed and treated for CAUTI actually have only asymptomatic bacteriuria.

The general principle of early catheter removal does not necessarily apply to spinal cord injured patients who may not have a suitable alternative for safe bladder drainage. Inappropriate Foley catheter removal puts them at risk for urinary retention, vesicoureteral reflux, renal failure, autonomic dysreflexia, and sepsis. Clean intermittent self-catheterization is safe, effective, and associated with a lower incidence of bacteriuria and CAUTIs but there are still increased risks of infection, false passages, urethral strictures, bladder overdistention or retention, and a heavy reliance on caregivers for logistical support and supplies.

There is some evidence that long-term use of nitrofurantoin and D-mannose prophylaxis can effectively reduce CAUTI in spinal cord-injured patients.

A guidelines-based model for ordering urine cultures and antibiotics has significantly reduced overdiagnosis and overtreatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in long-term catheterized patients by over 70%.

**UTIs in Pregnancy**

Between 2% and 7% of pregnant women will develop asymptomatic bacteriuria, usually early in their pregnancy.

Pyelonephritis during pregnancy can be challenging and generally requires hospitalization. Standard therapy would include ceftriaxone, cefepime, and ampicillin/gentamicin. Aztreonam is suggested if there is a beta-lactam allergy. Treatment can be adjusted after culture reports are available. More severe infections may require piperacillin/tazobactam, meropenem, ertapenem, or doripenem.

**UTIs in Renal Failure and Dialysis**

It is well known that chronic renal disease will affect decreased urinary excretion of antibiotics, but other factors also play a role.

The diagnosis of a UTI in dialysis patients can be tricky as 30% to 40% will normally demonstrate pyuria even without any infection.Candida is the most common organism in this population.

Antibiotics must be used cautiously in patients with severe or end-stage renal failure. Nitrofurantoin and tetracyclines (other than doxycycline) should be avoided. Aminoglycosides can be used cautiously, as they are potentially nephrotoxic. A number of other antibiotics, such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, trimethoprim alone, cephalexin, second and third-generation cephalosporins, and fluoroquinolones can generally be used at a reduced (usually 50%) dosage.

A number of antibiotics generally do not require any adjustment in renal failure. These include:

- Azithromycin

- Ceftriaxone

- Clindamycin

- Doxycycline

- Fosfomycin

- Linezolid

- Nafcillin

- Rifampin

Intermittent bladder instillations of antibiotics (gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin, neomycin/polymyxin B/bacitracin) or antiseptic (povidone-iodine) solutions can be helpful in patients with renal failure who have minimal urinary volume, are already performing intermittent self-catheterization, or where alternative means have not been successful.

**UTIs in Renal Transplants**

The diagnosis of a complicated UTI can sometimes be difficult in renal transplant patients. Symptoms may be subtle and non-specific such as nausea or unusual fatigue. Fever and palpable tenderness over the graft site are more likely to be associated with a UTI than acute rejection. Therefore, renal transplant UTI patients with systemic signs of infection, such as fever or graft tenderness on palpation, should have blood cultures taken as well as standard urine cultures. This is because about 9% will ultimately show positive for bacteremia.

All symptomatic UTIs in renal transplant patients are considered complicated UTIs. Morbidity and mortality from UTIs are increased in kidney transplant patients as the required immunosuppression increases infection risk and interferes with therapy.

UTIs are most common during the first year after transplantation and will occur in about 25% of transplant recipients during that time.

Screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria immediately post-transplantation for the first 90 days is controversial, as many experts recommend it while others do not.

Screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria after the first three months is not recommended as treatment beyond this point has not been effective in UTI prevention or graft preservation and will potentially lead to unnecessary antibiotic use and increased bacterial resistance.

Post-transplantation risk factors for UTIs include female gender, advanced patient age, longer time on dialysis prior to transplantation, recurrent UTIs in the recipient prior to transplantation, polycystic kidney disease, Foley catheterization, ureteral stent placement, use of a deceased-donor transplant, and urinary tract obstruction or dysfunction.

Antibiotic UTI prophylaxis is commonly used for the first 6 to 12 months post-transplantation.

There is an increased incidence of Klebsiella pneumoniae being the infecting organism in renal transplant patients than in the general population.Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, other common pathogenic bacteria include Enterobacter cloaca. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterococcus. Due to reduced host resistance factors, treatment is typically 14 to 21 days. Patients suspected of having a UTI but demonstrating a negative urine culture should be tested for Corynebacterium urealyticum, which requires special culture media for identification.

Simple cystitis is typically treated for 10 to 14 days. (Nitrofurantoin may now be used if the GFR is 30 mL/min or more.)

Selective imaging can be helpful in some renal transplant patients with UTIs. The initial test is usually ultrasonography. Patients with polycystic kidney disease may have an infected cyst which can be challenging to identify. Such patients often have flank pain related to the infected renal cyst rather than graft discomfort. In such cases, a CT-PET scan can be beneficial.

**Specific Infections**

**Emphysematous cystitis**is a lower urinary tract infection of the bladder where there is gas within the bladder wall caused by gas-producing bacteria. Such gas-forming bacteria are usuallyEscherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumonia. (Other organisms that can produce gas include Proteus, Enterococcus, Pseudomonas, Clostridium, and (rarely) Aspergillus and Candida.) Rarely emphysematous cystitis has been caused by infectious colitis with no clinical signs or evidence of a UTI.

**Emphysematous pyelonephritis**is a particularly debilitating necrotizing infection of the kidney characterized by gas within the renal parenchyma or perinephric space. It is typically diagnosed on a CT scan. The vast majority of patients with the condition are diabetic (95%), which is six times more common in women than men. It is also associated with renal failure, obstruction, polycystic kidneys, and an immunocompromised state.

**Pyonephrosis (obstructive pyelonephritis)**describes an acutely infected, hydronephrotic kidney where there is usually an obstructing calculus. Sepsis rapidly ensues unless the obstruction is quickly relieved by drainage from a double-J stent or percutaneously.  These patients are generally quite ill with high fevers, chills, and flank pain. Pyonephrosis is considered an urgent surgical emergency as patients tend to rapidly progress to urosepsis, shock, and death. The urine may sometimes not show any obvious signs of infection if there is complete obstruction of the affected renal unit. Ultrasonography can identify the problem quickly, but a non-contrast CT scan will more clearly show the level and nature of the obstruction. A CT scan can also show other pathologies, such as various cancers, retroperitoneal fibrosis, and other disorders. Management includes fluids and antibiotics, but the critical component is urgent drainage of the hydronephrotic, infected kidney.

Definitive treatment of the obstruction is usually delayed until the immediate infectious process has been controlled. Percutaneous nephrostomy is usually preferred for the most severe cases as there is minimal manipulation of the infected stone and no risk of possible failure to bypass the obstruction cystoscopically from a retrograde approach.

**Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis**is a chronic renal infection where the kidney is almost always obstructed and hydronephrotic with necrosis and severe inflammation of the renal parenchyma. It is often seen in patients who are immunocompromised and/or diabetic. It is diagnosed most reliably by a CT scan. It can sometimes be mistaken for renal cell carcinoma as foamy lipid-infused histiocytes (xanthoma cells) can appear to be cancer cells on biopsy.

Other specific infections involving the urinary tract are best found in our companion articles on those specific topics. These would include tuberculosis, candidiasis, schistosomiasis, filariasis, prostatitis, orchitis, epididymitis, necrotizing fasciitis, renal and scrotal abscesses, etc.

**New diagnostic methods and guideline implementation guides**are being developed to hasten proper diagnosis, minimize inappropriate antibiotic use, and improve antimicrobial selection accuracy. These new aides include computer programs with artificial intelligence algorithms, new classes of biomarkers, and cell-free DNA analysis, among others. New catheter materials, coatings, innovative bacterial growth interference agents, and anti-infective vaccinations for high-risk populations are being studied. Entirely new classes of antibiotics are being designed and created.