# Definition/Introduction

Healthcare professionals, when determining the impact of patient interventions in clinical studies or research endeavors that provide evidence for clinical practice, must distinguish well-designed studies with valid results from studies with research design or statistical flaws. This article will help providers determine the likelihood of type I or type II errors and judge adequacy of statistical power. Then one can decide whether or not the evidence provided should be implemented in practice or used to guide future studies.

# Issues of Concern

Having an understanding of the concepts discussed in this article will allow healthcare providers to accurately and thoroughly assess the results and validity of medical research. Without an understanding of type I and II errors and power analysis, clinicians could make poor clinical decisions without evidence to support them.

**Type I and Type II Errors**

Type I and Type II errors can lead to confusion as providers assess medical literature. A vignette that illustrates the errors is the Boy Who Cried Wolf. First, the citizens commit a type I error by believing there is a wolf when there is not. Second, the citizens commit a type II error by believing there is no wolf when there is one.

A type I error occurs when in research when we reject the null hypothesis and erroneously state that the study found significant differences when there indeed was no difference. In other words, it is equivalent to saying that the groups or variables differ when, in fact, they do not or having false positives.

Drug 23 will significantly reduce symptoms associated with Disease A compared to Drug 22.

For our example, if we were to state that Drug 23 significantly reduced symptoms of Disease A compared to Drug 22 when it did not, this would be a type I error. Committing a type I error can be very grave in specific scenarios. For example, if we did, move ahead with Drug 23 based on our research findings even though there was actually was no difference between groups, and the drug costs significantly more money for patients or has more side effects, then we would raise healthcare costs, cause iatrogenic harm, and not improve clinical outcomes. If a p-value is used to examine type I error, the lower the p-value, the lower the likelihood of the type I error to occur.

A type II error occurs when we declare no differences or associations between study groups when, in fact, there was.

(See Type I and Type II Errors and Statistical Power Table 1)

**Power**

A concept closely aligned to type II error is statistical power. Statistical power is a crucial part of the research process that is most valuable in the design and planning phases of studies, though it requires assessment when interpreting results. Power is the ability to correctly reject a null hypothesis that is indeed false.

The power of a statistical test is dependent on: the level of significance set by the researcher, the sample size, and the effect size or the extent to which the groups differ based on treatment.

It is essential to recognize that power can be deemed adequate with a smaller sample if the effect size is large.

Medical researchers should invest time in conducting power analyses to sufficiently distinguish a difference or association.

# Clinical Significance

By limiting type I and type II errors, healthcare providers can ensure that decisions based on research outputs are safe for patients.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

All physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other healthcare professionals should strive to understand the concepts of Type I and II errors and power. These individuals should maintain the ability to review and incorporate new literature for evidence-based and safe care. They will also more effectively work in teams with other professionals.