Hydroxycobalamin is the antidote of choice for acute cyanide poisoning, especially if there is concomitant carbon monoxide poisoning. The other antidotes impair oxygen-carrying capacity which worsens cellular hypoxia and acidosis. The standard dose is 5 grams intravenously over 15 minutes. It is well tolerated but may cause a headache, gastrointestinal distress, allergic reactions, and hypertension. Patients and caregivers need to be aware that the antidote will make the patient's urine look like dark red wine. This discoloration can cause false lab abnormalities due to distortion of colorimetric tests. This is not due to myoglobinuria but due to hydroxocobalamin.

Indications for administering hydroxocobalamin include suspicion of cyanide poisoning with smoke inhalation, especially in patients with altered mental status, hemodynamic instability, or respiratory failure. In the case of cardiac arrest, a 10-gram dose is recommended if cyanide is the likely cause of the arrest. HBO2 has been used as a primary treatment for cyanide poisoning, but it is better if combined with hydroxocobalamin. HBO2 can temporarily cause an increase in the serum cyanide concentration as cyanide is displaced from the cytochrome a3 in the mitochondria moving it from the extravascular compartment into the blood. HBO2, but not normobaric oxygen has been shown to improve mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation during cyanide poisoning. Hydroxocobalamin can then act as a cyanide scavenger, forming the nontoxic cyanocobalamin. The synergistic effect of HBO2 and hydroxocobalamin in animal models of cyanide poisoning has shown a reversal of hypotension and lower lactate levels than animals treated with either alone.