# Continuing Education Activity

Subarachnoid hemorrhages are life-threatening and result from the accumulation of blood between the arachnoid and pia mater. The incidence of subarachnoid hemorrhage in the United States is between 10 to 14 out of 100,000 individuals per year. Although presentations may vary, the characteristic presenting symptom is the thunderclap headache, which patients may describe as the "worst headache of my life." This should prompt further imaging. The headache often is associated with nausea, vomiting, and diplopia. Quite often signs of meningismus are present due to the spread of blood into the fourth ventricle and further down the spinal cord, irritating nerves and causing neck and back pain. Cranial nerve deficits can occur. Practitioners should perform a detailed exam. The presence of focal deficit increases the grade of subarachnoid hemorrhage and changes the perspective of post-event recovery. Patients with a high-grade subarachnoid hemorrhage quite often present in a state of coma that calls for a quick evaluation and urgent treatment, as the coma can be reversible. In addition to subarachnoid hemorrhage patients may have a concurrent intraocular hemorrhage, known as Terson syndrome. When Terson syndrome is present, an ophthalmology service should be consulted to help with the care of the patient. Eighty percent of patients that develop Terson syndrome require regular follow-up visits but do not require further intervention. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of subarachnoid hemorrhages and highlights the essential role of the interprofessional team in caring for those with this grave condition.

**Objectives:**
- Explain when subarachnoid hemorrhage should be considered on differential diagnosis.
- Review the exam findings expected in a patient with a subarachnoid hemorrhage.
- Describe the management of a subarachnoid hemorrhage.
- Explain the significance of cooperation between the interprofessional team members to enhance the delivery of care for those with subarachnoid hemorrhage.

# Introduction

Overall, about 20% of strokes are hemorrhagic, with SAH and Intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) each accounting for 10%.

# Etiology

As elucidated earlier, about 85% of nontraumatic SAH cases are secondary to aneurysmal rupture. The remaining 15-20% have a diverse cause, and the mechanism of bleeding is often not identified. Determining the precise etiology of the bleeding is very important, as practitioners can tailor treatment to the cause of the bleeding. The most common causes of nontraumatic SAH are mentioned below:

**1) Aneurysmal Subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH)**

- An aneurysmal cause of SAH has similar risk factors associated with aneurysm formation. Hypertension, cigarette smoking, and family history are the most consistently observed risk factors. Other factors include Alcohol, sympathomimetic drugs, and estrogen deficiency.

- Older age (>60 years), posterior circulation location, atherosclerosis, hypertension, and large Intra-arterial aneurysm (IA) size (>5 mm) are contributing factors for an IA to rupture. A family history of IA or SAH, previous history of SAH, or the presence of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease increases the risk of IA rupture.

**2) Nonaneurysmal Subarachnoid hemorrhage (NASAH)**

i) Perimesencephalic nonaneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage: It is characterized by a specific pattern of localized blood on CT, normal cerebral angiography, and a benign course of illness.

ii) Occult aneurysm: A small percentage of cases are not diagnosed in initial angiographic studies but may be identified on repeat angiography and are classified under this group.

iii) Vascular malformations: These can be intracranial or spinal in location. Most brain vascular malformations that cause SAH are either arteriovenous malformations (AVM) or dural arteriovenous fistulae.

iv) Intracranial arterial dissection: Dissection of an intracranial artery can produce SAH. When the dissection of the intracranial artery extends through the adventitia, SAH occurs.

v) Other causes: Cocaine abuse is associated with aneurysmal and nonaneurysmal SAH.

# Epidemiology

The overall global incidence of aneurysmal SAH was 7.9 per 100,000 person-years.

Most aSAH occur between 40 and 60 years of age, and young children and older adults can be affected.

# Pathophysiology

Hemodynamic stress is the initiating factor for intracranial aneurysm (IA) formation. The observation best illustrates that IAs occur at arterial junctions, bifurcations, or abrupt vascular angles where excessive hemodynamic stresses are exerted on arterial walls.

# Histopathology

Aneurysms are divided according to their morphology into:

i) S**accular aneurysms**that are pouch-like protrusions of the vessel wall, usually arising in cerebral artery bifurcations (A);

ii) **Fusiform aneurysms**that are dilatations of the vessel wall that do not lead to the formation of a separate saccular pouch (B); and

iii) dolichoectasias are elongated, tortuous, and sometimes dilated vessel segments (C).

Furthermore, a rare fourth type of cerebral artery aneurysm is the dissecting aneurysm that usually has a fusiform shape (B), but originates from acute dissection or tearing of the arterial wall layers.

# History and Physical

A typical presenting symptom is a thunderclap headache. Patients usually describe it as the "worst headache of my life." This problem should prompt further imaging. A headache is frequently associated with nausea, vomiting (often projectile), nuchal rigidity, and photophobia. Meningismus is typically present due to blood extending into the fourth ventricle. As the blood moves further down the spinal cord, it irritates surrounding nerves causing neck pain and stiffness. Practitioners should perform a detailed exam. The presence of a focal deficit increases the grade of subarachnoid hemorrhage and changes the perspective of post-event recovery. Patients with a high-grade subarachnoid hemorrhage often present in a state of coma that calls for an urgent evaluation and treatment, as in some the coma can be reversible.

# Evaluation

Initial evaluation of a patient suspected of having a subarachnoid hemorrhage should include a head computed tomogram (CT).

The sensitivity of CT scans and red blood cell (RBC) counts are time-dependent and very sensitive early in the diagnosis. This loss of sensitivity over time can be due to the brisk physiologic flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Over time, the RBCs present in the CSF undergo lysis resulting in breakdown products such as bilirubin and oxyhemoglobin. RBC lysis explains that xanthochromia becomes increasingly sensitive after a few hours.

# Treatment / Management

All Patients presenting with aSAH should be organized according to the severity of disease. In general, management include medical measures and interventional options like endovascular coiling or direct surgical clipping of the IA. Patients are typically treated with both medical and interventional options. More conservative or less invasive interventions may be sufficient for patients with grade I or II SAH. The key goals for all SAH patients are the prevention of rebleeding, delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI), supportive care, pain management, and accurate diagnosis and treatment.

Although immediate care aims to prevent rebleeding and to secure the aneurysm, other common problems include hydrocephalus and vasospasm. Hydrocephalus is present in up to 30% of patients with intraventricular hemorrhage.

Osmotic diuretics (i.e., Mannitol) and antihypertensive medications for blood pressure control are required to stabilize the patient until surgical or endovascular interventions can be initiated to secure the IA.

**Monitoring**

**Transcranial Doppler**– Transcranial Doppler (TCD) sonography is used for detecting and monitoring vasospasm in SAH. A TCD is able to detect changes in velocity prior to the clinical sequelae of vasospasm. However, it is an operator-dependent technology that has imperfect sensitivity and specificity.

**Imaging studies**– In the acute phase of SAH, imaging studies like CT angiography (CTA) and CT perfusion can detect arterial narrowing or perfusion asymmetry. These methods are sensitive and help in predicting delayed cerebral ischemia.

**Electroencephalography (EEG)**– Continuous EEG can be useful to detect subclinical seizures or nonconvulsive status epilepticus, particularly for patients with poor-grade SAH who develop unexplained neurologic deterioration or fail to improve.

**Frequency of neuro checks**– Patients with acute SAH should be carefully examined every one to two hours, especially during the high-risk period for delayed cerebral ischemia.

A development of neurologic deficits should be evaluated with an urgent head CT scan (to identify rebleeding, cerebral infarction, hydrocephalus), angiography (to identify symptomatic vasospasm), and/or EEG (to detect subclinical seizures). Medical complications can also contribute to a change in neurologic status.

Even in the absence of clinical change, it is important to identify cerebral vasospasm and decreased cerebral perfusion. Therefore, some centers monitor all patients with aneurysmal SAH with TCD sonography daily and head CT, CTA, and CT perfusion on admission and between days 3 to 5 and days 7 to 10 to screen for evidence of decreased cerebral perfusion or vasospasm.

**Intracranial pressure monitoring**– It is recommended to perform a ventriculostomy in patients with enlarged ventricles on CT or with WFNS scale score ≥3; this allows direct measurement of ICP and also allows treatment by drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) when appropriate.

**Medical Management**

The significant concerns after an aSAH are rebleeding, hydrocephalus, and vasospasm. The most immediate problem is rebleeding. The most significant risk of rebleeding and mortality is within the first 6 hours of the initial hemorrhage.

**Drug Therapy**

Historically, tertiary and academic medical centers have had specialized neuroscience units. In recent years, smaller community hospitals that previously cared for neuroscience patients in general medical or surgical ICUs are becoming specialized. With this, the number of neuroscience/neurological ICUs and specialty medical-surgical units are increasing.  The role of neuroscience-specialized pharmacists is growing, providing an additional level of expertise to understand the effects of neurological illness or injury, drug interactions, and the impact on the patient.

**Blood Pressure Control**

Blood pressure control is critical to reducing the risk of rebleeding until the IA is secured and during the first 24 to 48 hours postoperative period.

Labetalol and hydralazine are often the favored intermittent dosing medications, whereas nicardipine (Cardene) and clevidipine (Cleviprex) are continuous infusions used for blood pressure control.

Nicardipine (Cardene) is given via continuous IV infusion in titrated doses from 5 to 15 mg/hr to maintain the systolic blood pressure of 150 to 160 mm Hg to prevent rebleeding. Some clinicians prefer to maintain a blood pressure of less than 140 mm Hg to prevent rebleeding.

Clevidipine (Cleviprex) is also a calcium channel blocker with a similar mechanism of action as nicardipine.

**Vasospasm Prevention and Treatment**

The drug categories that prevent and treat vasospasm include calcium channel blockers, magnesium, endothelin antagonists, and statins. These categories are revieNimodipine following sections to describe their current use, if any, in vasospNimodipinement.

Calcium Channel Blockers

Calcium channel blockers (CCBs) reduce cardiac and smooth muscle contraction without an effect on skeletal muscle. The effectiveness of this classification of drugs in the management of aSAH has been a source of many studies over the years. Still, it is considered that CCBs mitigate the abnormal vasoconstriction of cerebral vascular smooth muscle. Oral administration of the dihydropyridine-type calcium channel blocker nimodipine is the only treatment with consistent, high-quality evidence for decreasing DCI and is now standard of care in patients with aSAH. However, these results are advocated by one large trial.

Magnesium

The use of Magnesium sulfate has shown to have mixed results on neuroprotective and its vasodilatation properties—vasodilation results from an inhibition of Voltage-gated calcium channel-mediated smooth muscle contractions. Various spasmogenic agents such as endothelin-1, norepinephrine, angiotensin II, and serotonin are counteracted by magnesium. The Magnesium for Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhage (MASH-2) trial was a phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. A total of 1,204 patients were enrolled. The study concluded with no improvement in outcomes in the intervention group.

Endothelin Antagonists

Endothelin antagonists (ET-A) are another potential treatment under investigation. ET-A receptors mediate vasoconstriction in arterial smooth muscle. Clazosentan is a selective ET-A receptor antagonist that demonstrated a decrease and a reversal in vasospasm after SAH. One study, CONSCIOUS-1 (Clazosentan to Overcome Neurological Ischemia and Infarct Occurring after Subarachnoid Hemorrhage), found a significant dose-dependent effect on vasospasm when evaluated with angiography. The 413 patients in this study were randomized and given placebo or clazosentan within 56 hours and continued on their assigned protocol for up to 14 days.

Statins

Research with statin drugs have also demonstrated a lack of efficacy and have shown no benefit in the treatment of vasospasm and neither does it improve short term or long term outcomes in aSAH

Anticoagulants

As per the 2015 guidelines from the Neurocritical Care Society (NCS) and Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM), it is recommended to discontinue all antithrombotic agents and reverse all anticoagulation until the aneurysm is definitively repaired by surgery or coiling.

Pain Control

Pain management is an essential aspect of patient care. With complaints of the “worst headache of my life”, the interprofessional health care team needs to provide interventions to make the patient as comfortable as possible. Nonopioid medications such as acetaminophen (650 mg PO or 1,000 mg IV) are first line medications and be administered every 4 to 6 hours; however, consideration must be given to contraindications, that is, liver diseaase.

**Surgical management**

Once an aSAH or a ruptured aneurysm is identified, repair with surgical clipping or endovascular coiling is the only effective treatment and should be performed as early as feasible, preferably within 24 hours

# Differential Diagnosis

- Bacterial and tuberculous meningitis

- Granulomatous meningitis

- Neurosarcoidosis

- Pseudo-subarachnoid hemorrhage

# Staging

Several grading scales are used in clinical practice to standardize the classification of patients with aSAH and to monitor progression and change in condition. These scales are based on the initial clinical neurological examination and the appearance of blood on the initial head CT. These scales include the Glasgow Coma Scale, the Hunt and Hess grading scale, the WFNS scale, the Fisher grading scale, and the modified Fisher grading scale.

I) The **Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)**, introduced in 1974, is designed as a reliable and objective scale of neurological function in three subscales of level of consciousness, eye-opening, and motor function.

II) The World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies (WFNS) developed the **WFNS grading scale**, which describes the clinical presentation of SAH patients. The scale includes consciousness and motor deficits in its scoring system. The WFNS grading system uses a combination of consciousness and motor deficits from the GCS and the presence of focal neurological deficits to grade the severity of SAH.

III) The **Hunt and Hess grading scale**, introduced in 1968, helps to classify the severity of aSAH based on the patient's clinical condition. It is used as a predictor of a patient's prognosis and outcome. A higher score (grade) correlates to a lower survival rate.

IV) The**Fisher grading scale**is a numerical scale from 0 to 4 that provides insight into the amount of subarachnoid blood on a CT scan. These grading scales correlate to the hemorrhage's severity, the IA's clinical grade, and the vasospasm's incidence after the SAH. In comparison, the**modified Fisher grading scale**provides more specific descriptions of the amount and location of blood seen on a CT scan.

# Prognosis

SAH is associated with a high early mortality rate.

Long-term complications of SAH include neurocognitive dysfunction, epilepsy, and other focal neurologic deficits. In one registry, more than 10 percent of patients with SAH remained moderately or severely disabled.

# Complications

- Seizures

- Vasospasm

- Rebleed

- Hydrocephalus

- Increased intracranial pressure

- Brain herniation

- Cerebral infarction

- Medical complications

- Neurogenic pulmonary edema

- Death

# Consultations

A neurosurgical and neurointerventional consult is essential in the early management of this condition.  An interprofessional team can help in making early decisions like coiling or clipping of the culprit aneurysm.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

A patient with an aneurysm, who is being conservatively managed should be advised on all the complications that can occur if it ruptures.

Any patient and relatives getting admitted with subarachnoid hemorrhage secondary to an aneurysm rupture should be aware of the chance of rebleed and the morbidity and mortality associated with any intervention.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The majority of patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage present to the emergency department. Thus, the emergency department physician and nurse practitioner must know the workup for these patients. Because of its high mortality, an interprofessional team that includes a Neurosurgeon, Interventional radiologist, Neurologist, Intensivist, and Intensive Care Unit nurses is recommended. Unfortunately, despite optimal care, most patients die within 30 days. Even those who survive are left with severe complications that are disabling.