**Prehospital**

Management of spinal cord injuries begins at the scene of the injury with a primary survey involving the airway, breathing, circulation, and disability (ABCD). Disability includes calculating a Glasgow coma scale (GCS), pupil examination, and identifying any lateralizing signs. This should be repeated as often as necessary whenever the patient's status changes. Next, a secondary survey should be performed that involves a focused examination of the patient that includes spinal examination (3-person logroll in order to assess and palpate the spine), assessing distal motor function in both upper and lower limbs, incontinence and skin appearance. Lastly, providers in the field should collect as much patient history as possible, noting any subjective complaints of neck pain. Restricting spinal motion is of the utmost importance in patients with suspected spinal cord injuries.

**Immediate Hospitalization Period**

In the immediate period following a spinal cord injury, providers should pay particular attention to optimizing tissue perfusion to the penumbra to reduce secondary injury. Hemodynamic stability and mitigating the meta-inflammatory response are the prime initial focus.

The use of corticosteroids in spinal cord injury has a long history of controversy. The goal of intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone therapy is to halt the inflammatory cascade that results in secondary spinal cord injury. The landmark Second National Spinal Cord Injury Study (NASCIS-II) did show statistically significant neurological benefits with the administration of IV methylprednisolone if given within 8 hours of initial injury; however, there was also an increased risk of adverse events. Therefore, the Congress of Neurological Surgeons recommends against IV methylprednisolone administration.

Any backboards should be removed as soon as possible to reduce the occurrence of pressure ulcers. All patients with concern for spinal cord injury should have a thorough trauma evaluation performed in the emergency department. These patients should have cervical immobilization maintained during the initial evaluation. Providers should utilize the Canadian C-spine Rule and National Emergency X-Radiography Utilization Study (NEXUS) to help guide diagnostic imaging needs, as well as help determine the continued need for cervical immobilization.

Conservative management should only be considered in situations without fracture, dislocation, disc herniation, or spinal instability; otherwise, surgical intervention is preferred.

In patients without instability, the decision for conservative versus surgical management of acute central cord syndrome is highly debated, with no clearly established guidelines. Research studies have produced mixed results comparing conservative management with early surgical intervention. Numerous studies showed that delaying surgery in traumatic central cord syndrome may be beneficial where the odds of mortality decreased within each day of delay. The goal of delayed surgery was to improve the patient's underlying health, especially in older adults, and treat other potential comorbidities before the surgery.

Recently, the Spinal Cord Society (SCS) and Spine Trauma Study Group (STSG) released a position statement after a systematic review and meta-analysis regarding the management of acute central cord syndrome. Their recommendation was patients with acute traumatic central cord syndrome due to hyperextension injury and cervical stenosis without fracture, dislocation, disc herniation, or spinal instability should be given the option of early spinal cord decompression (less than 24 hours after injury) or initial conservative management followed by delayed cord decompression (greater than 24 hours after injury) if there was a neurological decline or a plateau with neurological recovery. The review did not find a difference in complications or outcomes between early surgery and conservative management with delayed surgery.

**Surgical Approach**

At this time, there are no guidelines for the surgical approach, and it is left to the surgeon to decide the most appropriate course for intervention that will optimize outcomes and reduce complications. Generally, single-level anterior compressive lesions necessitate an anterior approach. A posterior approach should be considered in patients with compression at multiple levels. Patients with spinal fractures or dislocations should undergo reduction and stabilization, which may require a combined anterior and posterior approach.