**Masking Dilemma**

In situations where there is a sizeable conductive component in both ears, it may not be possible to mask effectively at all.

An example of this is as follows:

During an audiometric assessment, air conduction thresholds receive values of 70 to 105 dB across all frequencies in both ears. On continuing to test bone conduction testing, non-masked bone conduction testing responses receive values of 15 to 20 dB across all frequencies.

Here, the difference between air conduction and bone conduction is greater than 55 dB (interaural attenuation), and therefore masking is required.

As a procedure, the masking noise to the nontested ear may be set at 80 db and a tone presented (via bone) to the test ear at 15 dB. If there is no response, the tone is then increased (via bone) to the test ear to 20db. If there is a response at this level then the masking noise is increased in the non-test ear to 85 dB and the tone is then re-presented to the test ear. If there is now no response at this level, the tone of the test ear is then increased (via bone) to 25 dB. If at this level there is a response, then the masking noise presented to the non-test ear is increased to 90 dB. If at this level there is no response, the pattern may continue without ever reaching a plateau or receiving true masked levels. Here, the sound of the masking noise is crossing back over to the test ear as the test tone is increased, creating a masking dilemma.

In this circumstance, the unmasked responses are labeled with an asterisk, and it is stated that masking is not possible without 'over-masking.' This must be confirmed at all frequencies.