After the history and physical examination, the next step is to obtain laboratory and diagnostic evidence to determine the cause of the patient's chief complaint and confirm or rule out a liver abscess. Laboratory tests include a complete blood count with differential, tests for hepatocellular injury (liver enzymes that are usually elevated in half the cases), liver synthetic function tests (Prealbumin and INR), alkaline phosphatase (elevated in around 90% of patients), C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and blood cultures to rule out bacteremia.

If an amebic abscess is suspected (such as in residents or travelers from Southeast Asia, Africa, etc.), stool test or serology for Entamoeba histolytica should be performed. For the hydatid cyst, serology for Echinococcus is needed. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) seems to be the most sensitive and specific for Echinococcus. After initial screening with ELISA, confirmatory tests with immunoelectrophoresis and immunoblotting are needed. Serology positivity is dependant on the size and site of the cysts. Liver and bone cysts produce positive serology, whereas lung, brain, eye, splenic, or calcified cysts do not. Calcification is usually a sign of non-viable material.

Many radiographical tests can be performed, and certain tests should take precedence. It is important to limit a patient's exposure to unnecessary radiation and tests. There can be findings in the chest x-ray, pointing to this diagnosis, such as elevated hemidiaphragm on the right and pleural effusion over the liver. However, the initial test of choice is an abdominal ultrasound (US), which shows hyper or hypoechoic lesions with occasional debris or septation. Computed tomography (CT) with contrast is the next step, and slightly more sensitive. Rim enhancement and edema are not typical but very specific for infection. The US or CT is followed by needle aspiration under guidance to identify the exact causative organism, which is essential for diagnostic as well as therapeutic purposes (small cysts).

Stains and cultures should be obtained from the direct aspirate. Drains that are in place will get contaminated with skin flora and are not accurate for cultural purposes. Stains and cultures should be done for aerobes and anaerobes (special handling might be needed), but occasionally more specific cultures need to be done, such as fungi, Mycobacterium, Entamoeba histolytica, and parasites.

Diagnosis is confirmed when there are cystic or solid areas in the liver that, upon aspiration, will yield fluid with positive cultures. It is important to obtain these tests quickly and start treatment because of the high complication rate if left untreated.