Diffuse intramural esophageal diverticulosis is one of the causes of gastrointestinal symptoms, especially dysphagia. Health care providers need to consider it whenever dealing with a patient with dysphagia. Since dysphagia is the usual presentation for our subject of interest and since all health care providers must diagnose and intervene when a patient presents with dysphagia, we will describe below some recommendations to deal with patients who present with dysphagia.

Dysphagia is defined as difficulty in swallowing. It can be divided into oropharyngeal versus esophageal. The first indicates difficulty initiating swallowing and is mostly due to motility disorders, while the latter denotes the inability to transport food down the esophagus with a feeling of food stuck in the esophagus. Furthermore, esophageal dysphagia can be attributed to motility disorders like achalasia and esophageal spasms. Other causes can be structural issues like esophageal cancer, esophagitis, esophageal webs and rings, diverticulosis, or strictures.

Below are recommendations are taken from "Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Assessment of Uninvestigated Esophageal Dysphagia" published in Journal of the Canadian Association of Gastroenterology, 2018

- In patients presenting with dysphagia, it is recommended to use history and physical exam to identify oropharyngeal causes.

- In patients with esophageal dysphagia, it is recommended to use history to differentiate structural and motility disorders of the esophagus.

- In patients presenting with esophageal dysphagia, it is recommended to use history and physical exam, including alarm features like vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding, unexplained weight loss, abdominal mass, or anemia, to ensure timely management especially need for urgent investigations.

- In patients with esophageal dysphagia, endoscopy is recommended over barium esophagram to improve structural esophageal disease diagnosis. On the other hand, barium esophagram is chosen over endoscopy whenever there is limited local access to endoscopy with efforts for timely referral for endoscopy at other facilities.

- For patients under the age of 50 who present with esophageal dysphagia and reflux with no alarm features, it is recommended to investigate after the patient failed a trial of oral proton pump inhibitors (PPI), taken twice daily for 4 weeks.

- Esophageal manometry is used in evaluating persistent dysphagia after excluding structural causes as it is considered the gold standard for diagnosing esophageal motility disorders.