Identifying appropriate candidates for hair transplantation includes an evaluation of the following

- Diagnosis: Fortunately, diagnosing androgenic alopecia is relatively straightforward and based upon the characteristic pattern of associated hair loss (Norwood for males, Ludwig for females), the miniaturization and depigmentation of hairs, and the lack of clinical inflammation. If these features are not present, further evaluation (i.e., laboratory, histopathology) may be warranted.

- Age: The HT surgeon should only operate on patients older than 25 years of age because future hair loss pattern is less predictable and expectations are generally more unrealistic in patients younger than 25 years old.

- Hair Caliber: Mathematically speaking, hairs with larger shaft diameter provide exponentially more surface area coverage; therefore, patients with thicker-caliber hair can expect to obtain much denser coverage (better aesthetic results) versus patients with thin-caliber hair (when controlled for the number of follicular units transplanted).

- Donor Hair Density: Patients whose scalp donor sites have greater than 80 FUs per squared cm are excellent candidates. Those with donor hair density less than 40 FUs per squared cm are considered poor candidates for HT, and the clinician needs to set patient expectations accordingly.

- Degree and Pattern of Baldness: patients hoping to correct frontal baldness can expect the most dramatic results in appearance, and thus represent great candidates. Grafting only the scalp vertex should be avoided if possible, as this not only consumes potential future donor grafts but also may cause a “doughnut” appearance as hair loss progression continues. The surgeon must reiterate that concentrating grafts in the frontal scalp will provide the maximum long-term density and minimal aesthetic risk.

- Hair Color: In the light-skinned individual, patients with light-colored hair (i.e., blonde, red) are preferable to those with black hair since the color contrast between hair and skin is less noticeable. NOTE: proper technique helps mitigate most problems with transplanting dark-haired patients.

- Patient expectations: Patients with realistic expectations and a history of compliance with hair loss medications/treatments (i.e., minoxidil, finasteride, platelet-rich plasma) represent ideal candidates. The patient must also understand the need for a conservative approach when recreating the anterior hairline so that it will have a natural appearance that lasts. Lastly, multiple hair transplantation sessions may be needed to achieve the desired results.

Two types of hair transplantation techniques predominate, including the follicular unit transplantation (FUT) and follicular unit extraction (FUE) techniques. Currently, FUE represents the more common approach due to its potential advantages over FUT,

- Increased number of grafts are harvestable

- The patient's hairstyle is not a factor since scarring is less apparent

- Donor site laxity and density are not a significant deterrent

- Postoperative pain is less

- Postoperative healing time is less

- The surgeon can target follicular groups of a specific size or hairs with a specific diameter or pigmentation

- The surgeon can target hairs outside the typical donor site (i.e., parietal scalp, chest, back, beard, pubis) if needed.

On the contrary, FUT may be preferable to FUE given FUT’s reported advantages, which include:

- Shorter operative: Though FUE operative time is typically longer than FUT, recent advancements in FUE extraction techniques (e.g., automated mechanical instruments and robotic technology) may close this operative time gap by offering decreased extraction times compared to the traditional, manual FUE techniques

- Less transection (of follicles) rate

- Less of a learning curve

Still, controversy remains as to which hair transplantation procedure is superior. Nevertheless, most HT surgeons would agree that deciding on whether to use FUE or FUT depends on several factors, some of which have been enumerated above. In summary, both FUT and FUE represent powerful techniques for improving the aesthetic appearance of the hair, and the astute hair transplantation surgeon should be knowledgeable of the nuances of each.