Pregnancy poses a vulnerable situation for the maternal-fetal dyad putting both of them at risk of disastrous complications. Disruption of fetal tolerance may contribute to the immuno-pathophysiology for pregnancy-related maternal and fetal complications. The immune disruption at the maternal-fetal interface can explain the pathophysiology of unexplained infertility, recurrent abortion, endometriosis, preeclampsia, and placental abruption.

**Recurrent Spontaneous Abortion (RSA)**

RSA (three or more miscarriages) can be due to various factors, including anatomical defects and endocrine disorders ( diabetes, hypothyroidism, polycystic ovarian syndrome). Immune dysfunction at the maternal interface may also be contributing factor for recurrent abortion, as listed below.

- Impaired remodeling of the spiral artery and overexpressed angiogenic growth factors are linked with RSA.

- Autophagy level is noted to be lower in trophoblastic villi among patients with RSA.

- RSA patients have increased levels of mature dendritic cells and decreased levels of immature dendritic cells.

- Decreased M2 macrophage and Treg cells levels are linked with RSA.

**Endometriosis**

The pathophysiology of endometriosis (implantation of endometrial tissues outside the uterus) can be explained by the disturbances in the immune environment causing aberrant implantation and proliferation of endometrial tissue at the ectopic site. The following immune aberrations are noted in endometriosis.

- High levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1 and TNF-α) and decreased levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-13)

- Increased levels of activated peritoneal macrophages

- Lower levels of T reg cells and NK cells

- Polyclonal B cell activation with increased antibody production.

**Preeclampsia**

Preeclamptic pregnant women have high proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8) and decreased anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10). High levels of CD4+ T cells infiltration in the placenta and overrepresentation of M1 macrophages are also noted among preeclamptic mothers.

**Placental Abruption**

The placental abruption is linked with sterile inflammatory changes due to insufficient decidual suppressive activity and increased levels of cytotoxic immune cells in the decidua. The pro-inflammatory cytokines and tissue-specific angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factors are upregulated, leading to disruption of vascular integrity, increasing the risk of placental abruption.

**Preterm Labor**

Triggers such as infection, stress, or inflammation during pregnancy activate prematurely the shift of the anti-inflammatory state to a pro-inflammatory state, which precipitates preterm labor. During labor, the recruitment of effector CD4+ T cells in decidual tissues, which secretes proinflammatory cytokines such s IL-1β, and TNF-α is noted.  The number of neutrophils is increased in decidua when pregnant women have preterm labor with chorioamnionitis. The role of macrophage, NK cells, and dendritic cells in preterm labor are under investigation.

**Advanced Maternal Age and T cell Subset**

Advanced maternal age disrupts the T-cell profile at the maternal-fetal interface and might lead to reduced fetal survival or intrauterine growth restriction. Mother of Advanced age has a lower number of CD4+ T-regulatory cells at the maternal-fetal interface and an increased number of pro-inflammatory T-cells such as gamma IFN producing CD4+ and CD+8 cells in the fetus.

**Virus Pathogenesis and Role of Inflammation**

Viral infections put pregnant women at high risk of abortions, prematurity, low birth weight, and neurologic deficits for the fetus. The shift of the immunity in pregnancy from Th1 to Th2 suppresses CD4, CD8, and NK cells, thereby suppressing cell-mediated immunity against viral infections; this explains why few viral infections such as herpes simplex, hepatitis E and influenza have severe implications among pregnant women compared to non-pregnant.

**Immune Therapy During Pregnancy**

- Intravenous immunoglobulin and allogenic lymphocyte immunotherapy increased the successful pregnancy rate among RSA patients of unknown etiology getting in-vitro fertilization.

- Cyclosporine A has been used in RSA patients because of its role in increasing Treg cells.

- Progesterone has been proven to decrease the risk of abortions in patients with RSA. In addition, progesterone is helpful in multiple ways, such as improving the perfusion at the maternal-fetal interface and regulating the immune response.

- Tregs-enhancing drugs, adoptive Treg cell target therapy, and low dose interleukin are under trial for helping RSA patients.

- Biologic agents such as eculizumab are used as a trial medicine to manage immune dysfunction related to preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome.