Buprenorphine, a synthetic opioid, treats pain and opioid addiction. It underwent development in the late 1960s. It is a synthetic analog of thebaine, an alkaloid compound derived from the poppy flower. It is a Schedule III drug, which means that it has some potential for moderate or low physical dependence or high psychological dependence.

Buprenorphine is FDA-approved for acute pain, chronic pain, and opioid dependence. It is an agent used in agonist substitution treatment, which is a process for treating addiction by using a substance (such as buprenorphine or methadone) to substitute for a stronger full agonist opioid (such as heroin). The prescriber then tapers down the substitute, and the patient withdraws from the opiate addiction with minimal discomfort. Buprenorphine substitute treatment allows the patient to focus on therapy instead of uncomfortable withdrawals. It is an effective option to treat opioid dependence, reduce cravings, and improve the quality of life for patients undergoing addiction treatment. It allows the patient to circumvent many of the uncomfortable symptoms of opioid withdrawal, creating a treatment plan that patients are more likely to adhere to, thereby decreasing morbidity and mortality.

Off-label, use includes withdrawal for heroin-dependent, hospitalized patients. This use is only by injection.

**Additional Uses Buprenorphine**

Other kinds of addiction disorders may also find a role for buprenorphine use. There is an experimental drug that is a combination of buprenorphine and naltrexone, and its role in cocaine addiction is under investigation. Naltrexone is an antagonist of mu and kappa opioid receptors, and when used in conjunction with buprenorphine, it results in the stimulation of only kappa receptors without stimulating the opioid receptors. Theoretically, this combination may result in decreased compulsive cocaine use without resulting in opioid addiction.

The Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2016 now allows physicians to provide office-based treatment for opioid addiction (DEA, 2018). This Federal legislation permits physicians to prescribe Schedule III, IV, or V "narcotic" medications approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with opioid addiction. In 2002, the FDA approved buprenorphine and a combination of buprenorphine/naloxone to manage opioid dependence.

**Indications**

- For managing opioid-dependent patients who have a contraindication to methadone

- There are no available methadone facilities or healthcare providers, and there is a long waitlist of more than three months to join a methadone clinic.

- For opioid-dependent patients with intolerance to or have failed methadone treatment.

- Other individuals who may benefit from buprenorphine are those with a short history of opioid dependence and/or have lower needs for opioid agonists.