Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy is an under-recognized condition that carries a poor prognosis. As this disease develops due to cirrhosis, early recognition and management of conditions predispose to liver disease is key. This requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team. Primary care physicians and mid-level providers should monitor patients for alcohol use disorder, screen for hepatitis, and encourage lifestyle modifications in patients at risk for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Early referral to gastroenterology may be appropriate for patients with genetic or immune conditions, such as Wilson’s disease or autoimmune hepatitis. A high suspicion for CCM is necessary for patients with known cirrhosis as presenting symptoms are non-specific, and no screening guidelines exist. Gastroenterology, or hepatology, will be involved in the management of cirrhosis. Pharmacists will help monitor medication therapy, advise on potential adverse effects, and check for drug-drug interactions. Nursing staff can serve as the initial point for patient counseling and answering questions. If the patient is determined to be a liver transplant candidate, a transplant team should be involved early on. Cardiology should follow these patients to monitor cardiomyopathy and tailor medical regimens. A dietary referral may also be helpful for patient education on fluid and sodium restriction. The involvement of an interprofessional team with effective communication is essential for managing any patient with CCM. [Level 5]