The most concerning adverse effect of bismuth subsalicylate (BSS) is salicylate toxicity. Although quite rare, bismuth toxicity can occur in patients. It primarily occurs in patients who have taken bismuth subsalicylate inappropriately, whether through an overdose or for extended periods of time.

Toxicity is generally seen in patients who ingest more than 150 mg/kg of salicylates (or > 6.5 g of aspirin equivalent). There are no specific antidotes for salicylate toxicity. However, the management of mild to moderate toxicity generally includes supportive care with intravenous fluids. If the patient presents within 2-hours of ingestion of BSS, decontamination with activated charcoal is strongly recommended. Salicylate absorption can be delayed; as such, activated charcoal may also be considered after 2-hours of ingestion if the patient is in a normal mental state. It is recommended to check a salicylate concentration every 1 to 2 hours until a decline is observed. If the salicylate concentration is more than 30 mg/dL, the healthcare team should consider urine alkalization.

In more severe cases and with the presence of altered mental status and metabolic acidosis, hemodialysis may be an option. If the patient is not able to maintain their airway and intubation is required, precautions should be taken to avoid severe acidosis. It is recommended to closely follow up with arterial blood gases and maintain the pre-intubation minute ventilation and low PCO2. Other laboratory parameters that are recommended to be collected include hepatic panel, INR/PTT, CBC, electrolytes, and serum creatinine (renal function tests).