# Introduction

Contrary to what the name suggests, rheumatoid factors (RF) are found not only in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) but in a wide range of pathologies including other autoimmune and non-autoimmune diseases. They have been found in up to 4% of young, healthy individuals and the elderly as well.

# Function

Rheumatoid factors are not routinely detectable in the circulation without an immunogenic stimulus. They are considered to be part of the normal response to a variety of antigenic stimuli, for example, to bacterial toxins like lipopolysaccharides or viruses such as Epstein–Barr virus (EBV).

**Rheumatoid Factors in RA**

The pathogenesis of RA involves a complex interplay between B cells, T cells, and dendritic cells. A multitude of environmental and genetic factors leads to loss of tolerance to the proteins that have a citrulline residue, which leads to the production of autoantibodies like anti-cyclic citrullinated protein/peptide antibody (ACPA) and RF.

# Issues of Concern

Patients with rheumatic diseases like Sjogren syndrome, mixed connective tissue diseases, mixed cryoglobulinemia, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have elevated RFs. They are also frequently found to be elevated in some non-rheumatic diseases, especially chronic infections like hepatitis C, tuberculosis, and subacute infective endocarditis. Sarcoidosis and malignancies like primary sclerosing cholangitis also have RF elevation. It is not certain how a subset of chronic infections and inflammatory diseases lead to the production of increased RF. One explanation is the chronic and persistent stimulation of the immune system by these disorders leading to a state of chronic inflammation. Successful treatment of the underlying disorder frequently leads to the disappearance of these autoantibodies. Hepatitis C could have a very high level of RFs (as high as 76%).

RFs can also interfere with other laboratory tests, including anticardiolipin antibodies, anti-HCV antibodies, antirubella antibodies, thyroid assay, and other tests for various cytokines.

# Clinical Significance

The presence, absence, titers, and isotypes of rheumatoid factors have important implications for the diagnosis and prognosis of rheumatoid arthritis. The seropositive patients (RF-positive) with RA may experience more aggressive and erosive joint disease and extra-articular manifestations such as rheumatoid nodules and vasculitis than those who are seronegative (RF-negative).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Once considered central to the pathogenesis and the diagnosis of RA, Rheumatoid factors are probably one of the most studied autoantibodies in the medical literature. Apart from RA, RFs can be elevated in a number of rheumatic and non-rheumatic diseases. Although useful in the diagnosis of RA along with ACPA, testing for RF in the general population, as a screening test for rheumatological disorders should be strongly discouraged. It should be remembered that the diagnostic accuracy of RF depends on the patient population chosen. For example, the higher the pre-test probability of RA, the higher the positive predictive value will be. As with any other diagnosis, a thorough history and physical examination should dictate the battery of tests chosen. Therefore, any patient with arthritis/arthralgia should be not subjected to testing for RFs unless the clinical suspicion for RA is high. On the other hand, if the patient has been diagnosed with RA, it is prudent to provide a referral to a rheumatologist. Early involvement of rheumatologists in the management of patients with RA has shown better outcomes in terms of joint function and disability.