NBS is not a new entity, and it has been reported in the literature for several decades. However, despite these reports, most healthcare workers appear to be unfamiliar with the diagnosis and have often overlooked it. The exact incidence of NBS is not known, but from the case reports, it is estimated that about 4% to 6% of the population that use long-term opioids develops the syndrome. Based on self-reported questionnaires, it is estimated that about 150,000 individuals in the United States may have NBS; however, these numbers are underestimated because there is no way to confirm the diagnosis. Other recent studies from the gastrointestinal (GI) clinics suggest that in patients with chronic noncancer pain the incidence may be much higher with a longer duration of usage.

It is now estimated that among chronic opioid users 1 out of 20 patient will develop NBS. Thus all healthcare workers who prescribe, dispense or look after patients on opioid must be fully aware of this syndrome so that they may take appropriate and timely action.

**Demographics**

While there are no specific populations which are more susceptible to NBS, small studies reveal that NBS appears to be more common in the following sub-populations:

- Well educated

- Females

- Unemployed and/or disabled for a long time because of health issues

- The pain was moderate to severe

- Having moderate to severe psychosocial impairment (i.e., depression, anxiety, impulsive, labile mood, angry)

Almost every article on NBS reveals that psychiatric comorbidity worsens NBS and hence once the diagnosis of NBS is made, these patients should be thoroughly evaluated by a mental health professional.