The function of quality management (QM) in general (or of healthcare quality management (HQM) in particular) is to improve quality, as defined below, through data analysis and through the identification of root causes (independent variables) of events. QM is a simpler and historically earlier version of the scientific method (SM). QM shares with the SM the goal of increasing objectivity and reducing subjectivity in decision-making. Both QM and the SM involve:

- Defining a problem or issue of interest,

- Quantifying one or more independent variables exposed to a process or event,

- Analyzing how outcomes differed after exposure, and

- Concluding what the measurements mean.

These steps can be referred to as a quality process cycle.  Different persons divide the cycle into different numbers of steps, such as Plan Do Study Act (PDSA) or Define Measure Analyze Improve Control (DMAIC). Although persons performing QM can perform experiments that eliminate bias and confounding variables the way that scientists do to achieve level 1 evidence, QM analyses fall below level 1 evidence. They do not attempt to eliminate all possible forms of bias and confounders. The goal of QM is usually to determine which of two processes is better or when a process should be altered to reach an objective, not to quantify precisely how much better one process is compared to another or how precisely a relationship exists between an independent variable and a dependent variable. Whereas the SM emphasizes attempting to disprove a null hypothesis, identifying/eliminating data collection biases, and quantifying the degree of mathematical certainty for a finding, QM uses simpler ways to modify a process to achieve a more desirable outcome.

QM emphasizes process monitoring and control. According to Deming, quality managers should evaluate every part of a process that can result in delays and in inconsistencies between individuals and between systems. In addition to using lists of processes, quality managers use lists of priorities. The list of Taiiichi Ohno, who is credited with the development of the Toyota Production System and Lean manufacturing, had three items to eliminate:

- Muda (futility)

- Mura (inconsistency), and

- Muri (overburdening).

Managers may not implement QM because of the following restrictions:

- They are not able to obtain data (i.e., measure structures, processes, or outcomes).

- They are not able to design an experiment to show whether a new process is superior to a current process.

- They are not able to quantify statistical confidence in differences between groups.

- They cannot perform plan-do-study-act (PDSA) cycles in the time allotted for their workdays while also performing requirements assigned to them by their superiors and do not want to hire a person who can.

- They are overly tasked with "putting out" instead of "preventing" fires (are distracted by their daily routines and issues and do not focus on larger or longer-term objectives).

- They work for superiors who do not see a benefit of adequate proportion to the costs of performing PDSA cycles.

- They are not concerned with how well things could be performed and instead think, "if it ain't broke, don't fix it," or are concerned only that a bottom line is met somehow (the ends justify the means).