# Introduction

The dentate nucleus is the largest deep cerebellar cluster of neurons; it has a dentated – serrated – edge. Efferent fibers of the dentate nucleus are involved in the modulation of motor neurons and neurons involved in conscious thought and visuospatial function. Disruption of the dentate nucleus is typically associated with cerebellar ataxia.

# Structure and Function

The dentate nucleus is the most lateral deep cerebellar nucleus and is rich in iron. The cerebellar vermis and roof of the fourth ventricle are adjacent to the dentate nucleus. A sagittal section through the dentate nucleus shows its serrated appearance.

The dentate nucleus regulates fine-control of voluntary movements, cognition, language, and sensory functions.

The dentate nucleus has two parts

- The dorsal (motor) domain: This has connections with cortical motor areas regulating motor functions

- The ventral (non-motor) domain: This has links with the cortical association areas controlling cognitive functions

# Embryology

The cerebellum and, by extension, the dentate nucleus arises from the metencephalon, which derives from the rhombencephalon (hindbrain).

Fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8) is important in cerebellum development, as atopic injections of FGF8 can develop a secondary cerebellum in other brain regions. FGF8 appears to define the boundaries into which the cerebellum will develop. The subsequent removal of FGF8 establishes the onset of cerebellar development.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The dentate nucleus mainly receives blood supply from the superior cerebellar artery (SCA) with some contribution from the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA).

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) derived from blood vessels supplying the dentate nucleus commonly comes from the PICA and the adjacent choroid plexus in the fourth ventricle.

# Nerves

**Inputs to the dentate nucleus.**Afferent proprioceptive information synapses with dentate nucleus neurons through the spinocerebellar tract via the inferior cerebellar peduncle. Premotor cortex and supplementary cortex neurons also synapse the dentate nucleus.

**Outputs to the thalamus.**Utilizing the dentatothalamic tract, the dentate nucleus sends output signals through the ipsilateral superior cerebral peduncle, then decussate to synapse the contralateral ventrolateral (VL) thalamic nucleus. VL neurons send fibers to the precentral gyrus (primary motor cortex; M1), premotor cortex, prefrontal gyri, posterior parietal areas, and the basal ganglia – specifically the striatum and the substantia nigra.

**Myoclonic triangle.**The dentate nucleus, along with the red nucleus and the inferior olivary nucleus (ION) of the medulla oblongata, comprises the myoclonic triangle (triangle of Guillain-Mollaret).****

**Cerebellar Purkinje cells.**Cerebellar Purkinje cells are GABAnergic neurons located in the cerebellar cortex synapse on deep cerebellar nuclei, such as the dentate nucleus, to inhibit deep cerebellar neurons.

# Muscles

The dentate nucleus and the interposed nucleus are involved in modulating voluntary movements of skeletal muscles, especially muscles in the extremities and extraocular muscles.

# Physiologic Variants

The cerebellum, and by extension, the dentate nucleus, is highly invariant among humans.

# Surgical Considerations

Resection of tumors in the cerebellum should consider sparing the dentate nucleus as the destruction of the dentate nucleus results in cerebellorubral degeneration with possible hypertrophic ION degeneration and subsequent palatal tremors, which may be caused by the disruption of the myoclonic triangle.

# Clinical Significance

**Cerebellar ataxia.**Inactivation of the dentate nucleus results in cerebellar ataxia, a loss of finely coordinated movements.

**Freiderich ataxia.**Friedreich ataxia is the most common inherited autosomal recessive progressive ataxia.

**Myoclonic triangle disruption.**Disruption of the myoclonic triangle, resulting in disinhibition of the ION, can result in palatal tremor, which is associated with rhythmic involuntary contractions of the palatine muscles.

**Disruption of embryological neural migration.**Disruption of neural migration during embryonic development of the cerebellum, such as those that disrupt the reelin pathway or conditions in which reelin expression decreases, can cause a myriad of neuropsychological disorders ranging from congenital ataxia and epilepsy to schizophrenia, mood disorder, and autism.

**Maple syrup urine disease.**Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is a genetic disorder involving the decreased function of the branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase, which is involved in the catabolism of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) such as leucine, isoleucine, and valine.

**Canavan disease.**Canavan disease (CD) is a rare early childhood progressive neurodegenerative disease associated with swelling and spongy degeneration of white matter in the brain.

**Langerhans cell histiocytosis.**Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is cancer resulting from the dendritic cells of the skin (Langerhans cell). Although LCH usually affects the skin and bone, it can affect the central nervous system (CNS). T1-weighted MRIs of children with LCH shows changes in the CNS, ranging from pineal gland enlargement to dentate nucleus signaling modifications that may correlate with degeneration.

**Alzheimer disease.**Normal aging of the cerebellum correlates with a loss of about 2.5% Purkinje cells per decade. However, there is no evidence of age-related neuronal loss of the deep cerebellar nuclei. Patients with Alzheimer's disease have deposits of amyloid plaques on the cerebellar cortex; those at a later stage tend to have balance and gait problems due to a reduction of cerebellar glucose metabolism. Although amyloid and tau inclusions are largely absent from the deep cerebellar nuclei, there is an increased level of iron deposition as per MRI.

**Autism spectrum disorders.**Autism spectrum disorders are a group of behavioral neurodevelopment disorders associated with cognitive impairment and deficits in language and communication.

**Essential tremor.**Even though the thalamic ventral intermediate nucleus has merited consideration as the driving center for tremors, this nucleus receives input from the main cerebellar projections. Research has found that the increased functional connectivity between the cerebellar cortex and dentate nucleus is compensating for the reduced connectivity between the dentate nucleus and thalamus.

# Other Issues

Patients undergoing repeated T1-weighted MRI with gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCAs) for neurologic diseases have a potential for gadolinium to deposit and persist in the globus pallidus and dentate nucleus.