HPV is transmitted primarily through penetrative sex. While HPV also can be transmitted via non-penetrative sexual activity, it is less common.

- There is conflicting evidence about the effect of condoms on prevention.

- About 30% of genital warts will disappear within four months of their initial appearance.

- Most genital warts will recur within three months of completion of initial therapy, even if therapy was followed correctly.

- Recurrence rates depend on the patient's general health and immune status, previous HPV vaccinations, specific HPV strain, number of inoculations (sexual frequency with an infected partner), use of condoms, and the viral load.

- Smoking increases the risk of getting genital warts.

- Approximately three out of four unaffected partners of patients with warts develop them within eight months of contact.

- Although 90% of HPV infections are cleared within two years of infection, it is possible for a latency period to occur, with the first occurrence or a recurrence happening months or even years later.

- Latent HPV is transmissible, and if an individual has unprotected sex with an infected partner, there is a 70% chance they will become infected.

- In individuals with a prior HPV infection, the appearance of new warts may be either from a new exposure or a recurrence.

- Anal or genital warts may be transmitted during birth and may be an indicator of sexual abuse.

- Genital warts may sometimes result from autoinoculation by warts elsewhere on the body, such as from the hands.