Given the high emotional stakes with discussing driving privileges, it is better to begin this discussion early in the course of dementia before overt impairment is noted.

After providing the driving fitness assessment, patients and families may need help complying with this new transition at home. Clinicians may suggest social resources or safer public transportation options.

In summary, patients with dementia are at increased risk of driving impairment, and fitness to drive should be evaluated in all patients with neurocognitive disorders. There is no single objective scale or test to determine driving fitness, so this decision should involve a multidisciplinary assessment. It is prudent to begin screening for driving impairment as soon as the clinician obtains a history of driving accidents/citations or significant changes in driving patterns (likely to be reported by caretakers). This should be followed with a thorough evaluation of the patient’s medications and physical exam. If patients have high-risk features on the screening, they should be further evaluated with neuropsychological testing and the clinical dementia severity scale (Level 1A evidence).

Due to the complexity of CDR scoring, clinicians in a busy practice may consider MMSE or MoCA as an alternative. Still, they should consider the lack of Level 1A evidence supporting their use in assessing driving ability. The next step in safety assessment may refer the patient to a certified occupational therapist or a driving rehabilitation specialist to assess on-the-road driving abilities. Using this stepwise diagnostic approach may provide a comprehensive evaluation of patient road safety. After a patient has been deemed unfit to drive, it is the clinician’s responsibility to share this information sensitively and ensure that the patients and caretakers are well-supported in this important transition.