Early recognition of trauma to the chest is a priority. The first 3 steps of trauma evaluation involve evaluation, recognition, and intervention of potential injuries to “the box.” Following a routine method of TRAUMA PROTOCOL evaluation reduces missed injuries. Injuries to the heart and lungs are usually serious, and early diagnosis is vital since they have the highest mortality if missed. Injuries to other thoracic structures also need to be considered; the ribs, clavicle, trachea, bronchi, esophagus, and large vessels, including the aorta and veins, need to be evaluated in the secondary and tertiary survey.

Since the trajectory of penetrating injury can vary, a thorough evaluation is key.

The primary survey identifies immediately life-threatening injuries. These injuries should be addressed at the time of identification.

Potential injuries that should be ruled out include:

- Large hemothorax

- Large pneumothorax

- Pericardial effusion with or without tamponade

- Hemoperitoneum (depending on trajectory)

Once the initial exam is complete and adjunct imaging is complete, a secondary survey may reveal:

- Rib fractures

- Small hemothorax

- Small pneumothorax

- Pulmonary contusion

- Chest wall contusion

There are physical exam findings that increase suspicion of chest trauma. Open wounds should be considered as possible points of entry and or exit. When discussing missile injury, it is imperative to refrain from documenting entry vs. exit points since this is a forensic notation, and incorrect documentation can have legal ramifications.

**Diagnostics**

While chest radiography prevails, it does have limitations. Since chest radiography is achieved in the supine position, small and medium-sized pneumothoraces and hemothoraces may be missed.

The extended-Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (eFAST) may be done with the primary survey, especially in an unstable patient. eFAST allows for quick identification of chest areas with air and/or blood and helps focus definitive management.

The 4 views of the traditional Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) exam include the cardiac (subxiphoid) window, right upper quadrant (RUQ, or Morrison’s pouch), left upper quadrant (LUQ), and suprapubic (bladder) window. The presence of a black collection outside of an organ, viscera, or pericardia suggests a positive FAST exam.

The eFAST includes pulmonary views and also evaluates for pneumothorax and hemothorax, in addition to the traditional 4 views. eFAST should be started in the area where there is the highest suspicion for injury. If the thorax is of concern, then this is where the eFAST should begin. This includes anterior chest wall evaluation between ribs for pneumothorax and looking for the continuation of the spinal stripe caudal to the diaphragm in the RUQ and LUQ windows to evaluate for hemothorax. The spinal stripe can be present in cases of pleural effusion. Similar to a positive FAST exam, any presence of fluid in the trauma patient is assumed to be blood.

Computed tomography (CT) is more sensitive and specific. However, this requires the patient to be stable for transport.

Other adjuncts include endoscopy, bronchoscopy, and electrocardiography to complete evaluation when warranted.