Any obstruction of the tracheal bronchus can lead to atelectasis, decrease ventilation, and infection. Hence in children, recurrent upper lobe pneumonia is a common presentation. These complications usually occur when the clinician does not diagnose the tracheal bronchus.

One classification categorizes the tracheal bronchus about the carina anatomically:

- Type I is when the tracheal bronchus is more than 2 cm from the carina, and there is a narrowing of the distal trachea

- Type II is when the tracheal bronchus is more than 2 cm from the carina, but there is no narrowing of the distal trachea

- Type III is when the tracheal bronchus is less than 2 cm above the level of the carina

An additional classification system describes tracheal bronchi relative to the upper lobe bronchus and pulmonary arteries.

- A normal right upper lobe bronchus is termed eparterial as it arises cranial to the right pulmonary artery.

- A normal left upper lobe bronchus is called hyparterial as it arises caudal to the normal left pulmonary artery.

- An aberrant bronchus arising proximal to the upper lobe bronchus is called pre-eparterial on the right side and eparterial or pre-hyparterial on the left side.

- A bronchus arising distal to the upper lobe bronchus is called post eparterial on the right side and post hyparterial on the left side.

Tracheal bronchus may be displaced or supernumerary.

- If the anatomic upper-lobe bronchus is missing a single branch, the tracheal bronchus is defined as displaced.

- If the right upper-lobe bronchus has a normal trifurcation into apical, posterior, and anterior segmental bronchi, the tracheal bronchus is defined as supernumerary.

The supernumerary bronchi may end blindly; in that case, they are also called tracheal diverticula. If they terminate in aerated or bronchiectasis lung tissue, the term for this is apical accessory lungs or tracheal lobes.

Incidental intubation of tracheal bronchus can cause obstruction, pneumothorax, post obstructive pneumonia, and respiratory failure.