Currently, the exact etiology of glaucoma is unknown but there is a clear correlation with elevated eye pressures in the majority of POAG cases. Open-angle glaucoma typically manifests as a slow painless damage to the optic nerve that is thought to be due to the drainage system in the eye becoming ineffective. In glaucoma, the resistance to drainage of aqueous humor most commonly starts at the inner wall of Schlemm’s canal at the juxtacanalicular trabecular meshwork. The decreased outflow facility, or increased resistance to outflow of aqueous results in the gradual elevation of IOP and a characteristic damage pattern to the optic nerve ganglion cell nerve fiber layer. Another theory is that the increased IOP causes decreased blood flow to the optic nerve fibers which leads to subtle ischemic damage. Either way, POAG patients often have elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) readings that seem to correlate with characteristic optic nerve damage patterns. As the disease progresses, there is a slow loss of peripheral vision in both eyes; eventually leading to loss of central vision if left undetected or untreated. It is because of this pattern of loss that affected persons do not notice a change in their vision until their loss is advanced and affecting the central vision.

There are a couple subsets of open-angle glaucoma which are Juvenile open-angle glaucoma and low-tension/normal-tension glaucoma. Juvenile open-angle glaucoma affects patients between the ages of 5-35 years old. It is uncommon and tends to be found later in the disease process because its early but gradual IOP elevation. Patients also typically present with eye pressures greater than 30 mm Hg. Juvenile open-angle is thought to follow the same process of increased IOP leading to optic neuropathy as POAG, just in a younger patient population.

Low-tension or normal-tension glaucoma resembles POAG as there is the characteristic optic disc cupping and peripheral visual-field loss finding but the IOP readings are consistently less than 21 mm Hg. Theories include having an abnormally pressure-sensitive optic nerve or intermittent ischemic change due to atherosclerosis/vascular insufficiency.

Angle-closure is the type of glaucoma that can present as a medical emergency in the acute setting. This occurs when the drainage system of the eye becomes blocked abruptly due to the closure of the angle formed between the cornea and the iris. Typically, this occurs due to an age-related thickening of the lens, causing the gradual increase in a relative pupillary block which then pushes the iris anteriorly. This anteriorly displaced iris along with a natural anatomical variation of a smaller angle, as seen in far-sightedness or in certain ethnic groups, allows for easier blockage of the outflow tract. A pupillary block is considered to be the underlying cause of more than 90% of cases. When sudden pupil dilation occurs due to stimulus or drugs the iris becomes thick enough in its contracted state, or anteriorly displaced by pupillary block, to block the drainage of fluid via the trabecular meshwork. The pressure then rapidly increases within the eye. It is this rapid change in intraocular pressure that can cause vision loss to occur within a day of onset without intervention, due to retinal vascular occlusion, ischemic optic neuropathy, or glaucomatous optic nerve damage. However, only about 10% of glaucoma cases are this acute angle closure type.

Angle-closure glaucoma can occur secondary to another cause. One such cause is lens subluxation in Marfan’s syndrome.

Secondary open angle type is due to injury, eye disease and rarely eye surgery causing increased intraocular pressure and therefore optic nerve damage like the open-angle form of glaucoma. One mechanism is from laser surgery which can cause pigment release, inflammatory cells, debris, and mechanical deformation resulting in blockage of the trabecular meshwork leading to increased intraocular pressure. The most common mechanism for secondary type is from diseases causing neovascularization. Neovascularization can either physically block the outflow tracts.