The differential diagnosis of pigmented oral lesions ranges from various benign entities to rare oral melanoma. Oral melanoacanthoma usually presents as a solitary lesion but in rare instances may be multifocal or diffuse in nature.Melanocytic benign lesions can be divided into multifocal and solitary. Multi-focal lesions should include smokers' pigmentation of the mucosa, which occurs in those who smoke or chew tobacco.

Multifocal hyperpigmented melanocytic lesions can be caused by certain conditions, such as HIV, syndromes like Peutz-Jeghers, neurofibromatosis, McCune-Albright syndrome, Addison's disease, Laugier-Hunziker, and some drugs including azathioprines, antimalarials, cytotoxic agents, such as bleomycin, and contraceptives.

Non-melanocytic diffuse pigmentation may be due to heavy metals, trauma, or hemochromatosis.

In focal pigmentation, differential diagnoses include melanotic macule, which is most common, followed by melanocytic nevi, and more rarely oral melanoma.

Addison disease causes hyperpigmentation of the oral mucosa by increased melanocyte-stimulating hormone due to increased production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in the presence of failing adrenal glands.Laugier-Hunziker syndrome is a rare cause of oral and cutaneous hyperpigmentation that typically occurs in older caucasian males with an absence of associated hamartomas or malignancies and is a diagnosis of exclusion.

Up to 18% of human immunodeficiency virus patients may be affected by oral hyperpigmentation. It most often affects the gingival mucosa and may develop irrespective of antiretroviral therapy, CD4 counts, or disease duration.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant disease with benign hyperpigmented buccal macules and gastrointestinal hamartomas or polyposis. It is associated with stomach, colon, and pancreatic cancer, among others. It often presents in childhood, and patients will have oral and cutaneous hyperpigmented macules that usually cover the lips, oral mucosa, and perioral area. Patients presenting with oral or perioral hyperpigmentation and gastrointestinal polyps or family history suggestive of PJS should undergo genetic testing.

Amalgam tattoo or focal argirosis typically presents as blue or greyish tinge, located in the mucosa near a previous dental filling, dental implant, or prosthesis. These lesions can be detected on x-rays. A biopsy will show tiny black deposits in the connective tissue, typically aligned along the collagen fibers and blood vessels. If the patient's history does not very clearly point towards a benign or non-melanocytic diagnosis, then a biopsy of the lesion should be performed.

Oral melanoma should be suspected in instances of lesions displaying the ABCDE criteria, which include Asymmetry, Border irregularity, change in Color, Diameter >6mm, and Elevation, or the presence of a raised lesion. Oral melanoma accounts for almost a quarter of melanoma of the head and neck. It is associated with a very poor prognosis, approximately 30% five-year survival, because of its propensity for metastasis and local recurrence. Despite its rarity, since oral melanoma carries such a poor prognosis, a biopsy should be performed to rule it out.