Currently, the therapeutic options are limited to asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic patients with Krabbe disease's infantile form.

**Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant (HSCT)**

The hematopoietic cells from a healthy donor are transplanted to the patient. HSCT helps the patient to populate the brain with microglia with normal function and good GALC enzyme activity. HSCT works best when given before the onset of symptoms and helps plateau or slow its progression. Studies have shown its efficacy in halting the cognitive and motor decline in the patient.

A study focused on diffusion tensor imaging in patients with Krabbe disease demonstrated that HSCT reduces the fraction anisotropy (FA) across six tracts measured. The decrease in FA in corticospinal tracts is associated with better cognitive and motor outcomes. A reduction in FA in the splenium and uncinate fasciculus is correlated with better cognitive outcomes.

**Cord Blood Stem Cell Transfusion**

Cord blood stem cells collected from an unrelated donor's umbilical cord are transfused into the patient. However, this procedure has also been beneficial to only those patients treated before symptoms appear.

**Supportive**

There is a lot more research required to find better treatment options for patients suffering from Krabbe disease. Until then, the patient can be provided with supportive care.

- Muscle relaxants for spasms

- Anti-convulsants might sometimes be helpful for seizures

- Physiotherapy to increase mobility

- Occupational therapy for older children

- Tube feedings for good nutrition if swallowing is affected