As with all abscess, once identified, the mainstay of treatment is incision and drainage given the significant concern of extension into nearby tissue. Simple, superficial perianal abscess and some ischiorectal abscesses can be drained at the bedside. A horseshoe abscess is a large abscess in the deep postanal space which extends bilaterally to the ischiorectal fossae. This must be treated in the operating room by a specialist. For superficial perianal abscesses, giving the appropriate amount of anesthetic with epinephrine should be sufficient to adequately incise and drain the abscess. Typically, the incision is cruciate or elliptical and made as close as possible to the anal verge to minimize the potential long fistula formation. Given that a large number of abscesses are associated with a fistula, concomitant fistulotomy or seton placement may be performed with varying results. However, compared to an incision and drainage, a fistulotomy is associated with a significantly lower rate of recurrence. Packing of the wound is controversial, but Perera et al. did not find significant evidence to support an advantage over packing the wound compared to incision and drainage without packing.

Surgeons should perform an examination under anesthesia to evaluate patients with recurrent or bilateral abscesses for intraoperative drainage, including cases where internal draining may be necessary. A larger abscess may require placement of a drain for up to 3 weeks. Catheters are also recommended for patients with severe systemic illness, underlying comorbidities including diabetes and morbid obesity. The catheters can be placed after a small stab incision is made through the skin using a mushroom tip catheter 10 to 14 Fr which is then secured to the skin with a suture. Surgeons generally follow up at 2 to 3 weeks for incision and drainage patients, and 7 to 10 days for patients with mushroom tip catheters. They are usually followed until completely healed. A high fiber diet is recommended.

Some surgeons do advocate a diverting colostomy in severe cases but the infection may persist despite the colostomy. The key is to provide adequate drainage to control the infection.

The management of fistula is not easy and there are several methods to manage them including:

- Seton treatment

- Fistulotomy

- Fistulectomy

- Glue therapy

- Marsupialization

- Anal flap

Antibiotics are recommended when there is associated cellulitis of the surrounding skin, patients that fail to improve after drainage and immunocompromised patients. Currently, no data exist to suggest that antibiotics will reduce fistula formation. Antibiotics should include coverage for the organisms listed above. We recommend obtaining wound cultures if antibiotics are prescribed, especially those who already have completed a prior course, or known resistance in the past. We recommend treating with amoxicillin-clavulanate or ciprofloxacin plus metronidazole for 10 days.

Admission is recommended for patients who are frail, have a fever, hypotensive or immunosuppressed.

Patients should be made aware that healing is not immediate and pain may be moderate to severe after surgery.