The clinical triad of abdominal pain, peripheral neuropathy, and neuropsychiatric manifestations must prompt suspicion of acute porphyrias. ADP is an extremely rare form of acute porphyria and requires a high index of suspicion for diagnosis. Patients commonly present with recurrent abdominal pain and may end up in a surgical service. Hence the surgical teams must be aware of this nonsurgical cause of recurrent abdominal pain with normal abdominal imaging studies and must look for neuropsychiatric signs and neuropathy when patients present with recurrent abdominal pain. The diagnostic algorithm for acute porphyrias must be followed to diagnose this extremely rare condition.

Interprofessional involvement of the primary care clinician, hematologist, nursing, surgeon, genetic/metabolic disease expert, biochemist, and pharmacist is necessary for early identification of this disease. A high index of suspicion can prevent multiple episodes and unnecessary diagnostic tests. Nursing must be educated on the administration of hemin and monitor for adverse reactions. Pharmacists have an important role in verifying drug interactions and making sure no drug that can trigger an episode is administered to a patient. Finally, patient counseling is very important as they must be aware of the importance of avoiding triggers that precipitate attacks. Open communication and collaboration between interprofessional members of the team are necessary to ensure early diagnosis, enhance outcomes, and prevent recurrent episodes. [Level 5]