The widely accepted view in the literature is that a reduction in subchondral blood supply is responsible for osteonecrosis. However, numerous risk factors and theories exist on the development of this vascular impairment. Shah et al. succinctly categorize these into six groups.

- Direct cellular toxicity

- Chemotherapy
- Radiotherapy
- Thermal injury
- Smoking

- Extraosseous arterial fracture

- Hip dislocation
- Femoral neck fracture
- Iatrogenic post-surgery
- Congenital arterial abnormalities

- Extraosseous venous

- Venous abnormalities
- Venous stasis

- Intraosseous extravascular compression

- Hemorrhage
- Elevated bone marrow pressure
- Fatty infiltration of bone marrow due to prolonged high-dose corticosteroid use
- Cellular hypertrophy and marrow infiltration (Gaucher's disease)
- Bone marrow edema
- Displaced fractures

- Intraosseous intravascular occlusion

- Coagulation disorders such as thrombophilias and hypofibrinolysis
- Sickle cell crises

- Multifactorial

In a small percentage of cases, mutations in the COL2A1 gene, which codes for type 2 collagen production, have demonstrated autosomal dominant inheritance patterns.

Repetitive trauma, like assembly line work, can lead to AVN over time. Nontraumatic risks for AVN include anything potentially impacting vascular flow to the bone. Radiation can induce bone marrow changes leading to AVN.

Anatomy with low collateral capabilities or retrograde vasculature, such as the carpus, is at increased risk for necrosis.

Glucocorticoids used at high doses and for prolonged periods can induce osteonecrosis via osteocyte apoptosis. Apoptosis disrupts the lacunar-canicular system.