When hyperthyroidism is suspected based on clinical features, the patient should undergo an initial evaluation with measurement of TSH, free T4, and total T3 to confirm the diagnosis. Figure 1 illustrates the diagnostic algorithm for hyperthyroidism. Patients with overt hyperthyroidism will have low/suppressed TSH levels with elevated free T4 and total T3 levels. Patients with mild/subclinical hyperthyroidism will have low/suppressed TSH with normal free T4 and total T3 levels. 'T3 toxicosis' is defined as low/suppressed TSH with normal T4 and elevated T3 levels.

Conditions that can interfere with the assessment of TSH include the presence of heterophile antibodies and high biotin intake due to interference with the assays.

After the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism has been confirmed, measurement of thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb) levels as an initial test for determining the etiology of hyperthyroidism has been shown to reduce the time to diagnosis and is more cost-effective.

If TRAb levels are normal, the patient should undergo a radioiodine thyroid uptake and scan using an I-123 isotope (enters the thyroid gland through the Na/I symporter). This test is contraindicated in pregnant and lactating women. A capsule containing an I-123 isotope is given a day before the scan is performed. The pattern of uptake of I-123 by the thyroid gland seen on the scan can help determine the diagnosis (see Figure 1). However, this test does not help differentiate between type 1 and type 2 amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis, as the uptake will be low in chronic amiodarone use.

- 
**High Uptake/Normal**

- 
              
- Graves disease will have high or normal uptake in a diffuse pattern
              
              
- TMNG will have a high or normal uptake in a patch pattern
              
              
- TA will have a high or normal uptake with a solitary area of high uptake (corresponding to the known nodule) with low uptake in the remainder of the gland

- 
**Low or Absent Uptake**

- 
              
- Any etiology of thyroiditis is associated with low or absent uptake (Na/I symporters are not functional in inflamed or destroyed thyroid follicular cells)
              
              
- Iatrogenic and factitious thyrotoxicosis

Thyroid ultrasound using the color doppler is another important test that can help determine the underlying etiology. Intrathyroidal arterial flow velocities are measured.