CU is classified based on the pathophysiology into:

- Immunologic CU (ICU)

- Non-immunologic CU (NICU)

- CU due to unknown mechanisms

**1. Immunologic CU (ICU)**

ICU involves antigen binding to IgE-specific antibodies (type I hypersensitivity reaction) on the dermal mast cells. After antigen-antibody binding, there is a release of histamine and vasoactive mediators like prostaglandins and leukotrienes, resulting in disturbance of skin microcirculation. A stronger allergic response than non-immunologic CU (NICU) gets elicited due to the ready absorption of the proteins by the skin

- Stage 1- Localised urticaria (redness and swelling), dermatitis and some non-specific symptoms like burning, itching, tingling, etc

- Stage 2- Generalized urticaria

- Stage 3- Systemic manifestations like bronchial asthma, angioedema, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, oropharyngeal symptoms (Ex. lip swelling, hoarseness, difficulty in swallowing), gastrointestinal symptoms (Ex.nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps)

- Stage 4- Generalized anaphylactic reaction including anaphylactic shock

There are two broad categories of agents causing ICU.

- High molecular weight proteins with molecular weight more than 10000 kD. Ex. dietary proteins.

- Hapten chemicals with molecular weight less than 1000 kD: They conjugate with carrier proteins like albumin and form the hapten-carrier protein complex. Ex. Di-isocyanate used in polyurethane products and ammonium persulphate.

The agents causing ICU can divide into four groups.

- Group I - Plant-derived proteins (Ex.vegetables, fruits, spices)

- Group II- Animal-derived proteins (Ex.meat, dairy products, seafood)

- Group III- Grains (Ex. wheat, barley, rye)

- Group IV- Enzymes (Ex.alpha-amylase, cellulase, xylanase)

**2. Non-immunologic CU (NICU)**

NICU is less severe and more common than ICU. There are no specific antibodies against the causative agents. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit the response showing that prostaglandins (Ex. prostaglandin D2) may play a role in the pathogenesis.

NICU agents can classify into the following types:

- Animals (Ex. arthropods, caterpillars, corals)

- Foods (Ex. pepper, mustard, thyme)

- Fragrances and flavorings (Ex. balsam of Peru, cinnamic acid, cinnamic aldehyde)

- Medications (Ex. benzocaine, camphor, witch-hazel)

- Metals (Ex. cobalt)

- Plants (Ex. nettles, seaweed)

- Preservatives and disinfectants (Ex. benzoic acid, formaldehyde)

Described in Table 1 are some of the common causative agents for NICU. There is an overlap in the causative agents between ICU and NICU.

**3. CU due to an unknown mechanism**

Some reactions of CU have unknown mechanisms that remain unclassified. Ammonium persulphate is a classic example of this type of response. CU due to ammonium persulphate can be mediated by type 1 (IgE-mediated) or by classical pathway (IgG or IgM-mediated).

**Protein contact dermatitis**

Protein contact dermatitis (PCD) was first described in kitchen workers who had localized dermatitis of the hands and forearm. PCD is chronic hand eczema that occurs in contact with proteins, with or without a positive prick test.