IPAH results in narrowing of the blood vessels going to or within the lungs, restricting the pulmonary circulation and making it difficult for the heart to pump blood. Pulmonary artery resistance is increased due to vasoconstriction, vascular remodeling, and thrombosis. As the disease progresses, the constant increase in pressure and remodeling of pulmonary vasculature promotes further pulmonary hypertension. To maintain cardiac output, the right ventricular systolic pressure is elevated to overcome the increased pulmonary vascular resistance.

The compensation of the heart to balance the effects of IPAH can be explained with Ohm’s law. There is a relationship between the resistance (R), pressure (V), and flow through a vessel (I), in this case, pulmonary vasculature.

- Ohm’s law: V = RI or I = V/R

According to Ohm's law, the pressure increases, and the flow decreases when there is increased resistance. Decrease flow results in the backup of blood into the right ventricle and less blood flowing forward through the pulmonary vasculature. Progression of the condition can lead to right heart failure and decreased cardiac output.

Genetic susceptibility (BMRP2 mutation and other genetic factors) leads to endothelium dysfunction, leading to an altered synthesis of endothelium-derived vasoactive substances that affect many intracellular pathways. The major intracellular pathways involved are nitric oxide, endothelin, and prostacyclin pathway, which leads to the changes in the vasculature in PAH. The decrease in the production of vasodilators and overexpression of vasoconstrictors leads to vasoconstriction due to an imbalance between vasodilators and vasoconstrictors.

There is an imbalance between prostacyclin (vasodilator and inhibit platelet activation) and thromboxane A2 (vasoconstrictor and platelet agonist). Prostacyclin synthase production and nitric oxide decrease in idiopathic pulmonary artery hypertension. The overexpression of endothelin-1 not only causes vasoconstriction but also promotes the proliferation of smooth muscle cells of the pulmonary artery and vascular remodeling. Serotonin levels are increased in plasma, which promotes vasoconstriction and endothelial cell proliferation. Serotonin transporter mutation in lung tissues and platelets also plays a role in pathogenesis. Decreased levels of vasoactive intestinal peptide, which is a vasodilator and inhibits platelets. All these alterations in vasoactive substances lead to vasoconstriction, vascular remodeling, and thrombosis, which causes an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance.