# Continuing Education Activity

Bromocriptine is a medication currently used in the management and treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is an ergot alkaloid derivative in the dopamine D2 agonist class of drugs. This activity will review the indications, contraindications, and mechanism of action for bromocriptine as a valuable agent in managing type 2 diabetes mellitus, as well as its more traditional uses in Parkinson disease acromegaly pituitary prolactinomas. Further, throughout this activity, we will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors pertinent to all inter-professional healthcare teams in managing patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus, Parkinson disease, acromegaly, and pituitary prolactinomas using bromocriptine.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of bromocriptine.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of bromocriptine.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for patients receiving therapy with bromocriptine.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance bromocriptine and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Bromocriptine is a medication currently used in the management and treatment of Type 2 diabetes mellitus. It is an ergot alkaloid derivative in the dopamine D2 agonist class of drugs. This discussion reviews the indications, contraindications, and mechanism of action for bromocriptine as a valuable agent in the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus, as well as its more traditional uses in Parkinson disease, acromegaly, and pituitary prolactinomas.

**Diabetes Mellitus Type 2**

The most recently FDA-approved indication for bromocriptine mesylate is a supplemental medication for adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus (type 2 DM) to help with glycemic control.

**Hyperprolactinemia**

Bromocriptine is an FDA-approved medication indicated for the use of disorders causing hyperprolactinemia, which most often is due to the most common of the pituitary adenomas – prolactinoma.

**Acromegaly**

Acromegaly characteristically demonstrates a set of complications associated with increased blood concentrations of growth hormone (GH). GH is affected by the sympathetic nervous system, where the binding of catecholamines to alpha receptors increases blood concentrations of GH, and the binding of beta receptors decreases blood concentrations of GH. In an average adult, catecholamines, including norepinephrine, epinephrine, and L-DOPA, would increase blood concentrations of GH.

**Parkinson Disease**

Parkinson disease (PD) is a progressive neurological disorder characterized by resting tremor, rigidity, akinesia or bradykinesia, and postural instability due to the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra.

# Mechanism of Action

Bromocriptine is a dopamine receptor agonist with selective agonist activity on D2 dopamine receptors while simultaneously acting as a partial antagonist for D1 dopamine receptors.

# Administration

Bromocriptine is available in two forms: an oral tablet/capsule (2.5 to 5.0 mg) for the treatment of hyperprolactinemia, acromegaly, and Parkinson disease, and another oral tablet/capsule (0.8 mg) for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

- Hyperprolactinemia: Initial dose of 1.25 to 2.50 mg/day, followed by an increase over the following days with a final maintenance dose of about 5 mg/day.

- Acromegaly: Initial dose of 1.25 to 2.50 mg/day and an increase in 2.50 mg increments until desired GH blood concentrations are reached, with maintenance doses ranging from 7.50 to 30.0 mg/day.

- Parkinson Disease: Initial dose of 2.50 mg/day with an increase in increments of 2.50 mg based on tolerance and effect. Use the lowest dose possible to achieve symptomatic control, with a low dose considered less than 30.0 mg/day and a high dose considered 31.0 to 100 mg/day.

- Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: Initial dose of 0.8 mg/day with a weekly increase of 0.8 mg until the desired glycemic control is reached, with a maximum dose of 4.80 mg/day.

# Adverse Effects

**Most Common Side Effects**

- Nausea

- Vomiting

- Dizziness

- Hypotension

- Headache

- Fatigue

**More Serious Side Effects**

- Psychosis

- Fibrosis (retroperitoneal, pleural, cardiac valve)

- Cardiovascular incidents (valvular damage, stroke, myocardial infarction)

# Contraindications

Bromocriptine is contraindicated as a treatment in patients with type I diabetes mellitus, syncope, and psychosis. Patients with syncopal migraines should also avoid bromocriptine due to its ability to spark hypotensive episodes, and breastfeeding patients should avoid bromocriptine due to its inhibitory effect on lactation.

# Monitoring

Patients using bromocriptine should take a pregnancy test if amenorrhea occurs due to the possibility of pregnancy and diminished prolactin secretion in the fetus with continued use. Clinicians should discontinue bromocriptine if pregnancy is confirmed unless otherwise recommended by a physician.

Patients taking bromocriptine should also receive liver function tests (LFTs) to check for elevated liver enzymes and be given a cardiovascular assessment before using the drug.

# Toxicity

Bromocriptine metabolism occurs primarily in the liver via the cytochrome P450 3A4 enzymes and should be avoided in anyone with hepatic impairment.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and treatment of complicated disorders such as type 2 diabetes mellitus, acromegaly, hyperprolactinemia, and Parkinson disease require not only an astute patient-centered approach from physicians but an interprofessional team of healthcare workers who can guide patients from their first clinic visit until achieving symptomatic control. When clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, laboratory technologists, medical students, and all other involved members of the healthcare team collaborate effectively, there is greater access to care, increased coordination of services, better outcomes in chronic disease, and improvements in patient safety.

When a patient first enters a clinic, the initial diagnosis requires collaboration between the primary care provider and the appropriate specialist. The validity of the clinician’s diagnosis is dependent on the combination of clinical findings with laboratory tests. To prescribe the appropriate medication dosage and administration, the clinician must consult with the pharmacist, and the pharmacist must communicate with the patient so that the patient understands all instructions and side effects. If the patient incorrectly takes the medication, that patient should go to the emergency department, where nurses will be responsible for constant monitoring and consulting with toxicologists, radiologists, or even with pediatric specialists in the case of an accidental overdose in a child. If medical students are involved, they too, must effectively communicate with the attending physician, nurses, and technologists. Medical students trained in inter-professional education demonstrate more respect and positive attitudes when working with each other and other healthcare team members.

Even with patients regularly taking their medication as prescribed, health management continues. Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus will be assisted by Certified Diabetes Educators (CDEs) to provide diet and nutritional guidance, as well as mental health professionals, podiatrists, optometrists, and other community health workers to address the various sequelae associated with the disease. Patients with Parkinson disease, acromegaly, and hyperprolactinemia must continue to be cared for by their respective neurological and endocrine teams to treat the diseases holistically. Bromocriptine is a drug with a historically safe side-effect profile and very rare severe adverse effects, but it is a necessity that communication is present between each member of the team to ensure safe and effective treatment because even one unnecessary adverse event is one too many.