These patients are extremely ill and should be transferred immediately to the intensive care unit. The sepsis causes refractory hypotension and diffuse capillary leak. Thus the patient will need aggressive resuscitation with fluids and the use of inotropes to maintain blood pressure. The patient must be kept NPO (nothing by mouth) until seen by the surgeon. Nutrition is vital, but only after surgery has been completed. Enteral feedings should be started as soon as the patient is hemodynamically stable. The enteral feedings may help offset the massive negative protein balance that occurs as a result of catabolism.

Key concepts for treatment/management of skin and soft-tissue infections are:

- Early diagnosis and differentiation between necrotizing and non-necrotizing SSTIs

- The early launch of appropriate empiric antibacterial coverage (wide-spectrum)

- Adequate control of infection sources, such as aggressive surgical intervention for abscess drainage and debridement of necrotizing soft tissue infections (NSTIs)

- Identification of infection-causing pathogens and applicable adjustment of antimicrobial coverage.

Antimicrobial therapy for necrotizing fasciitis is as follows:

- Imipenem 1 g every 6 to 8 hours **AND**daptomycin 6 mg/kg QD,**AND**clindamycin 600 mg to 900 mg four times per day.**OR**

- Piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375 g every 6 hours or 4.5 g every 8 hours **AND**daptomycin 6 mg/kg QD,**AND**clindamycin 600 mg to 900 mg four times per day.**OR**

- Meropenem 1 g IV every 8 hours **AND**vancomycin 15 to 20 mg/kg/dose every 8 to 12 hours**AND**clindamycin 600 mg to 900 mg four times per day.**OR**

Surgery

The treatment of necrotizing fasciitis is surgery, and no time should be wasted calling for a surgical consult. The earlier the surgery is undertaken, the better the outcome.

The surgery requires extensive, wide debridement of all necrotic tissues. In some cases, a second-look surgery may also be required. Early surgery may help minimize tissue loss and eliminate the need for amputation of a gangrenous extremity. With wide debridement, the wounds need to be left open and are packed with wet gauze. Daily dressing changes are mandatory. As long as the necrotic tissue is removed, the patient's recovery is faster. A great deal of surgical judgment is required when faced with normal-appearing tissue, which is not frankly necrotic. In most cases, if there is any doubt about viability, the tissues should be removed. In most cases, hemodynamic stability is restored once the necrotic tissue and pus are removed. The patient should be kept intubated and monitored in a critical care unit.  In some patients, daily surgical debridement may be required. During the surgery, meticulous attention should be paid to hemostasis.  Some patients may require repeat visits to the operating room for the removal of necrotic tissue.

**Soft-tissue Reconstruction**

Once all the necrotic tissue is removed and there is evidence of granulation tissue, the plastic surgeon should be consulted. In most cases, primary closure is not possible, and hence the plastic surgeon may be required to reconstruct the soft tissues and close the wound with a muscle flap. If there is no adequate natural skin available for a skin graft, then one may need to use artificial skin.

Another method of treatment includes the use of hyperbaric oxygenation. While the literature does suggest this modality can be used, most of these patients are in the intensive care unit attached to a variety of medical equipment, thus making the journey to the hyperbaric oxygen therapy facility difficult. For small wounds, hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be effective, but for large wounds, there is no evidence that this therapy improves healing or prolongs life. Finally, it should be noted that hyperbaric oxygen therapy is an adjunctive treatment and not a substitute for surgical debridement.

HBO treatment may be useful when the patient is stable. Some data show that this treatment can help reduce mortality. HBO is not a substitute for surgery but a complementary treatment.