The treatment of gout is based on the goals of treatment. During acute flares, the goal is solely to reduce the inflammation and symptoms. Long term goal is to reduce serum urate levels to achieve suppression of flare-ups and regression of tophi.

**General Principles of Therapy**

- The earlier the treatment is introduced for a gout flare, the rapid and complete resolution of symptoms occurs.

- The duration of gout flare therapy ranges from a few days to several weeks, depending on the timing of treatment initiation.

- Anti-inflammatory gout flare prophylaxis should generally be continued during the early months of urate-lowering therapy.

- For patients receiving urate-lowering therapy at the time of gout flare, the urate-lowering medication should be continued without interruption as there is no benefit to temporary discontinuation.

- Tophus is an indication to initiate long-term urate-lowering therapy either during or following the resolution of a gout flare to reverse or prevent joint damage and chronic gouty arthritis.

**Acute Gout Flare**

Management of acute flares aims at decreasing the inflammation and the resulting pain. The physician should start the treatment within the first 24 hours of onset to reduce the severity and duration of the flare-up.

**NSAIDs**

NSAIDs are most effective when therapy is initiated within 48 hours of the onset of gout symptoms. A potent oral NSAID, such as indomethacin (50 mg three times daily) or naproxen (500 mg twice daily), is initiated. Other NSAIDs include meloxicam (15 mg daily), ibuprofen (800 mg three times daily), diclofenac (50 mg two to three times daily, and celecoxib (200 mg twice daily). Typically NSAID treatment for gout flare lasts for five to seven days. No data favors one NSAID over the other. High-dose, fast-acting NSAIDs such as naproxen or diclofenac are options, and indomethacin is not preferable due to its toxicity profile.

Contraindications for the use of NSAIDs include active duodenal or gastric ulcer, cardiovascular disease (uncontrolled hypertension or heart failure), NSAID allergy, and chronic kidney disease with creatinine clearance (CrCl) of less than 60 ml/minute per 1.73 square meters. Aspirin is not used to treat gout flare due to the paradoxical effects of salicylic acid on serum urate levels.

**Oral Glucocorticoids**

Glucocorticoids are recommended in gout patients with contraindications to NSAIDs and/or colchicine. These agents are also drugs of choice for patients with renal insufficiency. The initial dose for gout flare is 30 to 40 mg of prednisolone or prednisone once daily or given in a divided twice-daily dose until flare resolution begins, and then taper the dose of glucocorticoids over the next 7 to 10 days. This has been proven to be at least comparable to NSAID efficacy. High starting doses of systemic steroids(>0.5mg/kg body weight) are required for acute gout, especially in patients with a polyarticular presentation. a depot preparation for triamcinolone (60mg once) or methylprednisolone has been reported to be effective.

In patients with an unclear diagnosis of an acute gout flare, arthrocentesis and synovial fluid analysis should be performed, and oral and intra-articular glucocorticoids must be avoided until the results are available initiation of other agents like NSAID or colchicine be considered. Frequent adverse effects of moderate- to high-dose, short-term glucocorticoid use include hyperglycemia, fluid retention, increased blood pressure, and mood changes. Repeated and frequent courses of glucocorticoids should be avoided to limit adverse effects. In patients with concomitant or suspected infections, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, prior glucocorticoid intolerance, and in post-operative status, glucocorticoids may heighten the risk of impaired wound healing.

Initiation of daily low dose adjunctive colchicine may be done to prevent rebound flare-ups during tapering. Extended tapering doses of glucocorticoids up to 14 or even 21 days are advised in patients with rebound flares, shortened inter-critical periods, and not receiving anti-inflammatory prophylaxis.

**Parenteral Glucocorticoids**

Intravenous or intramuscular glucocorticoids are suggested in patients who are not candidates for intraarticular glucocorticoid injection or cannot take oral medications. A typical dose of methylprednisolone is 20 mg intravenously twice daily, with stepwise reduction and rapid transition to oral prednisone when improvement begins. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) has also been described as efficacious for treating gout flare, but limited availability and cost restrict its use.

**Colchicine**

Colchicine is comparably effective to other agents if taken within 24 hours of gout flare onset. Colchicine has been shown to reduce pain by over 50% in a randomized control trial at 24 hours compared to a placebo. The lipophilic nature of colchicine makes it readily bioavailable for cellular uptake after oral administration. Its primary target is tubulin, and it is eliminated by hepatic elimination. It acts by binding tightly to unpolymerised tubulin and forms a colchicine - tubulin complex which regulates microtubule and cytoskeletal function. It regulates cell proliferation, gene expression, signal transduction, chemotaxis, and neutrophil secretion of granule contents. It decreases neutrophil adhesion by suppressing E-selectin redistribution in the endothelial membrane.

EULAR consensus guidelines for treating acute gout with colchicine advise a maximum of 3 doses of 0.5mg per day. The total dose of colchicine should not exceed 1.8 mg on day 1 (either 1.2 mg for the first dose followed by 0.6 mg an hour later [US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved dose] or 0.6 mg three times on the first day.

A reduced dose of colchicine may be required for patients with diminished hepatic or renal function or potential drug interactions. ABCB1 inhibitors like cyclosporin and clarithromycin may cause colchicine toxicity. Colchicine neuromyopathy may develop weeks after initiation of cyclosporin. High-dose colchicine regimens should not be encouraged due to unacceptably high toxicity. The adverse effects of colchicine comprise gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea and diarrhea), myotoxicity, and myelosuppression (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and aplastic anemia).

- Colchicine dosing adjustments for certain high-risk groups of patients should follow the guidelines provided in the manufacturer's FDA-approved information. Usually, no more than 0.3 mg dose is administered on the day of a gout flare, and the dose is not repeated for at least three to seven days or more in such patients. Following are the high-risk groups: 

- Patients taking colchicine prophylaxis within the past 14 days, with normal hepatic and renal function, who have taken a medication that inhibits P-gp and a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor within the last 14 days
- Patients taking colchicine prophylaxis within the past 14 days, with any hepatic and renal impairment, who have taken a medication that is a moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor within the last 14 days
- Patients with advanced hepatic or renal impairment (Child-Pugh C cirrhosis or equivalent CrCl of <30 mL/minute) regardless of recent colchicine use.

**Prophylaxis For Acute Gout**

The subclinical joint inflammation in gout forms the basis for colchicine prophylaxis. An acute gout flare is the most common adverse effect of urate-lowering therapy. For prophylaxis, low-dose colchicine therapy is the first choice. It is commenced 1 or 2 weeks before using urate-lowering drugs and continued for up to 6 months after normalization of the uric acid levels or until the clinically visible tophi resolve. Low-dose NSAIDs and low-dose corticosteroids are rarely used. The recommended dosage of colchicine is 0.5mg once or twice daily in the absence of any renal or hepatobiliary compromises.

**Interleukin 1 Inhibition**

Interleukin 1 antagonists have shown efficacy in refractory cases of gouty arthritis. Soluble IL1 receptor antagonist - ANAKINRA 100mg/day subcutaneously for three days or IL1 beta specific monoclonal antibody canakinumab. A single dose of 150 mg subcutaneously was more effective than a single-dose IM dose of triamcinolone acetonide though the risk-benefit ratio is uncertain.

**Non-acute Flares**

**Pharmacologic**

The clinician should not start urate-lowering therapy (ULT) in patients with asymptomatic hyperuricemia or gout with rare attacks (1 flare/year). The American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 2012, Guidelines for starting ULT include the following:

- Frequent or disabling gout flares (greater than or equal to two per year) that are difficult to treat

- Gout with chronic kidney disease (stage 3 or higher)

- Tophus diagnosis on physical examination or imaging

- Past urolithiasis

- chronic tophaceous gout

Urate-lowering therapy is started at a low dose to monitor the side effects and response to treatment. Titration of the dose is every 2 to 6 weeks to achieve serum urate levels of less than 6 mg/dl or 5 mg/dl in those patients with tophi.

During the initiation of ULT, there is an increased risk of gout flare-ups, so colchicine prophylaxis is recommended for three months after achieving the serum urate goal in the patients without tophi or six months with tophi to reduce the flare-up risk.

ULT can categorize into three classes (based on the mechanisms).

**Xanthine oxidase inhibitors (XOI)**- XOI works by inhibiting uric acid synthesis. This class includes allopurinol and febuxostat. Allopurinol is the recommended first-line pharmacologic ULT in gout.

**Allopurinol**

Allopurinol is covert to its active metabolite oxypurinol in the liver; the drug has a half-life of 24 hours. The initial allopurinol dose is 100 mg daily in patients with CrCl greater than 60 mL/minute and is titrated upward by 100 mg every 2 to 4 weeks. A dose of 300 mg of allopurinol once daily reduces serum urate levels in 33% of the population. Doses less than 300 mg are given in a once-daily regimen, and more than 400 mg are given in two divided doses. Allopurinol and oxypurinol lower the serum urate by a dual action of inhibiting xanthine oxidase inhibitor as well as by competing with phosphoribosylpyrophosphate in the salvage pathway and by suppressive effects of drug nucleotides on the aminotransferase activity. Allopurinol non-selectively also inhibits pyrimidine metabolism. A starting dose of allopurinol of <1.5 mg per mL/minute of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is advised in patients with stage 3 or greater chronic kidney disease.

Adverse effects of allopurinol - may precipitate gout flares, pruritic and maculopapular rashes, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, diarrhea, and severe cutaneous adverse reactions. bone marrow impression is uncommon but may occur at very high doses or in patients with CKD. (DRESS) syndrome - drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms is a potentially life-threatening reaction to allopurinol. Steven johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis may occur in major allopurinol hypersensitivity(AHS). The highest risk for AHS occurs in the first 60 days after initiation of allopurinol therapy. Allopurinol can potentiate the cytolytic and immunosuppressive effects of azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP), which are in part metabolized by xanthine oxidase.

**Febuxostat**

it is a selective xanthine oxidase inhibitor that occupies the access channel to the molybdenum-pterin active site of the enzyme. Renal elimination plays a minor role in febuxostat kinetics. Febuxostat received FDA approval to treat gout patients with hyperuricemia at daily doses of 40, and if the urate levels do not normalize in 2 weeks dose is increased to 80 mg daily. Cardiovascular and hepatic abnormalities may be more common with febuxostat compared with allopurinol. In patients with CKD, the urate-lowering effect of febuxostat is superior to allopurinol. Patients taking azathioprine, 6-MP, and theophylline are considered contraindications to the use of febuxostat.

**Uricosuric Drugs**

The uricosuric agents work by increasing renal urate clearance.

**Uricase Pegloticase (urate oxidase)**- Uricase is present in non-primates and lower primates. Pegloticase (a pegylated recombinant form of uricase) is a potent agent that rapidly reduces serum urate levels. It directly degrades the uric acid to highly soluble allantoin. PEGylation of the recombinant porcine-baboon uricase pegloticase has a circulating half-life of days to weeks and decreases but does not eliminate immunogenicity. Uricase is reserved only for patients with refractory gout.  Patients have to discontinue urate-lowering therapy while starting this medication because they may develop antibodies against uricase. Pegloticase is administered as intravenous infusions every two weeks, and before each infusion, serum urate levels should be monitored to confirm urate-lowering efficacy.

For at least the first six months of treatment, all patients treated with pegloticase should receive gout flare prophylaxis. In patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, pegloticase is contraindicated. Another agent Rasburicase (non-pegylated recombinant uricase), has not been approved by FDA for use in gout. It is used to prevent acute uric acid nephropathy due to tumor lysis syndrome in patients with high-risk leukemia and lymphoma. phase 3 studies of pegloticase have shown complete resolution of one or more tophi on 20% of patients by 13 weeks and lowered uric acid levels to less than 6mg/dl in 42% of subjects by six months.

Acute gout flares are seen in 80% of patients on pegloticase in the first few months of therapy, even with prophylaxis. Moderate infusion reactions like flushing, urticaria, and hypotension are seen, and in 2%, severe reactions like anaphylaxis are seen. Reactions also include severe muscle pain and cramping due to unknown mechanisms.

**Non-Pharmacologic**

Patients with gout are encouraged to modify their lifestyles to prevent future attacks.

Diet recommendations include reducing alcohol consumption, limiting purine-rich foods (meat, seafood, high fructose corn syrup, and sweetened soft drinks), and substituting low-fat or non-fat dairy products for their higher fat content counterparts. Weight loss and adequate hydration will also help reduce gout flare-up frequency.