The muscles in the upper extremity categorize into hand muscles, forearm muscles, and arm muscles. All the muscles in the upper extremity drain via the superficial and deep veins.

**Hand Muscles**

- Lumbrical muscles

- Dorsal interosseous muscles

- Palmar interosseous muscles

- Adductor pollicis muscle

- Thenar muscles

- Abductor pollicis brevis muscle
- Opponens pollicis muscle
- Flexor pollicis brevis muscle

- Hypothenar muscles

- Opponens digiti minimi muscle
- Flexor digiti minimi muscle
- Abductor digiti minimi muscle
- Palmaris brevis muscle

The muscles in the hand drain into the dorsal venous arch, superficial palmar arch, and the deep palmar arch.

**Forearm muscles**

- Pronator quadratus muscle

- Flexor pollicis longus muscle

- Flexor digitorum profundus muscle

- Flexor digitorum superficialis muscle

- Pronator teres muscle

- Flexor carpi radialis muscle

- Palmaris longus muscle

- Flexor carpi ulnaris muscle

- Supinator muscle

- Abductor pollicis longus muscle

- Extensor pollicis brevis muscle

- Extensor pollicis longus muscle

- Extensor indicis muscle

- Extensor carpi radialis brevis muscle

- Extensor digitorum muscle

- Extensor digiti minimi muscle

- Extensor carpi ulnaris muscle

- Brachioradialis muscle

- Extensor carpi radialis longus muscle

The venous drainage of the muscle located in the forearm directs towards the radial and ulnar veins. The forearm muscles that have tendon attaches in the hand will also drain into the dorsal venous arch, superficial palmar arch, and deep palmar arch.

**Arm Muscles**

- Coricobrachialis muscle

- Biceps brachii muscle

- Brachialis muscle

- Triceps brachii muscle

The arm muscles will drain into the brachial, axillary, and subclavian vein. The muscles that have an attachment in the forearm will also drain into the ulnar and radial veins.

The venous drainage of the muscles in the upper extremity may follow the nearest vein, but ultimately the venous system for the muscles in the upper extremity has some overlap. The overlap is due to muscle origins and insertions. The connections between the superficial veins and the deep veins by the perforating veins also create collateral venous drainage.