**Pharmacotherapy**

There is no specific treatment for fat embolism or fat embolism syndrome. Based on experimental studies, an attempt was made to use dextrose infusion to decrease FFA mobilization. Ethanol also was used as an agent to inhibit lipolysis. In clinical practice, there were no proven benefits.

Experimental use of heparin in an animal model was found to be beneficial but is no longer used in clinical practice because of the potential risk of bleeding. There has not been a proven clinical benefit with the use of heparin in fat embolism syndrome.

Therapy with corticosteroids has been proposed for the treatment of fat embolism syndrome based on the following effects of corticosteroids:

- Inhibition of complement activated leucocyte aggregation

- Limiting FFA level

- Membrane stabilization

A meta-analysis of seven randomized control trials using corticosteroid prophylaxis showed close to 77% reduction in the risk for fat embolism syndrome in a patient with a long bone fracture. There is, however, no difference in mortality, infection, or avascular necrosis between the treatment group and control. For this reason, the use of corticosteroids is still very controversial.

**Inferior Vena Cava Filter**

This has been proposed as a measure to prevent the showering of fat emboli. As a prophylactic treatment for fat embolism syndrome, placement of an inferior vena cava filter has not been studied sufficiently.

**Operative Measures**

It is highly recommended to start early open reduction and internal fixation of long bone fractures. The incidence of fat embolism syndrome is higher in a patient with long bone fractures who are managed conservatively.

The use of internal fixation devices in the management of fractures of long bones significantly reduces the incidence of fat embolism syndrome.

During operative fixation of the long bone fracture, care must be taken to limit the intramedullary pressure, as a high pressure is associated with an increased amount of fat emboli entering the systemic circulation.

Some techniques utilized in orthopedic surgery to reduce embolization include:

- Lavage of bone marrow prior to fixation

- Venting of the femoral bone

- Drilling of small holes in the cortex of the bone to lower intramedullary pressure

None of these maneuvers has been shown to reduce fat embolism syndrome.

**Supportive Care**

This is the mainstay treatment once a patient develops fat embolism syndrome. Supportive care is geared towards adequately oxygenating the end organs.

**Goals of Supportive Care**

- Provision of adequate oxygenation and ventilation

- Maintenance of adequate hemodynamic stability

- Transfusion of packed red blood cells to improve oxygen delivery if indicated

- Prophylaxis of deep venous thrombosis with a sequential compression device

- Adequate nutrition and hydration

Supplemental oxygen might be required, and if the patient develops fulminant acute respiratory distress syndrome, intubation and mechanical ventilation might be required.

**Albumin**

Albumin is recommended as part of the resuscitation tools for hypovolemia. It restores intravascular volume and helps to bind free fatty acid. This prevents the systemic dissemination of fat globules.

**Indications for Intubation**

- Altered mental status with Glasgow coma score of less than 8

- Moderate to several respiratory distresses with no improvement on noninvasive support

fat embolism syndrome might also cause pulmonary hypertension with right ventricular failure. Inotropic support with dobutamine or a phosphodiesterase inhibitor like milrinone might be required.

Cerebral edema if present might require management with the following:

- Mannitol

- Hypertonic saline

- Intracranial pressure monitors