Women who have undergone bariatric surgery and those taking certain medications that induce hepatic enzymes such as antibiotics (rifampin), antifungals (griseofulvin), and anticonvulsants (phenytoin, carbamazepine, topiramate, and barbiturates) are not advised to use combined or progestin-only contraception.

**Combined Estrogen-progestin Contraception**

Any factors that increase the risk of cardiovascular disease or thromboembolism are contraindications to COCs, due to the procoagulant effects of estrogen and are considered an “unacceptable risk” as indicated with a Category 4 label. Category 4 denotes unacceptable health risk if the contraceptive is administered to subjects with the existing condition, basically a contraindication. These categories from 1 to 4 are outlined in detail by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). These include women ≥35 years old who smoke, two or more risk factors for cardiovascular disease (older age, smoking, diabetes, and hypertension), hypertension (≥160/≥100 mmHg), venous thromboembolism (unless on anticoagulation), thrombogenic mutations, ischemic heart disease, history of stroke, complicated valvular heart disease (pulmonary hypertension, risk of atrial fibrillation, history of subacute bacterial endocarditis), diabetes mellitus for longer than 20 years or diabetes with nephropathy, retinopathy, or neuropathy.

Other Category 4 contraindications: current breast cancer, cirrhosis, hepatocellular adenoma or malignant hepatoma, and migraine with aura.

The recommendation is that postpartum women refrain from taking COCs for at least the first 21 days after delivery due to the procoagulant effect of pregnancy and the increased risk for VTE during this period. If breastfeeding, women should not take COCs until 30 days after delivery due to possible effects on lactation.

**Progestin-only Contraception**

Most women with medical comorbidities are candidates for POPs. Contraindications to all progestin-only contraception types include many similarities to those of COCs: known or suspected pregnancy, known or suspected breast cancer, undiagnosed abnormal uterine bleeding, and benign or malignant liver tumors, severe cirrhosis, or acute liver disease. There are also contraindications specific to each progestin-only contraception as listed in Lexicomp and can be found below:

DPMA - hypersensitivity to medroxyprogesterone or any component of the formulation, active thrombophlebitis, thromboembolic disorders or cerebral vascular disease, estrogen or progesterone-dependent tumor

Etonogestrel - hypersensitivity to etonogestrel or any component of the formulation

Levonorgestrel - hypersensitivity to levonorgestrel or any component of the formulation, postcoital contraception, congenital or acquired uterine anomaly (distort the uterine cavity and would affect correct IUD placement), acute pelvic inflammatory disease, or history of pelvic inflammatory disease (unless there has been a subsequent intrauterine pregnancy), postpartum endometritis or infected abortion within past three months, known or suspected uterine or cervical malignancy, untreated acute cervicitis or vaginitis (including bacterial vaginosis) or other lower genital tract infections until the infection is controlled. These conditions increase susceptibility to pelvic infections.