Androgen abuse is a very common problem among athletes. While most sporting organizations do conduct random screening checks, there are newer analogs being introduced every year; hence discovering people who abuse these agents is not always easy. Various public safety campaigns exist to educate aspiring athletes about the dangers of using anabolic steroids. Most major sports associations continuously test their athletes for banned substances, which include AAS. In fact, many sporting organizations now employ clinicians, including physicians and nurses, to educate athletes about the harms of androgen abuse.

A five-year study funded by WADA (World Anti-Doping Agency) published in 2016 highlighted the strategy to reduce AAS misuse. The results of the study were predictable in that the areas of focus should be on prevention and education. Coaches, athletic trainers, and team physicians are not appropriately trained to identify athletes at risk. [Level 3] WADA has multiple educational programs and many resources available on its website for each discipline. Prevention is the best strategy to reduce AAS misuse and sequelae resulting from it. WADA maintains that each athlete is responsible for every chemical in their body. Sports organizations can issue severe penalties if they find any of the banned substances. Physicians and nurse practitioners treating athletes need to be aware of medical exception rules available on WADA's website. Most importantly, clinicians should be mindful of the risk factors for AAS misuse, clinical presentations, complications of use, and other conditions that may mimic AAS misuse.

In summary, AAS misuse and toxicity requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. The nurses often assist with patient education and report to the clinical team individuals they believe are at risk. Pharmacists trained in toxicology may assist the interprofessional team in managing patients that have untoward complications. The pharmacist can also assist in drug reconciliation and assist the team in avoiding drug interaction. Coaches and athletic trainers should be included in addressing the dangers of androgen use and be taught to identify potentially concerning athletes. [Level 5]