Conservative management can be offered to undisplaced metatarsal fractures, including stress fractures which include adhesive strapping, short leg walking cast for 4 to 6 weeks, or a non-weight-bearing cast for 3 weeks followed by a walking cast for another 3 weeks, except in professional athletes to avoid long duration of immobilization. In second to fourth metatarsal fractures, which are displaced only in the frontal plane without shortening, can also be managed nonoperatively.

Metatarsal fractures displaced in the sagittal plane may result in painful callosities, metatarsalgia, and neuroma formation; hence need to be managed operatively.

Management of open metatarsal fractures includes thorough debridement, wound lavage, fracture stabilization using external or minimal internal fixation followed by the postoperative use of antibiotics, and planned second-look surgery. Multiple implants are available for metatarsal fractures, including K-wires, mini fragment plates, and interfragmentary screws from the AO small fragment system (3.5 mm) and the AO Foot Set (2.7 mm).

**First Metatarsal**

The first metatarsal plays an important role in maintaining the balance of the foot as the majority of weight passed through it compared to the other metatarsals.  Any disruption of it may result in a dysfunctional foot. As there is a lack of ligamentous support between the first and adjacent metatarsals, the chances of displacement are high. Fractures that show instability and significant displacement warrant operative intervention.

First metatarsal fractures are difficult to keep reduced after closed reduction because of the pull of the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles and hence commonly require internal fixation. In the shaft of the first metatarsal fractures, stable fixation can be obtained with the help of two crossed K-wires of 1.8-2 mm diameter. The comminuted fractures can be managed with plates that should be placed over the medial-plantar aspect because of the minimum soft tissue cover on the dorsal aspect.

If there is extensive comminution of the first metatarsal fracture, then external fixation is more favorable as compared to internal fixation accounting for the poor soft tissue condition and high chances of postoperative infection. The main goal in such fractures is to maintain the length of the first metatarsal to prevent the transfer of metatarsalgia. Intra-articular fractures of the head of the first metatarsal should be carefully evaluated to assess the congruity of the joint. Open reduction and internal fixation will be the preferred treatment option for the fractures of the first metatarsal head, which shows joint incongruity to achieve desired functional outcome. Cancellous bone grafting can be considered in the management of metatarsal head fractures which show significant impaction.

First, metatarsal fractures that involve the metatarsophalangeal and the tarsometatarsal joint should be reconstructed anatomically to avoid posttraumatic arthritis. To avoid deformities such as hallux valgus or varus, the anatomical reduction must be obtained in the transverse (horizontal) plane.

**Second-Fourth Metatarsal**

The second metatarsal is more stabilized compared to the other central metatarsals due to the presence of the Lisfranc ligament, which runs between the second metatarsal base and the medial cuneiform. The rest of the central metatarsal bases are aligned together with the help of multiple strong ligamentous structures which lies on both plantar and dorsal aspect. Because of the stable proximal articulations and strong soft tissue support, there is minimum movement permitted, resulting in a high level of intrinsic stability. In cases of severe traumatic injuries, if displacement occurs, these central metatarsals will tend to displace as a single unit.

The goal of management is to restore the length in the sagittal plane, while dislocation in the transverse plane can be tolerated to some extent. The management of choice for simple fractures is retrograde percutaneous pinning.

The pros of the percutaneous pinning technique include the ability to preserve the vascularity of fractured bone with negligible disruption of the soft tissue envelope. In scenarios where closed manipulation failed to provide the desired outcome, open procedures using minimally invasive options need to be performed, which will help achieve the reduction by providing direct visualization of fractured ends with minimum soft tissue dissection. Comminuted fractures can be managed using mini-fragment plates. Metatarsalgia can be commonly seen in central metatarsal fractures managed conservatively due to malunion and parabola disruption.

**Fifth Metatarsal**

Fractures of the shaft should be managed operatively because conservative management usually results in displacement due to loose ligamentous connections to the fourth metatarsal. Undisplaced Jones fracture shows delayed fracture healing due to the poor blood supply and instability.

Nowadays, the trend is being shifted towards operative management, incorporating the benefits like early mobilization, high chances of union, and better functional outcomes. One of the common forms of operative management is intramedullary screw fixation. As cannulated screws are easy to insert hence, they are commonly used. Various studies proved the superiority of solid screw over the cannulated screw concerning its strength.

Other operative treatment options include tension band wiring, percutaneous pinning, and external fixation. Avulsion fractures that involve a small portion of the tuberosity can be managed by excision. In scenarios where fractures showing displacement more than 2mm and involving more than 30% of the joint should be managed by the operative intervention.

When considering the management of the proximal shaft fractures, we need to differentiate among non-union, delayed union, stress fractures, and acute traumatic injuries.

In patients where the diagnosis of delayed healing has been made, intramedullary fixation using screws along with bone grafting can be offered.

If on roentgenogram features of periosteal reaction are present such patients can be managed by either intramedullary fixation using a screw or extramedullary fixation using mini fragment plates. If roentgenogram suggests sclerosis of medullary canal with no signs of periosteal reaction, in such patients, multimodal approach including curettage of the sclerotic bone, stabilization of fracture ends, and corticocancellous bone grafting can be advised.