There are many diagnoses to take into consideration in the differential diagnosis for delusions of parasitosis.  Actual parasitosis must be ruled out based on a thorough history, physical exam, and laboratory testing.  Patients with an illness anxiety disorder can also fool physicians, and this diagnosis merits strong consideration.  Clinicians must also consider secondary causes from underlying psychiatric, substance abuse, or other medical conditions.

Misdiagnosis of delusions of parasitosis can occur when the patient has a cutaneous infection from either parasites or other organisms.

Delusions of parasitosis could also present in a patient having an underlying illness anxiety disorder, where patients have a preoccupation with disease and need evaluation by practitioners and often need constant support and reassurance.

Delusions of parasitosis can be secondary to many psychiatric illnesses, such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, major depressive disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder.

Nutritional deficiencies can cause secondary delusions of parasitosis.  B12 and folate are the two most common vitamin deficiencies that can lead to symptoms.

Neurologic disorders are also a common cause of secondary delusions of parasitosis.

Infections such as HIV, leprosy, and tuberculosis can also cause symptoms. Disorders of the thyroid and pancreas, such as diabetes mellitus, are a potential cause of symptoms.

Reactions to medications can also cause secondary delusions of parasitosis.  Studies have found that the side effects of topiramate, ciprofloxacin, amantadine, steroids, ketoconazole, and phenelzine can cause formication symptoms.