The SPG is accessible via the intranasal, infrazygomatic, and suprazygomatic routes; however, radiofrequency ablation techniques are typically performed via the infrazygomatic approach.

Fluoroscopic approach: Narouze et al. described the fluoroscopic guided infrazygomatic approach for SPG RFA. For this technique, the patient is positioned in the supine position, and a lateral fluoroscopic image is obtained. This image is best aligned by rotating the patient’s head or the fluoroscope C-arm in a manner that superimposes the rami of the mandibles on top of each other and creates an “inverted vase” appearance of the pterygopalatine fossa. The skin entry site is marked just anterior to the mandible and inferior to the zygomatic arch. A wheal is raised at the skin entry point using 1% lidocaine anesthetic solution. A blunt RFA needle with a 22-gauge diameter, 10-cm length, and a slightly bent 5-mm active tip is ideal for the procedure. The RFA needle is inserted at the skin site and advanced superiorly and medially towards the pterygopalatine fossa under real-time fluoroscopy guidance. The direction of the needle should be confirmed using an anteroposterior view, ensuring that the needle tip remains lateral to the lateral nasal wall. If the needle passes the lateral pterygoid plate, it should be redirected cephalad and anteriorly. This change in needle direction will help the curved needle tip to reach the pterygopalatine fossa. A 50-Hz sensory stimulation at <0.5 V will then produce deep paresthesia behind the root of the nose. Prior to lesioning, 0.2 to 0.5 ml of contrast agent should be injected under real-time fluoroscopy to rule out intranasal or intravascular spread. The region is then anesthetized using 0.5 ml of 2% lidocaine solution. Two radiofrequency lesions in this region are then created at 80 degrees C for 60 seconds each. Radiofrequency ablation is an extremely painful procedure, so it is critical to inject 0.5 mL of 0.5% bupivacaine along with 5 mg of triamcinolone after lesioning to prevent the development of neuritis.

CBCT approach: Loomba et al. described another method to perform the SPG RFA. They used cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) to guide needle placement. All of the steps of the procedure are similar to the technique described by Narouze et al. except that an interventional radiologist confirms the location of the tip of the radiofrequency cannula after the needle tip walks off the lateral pterygoid plate. The advantage of CBCT over bi-plane fluoroscopy is that CBCT offers improved anatomic visualization and possibly allows more accurate needle tip placement. Also, a CBCT scanner is less expensive than other modalities and causes less radiation exposure.