Following the history and examination, the best screening tool is an AP and lateral weight-bearing X-ray of the lumbar spine.****Lumbosacral spondylolisthesis can be best assessed mainly on the lateral view, but occasional coronal deformity should not be missed. In cases where clinical examination indicates an abnormal sagittal balance of the spinal column, a whole spine lateral standing X-ray is indicated. In the majority of cases, an isthmic defect will be detected on radiographs but in doubtful cases. An MRI scan is recommended. Oblique X-rays of the lumbosacral junction, Computerised Tomography (CT) scan, SPECT scans may also identify the defect but involve ionic radiation.

MRI scans are more sensitive in identifying pars lesions.MRI can also identify stress reactions that occur even before a fracture line develops.

Grading of the forward slip is classified by Meyerding classification:

- Grade I <25% of the width of the vertebra on the lateral view

- Grade II 25 to 50%

- Grade III 50 to 75%

- Grade IV 75 to 100%

- Grade V >100% (spondyloptosis)

Pelvic incidence (PI) has a direct correlation to Meyerding's grade.

The Spinal Deformity Study Group has created a new classification that guides treatment. This scale takes into account the spinopelvic parameters and the overall spinal alignment.

- I < 50% slip, PI <45 degrees, Surgery only if symptoms not controlled by non-operative methods.

- II < 50% slip, PI 45 to 60, Surgery only if symptoms not controlled by non-operative methods.

- III < 50% slip, PI >60 degrees, posterolateral fusion can be considered

- IV >50% slip, balanced pelvis high SS / low PT, decompression + / - Posterolateral fusion may be adequate

- V >50% slip, Unbalanced pelvis (retroverted) Low SS / High PT, reduction of slip, and circumferential fusion may be a consideration.

- VI >50% slip, Unbalanced spine (retroverted pelvis) Low SS / High PT + C7 plumbline anterior to femoral heads reduction of slip and circumferential fusion may be considered.

MRI (T-2 weighted sequence is best to assess spinal canal stenosis, foraminal stenosis, and nerve root impingement, as well as the morphology of lumbar and sacral vertebrae which presence correlated with history and examination findings, will dictate the surgical management). The most commonly affected nerve root is L5.