In prematurity, the delayed maturation of the adrenal synthetic pathways despite appropriate renin-angiotensin stimulation results in hypoaldosteronism that is most marked in infants with VPT. This is due to decreased activity of (CYP11B1) 11 beta-hydroxylase, which improves by day 3.

Hypoaldosteronism may result from defective secretion of renin, angiotensin generation, or aldosterone synthesis or release.

Where the primary defect is in aldosterone synthesis, there is a compensatory increase in renin and Ang II causing hyperreninemic hypoaldosteronism as seen in aldosterone synthase defects (CYP11B2), chronic suppression of ALD secretion from the normal contralateral gland after unilateral adrenalectomy for Conn syndrome, and discontinuation of substances having mineralocorticoid activity after prolonged use. An example is licorice used in chewing tobacco, mouth fresheners, and herbal remedies.

In critically ill patients, prolonged ACTH stimulation, along with cytokines released as a result of the critical illness, decreases the activity of aldosterone synthase and causes hyperreninemic HA and hypercortisolemia.

In hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism or type 4 RTA, there is a decreased renin output and consequent hypoaldosteronism. Renin production is dependent on sympathetic stimulation, and defective renin release results from autonomic neuropathies. This is aggravated by concomitant renal disease, medications affecting the RAA axis, the production of inactive renin, a decreased beta-receptor sensitivity, and defective prostaglandin synthesis. Typical patients are in the sixth to the eighth decades of life, have diabetes, mild to moderate renal disease and are taking any medications affecting the RAA, and present with asymptomatic hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and hyperchloremic normal anion gap acidosis. The serum ALD is low. Similarly, in patients with HIV, viral adrenalitis, nephropathy, and trimethoprim are contributory.

Beta-blockers decrease renin production, and NSAIDs inhibit cyclooxygenase and prevent renin release.

ACE inhibitors decrease Ang II production. ARBs block the stimulatory action of Ang II and prevent ALD secretion.

Spironolactone inhibits ALD biosynthesis as well as competitively inhibits the MR receptor. Amiloride and trimethoprim block the ENaC in the renal tubules increasing Na excretion and retaining K+. Triamterene is a K+ sparing diuretic acting on ALD independent ion-exchange sites in the DCT.

Both conventional and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) decrease ALD production and release, and so do cyclosporin and calcium channel blockers. LMWH diminishes the sensitivity of the ZG to Ang II.

Drugs like ketoconazole used in Cushing disease and other cancers affect all three axes of the adrenal synthetic pathways and diminish the action of Ang II.

Dopamine tonically inhibits ALD production. Increased dopamine used in critical care and during therapy with dopamine agonists can, in certain situations, cause HA.

Autosomal dominant PHA is caused by mutations in the genes encoding the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR). Over fifty mutations have been identified, and in each of them, a single defective allele in either parent is enough to manifest the condition phenotypically.

Autosomal recessive PHA has loss of function mutations of the genes encoding the alfa, beta, and gamma subunits of the aldosterone-responsive, amiloride-sensitive ENaC, the genes that regulate posttranslational phosphorylation of the thiazide-sensitive sodium chloride cotransporter, and those that regulate phosphorylation and ubiquitination of cofactors that affect ENaC degradation.

Urinary tract infections and obstructive uropathy, especially in children, can result in temporary aldosterone resistance (PHA III).

Patients post solid organ transplantation treated with calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporin and tacrolimus exhibit decreased MR transcription and down-regulation of MR receptors and consequent HA.