Universal precautions are recommended to limit exposure to healthcare providers. As stated earlier, tetramine is unlikely to be absorbed through intact skin.

Treatment should be started as early as possible as tetramine is rapidly absorbed after oral ingestion, and neurotoxicity occurs suddenly.

**Gastric Decontamination**

In acute confirmed ingestions, it is reasonable to consider gastric decontamination. The LD50 of tetramine is such that decreasing absorption may mitigate toxicity. However, no robust data or human studies suggest mortality benefits. Regardless, gastric lavage has been reported as a recommended treatment by clinicians with experience treating tetramine poisoning.

An animal study on the effects of activated charcoal use in tetramine-poisoned rabbits demonstrated a decrease in the elimination half-life by 55% and a reduction in the area under the curve by 70%, indicating tetramine is readily bound by activated charcoal.

There are no studies on biliary recirculation, and the benefit of multi-dose activated charcoal is unclear.

**Pharmacologic Treatment**

A distinctive characteristic of tetramine toxicity is refractory seizures. Multiple classes of drugs have been studied in animals with variable effects. Aggressive and early escalating treatment is recommended regardless of the agents chosen to treat tetramine toxicity. In a case series of 15 patients with tetramine toxicity, the authors advocate for early mechanical ventilation to avoid any hesitancy in escalating treatment with benzodiazepines.

**Benzodiazepines**

Benzodiazepines are one of the more common agents used in reported cases. Molecular studies demonstrated midazolam had the best inhibition of tetramine binding to the GABA receptor compared to diazepam and phenobarbitol. However, this has not been studied in humans.

**Sedative Hypnotics**

Early animal studies suggest aggressive sedative therapy with an agent such as phenobarbital is beneficial.

Molecular studies suggested propofol appears to have similar efficacy as midazolam in blocking tetramine binding to the GABA receptor.

**NMDA Receptor Inhibitors**

Ketamine was studied in mice, and with higher doses (70 mg/kg intraperitoneal), convulsions decreased, and the 60-minute death rate was decreased.

**Adjuncts**

Where tetramine cases are more commonly seen, treatment adjuncts are used frequently. Randomized controlled trials in humans for these adjuncts are lacking, and reports of the effects are limited to animal studies and case reports/series.

**Pyridoxine**

Vitamin B6 has been reported as a helpful adjunct in cases of tetramine toxicity. Data is limited on efficacy, and the exact mechanism is unclear. As previously mentioned, tetramine is a noncompetitive inhibitor of the GABAa receptor. Pyridoxine is used in other poisons that cause neurotoxicity, such as gyromitra and isoniazid toxicity. These agents contribute to seizures by depleting the active form of pyridoxine, pyridoxal 5-phosphate, an essential cofactor in GABA formation. Animal studies have demonstrated that pyridoxine combined with sodium 2,3-dimercaptopropanesulfonate (DMPS) decreased convulsions.

**Sodium 2,3-dimercaptopropanesulfonate (DMPS)**

DMPS, a chelating agent for heavy metals, has been suggested as a treatment modality for tetramine-poisoned patients. In addition to being used as a combination treatment with pyridoxine, animal studies demonstrated the potential benefit of DMPS alone. Proposed mechanisms involve the sulfhydryl groups and their ability to modulate the function of various ion channels. Rat studies showed decreased convulsions with DMPS alone due to the potentiation of GABA at the receptor site.

**Medication Adjuncts Under Investigation**

**Neurosteroids**

Neurosteroids are another class of drugs undergoing research as a treatment for tetramine toxicity. Neurosteroids interact with GABAa receptors both in the synaptic cleft and at extrasynaptic GABAa receptors, the latter of which are not sensitive to benzodiazepines.

In addition to the modulating effects of neurosteroids, there appears to be a synergistic effect of benzodiazepines and neurosteroids. Combination therapy of diazepam and allopregnanolone (a neurosteroid used to treat postpartum depression) demonstrated normalization of tetramine-induced synchronous calcium oscillations in rodents and improved survival from ten percent to 90%.

**Extracorporeal Removal**

Extracorporeal removal of tetramine has been implemented in many instances of poisoning through various modalities, including plasma exchange, hemodialysis (HD), high volume hemofiltration (HVHF), continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH), and charcoal hemoperfusion. There have not been large comparison studies in humans. Expert opinion on this as a treatment is mixed, and recommendations vary.

Charcoal hemoperfusion appears to be the more common modality, as studies have demonstrated that this method does remove tetramine from the body quickly. A two-hour session removed 1 mg of tetramine (measured from the perfusion device) when the initial plasma concentration was 100 mcg/L.

There are conflicting reports concerning extracorporeal removal. Some studies document pre-filtration and post-filtration concentrations in patients and note no significant change in concentration, bringing into question the efficacy of extracorporeal removal.

Given the distribution of tetramine throughout the body, this observation is thought to be more likely due to the redistribution of tetramine from body tissues into the serum, as studies have documented that tetramine is removed by charcoal hemoperfusion by directly analyzing the filter contents.

A case of a patient that received high-volume hemofiltration seven days after poisoning noted a decrease in tetramine concentration from 0.95 mcg/mL to 0.35 mcg/mL. The following day the serum concentration rebounded to 0.53 mcg/mL, and charcoal hemoperfusion was performed, lowering the concentration to 0.40 mcg/mL.

Serum rebound is frequently reported in published cases. Thus, additional sessions may be indicated. Eighteen patients received hemoperfusion followed by CVVH, which was more effective at removing tetramine.

**Extracorporeal Removal on Long-term Outcomes**

A case series of 17 children with an unintentional ingestion of tetramine compared outcome differences in those that received charcoal hemoperfusion and those that did not; the non-hemoperfusion group had a higher incidence of seizures.

EEG abnormalities were monitored at regular intervals, and the hemoperfusion group had a resolution of EEG abnormalities at six months, whereas the non-hemoperfusion group took a year to recover. This same study noted a quicker time to recovery in individuals that received multiple occurrences of hemoperfusion.