Routine studies like an ECG and chest x-ray can help differentiate other possible causes for chest pain but can be misleading. The presence of ECG findings consistent with an acute myocardial infarction occurs in eight percent of cases of AAD.  Furthermore, while the widening of the aortic silhouette increases the likelihood of AAD, its absence does not reliably exclude the diagnosis. Confirmation of AAD requires cardiovascular imaging to identify the presence of an intimal tear, establish the Stanford classification, and detect valvular or branch involvement. Most society guidelines recommend either CT aortography or transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) for the diagnosis of AAD. Deciding which modality to employ as a first-line screen should be based on institutional availability and expertise. For most emergency departments (EDs), CT angiography will likely be the first advanced imaging technique on account of its widespread availability.

Blood work should include CBC, electrolytes, troponin, D-dimer, and renal function. Smooth muscle myosin heavy chain assay is elevated is specific for AAD.

The chest x-ray may show a widened mediastinum (>8cm) or fluid collection in the hemithorax due to rupture. X-ray features that suggest AAD include:

- Left apical cap

- Pleural effusion

- Deviation of the esophagus

- Deviation of the trachea to the right

- Depression of the left mainstem bronchus

- Loss of the paratracheal stripe

If the patient is stable, a CT scan with contrast is recommended. The spiral CT can quickly detect the location of the intimal tear and help the surgeon plan the procedure. Suggestive of AAD findings include:

- Intimal dissection flap

- Double lumen

- Aortic dilation and hematoma

- Regions of malperfusion

- Contrast leak indicates aortic rupture

Echocardiography is also a useful modality to detect AAD. TEE is the preferred technique that can be done at the bedside and used for intraoperative visualization. The key drawback is the operator experience. However, if the patient is unstable, TEE is the recommended procedure. Other indications for TEE include renal insufficiency and contrast allergy. Findings may include:

- Dissection flap with differential Doppler flow

- True and false lumen in the ascending aorta

- Thrombosis in the false lumen

- Central displacement of intimal calcification

- Pericardial effusion

Aortography is not much used today unless there are plans to repair the dissection using stents.

A 12 lead ECG is mandatory to rule out an MI.