Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide has two forms: NAD+ (oxidized) and NADH (reduced). It is a dinucleotide connected by phosphate groups. One nucleoside has an adenine base and the other nicotinamide. When involved in metabolic redox reactions, the mechanism is as shown in Reaction 1.

- Reaction 1: RH2 + NAD+ -> R + H+ + NADH

R is the reactant, for example, sugar.

NADH enters the ETC at complex I and produces a total of 10 H+ ions through the ETC (4 from complex I, 4 from complex III, and 2 from complex IV). ATP-synthase synthesizes 1 ATP for 4 H+ ions. Therefore, 1 NADH = 10 H+, and 10/4 H+ per ATP = 2.5 ATP per NADH (**some sources round up**). When NADH is oxidized, it breaks into NAD+, H+, and 2 e- as shown in Reaction 2.

- Reaction 2: NADH -> H+ +  NAD+ + 2 e-

Flavin adenine dinucleotide has 4 redox states, 3 of them being FAD (quinone, fully oxidized form), FADH- (semiquinone, partially oxidized), and FADH2 (hydroquinone, fully reduced). FAD is made up of an adenine nucleotide and a flavin mononucleotide (FMN), connected by phosphate groups. FMN is synthesized in part from vitamin B2 (riboflavin). FAD contains a highly stable aromatic ring, and FADH2 does not. When FADH2 oxidizes, it becomes aromatic and releases energy, as seen in Reaction 3. This state makes FAD a potent oxidizing agent, with an even more positive reduction potential than NAD. FADH2 enters the ETC at complex II and creates a total of 1.5 ATP (4 H+ from complex III, and 2 H+ from complex IV; 6/4 H+ per ATP = 1.5 ATP per FADH2 **some sources round up**).

- Reaction 3: FADH2 -> FAD +  2 H+ + 2 e-

FAD also functions in several metabolic pathways outside of the ETC, including DNA repair (MTHF repair of UV damage), fatty acid beta-oxidation (acyl-CoA dehydrogenase), and synthesis of coenzymes (CoA, CoQ, heme).