Many studies show that the best treatment for uncomplicated strongyloidiasis is a drug called Ivermectin. The recommended treatment regimen consists of 200 mcg/kg for 2 consecutive days. For uncomplicated strongyloidiasis, the treatment is ivermectin daily until larvae can no longer be detected in stool, urine, or sputum for two weeks.

- Ivermectin does not kill the Strongyloides larvae, but only the adult worms. As a result, repeat dosing is necessary.

- There is an auto-infective cycle of about 2 weeks in which ivermectin must be re-administered, and additional dosing will be necessary as it will not kill Strongyloides in the blood or larvae deep within the bowels.

- Ivermectin is metabolized by the cytochrome P450 3A4 pathway in the liver, and therefore patient with hepatobiliary impairment needs to explore other options for therapy. It targets both the adult and larval stages, while albendazole targets only the adult stage of the parasite

- Albendazole and thiabendazole (25 mg/kg twice daily for 5 days, a 400 mg maximum) are also effective.

- The optimal duration of treatment is not clear.

-  Albendazole can suppress bone marrow and thus result in pancytopenia

- Eradication can be difficult as Strongyloides has been known to live in individuals for decades, even after treatment.

- Continued treatment is often necessary, even if symptoms resolve.

- Clothes and sheets should be washed with enzyme washing powder and dried on hot days.

For patients with hyperinfection syndrome, contact precautions and isolation are recommended, as larvae may be found in all body fluids. Family members should also be screened, and healthcare workers should adopt universal precautions. Steroids and leukotriene inhibitors should be avoided as leukotrienes play a potential role in immunity against Strongyloides infection.

Ivermectin is pregnancy category C and is thus not recommended for pregnant or lactating women unless no other option of treatment is available. Albendazole is allowed by WHO in the last 2 trimesters of pregnancy, although it is also pregnancy category C in the USA. If a new treatment is being initiated, pregnancy testing should be completed.

Ivermectin is also not recommended for body weight less than 15 kg, and therefore, albendazole is the recommended treatment at a dose of 400 mg daily for 3 days between age 2 to 20 and 200 mg daily for 3 days below age 2.

**Intensive Care**

- Immunocompromised patients may require intensive care for disseminated infection.

- Contact isolation should be considered because sputum, stool, and vomitus may contain infective larvae.

- Patients with hyperinfection syndrome often have sepsis, shock, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).