Since atherosclerosis is a predominantly asymptomatic condition, it is difficult to determine the incidence accurately. Atherosclerosis is considered the major cause of cardiovascular diseases. Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease mainly involves the heart and brain: ischemic heart disease (IHD) and ischemic stroke. IHD and stroke are the world's first and fifth causes of death respectively.

In the United States, about 610,000 people die of heart disease every year. That is 1 of every 4 deaths. Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of death in the Western world killing over 370,000 people annually. On an average, about 735,000 Americans have a  heart attack every year. Out of these, 525,000 have an initial attack, and 210,000 have a recurrent attack. It has been reported that 75% of acute myocardial infarctions occur from plaque rupture and the highest incidence of plaque rupture was observed in men over 45 years; whereas, in women, the incidence increases beyond age 50 years. This higher prevalence of atherosclerosis in men compared to women is attributed to the protective function of female sex hormones but is lost after menopause.

Stroke from any cause represents the fifth leading cause of death and the major cause of serious long-term disability in adults in the United States. It is reported that nearly 795,000 people suffer from stroke every year in the US resulting in about 140,323 deaths. The major form of stroke, ischemic stroke is due to ASCVD.

Many epidemiologic studies in North America and Europe have recognized numerous risk factors for the development and progression of atherosclerosis. They may promote atherosclerosis through their effects on low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles and inflammation.