Anatomy of the heart's conduction system comprises specialized cardiac muscle cells and conducting fibers (SA, AV nodes, HIS bundle, and Purkinje fibers) that conduct impulses through the heart and initiate the cardiac cycle and coordinate the synchronized contractions of the four cardiac chambers. EP study involves the placement of multipolar electrode catheters in the heart, typically in the right side, which generates intracardiac electrograms (EGMs) followed by programmed electrical stimulation (PES) to trigger a focus arrhythmia.

**Intracardiac Electrograms (EGMs):**These are electrical waves recorded by surface electrodes within the heart and represent local depolarization of the structures near the recording electrode. Hence, EGMs from the atrial (HRE) and ventricular(RVA/LV) catheters represent atrial and ventricular repolarization, respectively. EMGs from his bundle (HBE) represent atrial, his, and ventricular EMGs with the size of the atrial/ventricular component dependent on proximity to the respective structure. The carotid sinus (CS) involves both atrial and ventricular EGMs, atrial wave being larger in amplitude and ventricular waves smaller unless the catheter is advanced into the ventricular branch. Typical EP recordings include surface electrocardiograms, particularly of leads I, aVF, V1, and V6. The reader can orient themselves to tracings using the labels displayed along the left side of the margin and correlate the electrical activity with surface ECGs.

**Lead position -**Typical positions and their role is discussed here.

- The high right atrium (HRA) records the SA node electrical impulses. Pacing at this point allows assessment of SA node function, conduction from SA to AV node, and addition of premature complex or burst pacing through HRA may result in the induction of supraventricular tachyarrhythmia. Sinus node function is determined by SA nodal recovery time (SART) and SA nodal conduction time (SACT).

- Anterior tricuspid valve annulus (HBE) records electrical impulses that run through the bundle of his. This lead allows for the measurement of AH, HV, and His intervals, representing the AV node and ventricular conduction system.

- The right ventricle (RVA) records the ventricular apex.

- Coronary sinus (CS 1-8) records left atrial activation as the coronary sinus runs in the mitral annulus.

- Left ventricle leads: This allows for LV mapping, particularly for evaluating left-sided SVTs or suspected left-sided accessory pathways.

Typical catheter positions and recordings during EP studies are represented in the diagram below. RA- right atrium, RV- Right ventricle, LA - left atrium, LV- Left ventricle.

**Deflections in sinus rhythm:**Normal atrial activation sequence in sinus rhythm is from HRA to low RA then concentrically from the CS (proximal to distal). The normal ventricular activation sequence is from RV apex and concentrically from CS (proximal to distal)

**Basic Electrophysiologic study of 5 distinct parts:**measurement of baseline intervals, decremental ventricular pacing, decremental atrial pacing, atrial extra stimulus testing, and ventricular extra stimulus testing.

**1. Baseline intervals:**

- **Sinus cycle length:**This is the interval between sinus atrial EGMs (A-A interval or P-P interval), surface PR, QRS, and QT intervals, representing the duration of the cardiac cycle.

- **Sinoatrial conduction time (SACT):**this is a measure of sinus node function but lacks sensitivity for detecting sinus node dysfunction.

- **Sinoatrial nodal recovery time (SNRT):**This is measured by placing catheter electrode near SA node and pacing for about 30s at a fixed rate that is faster than the intrinsic sinus rate, and the same process is repeated at progressively faster rates up to 200beats per minute then allow for recovery of the sinus node and restoration of intrinsic sinus conduction. The longest pause from the last pacing stimulus to the first intrinsic sinus beat represents the SNRT.

- **AH, interval (normal range 50 to 130 msec):**This is measured on HBE as the time from first major deflection at baseline crossing to the onset of HIS bundle EMG and represents the conduction time through the AV node. The wide range in the normal subjects is due to the high concentration of muscarinic and adrenergic receptors on the AV node and influence with the autonomic nervous system. Short AH intervals represent fast conduction as seen due to increased sympathetic drive, steroid use, or pregnancy, while long AH intervals are seen with the parasympathetic drive (vagal tone) and with the use of AV blocking drugs (digoxin, Beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and antiarrhythmic drugs like amiodarone)

- **His interval (normal range 10 to 25msec):**This is measured on HBE as the beginning to the end of his deflection. It represents the conduction through a compact His bundle that penetrates through the fibrous septum.

- **HV interval (normal range 35 to 55 msec):**This is measured on HBE as the interval from the onset of HIS to the onset of ventricular activation on any surface lead or intracardiac EGM and represents conduction through the His-Purkinje system. The autonomic system has an insignificant influence on this, and abnormalities usually reflect pathologic conduction defects. Symptomatic bradyarrhythmias and prolonged HV interval (> 55 ms)  or asymptomatic bradyarrhythmias with HV interval > 100msec indicate pacemaker therapy. Short HV interval represents either a ventricular preexcitation (i.e., AV bypass tract) or ventricular origin of beats (i.e., ventricular premature beats or accelerated idioventricular rhythm)

- **VA conduction:**This is assessed by ventricular extra stimulus and incremental ventricular pacing. The absence of VA conduction suggests the origin of arrhythmia above the AV node (atrial tachycardia) and makes AVNRT and AVRT less likely to focus.

- **PA interval (normal range 20 to 60msec):**This is measured from the earlier point on P wave on surface ECG to earlier deflection on intracardiac EGM.

**2. Decremental ventricular pacing:**This involves continuous pacing from the right ventricle apex with faster rates, i.e., shorter cycle lengths until AV block occurs. Here, current flows from the ventricle to atria allow for assessment of retrograde conduction through the AV node and allow for the identification of accessory pathways.

**3. Decremental atrial pacing:**This involves continuous pacing in the atria with progressively faster rates/shorter cycle lengths until AV block occurs. Here current flows from atria to ventricle, therefore, allows for assessment of anterograde conduction through the AV node and unmask alternative pathways or accessory tracks.

**4. Atrial extra stimulus testing (AEST):**After baseline waves are recorded, multiple electrical impulses are administered at a fixed cycle length followed by a premature beat. The coupling interval of the premature beat is progressively shortened until the refractory period is reached. This allows for assessing the refractory period of anterograde AV node conduction and sometimes induces supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias. Such programmed electrical stimulation of atria is used to determine the effective refractory period of the His-Purkinje system (usually < 450msec)

**5. Ventricular extra stimulus testing (VEST):**This uses a similar technique of programmed electrical stimulation to assess the refractory period of retrograde AV node conduction

**6. Mapping and Ablation:**In many cases, the purpose of an EP study is diagnostic and therapeutic (i.e., ablation). Mapping refers to identifying the precise temporal and spatial distribution of electrical impulses generated by the myocardium and allows probing of the site where radiofrequency ablation can per performed for successfully curing the arrhythmia.