As Marker: Acid phosphatase can be detected normally in blood at a level of ≤ 2 ng/mL. Due to its secretion from different tissues, it is a non-specific marker and is, therefore, more valuable in monitoring response to therapy and prognosis than diagnosis. Prostate cancer is one of the most common cancers in men worldwide. A specific form of AP, sensitive to tartrate inhibition, called secretory prostatic acid phosphatase, is normally secreted by prostate tissue. However, cancerous prostate tissue tends to overexpress it. In fact, 95% of patients with prostate cancer have high levels of AP, especially if metastasized to bones. Therefore, it was the major serum marker for prostate cancer used in screening and staging but has recently been replaced with a more specific marker, the prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Nonetheless, prostatic acid phosphatase measurement is still being used in forensic cases as it is actively released in seminal fluid and can be used to identify seminal fluid in law enforcement cases.

Bone tissue is a dynamic tissue that is continuously being formed and resorbed in a balanced fashion. Osteoclasts, the cells responsible for bone resorption, express another isoform of acid phosphatase. Indeed, several studies have shown that acid phosphatase is directly involved in bone resorption. Bone AP differs from prostatic AP in being a tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP). In osteoporosis, the most common bone disease in humans, the resorption/formation balance becomes disrupted in favor of resorption. Several serum markers for bone resorption have been proposed, such as urinary hydroxyproline, total urinary pyridinoline, and bone sialoprotein. TRAP was found to be precise, resistant to hemolysis, and has minimal day to day variability. Therefore, it has been suggested to monitor response to therapy, but still under development. Also, agents that inhibit TRAP, such as fluoride, have been shown to improve and even reverse osteoporosis cases.

Acid phosphatase has also undergone evaluation in malignancies. In hairy cell leukemia (HCL), a chronic lymphoproliferative disease in which neoplastic B cells infiltrate the bone marrow, spleen, and blood, leading to splenomegaly, anemia, and recurring infections. Leukemic cells in HCL have an intracytoplasmic TRAP enzyme. In most patients, aspirates from blood or bone marrow are testable for the presence of TRAP, which showed to be quite sensitive and specific to HCL, hence aid in detection and diagnosis.

As Therapeutic Target: As noted above, AP as a marker has largely been replaced by more sensitive and specific markers; however, it gained more interest as a target for immunotherapy against cancers in the past decade. A novel strategy to eliminate cancer cells is through cancer vaccines that stimulate the adaptive immune system (similar to any other vaccine) to target cells with certain antigens expressed on cancerous cells. These antigens can be tumor-specific, exclusively expressed on cancerous cells, or non-specific antigens expressed on both normal cells and cancerous cells; however, they are much higher expressed on cancerous cells, such as prostatic acid phosphatase.

Sipuleucel-T is an immunological agent composed of fusion protein combining prostatic AP with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. The process involves the extraction of the patient’s autologous dendritic cells by leukapheresis, which then are loaded with Sipuleucel-T ex vivo and then re-infused to the patient. The dendritic cells will stimulate T-cells to target cells expressing prostatic AP. Three pivotal phase-3 placebo-controlled clinical trials showed that administration of sipuleucel-T every two weeks for a total of 3 doses in patients with androgen-independent prostate cancer increased the median survival by greater than or equal to four months (p=0.01) when compared to placebo. Therefore, it has been approved by the FDA for hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer.in vivo, the antigen-presenting cells, which can induce an immune response. Johnson and coinvestigators developed a DNA vaccine for AP and used attenuated Listeria monocytogenes, which selectively infect antigen-presenting cells, as carriers. Two phase-I clinical trials and preclinical studies on rodent models have shown promising results, and a randomized placebo-controlled phase II clinical trial is being currently being conducting to evaluate this vaccine.