# Continuing Education Activity

Implicit bias is the attitude or internalized stereotypes that unconsciously affect our perceptions, actions, and decisions. These unconscious biases often affect behavior that leads to unequal treatment of people based on race, ethnicity, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, disability, health status, and other characteristics. In medicine, unconscious bias-based discriminatory practices negatively impact patient care and medical training programs, hinder effective communication, limit workforce diversity, lead to inequitable distribution of research funding, impede career advancement, and result in carriers and disparities in the access to and delivery of healthcare services. This activity will address strategies to reduce the harm of implicit bias, clinician self-awareness and self-assessment of personal biases, and the role of the interprofessional team in increasing awareness and reducing bias-based discriminatory behavior.

**Objectives:**
- Recognize how implicit bias affects the perceptions and treatment decisions of clinicians leading to disparities in healthcare delivery and health outcomes.
- Identify stigmatized groups and strategies to eliminate discriminatory behavior in healthcare delivery for these groups.
- Describe strategies to increase awareness of personal unconscious biases in daily interactions and change behavior accordingly.
- Discuss how interdisciplinary teams can reduce the harmful effects of implicit bias in medicine.

# Introduction

Implicit biases are subconscious associations between two disparate attributes that can result in inequitable decisions. They operationalize throughout the healthcare ecosystem, impacting patients, clinicians, administrators, faculty, and staff. No individual is immune from the harmful effects of implicit biases. Unconscious bias-based discriminatory practices negatively impact patient care, medical training programs, hiring decisions, and financial award decisions and also limit workforce diversity, lead to inequitable distribution of research funding, and can impede career advancement.

When implicit biases are ignored, they jeopardize delivering high-quality healthcare services.

**Explicit versus Implicit Bias**

With explicit bias, individuals are aware of their negative attitudes or prejudices toward groups of people and may allow those attitudes to affect their behavior. The preference for a particular group is conscious. For example, a hospital CEO may seek a male physician to head a department due to his explicit belief that men make better leaders than women. This type of bias is fully conscious.

Implicit bias includes the subconscious feelings, attitudes, prejudices, and stereotypes an individual has developed due to prior influences and imprints throughout their lives. Individuals are unaware that subconscious perceptions, instead of facts and observations, affect their decision-making. Implicit bias and explicit bias are both problematic because they lead to discriminatory behavior and potentially suboptimal healthcare delivery.

We all hold implicit biases. Implicit bias is challenging to recognize in oneself; awareness of bias is one step toward changing one's behavior.

**Stigmatized Groups and the Implicit Association Test (IAT)**

Although we may consciously reject negative associations with stigmatized groups, it is virtually impossible to dissociate from a culture impregnated with such stereotypes. Patients from stigmatized groups may have one or more of these characteristics or conditions: advanced age, non-White race, HIV, disabilities, and substance or alcohol use disorders.

Implicit biases in healthcare are well-characterized by studies that use Implicit Association Tests (IAT) to evaluate medical decision-making toward stigmatized groups. The IAT measures the strength of associations between concepts and evaluations or stereotypes to reveal an individual's hidden or subconscious biases (Project Implicit - implicit.harvard.edu). The IAT is a highly validated measure for implicit biases; although vulnerable to voluntary control, the tool remains a gold standard in implicit bias research.

Implicit biases become destructive when they translate into microaggressions, defined as verbal or nonverbal cues that communicate hostile attitudes towards those from stigmatized groups.

**Implicit Bias Awareness and Training**

Comprehensive implicit bias training enhances the healthcare workforce's financial value, productivity, and longevity. The recognition of implicit bias is the first step in mitigating its effects. Many states in the US require implicit bias training for employment and licensure in the healthcare profession. The ongoing engagement of implicit biases among HCPs promotes cultural safety in healthcare organizations, representing a critical consciousness that welcomes accountability in the collaborative effort to provide culturally safe healthcare as defined by patients and their communities. HCPs should be aware of their implicit biases but not blame themselves when situations out of their control arise—respect for themselves, peers, and patients is the utmost priority. Progress toward reducing implicit bias is limited without personal discomfort and vulnerability.

Currently, very limited knowledge exists on how to conduct effective implicit bias training. However, studies show that incorporating mindfulness, coalition-building, and personal retrospection alongside broader structural changes is integral in reducing the harmful effects of implicit bias in the clinical environment.

**Implicit Bias Training: State Legislation and Requirements for Healthcare Providers**

California - AB241

Illinois - Sec. 2105-15.7

Michigan - R 338.7001

Maryland - HB28. Sec. 1-225

Minnesota - Sec. 144.1461

Washington - Sec. 43.70.613

Massachusetts - 243 CMR 2.06(a)3

New York - S3077

Pennsylvania - HB 2110. Title 63. Sec. 2102a

Indiana - HB 1178

Oklahoma - HB 2730

South Carolina - H 4712. Session 123

Tennessee - SB0956 and HB0642

# Issues of Concern

**Harm-Reduction Strategies for Stigmatized Groups**

Studies show that implicit bias training has little to no benefit without disaggregating the experiences of stigmatized groups and providing actionable recommendations. Here, we outline harm-reduction strategies, disaggregated based on the previously stigmatized groups (advanced age, nonwhite race, HIV positive, disabilities, substance use disorder, alcohol use disorder, low socioeconomic status, mental illness, non-English speaking, non-heterosexual, and obesity). Patients often belong to more than one group, given the intersectionality of historically disadvantaged populations in the US (e.g., being black with low socioeconomic status).

**Persons of Advanced Age**

Older adults are often associated with a cultural fear of death and dying.

Implicit bias can result in less mental health treatment for individuals of advanced age. Strategies to reduce implicit bias are created to educate clinicians that older adults deserve mental health treatment and should not be overlooked due to unconscious prejudicial negative feelings that clinicians may hold. HCPs should aim to schedule multiple health appointments in the same location and allot extra time for care for older adults. A healthcare team must ask for written permission before speaking with family members and caregivers. Healthcare teams should talk directly to patients even if a caregiver is present. Studies have shown that peer mentor support among older adults and support from those who have experienced illness facilitates patient empowerment.

**Persons of Nonwhite Race**

In 2021, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cited racism as a serious public health threat (CDC, 2021). Indeed, numerous studies have shown specific examples of race-based discrimination in healthcare settings. For example, implicit racial biases impact clinical decision-making for pain management, noninvasive cardiac testing, thrombolysis, cardiac catheterization, and cancer screening.

Strategies to reduce harm from implicit racial bias include finding things in common such as a shared group membership, which has been associated with a decrease in implicit racial bias.

- "Many of our patients face racism in healthcare; is this something you've experienced before?"

- "Are there any important life events that you've experienced or are currently experiencing that affect your health?"

Finally, it is essential to thank patients for sharing their stories, validate them, and acknowledge the trauma that those experiences may have caused. Knowledge of these experiences gives context to patients who lost trust in the healthcare system or may appear "non-compliant." Incorporating this practice into healthcare workflows enhances value-based care.

**Persons with Limited English Proficiency**

The nature of implicit bias toward those with limited English proficiency stems from an inherent miscommunication in health care. For English speakers, speaking English in the work setting is comfortable; when HCPs are displaced from their comfort zone, study findings reveal that healthcare quality declines. The widespread use of medical interpreters has reduced many patient barriers, but interpreters are usually only available in large healthcare systems and are not often used during outpatient care. As a result, HCPs often translate to the best of their ability when communicating with a patient with limited English proficiency. Although faster, this method leaves wide gaps in the exchange of health information and treatment compliance.

Strategies to reduce harm due to implicit bias against those with limited English proficiency include consistently using professional medical translators in outpatient and inpatient settings. Before patient care visits, it is more effective if HCPs and staff can ensure the professional translator is available for the entire appointment.

**Persons Living with HIV (PLWH)**

The nature of implicit bias against persons living with HIV (PLWH) has deep roots in AIDS exceptionalism, a Western response to a lethal virus that initially disproportionately affected men who had sex with men (MSM). Fear and stigma in the early 1980s drove a public health response that worsened the alienation of PLWH. The long-term impact of this public health response is a deeply held, false narrative that PLWH are dangerous. This narrative continues to dampen opportunities for well-studied public health measures to expand prophylaxis, diagnosis, and treatment of HIV.

Implicit biases and stigma associated with HIV are independent barriers to testing, adherence, and retention.

Strategies to reduce harm due to implicit biases against PLWH include actively countering the belief that HIV is avoidable without irresponsible behavior. Decades of studies have shown that PLWH is not the problem; a nationwide response that fails to protect its vulnerable population(s) has a more catastrophic outcome than the role of any individual group.

**Persons of the LGBTQIA+ Community**

The stigma surrounding PLWH and its misconstrued association with the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer/questioning (LGBTQ) community is exacerbated by heteronormative microaggressions when receiving healthcare, conveying the message that non-heterosexual identities are abnormal, different, or inferior to the heterosexual majority.

To reduce harm from implicit biases against those identifying with the LGBTQ community, it is essential to do one's diligence in understanding the terminology and how patients define themselves.

Although not enough to produce culturally competent care, small changes such as supporting the observance of LGBTQ Pride Day or encouraging employees to use their descriptor pronouns can have a positive impact.

**Persons with Substance Use Disorder, Alcohol Use Disorder, History of Incarceration, or Exposure to Police Violence**

Individuals with substance and alcohol use disorders, a history of incarceration, or exposure to police violence represent a population with significant unmet social and health needs. These unmet needs are exacerbated when HCPs hold negative implicit attitudes that individuals belonging to these groups are poorly motivated, manipulative, noncompliant, and violent.

Studies findings reveal that medical, nursing, and pharmacy trainees rarely receive training in healthcare delivery for persons with histories of criminal legal system exposure, characterized as those with frequent police stops, arrests, and incarceration, despite this group representing 57% of men and 31% of women in the US population.

One goal of implicit bias awareness and training is to reduce the harmful effects of implicit biases toward community-dwelling persons with a history of criminal legal system involvement. To do this, we must first dismantle the idea that a person with a history of incarceration must be a bad person; some groups are more likely to be incarcerated due to race alone.

**Persons with Low Socioeconomic Status or a History of Homelessness**

It is well-documented that HCPs working in safety-net hospitals and emergency departments express disdain towards individuals with low socioeconomic status and homelessness, colloquially known as the "revolving door" of acute care utilization in this population.

Strategies to reduce harm from implicit biases towards individuals from this group are twofold: 1) countering burnout with mindfulness and positive coping mechanisms and 2) eliminating the belief that low socioeconomic status and/or homelessness is earned.

**Persons with a Disability**

Evidence exists for the presence of implicit bias toward persons with a disability (PWD) from OT/PT specialists,

To reduce harm from HCP implicit biases toward PWD, HCPs should involve PWD in redesigning clinic spaces to improve accessibility. Many US outpatient clinics have incorporated features such as wheelchair-accessible doors, touchscreens, height-adjustable exam tables, and scales with handrails, but the lack of national standardization remains a limitation.

**Persons with Mental Illness**

The prevalence of mental illness is rising due to increased recognition and treatment (National Institute of Mental Health, 2022). Unfortunately, the negative stigma of having a mental illness prohibits many from seeking treatment.

Strategies to reduce harm due to implicit biases toward those with mental illness include speaking up when HCP colleagues dismiss a patient's mental illness or use it as a reason for lower-quality medical treatment.

**Persons with Obesity**

Those with obesity are too often misrepresented as lazy, irresponsible, and lacking self-discipline; however, ample evidence suggests that genetic factors, socioeconomic status, and environment can change a person's obesity risk.

Strategies to reduce harm to those with obesity starts with using appropriate terminology. For example, HCPs must use the word obesity as a noun describing an illness and not use the word obese as an adjective to describe a patient. The proper terminology is a patient with obesity and not an obese patient. This concept also applies to electronic health documentation; for example, the HCP should record a patient's information as a "31-year-old patient with obesity" and not a "31-year-old obese patient."

# Clinical Significance

The US healthcare system poses many challenges to HCPs: administrative burden, high patient load, and inefficiencies. Acknowledging and reducing implicit biases may seem like insurmountable tasks given these challenges. After all, how can you be emotionally available to recognize your own biases when you are barely managing to keep the ship afloat? A part of this reality is true; it is impossible to eliminate one’s own implicit biases and treat everyone equally all the time. However, studies have shown that practicing mindfulness, attentional control, and emotional regulation, in addition to showing compassion when able, positively impacts the culture of healthcare.

At the health systems level, providing implicit bias training courses for employees is not enough. Healthcare systems must 1) create stress-free spaces for HCPs to debrief and reflect on their experiences with implicit bias, 2) stop pressuring HCPs to constantly make major decisions during intense cognitive stress, and 3) provide opportunities for role-playing encounters with patients when implicit bias is perceived or acknowledged, as studies show the more HCPs practice these discussions, the more likely implicit biases are acknowledged and reflected upon in patient rooms.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although the relationship between implicit bias and interdisciplinary teams is relatively unexplored, it is evident that no single member is responsible for molding a healthcare team's culture. A culture that values open discussion of biases and protects psychological safety promotes team productivity, whereas rudeness and negative behaviors in healthcare teams may adversely affect team performance.

Tools for self-reflection of implicit biases among healthcare teams have been shown to improve patient trust in the quality of care. [Level 1] Clear communication of expectations and responsibilities minimizes the impact of bias on choosing team roles.

**Interprofessional Education Collaborative and Core Competencies**

Interprofessional teams share their values, perspectives, and strategies for planning interventions, and each member of the team plays a role in delivering patient care. Team members share their expertise and skills to provide effective patient care and achieve optimal outcomes. Teams function optimally when the members effectively communicate and have mutual respect for each other and their individual roles. Four core competencies have been established for interprofessional collaborative practice (see IPEC Core Competencies for Interprofessional Education Collaborative):

- **Work with individuals of other professions to maintain a climate of mutual respect and shared values. (Values/Ethics).**When team members place a high value on treating patients and team members equally and respectfully and operate ethically, interventions to reduce the harmful effects of implicit bias that result in health disparities can be created in a culturally safe and accepting environment.

- **Use the knowledge of one's own role and those of other professions to appropriately assess and address the health care needs of patients to promote and advance the health of populations. (Roles/Responsibilities)**Each interprofessional team member is responsible for identifying how implicit bias affects perceptions and clinicians' treatment decisions, leading to disparities in healthcare delivery and health outcomes.

- **Communicate with patients, families, communities, and professionals in health and other fields in a responsive and responsible manner that supports a team approach to promoting and maintaining health and preventing and treating disease. (Interprofessional Communication)**Discussions regarding cultural safety and the continued need for clinicians to engage in ongoing self-reflection and self-awareness and hold themselves accountable to provide culturally safe care should be a priority. Open discussions focused on accepting that everyone has implicit biases and that everyone has the ability to recognize them and change their behavior through interventions, such as counter-stereotyping, are helpful. Strategies to improve patient-clinician communication are beneficial, especially with patients in stigmatized groups.

- **Apply relationship-building values and the principles of team dynamics to perform effectively in different team roles to plan, deliver, and evaluate patient/population-centered care and population health programs and policies that are safe, timely, efficient, effective, and equitable (Teams and Teamwork)**Teams should work together to develop strategies to eliminate discriminatory practices that result in disparities in healthcare delivery, limited access, and suboptimal patient outcomes. Time should be given to interventions that embrace and increase diversity in the workforce.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

If members of an interprofessional health team don’t acknowledge their individual implicit biases, we will still leave a large hole in the potential to address bias in healthcare. The entire interprofessional team, including clinicians, nurses, pharmacists, therapists, and other ancillary and administrative personnel, is responsible for openly discussing implicit biases influencing the care provided and keeping one another accountable.