Radical resection of the tumor is recommended for liposarcomas; adjuvant therapy has not been established as an effective treatment.

Complete resection of the tumor results in a good prognosis in leiomyosarcoma of omentum. Some authors have used non-standardized chemotherapy schemes in non-resectable disease with the variable results. In patients with disseminated disease, multimodal therapy has also been used. Due to such tumors' aggressive nature, relapse is a common problem, and long-term survival is unknown.

SFTs are generally benign. 15 to 20% of them are malignant, especially tumors greater than 10 cm. Histologic features like high cellularity, high mitotic activity, pleomorphism, atypia, tumor necrosis, and hemorrhage denote malignancy.

Radical resection is the treatment of choice for omental GISTs; adjuvant therapy with imatinib after surgical resection in limited disease is also given.

Regarding mesothelioma of omentum, an intensive loco-regional treatment strategy has been adopted in several independent phases one and two trials, including cytoreductive surgery supplemented with perioperative hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy can also be added to it. It is reported that this form of treatment improved median survival as a result. Vogelzang et al. conducted a multicenter, controlled, randomized phase III trial, and pemetrexed-cisplatin is shown to be the gold standard in case of non-operable malignant pleural mesothelioma. This treatment yielded an objective response when used for the mesothelioma of omentum.

The definitive treatment for SFT of omentum is the surgical resection of the tumor with a negative margin. Post-op long term follow up is essential as these tumors commonly recur. Malignant tumors are aggressive, locally invasive with increased growth and metastasis. Therefore post-op chemotherapy is recommended in malignant tumors. Moreover, half of the malignant SFTs were positive for c-kit, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors like imatinib and sunitinib, which is also effective for GISTs, have been used SFTs too.