# Continuing Education Activity

Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is the most common long-term complication of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) reactivation. This reactivation of the dormant VZV is known as herpes zoster or shingles. VZV is the pathogen that causes the once common childhood condition varicella, colloquially known as chickenpox. Before the advent of vaccination in the late 1990s and early 2000s, upward of 90% of American adults would test seropositive for VZV. Although this number and the percentage of adults who go on to develop herpes zoster and PHN may decrease in the coming generations, PHN is currently a topic of clinical importance. This activity will highlight the role of the interprofessional team in understanding vaccination and treatment of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the risk factors for developing postherpetic neuralgia.
- Identify at-risk populations that would benefit from vaccination for postherpetic neuralgia.
- Describe the treatment options available for postherpetic neuralgia.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients with postherpetic neuralgia.

# Introduction

Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) is the most common long-term complication of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) reactivation, also known as human herpesvirus-3 (HHV-3).

The hallmark of PHN is a lancinating/burning pain in a unilateral dermatomal pattern that persists for three or more months after the onset of a herpes zoster (HZ) outbreak.

# Etiology

The VZV is a double-stranded DNA virus. It lays dormant in the ganglia of certain peripheral and central nerves after an episode of varicella resolves, generally in youth, with the immune system of the host eradicating the virus in most locations within the body.

# Epidemiology

Postherpetic neuralgia occurs in a subset of the population suffering from an episode of acute HZ. Well-established risk factors for an acute HZ episode progressing to PHN include age, severe immunosuppression, the presence of a prodromal phase, severe pain during zoster outbreak, allodynia, ophthalmic involvement, and diabetes mellitus.

A meta-analysis of the risk factors for the development of PHN published in 2016 noted that approximately 13% of patients older than or equal to 50 years of age with HZ would develop PHN.

One month after the onset of shingles, 9 to 14.3% of patients develop postherpetic neuralgia, and at three months, this percentage becomes 5%. At one year, 3% of patients continue to have severe pain.

Family history has also been considered a risk factor for herpes zoster. In a case-control study by Hicks et al., comprising 504 patients and 523 controls, it was observed that the blood relatives of patients were more likely to have herpes zoster than the control group (39% vs. 11%, p< .001). Moreover, this risk was more significant in patients with multiple blood relatives having herpes zoster than those with a single blood relative having herpes zoster.

A study from Iceland reported variations in the risk of postherpetic neuralgia associated with various age groups. Patients younger than 50 years were not found to have severe pain at any time. Severe pain was observed in patients older than 60 years: 6% at one month and 4% at three months from the onset.

There is no sex predilection for postherpetic neuralgia.

# Pathophysiology

The exact physiology that separates a self-limited zoster outbreak from postherpetic neuralgia is not fully understood. Histological examinations of relevant peripheral and central nervous tissue from sufferers of PHN reveal myelin and axon deficiency and atrophy of the dorsal horn in certain instances.

# History and Physical

Unlike other neuropathic conditions, the diagnosis of postherpetic neuralgia is relatively straightforward and not one of exclusion.

Herpes zoster can reactivate subclinically with no rash.

Physical examination of a patient with postherpetic neuralgia may reveal the following:

- Evidence of cutaneous scarring on an area of previous herpes zoster

- Altered sensation in the affected areas, either hypersensitivity or hypoesthesia

- Pain is produced by non-noxious stimuli, such as a light touch, known as allodynia

- Autonomic dysfunction, such as excessive sweating over the involved area

# Evaluation

Postherpetic neuralgia is almost universally diagnosed based on history and physical. However, laboratory tests and some targeted imaging may provide a degree of utility. They are of greater value in atypical presentations of PHN, such as zoster sine herpete or herpes zoster of the larynx. Serological testing for VZV IgG and IgM titers is available, although the sensitivity and specificity are less than ideal. A four-fold rise has been used to diagnose subclinical HZ (zoster sine herpete). However, this rising titer may or may not be secondary to viral exposure or reactivation. Comparatively, immunofluorescence of vesicle scrapings detects VZV antigens in a highly specific and sensitive manner. Similarly, PCR is exquisitely sensitive for the detection of VZV DNA.

Results of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis are abnormal in 61% of patients. Pleocytosis, elevated protein, and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) DNA are usually seen. Viral culture or immunofluorescent staining helps distinguish herpes simplex from herpes zoster.

Small-scale studies suggest that magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may hold promise for diagnosing challenging PHN cases and differentiating between PHN and HZ. A study by Haanpaa et al. reported that MRI revealed lesions attributable to HZ in the cervical cord and the brain stem in 9 patients (56%). At three months after the onset of HZ, PHN developed in 5 patients (56%) who had an abnormal MRI. On MRI, seven patients with no HZ lesions did not develop residual pain.

# Treatment / Management

Three fundamental treatment approaches may be considered for postherpetic neuralgia. The first is prevention, which focuses on identifying populations at risk for contracting HZ and administering a vaccine. The second is early recognition and treatment of an acute HZ infection, as delay may increase the chance of developing PHN. The third approach is symptom management of PHN via multimodal medication regimens and interventional procedures. The evidence regarding the efficacy of these methods is mixed but rapidly evolving, and certain approaches appear to be more successful than others. Prevention is advocated by many because, once established, PHN can be refractory to treatment, with a substantial number of sufferers achieving only a temporary and/or modest reduction in symptom severity despite multimodal therapy.

PHN is notoriously difficult to treat for many reasons. Complete resolution of symptoms is rare. A 2014 study concluded that less than half of patients with PHN achieve significant symptom reduction.

Traditional non-invasive treatments include oral and topical medications. The American Academy of Neurology (AAN), Special Interest Group on Neuropathic Pain (NeuPSIG), and European Federation of Neurological Societies (EFNS) all recommend an oral tricyclic antidepressant (TCA), pregabalin, and the lidocaine 5% patch as first-line therapies.

There are several other pharmacologic modalities to consider. Multiple studies have confirmed the short and long-term efficacy of the lidocaine 5% patch.

Other medication classes include non-TCA antidepressants and NMDA antagonists, but limited evidence supports their usefulness. For example, larger studies involving SNRIs (serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) and SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) have not shown better outcomes than TCAs, and both classes possess concerning side effect profile, though typically less severe than TCAs.

There are anecdotal reports that ketamine may prove beneficial, and a few small studies support this finding, but long-term data and large-scale studies are non-existent. Lidocaine infusions have also been considered. One double-blind study in 1999 showed that an intravenous lidocaine infusion provided clinically significant short-term pain reduction in patients with PHN.

Invasive therapies include botulinum toxin injections, sympathetic blockade with local anesthetics, epidural/intrathecal injections, and spinal cord stimulation. Botox injections are simple to perform and have a limited side effect profile.

# Differential Diagnosis

Neuropathic pain is an umbrella term that describes a type of pain common to many diseases and conditions. Nevertheless, unilateral neuropathic pain in a dermatomal pattern at or near the area of a previous HZ rash is highly specific for postherpetic neuralgia. However, there are rare instances where other neuropathic conditions should be considered. For example, there is at least one case report of CRPS affecting dermatomes afflicted by HZ just three months prior. The location of neuropathic pain will assist in the development of a differential diagnosis; if present in the face, trigeminal neuralgia and Bell’s palsy may be considered. What appears to be PHN in the thoracic dermatomes may infrequently be appendicitis, cholelithiasis, or colitis.

# Prognosis

Postherpetic neuralgia is challenging to treat. Symptoms may continue for years, sometimes whole life. With the advent of adult vaccination and the newly developed non-live vaccine formulation, prevention looms as a realistic goal for most of the susceptible American population.

# Complications

Depending on the duration of postherpetic neuralgia and how painful it is, the following complications can arise in patients:

- Depression

- Fatigue

- Disturbed sleep

- Lack of appetite

- Impaired concentration

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The mainstay of prevention is the vaccination against HZV.

The other approach is to attempt to prevent the progression of HZ to PHN, with the understanding that the severity of an HZ episode is a risk factor for PHN. Unfortunately, the available evidence supporting this technique is by no means robust, and existing investigatory studies are suboptimally designed for the endpoint in question. Therefore, while antiviral drugs, glucocorticoid administration, and/or invasive procedures may reduce the severity of an HZ episode in certain instances, there is no clear evidence that these methods, alone or in combination, result in a reduced incidence of PHN. Higher-quality studies are needed for a definitive stance.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Considering that postherpetic neuralgia is difficult to treat and outcomes are variable, prevention is of paramount importance. Therefore, primary care physicians and geriatricians are tasked with administering vaccinations to at-risk populations. When preventative measures fail or are never instituted, experts in the field of pain management who have experience with the condition and multimodal treatment techniques should be consulted. An interprofessional approach to managing patients with postherpetic neuralgia is the best way forward.