According to the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists (ACOG), the management plan for patients diagnosed with premalignant endometrial lesions includes:

- Ruling out the concurrent presence of endometrial carcinoma

- Strategic management plan designed to accommodate late diagnosis of occult carcinoma

- Prevention of progression to endometrial cancer

Management options of premalignant endometrial lesions include 1) surgical and 2) non-surgical options. A total hysterectomy (not supracervical hysterectomy) is the treatment of choice for premalignant endometrial lesions. In younger patients wanting to have children, high-dose progestin therapy with appropriate close histological monitoring is preferred.

Surgical Management: Total hysterectomy is the current standard of care for premalignant lesions of the endometrium. ACOG recommends that in clinically appropriate situations, total hysterectomy provides definitive treatment and assessment for a possible concurrent carcinoma. The supracervical hysterectomy, morcellation, and endometrial ablation are not recommended because of concerns of underlying carcinoma, which may be missed. Total hysterectomy with removal of the cervix with or without bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO), along with peritoneal washings, can provide proper staging of any incidentally discovered endometrial neoplasia and mitigates the risk of leaving behind any undetected or residual disease.

Surgical options include abdominal, vaginal, and minimally invasive procedures (such as laparoscopic or robotic approach) and may be chosen depending on the extent of the planned surgery and surgical skills of the operating surgeon. In contrast to abdominal hysterectomy, laparoscopic or vaginal hysterectomy is associated with less pain, earlier hospital discharge, and quicker recovery. However, the vaginal approach may not permit a comprehensive surgical staging, and removal of ovaries should intraoperative assessment require it. The scope of the surgery may change based on intraoperative frozen section guided pathologic review. Pathologic evaluation includes an assessment of myometrial invasion.

Non-surgical Management: Non-surgical management is offered to younger patients wanting to preserve fertility or patients with medical comorbidities; therefore, poor surgical candidates due to increased risk of complications. The therapeutic goal is 1) complete clearance of disease, 2) reversion to normal endometrium, and 3) prevention of invasive carcinoma.

Acceptable non-surgical treatments include hormonal therapy. Endometrial ablation is not advised as the completeness of ablation cannot be assessed. Additionally, it may cause fibrosis with adhesions in the endometrial cavity and making subsequent follow-up surveillance difficult or impossible. However, there are no standardized guidelines for optimal dosage and duration.

Hormonal therapy includes mainly progestins or suppression of estrogenic effects. In addition to this, selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMS) may be used. Other agents used to reduce estrogenic effects are aromatase inhibitors, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonists, and sulfatase inhibitors. Hormonal therapy using progesterone derivatives is used extensively for any patient wanting to preserve fertility. Medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) and megestrol acetate, with different doses and schedules, are the most commonly used progesterones. Nearly 75% of atypical hyperplasia resolve with long-term high dosage progestin therapy.

Progesterone acts as a counterbalance to the mitogenic effects of estrogens. It induces secretory differentiation of the glandular epithelium.

A full and detailed histopathologic examination of the endometrium is required to measure regression, persistence, or progression. Therefore examination of the entire uterus after hysterectomy is considered the “gold standard.” However, this option is not available for patients who receive non-surgical management in order to preserve fertility. These patients should be followed up with hysteroscopy and direct endometrial sampling when undergoing fertility-sparing management. No serum or tissue marker is available for follow up. Imaging modalities do not have the required specificity, so again follow up with hysteroscopy, and direct endometrial sampling is needed.

Hormonal therapy resistance is seen in nearly 30% of patients. This is thought to be due to a decreased availability of progesterone receptors and alteration of the apoptotic signaling pathway of the endometrial glandular cells.