The diagnosis of bacterial tracheitis is primarily clinical via a thorough history and physical examination. As discussed above, patients may appear febrile, dyspneic, hoarse, stridulous, septic or toxic-appearing, and in respiratory distress.****Trial with nebulized epinephrine and glucocorticoids will typically fail to show improvement in the patient's clinical course.

Laboratory investigation with white blood cell count is variable and nonspecific. Leukocytosis, as well as mild leukopenia, are commonly seen. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are also nonspecific but are estimated to be elevated in 68% of patients. Blood cultures are rarely positive; however, they should be obtained if there is suspicion for sepsis or if the patient is immunocompromised.

Radiographic images of the lateral or anteroposterior neck can show subglottic or tracheal narrowing, typical of that seen with croup (steeple sign).****Computed tomography (CT) scans are typically not used during the diagnosis of pediatric patients but can be used in adults or in patients with suspected tracheal stenosis or recurrent tracheitis, who have respiratory stability.

Definitive diagnosis is made by direct visualization, although it is not necessary with strong clinical suspicion. Laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy allow visualization of the infected airway and will demonstrate a normal or mildly erythematous epiglottis and an erythematous, edematous trachea with thick mucopurulent exudates.

Diagnosis of bacterial tracheitis can be difficult given its rarity, in addition to more prevalent diseases with similar presentations. Epiglottitis can also present with fever, upper airway obstruction, and toxic appearance. However, these patients often present with drooling and a preference for the tripod position, which is uncommon in bacterial tracheitis. Croup can also present with stridor and similar radiographic presentation with subglottic narrowing (steeple sign). Bacterial tracheitis can be a complication of croup and should be suspected if therapeutic interventions such as nebulized racemic epinephrine or steroids do not improve the clinical course.