Conventional radiographs using occlusal views were the initial diagnostic choice in the past. These can detect large radiopaque ductal stones relatively well, but they miss smaller and parenchymal stones. Additionally, only around 80% of stones are radioopaque, which leads to many stones not being diagnosed. While conventional radiography can still be useful in the initial workup of salivary stones, modern imaging techniques using ultrasound or CT scans can accurately diagnose the sialoliths and provide their exact location.

Sialography is traditionally regarded as the gold standard for diagnosing sialolithiasis as it allows excellent visualization of the salivary ducts and underlying ductal pathology. In this technique, contrast is injected via a small needle, enabling radiographic visualization, acting as a sialogogue, and allowing passage of smaller stones. Disadvantages include radiation exposure and risk of contrast reaction.

Non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) is a widely used modality for the evaluation of sialolithiasis. It is a valid tool for diagnosing sialolithiasis when it is big enough or when the radiographic slices are done every millimeter.

MR Sialography demonstrates similar sensitivity and specificity to NCCT for the evaluation of sialolithiasis. Benefits of MR include excellent visualization of the salivary ducts without the need for contrast and no radiation exposure. Disadvantages include cost, image acquisition time, and limited availability compared to NCCT and Ultrasonography.

Sialendoscopy allows for direct visualization of salivary stones and the salivary ducts, thus providing excellent sensitivity and specificity. In addition to aiding in the diagnosis of sialolithiasis, clinicians increasingly use sialoendoscopy for therapy and stone removal, given the advancements in endoscopic technology.

Ultrasonography provides a non-invasive method of imaging sialolithiasis. The usual appearance of sialoliths on ultrasound is a hyperechoic focus with posterior shadowing. Benefits to ultrasonography include no radiation exposure, real-time image interpretation, and widespread availability. Ultrasound is often available at the point of care and can provide rapid diagnostic information. Ultrasound is highly operator-dependent, revealing a wide range of reported sensitivity and specificity. Reported sensitivities are best for stones greater than 2 to 3 mm in size. Recent research has demonstrated sensitivity and specificity for stones greater than 3 mm in size comparable to conventional NCCT and sialoendoscopy.