Amylase is primarily used in diagnosing pancreatic diseases. Amylase is a commonly measured enzyme due to the availability of inexpensive, easily automated methods. Although amylase is a sensitive indicator of acute pancreatitis, it is not specific as it can be elevated in several conditions unrelated to the pancreas.

Amylase is not useful in predicting the severity of an acute pancreatic episode or monitoring the condition. The magnitude of the increase in serum enzyme activity is not related to the severity of pancreatic involvement; however, the greater the rise, the greater the probability of acute pancreatitis. The lack of specificity of total amylase measurement has led to an interest in the direct measurement of P-type amylase instead of total enzyme activity for the differential diagnosis of patients with acute abdominal pain.

Amylase inhibitors such as acarbose have been used in treating type 2 diabetes and have been shown to reduce hemoglobin A1C and peak postprandial glucose. Acarbose has also been shown to improve the remission of dumping syndrome in bariatric patients. The drug has also been shown to improve the risk of cardiovascular disease by slowing down the thickening of carotid arteries.

Various intra-abdominal events can lead to a significant increase in serum P-type amylase activities, up to a fourfold increase and sometimes beyond. Such increases may be caused by leakage of P-type amylase from the intestine into the peritoneal cavity and then into circulation.

Cases of amylase-producing multiple myeloma have been described. Increased amylase activity is due to salivary-type hyperamylasemia in most patients (sialyl salivary type).

Some patients with phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma were found to have hyperamylasemia, usually the salivary isotype. Here, hyperamylasemia may be related to the hypertensive crisis and vasoconstriction leading to tissue hypoxia rather than being a result of tumor secretion and is often transient.

Benign pancreatic hyperenzymemia, a syndrome first described by Gullo, is characterized by raised serum amylase, pancreatic isoamylase, lipase, and trypsin activities in asymptomatic subjects with no evidence of pancreatic disease by imaging. The syndrome occurs sporadically or in a familial form, and amylase activity fluctuates significantly with occasional transient normalization in some cases.

Damage of salivary glands, leading to salivary hyperamylasemia, has been seen in trauma or surgery to the salivary gland, radiation to the neck area involving the parotid gland and subsequently causing duct obstruction or calculi of the salivary glands.

Hyperamylasemia in anorexia nervosa is associated with vomiting, and indeed the finding of raised salivary amylase may provide a clue to concealed vomiting.

Hyperamylasemia may be associated with various tumors caused by either an ectopic production of the enzyme by the tumors or perhaps an inflammatory response by the tumor cells resulting in the marked release of the enzyme normally produced in these tissues into the bloodstream.

Gut diseases, including mucosal inflammatory disease of the small intestine, mesenteric infarction, intestinal obstruction, appendicitis, and peritonitis, usually result in increased P-type isoamylase because of increased absorption of amylase from the intestinal lumen.

Rare cases of hyperamylasemia have been reported in association with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), as well as with ciprofloxacin treatment.