The process of physiologic hemostasis can be altered for several reasons, such as genetic disorders, malignancy, sepsis, surgery, and drugs (those used for anti-aggregation and anticoagulation). From a basic approach to perioperative anticoagulation, a pharmacological review of anticoagulation is essential.

**Aspirin (Acetylsalicylic Acid)**

This agent is the most commonly prescribed antiplatelet drug for the prevention of cardiovascular disorders. Its mechanism of action is the irreversible inhibition of the cyclooxygenase (COX) 1 and 2 enzymes. The action of COX is necessary for the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandin (PG) H2. The PGH2 is rapidly converted to several bioactive prostanoids, including thromboxane A2, a potent vasoconstrictor, and an inductor of platelet aggregation. Despite the short half-life of aspirin (3 to 6 hours), its irreversible effects will last for the complete lifetime of the platelet (8 to 9 days). After the interruption of aspirin therapy, recovery of platelet function depends on its turnover (approximately 10% per day).

**Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)**

These drugs act by the inhibition of COX enzymes, depending on the particular drug. Some NSAIDs can selectively inhibit the COX 2 enzyme that mediates pain and inflammation, simultaneously limiting the undesirable effects of COX 1 inhibition. The effect of NSAIDs on platelet function is considered a short-term effect that normalizes within three days; nonetheless, this can vary between drugs in the class. For short-acting drugs like ibuprofen, diclofenac, and indomethacin, 50% of platelet function is restored 6 hours after the last dose and normalized after 24 hours.

**Thienopyridines (Clopidogrel and Prasugrel)**

These are inhibitors of the adenosine diphosphate (ADP) receptor, also called the P2Y12 receptor, in platelets. Physiologically, the union of ADP with its receptor increases levels of intracellular calcium and activates the GpIIB/IIIa platelet receptor that promotes the stabilization of the platelet clot through fibrinogen bonds.

**Non-thienopyridines (Ticagrelor and Cangrelor)**

These drugs are relatively new with different mechanisms of action from those discussed thus far. Ticagrelor is a reversible, non-competitive ATP analog that binds to a G-protein in the P2Y12 receptor, preventing its activation and signaling. After a loading dose of ticagrelor, the maximum antiplatelet effect is achieved within 2 hours, plasma half-life is 8 to 12 hours, and steady-state concentration in 2 to 3 days. Due to the reversible effect of ticagrelor on platelets, it is recommended to be suspended 5 days before surgery.

**Vitamin K Antagonists (Warfarin, Acenocoumarol, Phenprocoumon)**

These are also called coumarins. The most recognized and widely used drug of this group is warfarin, which has been available for more than 50 years. The mechanism of action of warfarin is the inhibition of the 2,3 epoxide reductase enzyme, responsible for the cyclical conversion of oxidized vitamin K to a reduced state. The latter is necessary as a cofactor for the carboxylation of glutamic acid at the N-terminus of coagulation factors. Without gamma carboxyglutamate residues, clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X cannot bind to the divalent calcium necessary for normal activation. However, the inhibition of carboxylation also affects the production of protein C and S anticoagulants. This creates a transient procoagulant state that can be explained by the shorter half-life of these anticoagulants (8 and 30 hours), compared to factor II and factor X (60 and 72 hours). This phenomenon is more frequent, with higher doses of vitamin K antagonists at the beginning of anticoagulation therapy.

**Direct Inhibitors of Factor Xa (Rivaroxaban, Apixaban, Edoxaban, Betrixaban)**

The common mechanism of action these drugs, also known as direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs), is to bind to the active site of factor Xa, thus inactivating it. Factor Xa is considered the rate-limiting step for the progression of the coagulation cascade, thrombin activation, and ultimately clot formation.

**Direct Inhibitors of Thrombin**

Dabigatran is the only medication in this group. Its mechanism of action is the direct inhibition of thrombin, preventing the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin and thus clot formation. Dabigatran has a quick onset of action (0.5 to 2 hours) and is metabolized by non-specific plasma esterases. The plasma half-life is around 12 hours; however, the half-life of this drug is tremendously affected by renal function, as its excretion is 80% by the kidneys and less than 10% by the liver. It is recommended to avoid dabigatran use with creatinine clearance (CrCl) less than 30ml/min, due to the potential for drug accumulation and adverse effect of bleeding (see table.1).

**Fondaparinux**

This drug is a pentasaccharide that acts as an indirect factor Xa inhibitor. The exact mechanism of action is the reversible binding of the drug to the antithrombin factor, potentiating its activity to inactivate Factor Xa. The plasma half-life of fondaparinux is approximately 15 to 17 hours. Its anticoagulant activity persists even 2 to 4 days after the last dose of the drug in a person with normal renal function.

**Heparins**

The binding of the heparin molecule to the antithrombin receptor enhances its potency to inactivate factors II and Xa. This drug has been widely used for years, with multiple indications and dosages. One of the most concerning adverse effects of this pharmacological group is the possibility of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Fortunately, this complication is infrequent, though it is dependent on the dose, route of administration, and type of heparin. In patients with renal failure and a CrCl < 30 ml/min, low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) should be avoided or adjusted to renal function, the use of unfractionated heparin (UFH) is a suitable option in this case. Heparin can be administered as a therapeutic dose for the patient with high thromboembolic risk (enoxaparin 1 mg/kg twice daily or dalteparin 100 units/kg twice daily) or as the prophylactic dose for patients undergoing bridge therapy (enoxaparin 40 mg once daily or dalteparin 5,000 units once daily).