**Physical Principles**

The role of the macromolecules and organelles involved in the process of cell division is critically dependent on the polar nature of these molecules. Their appropriate location in the cell and movement in a definite pattern according to the cell cycle stage is important for cell division to happen. Application of external alternating electrical fields interferes with this coordinated natural movement of these electrically sensitive polar macromolecules disrupting mitosis. The following two effects of electric fields on these macromolecules are responsible for the negative impact on cell division:

**1. Effect on Alignment**: Any molecule with spatial separation of the positive and negative charges is called a dipole and is sensitive to experiencing differential forces in the presence of an external electric field. Such molecules are forced to align along the direction of the local electric field, which prevents them from attaining the appropriate alignment required for mitosis to progress. This dipole alignment effect is predominant on the random movement of tubulin protein and prevents its polymerization by inhibiting the formation of the mitotic spindle. This effect results in metaphase arrest.

**2. Effect on Location**: These polar macromolecules also tend to concentrate in regions of high electric field density in the presence of non-uniform electric fields. The various factors that result in a non-uniform distribution of electrical fields are the geometry and the differential electrical property of the tissue. This displaces them from the specific spatial location in the cell they are supposed to be in the particular stage of the cell cycle.

This process, called dielectrophoresis, primarily affects the spatial location of the septin protein complex, which migrates to the constricted center of the dividing cell during the telophase due to high electric fields in that region due to the hourglass shape of the dividing cell. These electric fields exert minimal effects on normal tissue with a lower proliferative rate. Skin tissue surrounding the region may experience side effects because of a relatively higher turnover rate. There is some evidence that TTF may also cause alteration to oncogenes like p53.