**Screening Procedure**

The standard of care test for diagnosing HIV in a clinical setting is the serum test, known as the HIV fourth-generation test, a combination antibody (Ab) and antigen (Ag) test. Before the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommendation in 2014 to use the fourth-generation test, only Ab tests were used. The fourth-generation test looks not only for antibodies formed against HIV-1 and HIV-2 but also for the p24 Ag, allowing for earlier detection of HIV after exposure. The p24 Ag is detectable as early as 14 days after exposure. If the Ag test is positive and Ab negative, a reflex RNA test will confirm or negate the test. If the Ag and Ab are positive, the test will confirm if the HIV Ab is present by differentiating between HIV-1 and HIV-2. The differentiation of HIV-1 and HIV-2 is also novel to the fourth generation test and was not available in previous generations of tests.

If a very early HIV infection (less than 14 days) is strongly suspected, an HIV RNA test should be performed initially to detect an infection that may be present before the p24 Ag can be detected. Depending on the sensitivity of the RNA assay, the RNA may be detected as early as 5 to 10 days after the transmission of HIV. RNA also should be performed if the fourth-generation test is indeterminate.

The fourth generation has improved benefit over earlier generation tests because of earlier infection detection and the ability to differentiate HIV-1 from HIV-2, which has important treatment implications. In the VOICE study, 28% of HIV infections missed by a third-generation test were found using fourth-generation tests.

False negatives in HIV screening are usually due to missing an early HIV infection and can be reduced by using the fourth-generation test. However, these can still miss a very early infection. The false-positive rates of both the third and fourth generations are very low. Data show a false positive rate of third-generation testing (with confirmatory western blot) to be as low as 0.0004% to 0.0007%.

In the non-clinical setting, oral swab tests are still primarily enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) antibody tests performed as rapid tests but need to be confirmed with a serum western blot. An advantage of rapid tests is that they can be offered in a non-clinical setting such as community health fairs, places of worship, HIV service centers, and other locations outside healthcare facilities. Results are presented within 20 minutes, which decreases the number of patients who do not know the outcome of their test because they do not follow up for a return appointment, as can occur in the clinical setting. ELISA tests are Ab-only tests and detect HIV as early as 3 weeks after transmission.