Before determining the underlying cause, it is essential to establish what type of wound the patient has. These subclassifications can be acute or chronic.

**Types of Wounds**

**Acute**

Clinicians assess acute wounds by the method of injury and resultant damage to soft tissues and bony structures. For example, in crush or high impact injuries, there is an area of demarcation which is not fully recognized until sometimes as much as a week or two later. For this reason, it is important to determine the method of injury and to keep in mind that the wound seen is not necessarily the entirety of the wound which will be present in a week. In these cases, the patient and their family should be educated on this progression to prevent frustration and misunderstanding.

For all acute types of wounds, it is important to determine the length of time since injury (days or hours), the involvement of neurovascular supply, muscle, tendon, ligament, and bony structures, and the likelihood of contaminants in the wound. Also important is when the patient had their last tetanus vaccine/booster dose. Clinicians should start antibiotics if the wound is severely contaminated or if it has been longer than 3 hours since the injury. All underlying tissue should be repaired, and the wound should be irrigated to remove contaminants and bacteria.

In cases of traumatic/open fracture, the most used classification system is Gustillo-Anderson:

- Type 1: Clean wound, low energy puncture wound of less than 1 cm size, minimal contamination, minimal soft tissue damage, adequate soft tissue coverage of bone, without periosteal stripping, minimal fracture comminution

- Type 2: Moderate soft tissue damage and crushing, moderate contamination, laceration of greater than 1cm in size, adequate soft tissue coverage of bone, without periosteal stripping, minimal fracture comminution

- Type 3A: High-energy open injury, massively contaminated wound, extensive/significant soft tissue damage and crushing, adequate soft tissue coverage of bone, severely comminuted and/or segmental fracture, periosteal stripping is present

- Type 3B: Significantly contaminated wound, extensive soft tissue damage, unable to cover bone with soft tissue (requiring graft), severely comminuted and/or segmental fracture, periosteal stripping, and bone exposure

- Type 3C: Similar to type A or B, however, associated with arterial injuries requiring repair

**Chronic**

If a wound becomes arrested during normal stages of inflammation and healing, this classifies a chronic wound; deemed such at an untimely three months of non-progression. They often stall in the inflammatory phase.

- **Arterial (Atherosclerosis, Raynaud Disease, Scleroderma)**
- Is there enough blood flow?
- Generally, an ankle-brachial index (ABI) of less than 0.9 is diagnostic of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and limits blood supply to the tissues while impairing antibiotic delivery to infected wounds

- **Venous**
- Pressure-induced changes in blood vessel wall permeability lead to leakage of fibrin and other plasma components into the perivascular space
- Accumulation of fibrin has direct and negative effects on wound healing as it down-regulates collagen synthesis

- **Infection**
- Underlying infectious processes, including cellulitis and osteomyelitis, will inhibit wound healing
- Culturing for aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal pathogens is recommended

- **Pressure**
- Increased pressure to the area of concern will destroy new tissue growth and prevent proper perfusion of blood to the wound site
- These areas need to be offloaded to avoid undue pressure

- **Radiation Therapy**
- Causes stasis/occlusion of small vessels and damages fibroblasts and nuclei

- **Oncologic**
- Always biopsy areas of concern in non-healing wounds, as this can be an atypical presentation in various types of malignancies

- **Systemic**
- Multiple systemic diseases inhibit wound healing, with diabetes being the most common culprit

- It has been determined that uncontrolled blood glucose levels suppress the body's normal inflammatory response while inducing microvascular disease, which limits healing


- Obesity is also a significant risk factor that impairs wound healing, perhaps secondary to relative hypoperfusion and ischemia of subcutaneous adipose tissues
- Immunodeficiencies/immunosuppression and renal failure are also implicated

- **Nutrition**
- Although serum albumin is not a good predictor of wound healing, there is some evidence that protein malnutrition, as well as insufficient levels of certain vitamins and minerals, will hinder the body's ability to heal chronic wounds
- High glucose levels interfere with nutrient absorption, causing depletion of several nutrients
- Protein and energy requirements of chronic wound patients may rise by 250% and 50%, respectively

- **Age and Hormones**
- It is commonly recognized that, in healthy older adults, the effect of aging causes a temporal delay in wound healing but not an actual impairment in terms of healing quality
- A review of age-related changes in healing capacity demonstrated that every phase of healing undergoes characteristic age-related changes. Compared with females, aged males have been shown to exhibit delayed healing of acute wounds. Studies indicate that estrogen can improve the age-related impairment in healing in both men and women, while androgens negatively regulate cutaneous wound healing.

- 
**Pharmacological**

- 
              
- Hydroxyurea has been reported in multiple instances to cause non-healing ulcerations
              
              
- Chemotherapeutic drugs delay cell migration, decrease wound matrix formation, lower collagen production, impair fibroblast proliferation, and inhibit wound contraction; furthermore, they weaken immune functions, thereby impeding the natural inflammatory phase of healing, and increasing the risk of infection
              
              
- Steroids decrease inflammation, inhibit epithelialization, and decrease collagen production
- Vitamin A reverses delayed wound healing from steroids

- **Self-inflicted/Psychosocial**
- There are instances where a patient causes the ulceration, either on purpose or as a result of non-compliance
- This is often the hardest factor to spot and overcome but must always be a consideration
- In addition, psychological stress impairs cell-mediated immunity, compromising normal healing processes

- **Genetic**
- Predisposition to hypertrophic or keloid scarring, hereditary conditions, and various skin types (pigmentation, elasticity, thickness, sebaceous quality, and location)

- **Smoking**
- Cigarette smoke contains more than 4000 constituents
- Nicotine constricts blood vessels and increases platelet adhesiveness, carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin and reduces oxygen delivery, and hydrogen cyanide inhibits oxygen transport

**Necrotizing Soft Tissue Infections**

Necrotizing soft tissue infections (NSTIs)can induce and instigate widespread necrosis subsequent to their aggressive nature. Despite increased understanding of their disease processes, NSTI's rarity, complexity, and occasional ambiguity of symptomatology continue to pose diagnostic dilemmas.

- Categorized based on the layer(s) of soft tissue association, these infections include skin level necrotizing cellulitis, necrotizing fasciitis within the superficial or deep soft tissue, and myonecrosis/necrotizing myositis indicating muscle involvement. Establishing the diagnosis of these infections is often the main challenge. This differentiation is critical as necrotizing infections warrant prompt, aggressive surgical debridement.

- It should be of no surprise after reading this review that susceptible patients at most significant risk for these types of infections include elderly adults, patients with obesity, immunosuppressed individuals, patients with renal failure or diabetes, those who suffer from peripheral vascular disease, or patients with a combination of these factors.

- When the "hard signs" of bullae, crepitus, gas/emphysema on X-ray, hypotension with systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg, or skin necrosis are present, establishing the diagnosis of NSTI is not challenging. However, these indicators are often absent on presentation, thus potentially delaying diagnosis and surgical intervention. Most commonly, the diagnosis is clinical.

- Patients may clinically present or progress to develop sepsis or septic shock without obvious causation. The extremities, perineum, trunk, and torso are commonly implicated. A detailed examination should be undertaken for expression of turbid, grayish, semi-purulent material ("dishwater fluid") from an identifiable entry site, in addition to assessing the presence of skin changes, blebs, or crepitus. At the site of infection, patients often develop pain out of proportion to observed physical manifestations. Any of these findings mandate immediate surgical intervention, which should consist of exposure and direct visualization of potentially infected tissue (including deep soft tissue, fascia, and underlying muscle) and radical resection of affected areas.

- The Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis (LRINEC) score is also helpful as a laboratory aid in distinguishing necrotizing from non-necrotizing skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs). Wong et al. originally published a score of >/= 6, yielding a positive predictive value of 92% and a negative predictive value of 96%. Developed in 2004, LRINEC displayed promise for predicting the severity of skin and soft tissue infections.

- NSTIs necessitate prompt surgical debridement for satisfactory treatment following the primary initiation of antimicrobial therapy. Because of the rapidly progressive and potentially fatal outcome of this condition, if imaging cannot be performed expeditiously, delaying treatment is not justified. Radiologic studies should be considered only in patients in whom the diagnosis is not seriously considered.
- Plain film findings may demonstrate extensive soft tissue gas
- CT examination can reveal asymmetric thickening of deep fascia in association with gas, or the presence of abscesses
- MR imaging effectively differentiates between necrotizing and non-necrotizing infections; although it can be overly sensitive as well as time-consuming, thus should not delay prompt surgical intervention in the management of NSTIs

- Classified into two types, NSTIs are either polymicrobial (type I) or monomicrobial (type II), dependent upon the offending organism(s).
- Polymicrobial infections are more common, occur secondary to a combination of aerobic and anaerobic organisms, and primarily involve the trunk and perineum.

- Antimicrobial agents directed against gram-positive and gram-negative aerobes and anaerobes should be administered. Due to its inherent anti-toxin properties, Clindamycin is recommended as an addition to any empiric regimen.

- The aforementioned findings constitute a surgical emergency, the mainstay of which remains wide debridement of necrotic tissue until bleeding, viable tissue is reached. A grey serous fluid at the level of the necrotic tissue is usually noted, and as the infection spreads, thrombosed blood vessels can be visualized along the involved tissue planes.

- Typically, patients require serial trips to the operating room for wide debridement until adequate infectious source control is obtained.

In summary, successful treatment requires early initiation of broad-spectrum systemic antibiotic therapy, aggressive surgical debridement of all necrotic tissue, and supportive care (fluid resuscitation, organ, and critical care support) to maintain oxygenation and tissue perfusion. Delay of definitive debridement is the most critical risk factor for death. Early operative debridement is a significant determinant of success in NSTI treatment and an independent predictor of improved outcomes.