**Photostress Test**

If the Photostress Recovery Time (PSRT) of the worse eye is equal to that of the better eye, then the macula is not the cause of vision loss. Since the test is independent of media opacities and brain disorders cause bilateral vision loss, such a result would narrow down the vision loss to an optic nerve disorder.

- If the PSRT of the worse eye is longer than the normal/better eye, then the vision loss is due to macular disease.

- PSRT greater than 50 seconds is considered abnormal.

**Amsler's Grid**

- The patient has a central scotoma if the central white dot is not seen. The extent of the scotoma is described with the help of the diagonal lines on Amsler chart 2.

- The patient has a large scotoma if all four corners of the grid in any of the charts are not seen.

- If the central white dot is seen, but any boxes are blurry or missing, the patient has a peripheral scotoma or eccentric viewing.

- If any lines appear wavy or distorted, the patient has metamorphopsia due to macular diseases such as edema, drusen, or epiretinal membrane.

**2-Point Discrimination**

If the patient can perceive two different lights, it indicates that the macular function is normal.

**Maddox Rod Test**

- Grade 1 response - The patient can identify the direction correctly in all three positions. The line appears straight, continuous, and correct in color in all three positions. It indicates 6/6 to 6/9 vision.

- Grade 2 response - The patient can identify the direction correctly in all three positions. The line appears straight but broken and correct in color in all three positions.

- Grade 3 response - The patient can correctly identify the direction and the color but is unsure whether the line is straight or not.

- Grade 4 response - The patient can correctly identify only color.

**Entoptic Phenomenon**

If the patient can perceive shadows of the arborizing retinal vasculature, the macular function is probably normal. If they cannot perceive the vasculature, the macular function is probably poor.

In the blue field entoptic phenomenon test, normally, more than 15 corpuscles are seen. If there is a partial loss in movement, a complete loss, or slow movement, the retinal function is abnormal.

**Potential Acuity Meter (PAM)**

The smallest Snellen line where the patient can read three or more characters is recorded as the potential acuity.

**Laser Interferometry**

The gratings (also called spatial frequency) are made finer until the patient is unable to discern the direction of the gratings. The smallest gratings seen by the patient are recorded and then converted to Logmar or Snellen acuity. A spatial frequency of 30 per degree is equal to 20/20 (6/6) visual acuity.

**Critical Flicker Fusion Frequency (CFFF)**

The critical flicker fusion threshold (or threshold for flicker fusion, TFF), which denotes the fastest rate of flickering light that the visual system can see, is used to characterize the upper degree of one's ability in visual processing. This is what is used to determine visual acuity. While, according to certain sources, the human eye can detect the difference between modulated and steady light at up to 500 Hz, it is generally accepted that the human eye cannot detect flicker above 50 to 90 Hz.

**Electroretinogram (ERG)**

The normal ERG has three waves: [See the image on - Normal ERG]

- a wave – a small negative wave that originates from the photoreceptors

- b wave – a large positive wave that originates from the bipolar cells

- c wave – a slow-rising positive wave originating from the Retinal pigment epithelial cells

These components are measured using the following parameters:

- Amplitude – a measure of the maximum deviation. [See the image on - Amplitude of ERG waves]

- Implicit time – The time interval between the onset of the stimulus and the maximum response of a or b wave.

- Latency – The time interval between the onset of the stimulus and the start of a wave. [See the image on - Time responses of ERG waves]

These parameters from the patient are compared to normal ERGs to diagnose the status of the retina.

**Visually Evoked Potentials (VEP)**

- The VEP is a series of many waves, among which the following are used for clinical diagnosis:
- P100 wave – a positive wave that occurs at approximately 100 ms after photostimulation
- N75 wave – a negative wave that occurs at approximately 75 ms after photostimulation
- N135 wave - a negative wave that occurs at approximately 135 ms after photostimulation

- In each wave, the amplitude and the latency are compared with the normal VEP.

- If the largest amplitude fastest waves are produced with a checkerboard stimulus with 5-6mm squares, the visual acuity can be estimated to be around 20/20.

- If the largest amplitude fastest waves are produced with larger squared checkerboard stimuli, the visual acuity is correspondingly lower.

**Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA)**

The normal FFA has the following phases:

- Prearterial/Choroidal Phase - occurs 9.5 - 10 sec after injection of the dye. The posterior ciliary artery and choriocapillaris fill during this phase.

- Arterial Phase - occurs 10 - 12 sec after injection of the dye. The central retinal artery fills during this phase.

- Capillary/Early Arteriovenous Phase - occurs 13 - 15 sec after injection of the dye. The precapillary arterioles and capillaries fill during this phase.

- Late Arteriovenous/Lamellar/Early Venous Phase - occurs 14 - 16 sec after injection of the dye. The post-capillary venules fill during this phase.

- Venous Phase - occurs 17 - 19 sec after injection.

- Late Staining/Recirculation Phase - occurs 10 mins after injection of the dye—the disc margin and Bruch's membrane stain during this phase.

Hypofluorescent areas visualized are due to the following:

- Blocked fluorescence - Vitreous hemorrhage, subhyaloid hemorrhage, intraretinal hemorrhages, lipofusceine deposits like drusen, etc., block the underlying retinal and choroidal fluorescence.

- Vascular filling defects - Retinal venous and arterial occlusions keep the dye from flowing through the vessels producing hypofluorescence.

Hyperfluorescent areas visualized are due to the following:

- Pre-injection fluorescence - due to auto or pseudo-fluorescence.

- Early hyper fluorescence - due to abnormal retinal or choroidal vessels

- late/ extravascular hyper fluorescence - due to new vessels on the discs, vitreous inflammation, cystoid edema.

**Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)**

The OCT scan allows cross-sectional imaging of the macular and peripapillary regions. The scans are color coded with red-yellow representing areas of maximal optical reflection and backscattering. Blue-black represents areas of minimal signals. The vitreous is seen as a non-reflective dark space. The vitreoretinal interface is well-defined as the difference between the non-reflective vitreous and the backscattering retina. Layers within the retina can be seen separately, with each layer being discernible.

**Microperimetry**

The green hue symbolizes a low-intensity stimulus that corresponds to high sensitivity, while the red color represents a high-intensity stimulus (low sensitivity). An empty square represents a stimulus that is not seen, whereas a filled square represents a stimulus that is seen.