Patient positioning: The patient should be positioned supine, with the bed rotated, to allow full access to the patient's head and neck from both sides of the bed. A shoulder role may be used to extend the neck. Care is necessary to ensure that the head does not "hang" and is supported to prevent neck injury.

**Radical Neck Dissection**

Various incisions can be used, but the most common include the "hockey stick" incision from the mastoid tip extending inferiorly and then curving anteriorly into a midline neck crease at least two fingerbreadths below the mandible. A vertical line can be dropped from this incision inferiorly to create a "Y" incision to improve access inferiorly and posteriorly if needed. Many surgeons prefer to avoid this as it places a relatively hypo-perfused tri-point directly atop the carotid vessels after closure. Alternatively, the MacFee (parallel horizontal incisions), Schobinger, and reverse hockey stick incisions may be used per surgeon preference.

Skin flaps are raised in the subplatysmal plane from the mandible down to the clavicle. Anteriorly, flaps should be raised to the lateral border of the strap muscles. Care should be taken to avoid communication with a tracheostomy if one has been placed. Posteriorly, the skin flaps should be raised to the anterior border of the trapezius. The skin flaps are then retracted using sutures or elastic stays.

The anterior border of the SCM is identified, and the muscle is retracted posteriorly while dividing the fascia that ensheaths the muscle. The carotid sheath is identified deep to the muscle. The  IJV will be identified as superficial and lateral to the carotid. The sternal and clavicular heads of the SCM are then divided. The omohyoid muscle, which lies just superficial to the IJV, is also divided.

With proximal and distal control of the IVJ, the inferior end of the internal jugular is isolated and ligated, ensuring that neither the carotid nor the vagal nerve (CN X) is included in the ligation. The thoracic duct generally enters the IJV at the junction of the IJV and subclavian vein on the left side. If the thoracic duct is violated, clips or sutures should be used to prevent a persistent chyle leak. The SCM and IJ are then reflected superiorly, allowing access to the supraclavicular lymph nodes and the floor of the neck (composed of the splenius capitus, levator scapulae, and scalene muscles). The adipose tissue and lymph nodes are then elevated off of the floor of the neck between the trapezius (posteriorly) and the lateral edge of the strap muscles (anteriorly). The deep layer of deep cervical fascia overlying the anterior scalene muscle is left intact to protect the phrenic nerve. The brachial plexus may be identified in the lateral, inferior portion of this dissection between the anterior and middle scalenes and should be protected.

The SCM, IJV, and lymph nodes are then rolled superiorly to the level of the hyoid bone. It will be necessary to ligate numerous branches of the IJ to accomplish this elevation. Medially, the cervical rootlets provide the appropriate depth of dissection (superficial to the deep layer of the deep cervical fascia). The rootlets are divided to allow the removal of all nodal contents from level V to be reflected anteriorly. Once deep to the cervical rootles, care must be taken to avoid injury to the phrenic nerve and brachial plexus. At this time, the surgeon may choose to save the root of CN XI and the trapezius branch. The CN XI branch to the SCM is sectioned, allowing further reflection of the SCM.

Next, the tendons of the digastric and stylohyoid muscles are divided while protecting the hypoglossal nerve (CN XII), allowing for access to the superior aspect of the IJV and the submandibular region contents. The facial artery and vein are ligated on the inferior aspect of the submandibular gland. The submandibular gland and associated lymph nodes are then reflected superiorly and raised off of the mylohyoid. The mylohyoid is retracted anteriorly to reveal the course of CN XII along with the lingual nerve and submandibular duct. The duct and submandibular ganglion are then ligated, preserving the lingual nerve. The facial vessels will again be encountered on the anterior aspect of the submandibular gland and require a second ligation. The submandibular gland is then dissected free from the mandible and reflected posteriorly, exposing the superior aspect of the IJV. The IJV is then ligated high in the neck.

Dissection continues through the inferior 1/3 of the parotid--or parotid tail-- being careful to avoid injury to the main trunk of the facial nerve. Dissection then continues through the superior aspect of the SCM at the mastoid tip, allowing for en bloc removal of the specimen. The procedure may also be altered to elevate the parotid gland prior to ligation of the SCM, which may protect some branches of the lower division of the facial nerve.

The neck is then irrigated, and surgical drains are placed. The wound is closed in layers, which include the platysma, dermis, and skin.

**Modified Radical Neck Dissection**

The modified radical neck dissection uses the same incisions and elevation of subplatysmal flaps as the radical neck dissection.

The dissection begins with an incision of the fascia over the SCM and medial dissection in the superior third of the SCM to identify CN XI. The nerve is then skeletonized superiorly to the posterior belly of the digastric muscle and posteriorly to the trapezius. After skeletonization of the anterior border of the trapezius muscle, the fat and lymph nodes of level V are elevated and rolled medially. Cervical rootlets are often preserved, though they can also be divided while preserving the deep layer of the deep cervical fascia overlying the levator scapulae and scalene musculature to protect the phrenic nerve and brachial plexus.

The SCM is then retracted posteriorly, allowing access to levels II-IV of the neck. In level IIb of the neck, the lymphatic packet is dissected free from the deep layer of the deep cervical fascia and passed under CN. The nodal contents of level V are reflected medially and included with the nodes of levels II-IV. This tissue is reflected up to the carotid sheath. The nodal packet is divided inferiorly at the level of the clavicle after mobilization of the omohyoid inferiorly. Care should be taken to ligate the thoracic duct if encountered in this area. The transverse cervical artery will also be present in this area and should be avoided.

The nodal contents are sharply divided free from the carotid sheath. Care is taken to avoid injury to the vagus nerve during the dissection. The ansa cervicalis is seen running across the IJV at this point of the dissection and may be sacrificed. Numerous IJV branches leaving anteriorly may need to be ligated during this step. The nodal tissue is elevated up to the level of the hyoid.

Attention is then turned to the contralateral anterior digastric. The muscle is skeletonized from the mandible to the hyoid, and the level IA contents are rolled towards the ipsilateral anterior digastric. The ipsilateral digastric is then skeletonized to the digastric tendon and back along the posterior digastric tendon until the facial vein is reached. The facial vein is ligated, and the remaining posterior digastric muscle is skeletonized.

Next, the marginal mandibular nerve is identified and protected by elevating the fascia overlying the submandibular gland. The level IB contents are then dissected free from the mandible and mylohyoid. Just deep to the digastric tendon, CN XII is identified and protected. At the posterior border of the submandibular gland, the facial artery is identified and may be ligated or traced through the submandibular gland and left intact. Next, the submandibular gland is retracted inferiorly, exposing the lingual nerve and submandibular duct. The submandibular duct and ganglion are ligated, protecting the lingual and hypoglossal nerves. Level IB is then dissected free from the mandible and reflected inferiorly.

Finally, the nodal packet is dissected free from the bifurcation of the IJV and common facial vein, allowing for en bloc removal of levels I-V.

The surgical bed is irrigated with saline, inspected for hemostasis and chyle, and surgical drains are placed. The wound is then closed in layers.