In the last 10 years, significant knowledge regarding the most common epidermal nevus syndromes has been acquired.

**Schimmelpenning syndrome**is the most well-known epidermal nevus syndrome and was first described in 1957. The nevus sebaceous is the signature epidermal nevus of this condition which commonly follows a blaschkoid distribution and is seen in combination with skeletal, neurologic, and ophthalmologic features. Craniofacial defects, limb deformities, cognitive impairment, seizures, structural brain abnormalities, and coloboma are among some of the described features of this syndrome.

**Phakomatosis pigmentokeratotica**is also characterized by a nevus sebaceous but is seen in combination with a papular nevus spilus. Of note, in infancy, the nevus spilus component of this syndrome may be characterized by a light brown patch that does not develop the papules until several years later. Similar to Schimmelpenning syndrome, neurologic deficits are usually observed. Interestingly, a propensity to develop hypophosphatemic rickets is observed with greater frequency in this condition in comparison to Schimmelpenning syndrome.

**Nevus comedonicus syndrome**is characterized by a nevus comedonicus in combination with neurologic and ocular manifestations such as cataracts, microcephaly, anatomic cerebral malformations, and seizures among others. Most frequently these findings are ipsilateral to the nevus comedonicus.

**Becker’s nevus syndrome**is defined as an epidermal nevus in combination with ipsilateral muscular and or skeletal defects. The most commonly described findings include breast hypoplasia, scoliosis, vertebral defects, and hypoplasia of the muscles in the upper trunk. One notable finding is a lack of typical blaschkoid distribution in the epidermal nevus.

**Proteus syndrome**is an overgrowth syndrome affecting the bones and connective tissue that results in asymmetric growth of the limbs. The characteristic connective tissue nevi of this condition are frequently found on the plantar surface. The other cutaneous findings are vast but include lymphangiomas, patchy dermal hypoplasia, and lipomas among others. Neurologic deficits associated with disproportionate and asymmetric overgrowth of the underlying bony structures are a hallmark feature of this syndrome.

**Congenital hemidysplasia, ichthyosiform erythroderma, and limb defects (CHILD) syndrome**is inherited in an X-linked dominant pattern, and therefore a predominance of those affected are females. This condition has very characteristic ipsilateral findings. Most striking include the ipsilateral hypoplasia of limbs, facial hemiplasia, and hypoplasia of various organ systems. The classic epidermal nevus is well defined, abruptly stops at midline, and tends to improve with age. Stippled calcification of the epiphysis, a unique bone finding, can be found early in infancy and can help clue clinicians into the diagnosis.