The two methods of administration of Bimatoprost Ophthalmic Solution vary according to the intended effects.

**Applying Bimatoprost Ophthalmic Solution for Open-angled Glaucoma**

Bimatoprost ophthalmic solution 0.01% or 0.03% may be used as eye drops applied directly to the ocular surface. The usual dose of bimatoprost is one drop every evening, although it may vary depending on the physician's dosing. The patient should wait 5 minutes between the administration of bimatoprost and other ophthalmic drugs. With bimatoprost, 0.03%, reduction of IOP should begin after 4 hours, and the effect will peak at 12 hours but will maintain the reduced IOP through 24 hours.

**Applying Bimatoprost Ophthalmic Solution for Hypotrichosis**

Bimatoprost ophthalmic solution 0.03% is most commonly used and associated with increased growth and prominence of eyelashes with once-daily administration. The medication is currently available commercially as a bottled solution along with included applicators. Before application, patients should remove contact lenses. It is not recommended to apply any solution directly to the eye. Every evening, a drop of the solution is applied to the single-use-per-eye applicator and then brushed against the base of the upper eyelid margin. The applicator is to be used with only one eye to prevent contaminations. Evidence suggests that the solution should be applied for at least 16 weeks for maximum eyelash prominence.

**Application of new Bimatoprost Implant for Open-angled Glaucoma**

Although the topical ophthalmic solution of bimatoprost is highly effective for reducing IOP, there are also serious concerns of disease management due to poor adherence by the patients.

To circumvent these concerns, a bimatoprost sustained-release implant was developed and approved in the USA in 2020 for patients with ocular hypertension or OAG.