**Preclinical or Presymptomatic**

In this stage, individuals are asymptomatic with definite laboratory evidence. Identifying the biomarkers can help diagnosing Alzheimer disease in this stage. Low amyloid and increased tau proteins in CSF serve as a biomarker but they are not specific for Alzheimer disease. Another analysis has indicated that a combination of different variables– ApoE4 positivity, scores on the the paired associates immediate recall test and digits symbol substitution test, increased tau protein in CSF, and right entorhinal cortex thickness and right hippocampal volume on MRI – can predict the progression to MCI.

**Mild Cognitive Impairment**

In this stage, patients have impairment in either memory or in nonmemory domains, such as executive ability or language function. These individuals continue to work, socialize, and function independently. Patients with MCI progress to dementia t rate of 10% per year. Risk factors for progression to dementia includes the severity of impairment at the time of diagnosis in addition to the other risk factors for Alzheimer's disease.

**Dementia**

In this stage, patients have incapacitating memory impairment. Language changes include anomia, paraphasic errors, decrease in spontaneous verbal output and a tendency for circumlocution to avoid forgotten words. Impairment of visuospatial abilities leads to wandering in the familiar surroundings and constructional apraxia.

20-40% of patients will have delusions. Visual hallucinations are more common, although, patients can also have auditory and olfactory hallucinations as well. Disruptive behaviors occurs in almost 50% of the patients. Patients also lose their normal circadian sleep-wake pattern and their sleep becomes fragmented. Motor vehicle crashes are greater in these patients.