Without an interdisciplinary team involved in the care of a stroke patient, many aspects of care and needs of the patient and family may slip through the cracks. In addition, and most importantly, the team members, typically including stroke neurologists, nurses, care coordinators, physical, occupational, kinesiological, and speech therapists, and pharmacists, each address different concerns and needs, and all make important contributions when it comes to discharge planning and the future management of the patient after their hospitalization.

It is important to have stroke specialists on the team, which include a stroke neurologist, but also needs to include nurses and therapists who have been trained to care for stroke patients. This is important, so the patient gets the care that is tailored to them and their needs. Pharmacists are often on the teams as well. They are helpful when it comes to medication reconciliation, education of physicians and nurses regarding medication management, as well as education of the patient and their families. Pharmacists are also needed to assess what needs the patients will have on discharge, such as medication teaching or dose packs and pill containers. Other important members of the team, depending on the patient's functional status, may include chaplains, palliative care, and neuropsychologists. Therapists are necessary to assess and recommend needs on discharge, such as inpatient rehabilitation and homecare. The interdisciplinary team and their daily or bi-weekly rounds are important for the appropriate care and planning for patients. These individuals are important as each of them can address different needs of the patients, and are all involved in the inpatient care, including medications, treatments, assessment, therapies, and family education, as well as discharge planning, such as the best way to provide medications based on insurance, rehabilitation and home care needs, appropriate medications and physician follow up, and patient and family education.