Thiazide diuretics are an FDA-approved class of drugs that inhibit the reabsorption of 3% to 5% of luminal sodium in the distal convoluted tubule of the nephron. By doing so, thiazide diuretics promote natriuresis and diuresis. Three thiazide diuretics are the most commonly used: hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ), chlorthalidone, and indapamide. HCTZ and chlorthalidone are FDA-approved for clinical use in the management of primary hypertension. HCTZ and chlorthalidone are also FDA-approved for clinical use in adjunctive therapy in edema that is associated with chronic heart failure (CHF), hepatic cirrhosis, corticosteroids, and estrogen therapy. Indapamide is FDA-approved for the treatment of salt and fluid retention associated with CHF, and in the management of primary hypertension as either the sole treatment or in conjunction with other antihypertensive drugs. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, methods of administration, significant adverse effects, contraindications, toxicity, and monitoring, of thiazide diuretics, so providers can direct patient therapy where they are indicated as part of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Review the mechanism of action of thiazide diuretics.
- Identify the indications for various agents in the thiazide diuretic drug class.
- Summarize the adverse events and contraindications associated with the thiazide diuretic class of drugs.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to properly use thiazide diuretics to improve patient outcomes in the varied scenarios where they are effective.