Febuxostat is available in both 40 mg and 80 mg tablet formulations. Febuxostat is administered orally with an initial dose of 40 mg per day.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

- **Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustment is necessary for mild (Child-Pugh Class A) or moderate hepatic impairment(Child-Pugh Class B) in patients receiving febuxostat therapy. No clinical studies have been performed in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C), hence use with extreme caution.

- ****Patients with Renal Impairment:********No dosage adjustment of febuxostat is necessary for mild or moderate renal impairment (CrCl 30 to 89 mL/min). In patients with severe renal impairment (CrCl< 30 mL/min), the dose of febuxostat tablets is reduced to 40 mg once daily. American College of Rheumatology guidelines recommends febuxostat for patients with moderate to severe CKD.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Gout is rare in reproductive-age females due to the uricosuric effects of estrogen. In pregnant women, gout is quite uncommon. In preclinical studies, neonatal mortality has been observed at approximately 40 times the MRHD(maximum recommended human dose). Use with caution. Pharmacological management should be based on risk-benefit assessments.

- ******Breastfeeding Considerations:******No clinical information is available on using febuxostat during lactation. Hypothetically, febuxostat is more than 99% bound to plasma proteins; consequently, the concentration of febuxostat in maternal milk is likely to be low. Additionally, the oral bioavailability of febuxostat is only about 50%, so the amount an infant receives systemically is expected to be very small. However, febuxostat is present in rat milk. Hence the risk-benefit analysis is crucial before febuxostat is administered to a nursing mother. An alternative agent, allopurinol, should be considered during lactation.