Myriads of etiologies have been reported for secondary hypertension, which may be classified into the following broad categories;

**Renal Parenchymal Disease**

The renal parenchymal disease is the most common cause of secondary hypertension. It is a group of different renal disorders which may include diabetic nephropathy, glomerulonephritis, interstitial renal parenchymal diseases, and polycystic kidney diseases.

**Endocrine Disorders**

Hypertension due to endocrine disorders is caused by increased secretion of hormones. The common endocrine disorders responsible for secondary hypertension include primary aldosteronism, pheochromocytoma, and Cushing`s syndrome, and primary aldosteronism is responsible for the majority of endocrine hypertension cases.

**Renovascular Disorders**

Hypertension due to renovascular disorders is a rare entity and occurs due to stenosis of the unilateral or bilateral renal arteries.

**Vascular Disorders**

Coarctation of the aorta is the prime example of vascular disorders resulting in secondary hypertension in young adults.

**Miscellaneous**

Obstructive sleep apnea, polycystic ovarian syndrome, preeclampsia, and drugs may contribute to the etiology of secondary hypertension. In the presence of obstructive sleep apnea, the duration, as well as quality of sleep, is affected, which has been reported to increase the risk of hypertension.

Drug-induced hypertension is a significant cause of secondary hypertension. Hence, it is essential to look at the patient's medication list. Following are the drugs that can cause hypertension.

- Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are the most commonly implicated drugs in the worsening of blood pressure control due to their widespread use

- Sodium-containing antacids

- Drugs used to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder(ADHD):  Methylphenidate, amphetamine, dexmethylphenidate, and dextroamphetamine

- Anti-depressants: Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors

- Atypical antipsychotics like clozapine and olanzapine

- Decongestants that have phenylephrine or pseudoephedrine

- Appetite suppressants

- Herbal supplements like St John wort, ephedra, and yohimbine

- Systemic corticosteroids like  dexamethasone, methylprednisolone, prednisone, prednisolone, and fludrocortisone

- Mineralocorticoids like carbenoxolone, licorice, 9-alpha fludrocortisone, and ketoconazole

- Estrogens, androgens, and oral contraceptives

- Immunosuppressants like cyclosporine

- Chronic recombinant human erythropoietin

- Recreational drugs: cocaine, methamphetamine, MDMA, bath salts

- Nicotine, alcohol

- Chemotherapeutic agents like gemcitabine (which causes microvascular injury)