**Clinical Significance**

Stature is used to monitor physical growth and development during childhood. Stature is an indicator of malnutrition (including gestational malnutrition) and one of the constituents of BMI (body mass index); this can further help assess nutritional uptake. If the underlying cause of short stature is known, the related treatment can be provided.

Short stature has a psychosocial impact on an individual, and therefore, the behavior (bullying behavior, isolated behavior, etc.) of a person can be improved by counseling.

**Anthropological Significance**

Anthropology is a human science, with human auxology or human growth and development being a major branch of biological anthropology. The focus of a biological anthropologist is the assessment of physical growth and development during life, which can be examined through the stature of an individual. Anthropologists study the various reasons behind short stature in a population and can assist in recording the family history, emergence of puberty, as well as genetic diseases. Anthropologists also help assess growth patterns and nutritional uptake among different population groups and help evaluate the risk factors, including diet, environment, and genetics.

**Forensic Significance**

Identification is an essential part of forensic investigations. Where identification cannot be established, forensic investigators develop the biological profile based on ancestry, age, sex, and stature. While stature alone cannot be used to establish identity, it assists in crime investigation by eliminating suspects, especially so with short stature.