With respect to treatment and management, the initial goal is to stabilize the patient’s hemodynamics. If the patient is unstable, the patient should have two large-bore IVs, airway assessment, and have a type and cross in preparation for blood transfusion. For the unstable patient before surgical interventions, intrauterine tamponade should be performed. A Bakri balloon can be inserted into the uterus to tamponade uterine bleeding. If an intrauterine balloon is not available, gauze packing is an acceptable option. The physician should use a continuous piece to eliminate the risk of retained products. If the bleeding is uncontrolled with tamponade, surgical intervention is necessary. The discussion here will cover the standard surgical intervention, while coverage of alternate options will be in the surgical treatment section of this paper.

The standard surgical intervention for the hemodynamically unstable patient is uterine dilatation and curettage (D&C). This procedure can be performed rapidly with decreased bleeding within 1 hour. D&C with hysteroscopy may be more beneficial in identifying a cause for uterine bleeding but is not mandatory. The disadvantage of D&C for acute uterine bleeding is that this procedure will only provide temporary relief. The procedure will not treat the underlying causes, so medical therapy must start upon cessation of uterine bleeding. One study showed that decreased menstrual blood loss was only evident in the first period after the procedure but subsequently returned to baseline.

For the stable patient, the goal is to control the current bleeding and decrease any future bleeding episodes. The first-line treatment for acute abnormal uterine bleeding is hormonal therapy. There are multiple options available, including oral contraceptive pills (OCPs), IV estrogen, medroxyprogesterone acetate, and tranexamic acid.

IV conjugated estrogen is the only FDA specially approved treatment for acute AUB, due to the limited studies. One randomized control study showed that IV conjugated estrogen stopped bleeding for 72% of patients within 8 hours with the majority of those women showing results at 5 hours.

The recommended dose is 25mg IV every 4-6 hours for 24 hours. After 24 hours, the patient should transition to oral combined contraceptive pills or progestin to decrease unopposed estrogen exposure. The contraindications for IV estrogen are as follows:

- Current diagnosis of breast cancer

- Active or past venous thrombosis

- Arterial thromboembolic disease

- Liver dysfunction

- It should be used with caution in women with cardiovascular and thromboembolic risk factors

Combined oral contraceptive pills and oral progestins are commonly used medications for acute AUB. One study showed that treatment with either medication taken for one week stopped the bleeding in 3 days for 76-88% of women. The recommended treatment regimen for monophasic combined oral contraceptive pills that contain a minimum of 35mcg of ethinylestradiol is three times a day for seven days.

- >35 years of age and cigarette smoking

- Hypertension

- History of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE)

- Known thromboembolic disease

- Cerebrovascular disease

- Ischemic heart disease

- Migraine with aura

- Current or past breast cancer

- Severe liver disease

The treatment regimen for progestins is medroxyprogesterone acetate 20mg orally three times a day for seven days. The contraindications include:

- Active or past DVT or PE

- Arterial thromboembolic disease

- Current or past breast cancer

- Impaired liver function

Tranexamic acid received approval for the treatment of AUB in 2009. This drug is an antifibrinolytic that reversibly binds to plasminogen preventing fibrin degradation. The recommended treatment regimen is tranexamic acid 1-1.5g orally every 8 hours for five days or 10mg/kg IV (max dose 600mg/dose) every 8 hours for five days.

- Current thrombotic disease

- Used with caution in patients with a history of DVT, PE

As mentioned previously D&C is the current surgical treatment of choice for acute AUB; however, the other surgical options available to providers are endometrial ablation, uterine artery embolization, and hysterectomy. Endometrial ablation is an effective treatment in women who have contraindications to the medical therapies mentioned above. This procedure should only be performed on women who no longer desire fertility and when the possibility of endometrial or uterine cancer has been ruled out as possible causes of acute AUB.