Traumatic knee extensor injuries usually involve quadriceps contraction against a flexed knee, such as when a patient is attempting to regain balance after a fall, jumping, or missing a step on the stairs. Significant injuries may also occur in patients with comorbidities after a simple fall. Patients may hear a popping sound or feel a tearing sensation. They will likely complain of knee pain and swelling with an inability to bear weight.

Quadriceps tears typically occur where the tendon inserts into the patella and may cause an inferiorly displaced patella (patella baja). Patellar tendon tears have three common patterns of injury. The most common is the avulsion of the tendon from the inferior pole of the patella. Other injuries include a mid-tendon tear and a distal tendon avulsion from the tibial tubercle. These injuries typically result in a superiorly displaced patella (patella alta).

Patellar fractures are typically caused by trauma directly to the patella, such as a fall, or indirectly through a forced contraction. Patellar fractures can be vertical, marginal, transverse, or comminuted. Vertical fractures may not disrupt the extensor mechanism.

The patella can be dislocated in any direction, including intra-articular, but the most common is a lateral dislocation. In traumatic dislocations, the mechanism is typically a twisting motion of the knee or direct force to an externally rotated foot. Frequently, the patella will have subluxed and spontaneously reduced before a physician sees the patient. Dislocations have a high rate of recurrence and are complicated by patellofemoral instability and patellofemoral arthritis. Some patients with chronic patellar dislocations can self-reduce their injuries. Dislocation inherently causes a tear to the medial patellofemoral ligament (MPFL). The MPFL, along with the lateral patellofemoral ligament (LPFL), provides medial and lateral (respectively) counter-resistance to the patella.

Osgood Schlatter is caused by a combination of fast bone growth and repetitive stress on the patellar tendon insertion at the tibial tubercle. The growth of bone is faster than the ability of the patellar tendon to stretch, causing tension over the tibial apophysis. Repetitive stress can cause avulsion and inflammation of the apophysis, termed apophysitis. Constant stress on the inflamed apophysis may eventually lead to an avulsion fracture of the physis (epiphysiodesis) if left untreated (*mechanism and predisposing factors for proximal tibial epiphysiolysis in adolescents during sports activities). Typical activities that worsen pain include jumping, walking upstairs, and running. Osgood Schlatter's symptoms are typically self-limited and resolved once the apophysis fuses with the tibial epiphysis in early adulthood.

The mechanism of idiopathic chondromalacia patellae is complex and multifactorial; it includes components of degenerative changes, history of participation in sports, obesity, patellar maltracking, and muscular imbalances, which apply increased stress on the anterior knee.