**Infection**Similar to a long-term urinary catheter, bacteria can colonize an IPC. The pleural fluid culture will be positive, but there will no signs or symptoms or characteristic biochemical profile pathognomonic for empyema. In some patients, diagnosis of pleural infection might be challenging since most MPEs have low pH, high lactate dehydrogenase, and may be low glucose as well. So far, the incidence of IPC-related pleural infection is not known. Also, the diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis of pleural infection are the same for patients with IPCs.

Skin flora, most commonly Staphylococcus aureus, is reported in case reports followed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Fsych et al. reported, in a large multicenter trial involving 1021 patients, the incidence of infection to be only 4.8% and mortality of 0.29%.

Infection usually happens 6 to 8 weeks post-insertion and is more likely related to post-insertion care rather than bacterial colonization during the procedure. Interestingly, IPC-related pleural infection often leads to pleurodesis, particularly with a Staphylococcus infection.

There is no documented increased risk of pleural infection with IPCs in immunocompromised patients. This is well documented in patients with hematological malignancies on chemotherapy.

**Catheter Tract Metastasis (CTM)**

It is not uncommon for patients treated with IPC for MPEs to develop painful nodules near the insertion site or the point of entry into the parietal pleura. Treatment is analgesia and radiotherapy. Mesothelioma is notorious for causing CTM. The cause of this complication remains unknown.

**Residual Loculated Effusions**

It is postulated that the presence of an IPC promotes fibrin deposition, and this fibrin can form loculations and, thus, renders IPC non-functional. This complication usually happens at least 8 weeks post-insertion. Treatment is fibrinolytic therapy tPA through the IPC. This is usually very successful but carries a small risk of significant pleural hemorrhage.

**Malnutrition**

Cachexia is very common in cancer patients. Since the pleural fluid is rich in proteins, the risk of malnutrition is thought to be substantial. A prospective trial followed patients with IPC for 1 year but found no significant risk of malnutrition.

**Blockage**

Fibrous tissue grows around and inside the IPC, blocking of few holes. It seldom affects drainage. A complete blockage is rare and happens in less than 5% of cases. Mild blockage usually responds to saline flushes.

**Catheter Fracture**

This usually happens when an IPC is removed. Because the polyester cuff promotes inflammation and fibrosis, leading to tight anchoring of the catheter. The risk is reported to be about 10%. This is usually managed by surgical exploration or just leaving the catheter fragments inside the body. No complications have been reported from retained fragments of IPC.