Organ transplantation is the removal of an organ from one person (the donor), and placement into another (the recipient). Transplantation is performed in patients with end-stage organ failure and can increase life expectancy while also improving the patient's quality of life. The most commonly transplanted solid organ is the kidney, followed by the liver, heart, and lungs. Pancreatic and intestinal transplants are performed as well but are less common. More recently, vascularized composite allografts (VCAs, e.g., face, hand, penis) have been performed for reconstructive procedures.

Deceased patients are the major contributor to donor organs, and the most common causes of death are cerebrovascular accidents followed closely by traumatic brain injuries. In recent years, opioid overdoses have become another significant source of deceased organ donation.

Living donations are less common but still serve to increase the existing donor pool. Over 7300 living donations were performed in the United States in 2019, saving patients from a potentially long-wait on the transplant list. The most frequently donated organ is a kidney, but portions of the liver or lung are transplanted as well. More recently, living donations of VCAs have been explored.

The number of patients awaiting organ transplantation far outstrips the availability of donor organs. In the United States, estimates are that a new patient is added to the transplant list every ten minutes, and twenty patients die every day while awaiting transplant. In 2019, surgeons performed nearly 40,000 transplants, but at the end of the year, over 110,000 patients remained on the waiting list. While there are multiple ways to consent to organ donation (including a signed donor designation, designation on a driver's license, or signed consent from the deceased's next-of-kin), the estimate is that only 30 to 40% of potential donors in the United States become actual organ donors.