The pathophysiology of injury varies markedly in children compared to adults. Children differ from adults with respect to spinal cord anatomy as follows:

- Children have a different fulcrum due to a large head

- Children's vertebra is incompletely ossified

- Their ligaments are firmly attached to articular bone surfaces that are more horizontal.

Thus, the younger the age, the more flexible the spine is. Hence neural damage occurs in children much earlier than musculoskeletal injury. As age increases the likelihood of cervical cord injury decreases with up to 75% of injuries occurring in infancy up to 8 years old because the fulcrum of cervical mobility moves progressively downward with the child’s increasing age.

- Younger than eight years: C1 and C3

- Eight to 12 years: C3 and C5

- Older than 12 years: C5 and C6

The mode of injury occurrence can be classified as primary and secondary. Primary injury results from mechanical forces directly due to traumatic impact. Secondary injury occurs due to various vascular and chemical processes resulting from a primary injury.

Before one evaluates a patient, a basic review of spinal cord anatomy can yield a rapid diagnosis. The three most important tracts in the spinal cord are corticospinal tracts, spinothalamic tracts, and dorsal (posterior) columns.

The corticospinal tract is a descending motor pathway. Damage involving this tract causes ipsilateral clinical findings including muscle weakness, spasticity, increased deep tendon reflexes, and Babinski sign.

The spinothalamic tract is an ascending pathway that transmits pain and temperature sensation. Damage to this tract results in loss of pain and temperature sensation on the opposite side of the body.

The dorsal columns are also descending motor pathways which transmit vibration and proprioception. Damage to one side of the dorsal columns causes ipsilateral loss of vibration and position sensation. A light touch is transmitted by both the spinothalamic tracts and the dorsal columns. Therefore, a light touch is preserved to some extent unless there is involvement of both the spinothalamic tracts and the dorsal columns.