The small intestine (bowel) extends from the pyloric sphincter of the stomach to the ileocecal valve, and it consists of three segments: the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. The estimated length of the small intestine is thought to measure 4 to 6 meters in the living, depending on whether surgical, radiologic, or autopsy measurements are made. Embryologically, the small bowel derives from the primitive gut. The duodenum comes from the foregut, whereas the jejunum and ileum arise from the midgut. The duodenum is the most proximal section of the small bowel. It is supplied by the superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries, while veins follow the arteries and drain into the portal vein.  The duodenum combines the secretions from the pancreas and liver. The next part of the small intestine is the jejunum, where most digestion and absorption occur. The final part of the small bowel is the ileum. The superior mesenteric artery supplies the jejunum and ileum. In contrast, venous blood is drained through the superior mesenteric vein (SMV), which joins the splenic vein behind the pancreas' head to form the portal vein.

The large intestine (bowel) extends from the ileocecal valve to the anus. It is divided anatomically and functionally into the colon (ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid), rectum, and anal canal. The arterial supply of the large intestine is closely linked to its embryological origin. The midgut (cecum to the distal transverse colon) is supplied by the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) through the ileocolic, right colic, and middle colic arteries. The hindgut (distal transverse colon to the rectum) is supplied by the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). The rectum has a more complex vascularisation, with its superior third being supplied by the superior rectal artery, which stems from the IMA. In contrast, its middle and inferior third is supplied by arteries from the internal iliac arteries. Finally, the Drumond marginal artery and the Riolan’s arch constitute two major arterial anastomoses between the IMA and the SMA, which can provide valuable collateral flow in case of stenosis, occlusion, or during oncological resections of the sigmoid colon. The venous drainage follows the arterial supply except for the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV), which joins the splenic vein. The major role of the colon is water absorption and electrolyte exchange. Up to 5000 mL of fluid and up to 400 mEq of sodium can be absorbed daily in the colon under normal circumstances. Besides, the colon plays an essential role in providing essential vitamins, such as vitamins K and B12, produced by colonic bacteria.

The ileostomy is created from a section of the ileum. Its output is directly related to the location of the stoma. If the stoma is located more proximal, there is less surface area for electrolyte and water absorption. The consistency of the output is usually soft. However, that can be affected by many conditions such as food and fluid intake, diseases like active Crohn's disease, medications, and radiation therapy. The ileostomy output is approximately 600mL per day (ranges from 500 to 700mL). This output is reduced by half in the fasting state. Ileostomy output more than 1.5L is considered excessive, and patients may be prone to dehydration.

A colostomy is an exteriorization of the ascending, transverse, descending, or sigmoid colon. There are many types of colostomy, such as double-barrel colostomy, loop colostomy, and end-colostomy. A sigmoid colostomy and the transverse colostomy are the most usual colostomy type, whereas ascending and descending colostomies are uncommon and hardly performed. The perineal colostomy is a safe and efficient perineal reconstruction technique after abdominoperineal resection for low rectal cancer. Studies show improved quality of life for these patients, as there is a preservation of the body image by invisible perineal placement. Moreover, there is reasonable continence with acceptable functional results through this technique. The content of a left-sided colostomy is normally semi-solid. The contents of transverse loop colostomies are slightly more liquid but well-formed, and the patient empties them only once a day. The more proximal the colostomy is, the more liquid the contents are.