**Macroscopic Examination (Gross Pathology)**

Not surprisingly, osteoid osteoma and osteoblastoma have a similar macroscopic (gross) appearance in keeping with the radiologic presentation, which is also similar. Osteoblastoma has a copious vascular supply and appears red or red-brown, often with a gritty or sandpaper consistency. On curettage, the lesion may bleed profusely due to this rich vascularization. The average size is 3 to 3.5 cm, with a maximum diameter of up to 15 cm.

In keeping with its radiographic appearance, the tumor is usually round to oval with a thinned, expanded cortex, surrounding sclerosis, and periosteal reaction. The border between the tumor and medullary cavity is sharp, often with some reactive bone. The tumor has a ''pushing'' border against the endosteal cortical surface and trabecular bone of the marrow, consistent with its benign nature versus an infiltrative or permeative margin seen with more aggressive or malignant lesions.

**Histopathological Examination**

The formation of osteoid and immature bone trabecula is a key feature of both osteoblastoma and osteoid osteoma; however, osteoblastoma generally produces more osteoid and is more vascularized with a less organized appearance of the nidus. A rare cartilaginous matrix may be present.

Osteoblastoma does not infiltrate or permeate preexisting lamellar bone structures as do osteosarcomas. Instead, they are separated by a distinct, narrow layer of bone-free fibrous tissue. Particular attention should be given to the border between the lesion and the preexisting cortex or marrow trabeculae to distinguish osteoblastoma from osteosarcoma. As described above, secondary aneurysmal bone cysts can occur, most commonly in large or expanded lesions.

**Immunohistochemistry**

Beta-catenin can be used to differentiate between osteoblastoma and osteosarcoma. Osteoblastoma is characterized by nuclear beta-catenin staining, whereas cytoplasmic or membranous staining of beta-catenin suggests osteosarcoma.

A recent study has recommended using hypoxia-related microRNA-210 as a successful diagnostic marker for discriminating osteoblastoma and osteosarcoma.