Histamine (an endogenous chemical messenger) induces an increased level of vascular permeability, which leads to fluid moving from capillaries into the surrounding tissues. The overall outcome of this is increased swelling and dilation of vessels. Antihistamines stop this effect by acting as antagonists at the H-1 receptors. The clinical benefit is a reduction in allergy symptoms and any related symptoms.

First-generation antihistamines easily cross the blood-brain barrier into the central nervous system and antagonize H-1 receptors, leading to a different therapeutic and adverse effect profile in contrast to second-generation antihistamines selectively bind to peripheral histamine receptors.

The duration of the pharmacological action of first-generation antihistamines is about 4 to 6 hours. In contrast, second-generation antihistamines work for 12 to 24 hours. They are both metabolized by the liver using the P450 cytochrome system.

Parietal cells in the gastrointestinal tract secrete hydrochloric acid. They undergo regulation by acetylcholine, gastrin, and also histamine. Histamine is released from enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells. When histamine binds to the H-2 receptors on parietal cells, cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) increases, inducing protein kinase A. This action then leads to phosphorylation of the proteins that take part in the transport of hydrogen ions. Thus increased histamine leads to increased stomach acid, e.g., HCl secretion.

The use of antihistamines specific to the H-2 receptor blocks the entire process and reduces stomach acid secretion.