The initial weight loss for a patient undergoing an intragastric balloon system can produce a total body weight loss of anywhere from 6 to 15%, compared to the 1 to 5% through lifestyle modifications alone.

The American Society For Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ASGE) and Bariatric Endoscopy Task Force performed a meta-analysis regarding weight loss via intragastric balloon therapy. The degree of weight-loss achieved was dependent upon the balloon system utilized. Two meta-analyses support more significant weight reduction with a liquid-filled balloon than an air-filled balloon.

Intragastric balloons are practical and safe for managing obesity in the short term, but these are temporary measures. Weight regain is expected to occur after removing the balloon, so it is not a mechanism for sustained weight loss. In a study of 500 patients who had six months of treatment with balloon therapy, only 50% of these patients had maintained 20% excess weight loss at the one-year mark post balloon removal, and only 25% of these patients maintained this weight loss at the five-year mark.

Notably, there is no difference between lifestyle changes versus balloon therapy at ten years, so many patients may require additional treatments. It is important to note that intensive lifestyle intervention programs have a weight loss of approximately 7 to 10 kg after six months. Behavioral therapy appears to have long-term weight loss of around 5 kg.

Long-term follow-up after intragastric balloon placement therapy is heterogenic. Some patients undergo repeated usage of this therapy, others undergo pharmacotherapy, and others may decide on undergoing bariatric surgery. A review of controlled studies of the three mentioned FDA balloon systems concluded that all these systems have comparable efficacy on weight loss. The effects of the balloon were greater than the control subjects but less than that of bariatric surgery and the weight-loss combination drug phentermine-topiramate. Studies of metabolic parameters with intragastric balloon placement demonstrated improvement in diabetes and hypertension in patients with a  BMI classification of overweight but not obese. Long-term data evaluating patient outcomes of cardiovascular disease and mortality are not available. Still, it is thought that balloon therapies will not achieve meaningful and sustained improvements in obesity-related comorbidities if used as monotherapy.

**Intragastric Balloon Therapy versus Other Weight-loss Therapies**

Overall, intragastric balloon therapy can expect to achieve anywhere from an 8 to 15% total body weight loss in the short term.

In comparison, bariatric surgery can achieve an estimated total body weight loss of 13 to 30%, dependent on the procedure performed.

Currently, no trials directly compare pharmacotherapy methods of weight loss to the intragastric balloon. A meta-analysis of the individual therapies supports short-term weight loss achieved via the balloon compares favorably with pharmacological therapy.

Surgical interventions for weight loss are more efficacious for the patient, but as noted, certain circumstances or patient factors may limit the patient from undergoing such procedures. A retrospective study performed by the National Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network examined over 65,000 patients and discovered the total body weight loss at the one-year and five-year postoperative time frames. At the one-year mark, the average total body weight loss for the gastric bypass was 31.2%, sleeve gastrectomy was 25.2%, and the adjustable gastric band was 13.7%. At the five-year postoperative mark, the average total body weight loss for the gastric bypass was 25.5%, the sleeve gastrectomy measured at 18.8%, and the adjustable gastric band at 11.7%.

With the large differences in weight-loss durability and efficacy, intragastric balloons should not be used instead of a bariatric operation when the latter is both feasible and appropriate for the patient.

**Additional Treatments**

Additional measures may be needed for a patient to sustain or even augment weight loss after intragastric balloon therapy. These treatments can include pharmacologic, bariatric surgery, or repeat balloon therapy. It is estimated that with the continuation of an exercise regimen and diet, approximately 50% of weight loss achieved during the intragastric balloon therapy can be maintained at least one-year post balloon removal. For a patient to undergo repeat balloon therapy, they must undergo a mandatory one-month balloon holiday, meaning four weeks without a balloon in place. Studies demonstrate that these subsequent repeat therapies are just as effective as the initial treatment.

Consideration for an adjustable balloon system can be determined if a patient would like to undergo repeat balloon therapy. Studies have shown that approximately 80 to 90% of the weight loss achieved using intragastric balloon therapy is during the first 3 to 4 months.

Intragastric balloon therapy can be used in conjunction with bariatric operations for effective and safe weight loss in individuals with severe obesity. A study demonstrated that satisfactory results using the Orbera intragastric balloon were a predictor of a favorable outcome with subsequent lap band surgery. Weight-loss achieved with the intragastric balloon in the pre-operative stage aided in decreasing the risk and complexity of bariatric surgery in patients with a BMI greater than 50 kg/m^2.

Intragastric balloons can be used as a bridge to bariatric surgery, but the benefit of such may not be as dramatic as once thought. Trials that compared the balloon therapy versus control before a bariatric operation demonstrated that the balloon did not prevent postoperative complications. It was associated with a 34% failure rate and a higher cost.

**Conclusion**

Currently, intragastric balloons serve as valuable adjuncts to bariatric patient therapy. Their usage is on the rise, given their minimally invasive and temporary nature. Currently, bariatric surgery provides higher efficacy of weight loss but has its risks, complications, and benefits compared to intragastric balloons. Minimally invasive treatments like the intragastric balloon in conjunction with lifestyle modifications and pharmacotherapy treatments are promising. Intragastric balloons may also serve as a bridging therapy for patients who do not meet the qualifications to undergo bariatric surgery or would like to avoid surgery. Intragastric balloons are worth consideration for these patients and should be discussed in a comprehensive, thorough fashion with patients.