There are two options for radiologic imaging in the setting of acute stroke - CT or MRI.

There are several important laboratory studies to be performed. One is a coagulation panel, particularly in the setting of a patient on warfarin, as it is important to know the patient's INR and whether or not it was at a therapeutic level. Complete blood counts and basic metabolic panels should also be sent. A point of care blood glucose should be obtained on initial patient evaluation to assess if this may be contributing to the patient's symptoms. Hypoglycemia can mimic stroke and can be life-threatening if not recognized and treated promptly. More laboratory studies that need to be evaluated in patients with stroke are glycosylated hemoglobin levels and a lipid panel. This is because part of secondary stroke prevention involves optimizing these levels, which will be discussed later. Lastly, cardiac enzymes should be sent as well to assess for cardiac abnormalities.

After a stroke has been identified, the patient typically will need to get an EKG and a transthoracic echocardiogram, as well as telemetry monitoring, in order to determine whether there is an intracardiac thrombus or cardiac abnormality that may be the source of the patient's stroke. Some of these abnormalities that increase the risk of stroke include atrial fibrillation, a patent foramen ovale, or akinesis or hypokinesis of the cardiac walls. Assessment for a patent foramen ovale is typically indicated in patients of a young age or with recurrent strokes of unknown etiology. If a cardioembolic source is likely and these studies are all normal, the patient will likely get a transesophageal echocardiogram or cardiac MRI to get a better visualization of the left ventricle for a thrombus and the left atrial appendage for a thrombus, respectively. If these are still negative, the patient will likely get a Holter monitor on discharge, typically for 30 days, to see if any arrhythmia is captured.