**DIEP Flap**

Surgical planning of the DIEP flap involves the evaluation of the skin of the lower abdomen. The blood supply to the skin and fat from the lower abdominal wall, which will constitute the flap, arises from the external iliac artery and runs from lateral to medial under the rectus muscle. The deep inferior epigastric artery (DIEA) describes its course from the lateral aspect of the rectus abdominis muscle to the umbilicus. It starts from the transversalis fascia towards the peritoneum, where it penetrates the posterior aspect of the rectus abdominis muscle and takes on a variety of branching patterns with an average of five perforators supplying the skin. Most of the perforating vessels are found within 2 cm cranial and 6 cm caudal and between 1 to 6 cm around the lateral aspect of the umbilicus.

Perforators that pass through the rectus muscle at the level of the tendinous insertions are generally large with few side branches.

The innervation of the flap depends on dermatomes from the 11 and 12th intercostal nerves, with some contribution from the iliohypogastric and the ilioinguinal nerves.

**SIEA Flap**

The SIEA provides the same abdominal tissue for breast reconstruction as the DIEP flap, but no incision must be made in the abdominal fascia, and no vessel dissection is performed through the rectus abdominis muscle. However, less offered by the surgeon because the SIEA and vein are only inconsistently present on sufficient caliber to reliably support sufficient tissue for breast reconstruction. The anatomy of these vessels is quite variable and arises from the common femoral artery and saphenous bulb.

**GAP Flap**

Gluteal artery perforator (GAP) flaps allow the transfer of tissue from the buttock and are based on perforators from either the superior or inferior gluteal artery.

Introduced by Allen in 1993, recommended for women who have more skin and fat available in the buttock area than in the abdomen or who have had a prior abdominoplasty. No sacrifice of muscle is required.  The superior gluteal artery perforator (SGAP) flap and the inferior gluteal artery perforator (IGAP) flap can be used in these instances.   The superior gluteal artery arises from the internal iliac artery and exits the pelvis superior to the piriformis muscle. The inferior gluteal artery is a terminal branch of the internal iliac artery.  Typically the length of the IGAP pedicle is longer than that of the SGAP.  Between 2 and 4 perforating vessels from the inferior gluteal artery will be located in the lower half of each gluteal muscle.

**Profunda Artery Perforator Flap**

This reconstruction technique uses posterior thigh soft tissue based on profunda artery perforators and was first described by Angrigiani et al., who presented the transfer of posterior and medial thigh skin based on profunda femoris perforators.

The posterior thigh tissue is bounded by the iliotibial tract and adductor muscles horizontally, and the gluteal fold and popliteal fossa vertically. The profunda femoris artery enters the posterior compartment of the thigh to gives three main perforators.