Opioids are often prescribed for cancer-related pain and moderate-to-severe chronic pain, especially when inadequately controlled with non-opioid strategies. Although morphine is the prototype opioid agent widely used in critically ill patients, it may not always be the first choice, as with other opioids.

**Patients receiving mechanical ventilation:**Fentanyl, morphine, or hydromorphone are preferred because these opioids are fast-acting and titratable. Remifentanil may occasionally be selected if early extubation is expected as it has an ultrashort duration of action.

**Patients who are extubated:**In case of moderate-to-severe non-neuropathic pain in critically ill patients who have been extubated, IV fentanyl, morphine, or hydromorphone is preferred as these agents can easily be titrated, and patients can be given the appropriate analgesia without central nervous system depression.

**Patients with renal and/or hepatic insufficiency:**IV fentanyl or hydromorphone is a better choice, with dose adjustments as needed. Remifentanil may occasionally be considered in patients with severe multiorgan failure because its metabolism is independent of hepatic or renal function.

**Patients with hemodynamic instability:**Morphine is typically not advised in this case as it causes more histamine release, which could exacerbate hypotension, compared with fentanyl or remifentanil, which are preferred in these patients.

**Patients with bronchospasm:**Fentanyl or hydromorphone is preferred over morphine as they cause the lesser release of histamine compared to morphine.

**Patients requiring frequent neurologic assessments:**Remifentanil is preferred because of its ultrashort duration of action.

**Patients requiring intermittent bolus opioid doses:**Morphine or hydromorphone are preferred, especially when they have to endure a painful procedure because of their longer duration of action than fentanyl.

**Patients who may benefit from oral, enteral, or transdermal opioid administration:**Longer-acting oral opioids (e.g., methadone, extended-release oxycodone, extended-release morphine sulfate) can be used when nonintravenous forms are required, especially on discharge.

A transdermal route is possible for fentanyl, where chronic analgesia may be required.