**Osteosarcoma**

As a malignant condition, osteosarcoma would involve the Head and Neck multidisciplinary team with input from surgeons, oncologists, pathologists, and specialist nurses, to name a few. As a rare malignancy, a specialist's opinion of tissue diagnosis is likely necessary.

**Fibrous Dysplasia**

Fibrous dysplasia can occur as part of a broader systemic syndrome; therefore, liaison with endocrinologists, pediatricians, and other specialists may be required. Asymmetric facial expansion is likely to cause malocclusion, and thus orthodontic treatment and liaison will be necessary.

**Central Giant Cell Granuloma**

It is important to distinguish central giant cell granuloma from its systemic counterparts. Clinicians, therefore, must have a broad appreciation of what multiple or bilateral lesions may imply and must carry out a relevant biochemical investigation and familial screening.

**Osteoma**

Osteomas in children, or their presence in multiple, must prompt consideration of Gardener syndrome. Osteomas can precede colonic polyposis; therefore, an awareness of underlying causes and screening is vital for early recognition of the disease.

**Osteochondroma**

As osteochondromas can lead to compensatory dentofacial deformity, involvement of the whole facial deformity team will therefore be involved; this will likely include both orthognathic and orthodontic specialists.

**Osteoblastoma**

Due to their ambiguous nature and thus challenge for diagnostic certainty, multiple specialist opinions are often sought in these cases. Where there is uncertainty, histological specimens may be sent to specialist bone units for analysis. The presence of aggressive lesions in adolescents will require a holistic approach when recommending and discussing treatment with patients and their families.