Coronary atherosclerosis is an underlying pathology in ischemic heart disease. Coronary atherosclerosis is predominantly an asymptomatic condition. It starts at an early age, such as in the 20s, as fatty streaks, but it is clinically silent. It only becomes symptomatic once 50% to 70% of the luminal diameter is obstructed due to growing fibrous plaque, leading to end-organ ischemia or infarction. Clinically, a chronic stenotic lesion i.e., stable CAD, manifests with clinical symptoms of exertional angina, while plaque rupture may result in symptoms of acute myocardial infarction.

Patients with symptomatic coronary artery disease may present with the following signs and symptoms:

- Stable angina

- Unstable (Prinzmetal's) angina

- Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) which consists of ST-elevation (STEMI) and non- ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)

- Sudden cardiac death

- Chronic ischemic cardiomyopathy

- Congestive heart failure (CHF)

The most common symptom associated with coronary artery disease is dull, squeezing, or pressure-like chest pain located in the sub-sternal or left side of the chest and radiating to the left arm, neck, or jaw. It may be associated with dyspnea and increased sweating. In stable angina, it is exertional in nature and relieved on resting for a while or ingestion of nitrates, while pain associated with unstable or AMI (STEMI and NSTEMI) occurs at rest. The pain of AMI is partially relieved with nitrates.

**Physical Examination**

The following signs can be noted in a patient with AMI.

- Diaphoresis

- Tachypnea

- Dyspnea with crackles on lungs auscultation, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea due to left ventricular infarct, which leads to reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and pooling of blood in the lungs.

- Hypotension or cardiogenic shock due to the following: (1) Left ventricular infarction with reduced LVEF. S3 can be heard on heart auscultation. (2) Right ventricular infarction leading to a decreased venous return to the left heart. The patient can have jugular venous distension (JVD) and pedal edema with normal lung auscultation.

- Mitral regurgitation murmur can be heard, which is either functional or ischemic.

- Xanthoma/xanthelasma may or may not be present secondary to underlying dyslipidemia.

- Arrhythmias

On physical examination, tachycardia is common in a patient with AMI. While bradycardia can occur due to blockage of the right coronary artery branch, which supplies the sino-atrial node. Arrhythmias of different types also can be seen as secondary to ischemia of myocardium. Acute ischemia or infarction causes hypoxia and depletion of intracellular adenosine triphosphate, which shifts the cell to anaerobic glycolysis and lactic acid is accumulated inside the cell. This intracellular acidic environment lowers the pH and activates Na+/H+ and Na+/Ca++ ion exchange channels to dump H+ ion out of the cell and raise intracellular pH. This is accompanied by intracellular calcium overload and increased late sodium current. A lower resting membrane potential is generated in this manner, which turns infarcted tissues more excitable and leads to arrhythmias. There are many types of ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VA) present after AMI, such as non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT), sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT), or ventricular fibrillation (VFIB). VA is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death, occurring within 1 hour of AMI. Thrombolysis and percutaneous coronary intervention have reduced the incidence of VA and reduced the burden of sudden cardiac death (SCD) over the past decades. The incidence of VA is directly proportional to the size of an infarct and inversely related to the left ventricular ejection fraction after AMI.