Clinically, the spinal meninges are important for their role in the spread of cancers and diagnosing of meningitis. The spinal epidural space contains a system of epidural veins known as the Batson plexus, which appears to carry implications for the spread of various infections and metastatic cancer, such as prostate cancer, resulting in the metastatic epidural masses described earlier.

Clinicians utilize the spinal subarachnoid space when performing a diagnostic lumbar puncture, which may be useful in assessing the presence of meningitis, a subarachnoid bleed, or recording the opening pressure of CSF. A lumbar puncture is among the first tests performed when a patient presents with the cardinal features of meningitis (headache, fever, and nuchal rigidity). In adults, the L3/L4 interspinal space is the preferred location to collect the CSF from the lumbar cistern safely. The L4 spinous process is roughly midline at the level of the iliac crests, known as the intercristal or Tuffier line, making the L3/L4 interspinal space just above this landmark.

The patient should then be in either the left lateral decubitus position or seated with the spine flexed. The needle should be inserted with the bevel parallel to the fibers of the dura mater (up or down if left lateral decubitus and bevel to either the right or left if seated position, to reduce resistance when passing through the meninges and avoid harming any fibers of the cauda equina) into the L3/L4 interspinal space at a slight angle. The needle will then pass through the following structures: skin, subcutaneous tissue, the supraspinous ligament, the interspinous ligament, the ligamentum flavum, the epidural space, the dura mater, the arachnoid mater, and the subarachnoid space/lumbar cistern. The patient should receive counsel to expect common side effects such as headache, which occurs in a third of all cases, and pain is often relieved when lying supine.

Anesthesia during childbirth can also be delivered using the same landmarks as placing a lumbar puncture needle. An epidural anesthetic would be placed in the epidural space, while the placement of spinal anesthesia will be within the CSF of the lumbar cistern. Epidurals are typically more precise but have a longer onset of action and require a larger dose than spinal anesthesia. Levobupivacaine and bupivacaine are two commonly used agents for epidural and spinal anesthesia.