Due to the role of estrogen and progesterone treatments, promoting fibrocystic changes in the breast, metformin has been suggested as a treatment method to reduce the excessive cell proliferation caused by associated hormones.

For patients presenting with mastalgia, the first-line options are lifestyle changes. Other suggestions are the use of a supportive bra, as well as altering the dose of hormone replacement therapy regimen.

There is no evidence that reducing caffeine improves fibrocystic breast disease or mastalgia.

Analgesics such as aspirin and ibuprofen are options.

Researchers have proposed that a deficiency in prostaglandin E and its precursor gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) increase the sensitivity of breasts during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. GLA is subsequently also the active component of evening primrose oil.

Despite not having proven efficacy in previous studies, the use of evening primrose oil is warranted as supportive measures if pain persists despite treatment and advice. A 3 to 6 month period is the suggested timeframe to observe the desired effect

If breast pain is severe for more than six months and disrupts daily activities, other therapies such as tamoxifen, bromocriptine, or danazol can be options. Due to the recurrent nature and long duration of these symptoms, several months of treatment is necessary.

Fluid from cysts aspirated for symptomatic relief does not require cytological assessment. This evaluation is reserved for clinically evident lumps that resolve following the FNA procedure or where the cyst fluid appears macroscopically bloodstained.

Fluid from atypical cysts should have a cytological assessment.

Surgery is indicated for cysts that repetitively, despite frequent FNA, which have an intra-cystic solid appearance on ultrasound or have atypical cells present upon cytopathological evaluation.