While working up a patient for otosclerosis and a possible stapes procedure, it is ensured that the patient is not suffering from superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) or a dilated vestibular aqueduct, as these may also present with a low-frequency CHL. From a clinical standpoint, the presence of autophony, hyperacusis along with vertigo provocation with high volume or pressure changes (Tullio and Hennebert phenomena, respectively) should help point the provider down the path of SSCD.

The utilization of the acoustic reflex arc is one method that may be used to help the provider differentiate between a third window disorder and ossicular chain pathology such as otosclerosis. In the presence of a third window disorder such as SSCD and a dilated vestibular aqueduct, one could expect a present and normal reflex. This differs from the workup of a surgical candidate for the correction of CHL as a result of otosclerosis, where the acoustic reflex is expected to be absent.

A high-resolution computed tomography (CT) scan may also be useful in aiding the diagnosis and treatment of CHL pathologies. While not performed routinely due to the added costs and radiation exposure, high-resolution imaging of the temporal bone is more than 95% sensitive for diagnosing an osteosclerotic ear.

This SNHL component to otosclerosis would be treated medically with sodium fluoride or bisphosphonates.

Before the procedure, the patient should have understood and consented to the details of the operation, including the operative procedure itself, along with its possible complications and all of the admission and discharge measures. Indications and considerations for stapes surgery are as follows:

- The patient should be healthy to endure the procedure proposed, particularly if general anesthesia is being considered.

- The poorer hearing ear should be operated on first. This should be based on the patient’s statement and not on audiometric data. Operating in the opposite ear can occur six months after, provided this ear is now the one with poorer hearing. In children, choosing the poorer performing ear to avoid the use of a hearing aid before the beginning of school may be important. Surgery for the opposite ear should be delayed until they are old enough to make their own decisions.

- Confirmed diagnosis of otosclerosis.

- The patient has a 25 dB or greater CHL in the 250 and 1,000 Hz frequencies with a negative Rinne test at 512 Hz. A negative Rinne test at 1024 Hz shows an even greater CHL, making the patient a great candidate for surgery stapes surgery.

- 
              
- Sheehy et al. in 1971 found that a Rinne test will exhibit a greater bone conduction response when compared to air while utilizing a 512 Hz tuning fork in the presence of a 15 dB or more conductive hearing impairment. A greater bone conduction response, when compared to air while utilizing a 1024 Hz tuning fork, signifies a conductive hearing deficit of 20 dB or more.

- A mixed hearing loss that would require a CHL to be reduced for a hearing aid to be serviceable.