Metronidazole may be administered orally, intravenously, or topically. It comes in capsule, tablet, topical and intravenous forms.

- The standard capsule dosing is 375 mg. Standard tablet dosing is 250 mg or 500 mg. Oral administration can be taken with food to help minimize stomach discomfort. The extended-release tablets should be administered on an empty stomach 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals. It should not be split or crushed.

- Standard intravenous preparation and dosing is 5 mg/mL (100mL) and 500 mg (100 mL), respectively. When administered intravenously, the drug solution should not come in contact with equipment containing aluminum. Infusion of the intravenous solution should be over 30 to 60 minutes.

- The topical application gel is 0.75% and 37.5 mg per applicator and is applied vaginally.

Dosing of metronidazole for some of the more common indications is listed below:

- Dosing for amebiasis, both intestinal (acute dysentery) and extraintestinal:
- Oral: 500 to 750 mg every 8 hours for 7 to 10 days to be followed up with an intraluminal agent

- Dosing for bacterial vaginosis:
- Oral: 500 mg twice each day for seven days.

- Dosing for pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) treatment:

- Mild/moderate PID: Oral: 500 mg twice a day for 14 days (may be added to combination therapy)
- PID with tubo-ovarian abscess, initial treatment (as an alternative regimen): IV: 500 mg every 8 hours as part of an appropriate combination regimen
- PID with tubo-ovarian abscess, oral therapy subsequent to clinical improvement on a parenteral regimen: Oral: 500 mg twice daily with doxycycline for at least 14 days

- Dosing for trichomoniasis infection:

- Initial treatment: Oral: 2 g in a single dose or 500 mg twice daily for seven days (preferred regimen in HIV-infected women)
- Persistent or recurrent infection (treatment failure single-dose therapy): Oral: 500 mg twice daily for 7 days for the failure of 2 g single-dose regimen

- Dosing for Giardiasis:
- Oral: 250 mg 3 times each day or 500 mg 2 times each day for 5 to 7 days

- Dosing for intra-abdominal infections:
- Oral, IV: 500 mg every 8 hours as in an appropriate combination regimen. Therapy duration is 4 to 7 days following adequate source control, and a longer duration is necessary for uncomplicated appendicitis and diverticulitis managed nonoperatively.

- Dosing for skin and soft tissue infections:
- Necrotizing infections (a component of an appropriate combination regimen): IV: 500 mg every 6 hours - continue until debridement is no longer required, the patient has clinically improved, and is afebrile for 48 to 72 hours

- Dosing for surgical site infections, incisional (intestinal or GU tract; axilla or perineum), warranting anaerobic coverage:

- IV: 500 mg every 8 hours combined with other appropriate agents.

- Dosing for surgical prophylaxis:
- IV: 500 mg within one hour before surgical incision in a regimen with other antibiotics; recommended for select procedures involving the head and neck, GI tract, or urologic tract

- Dosing for oral, colorectal surgical prophylaxis:

- Oral: 1 g every 3 to 4 hours for three doses with additional oral antibiotics, following mechanical bowel preparation the evening prior to a morning surgery with subsequent appropriate IV antibiotic prophylaxis regimen

- Dosing for Helicobacter pylori eradication:
-  The triple regimen with clarithromycin: Oral: Metronidazole 500 mg 3 times each day combined with clarithromycin 500 mg twice a day and a standard-dose or double-dose proton pump inhibitor (PPI) twice daily; continue regimen for 14 days
- Quadruple regimen with bismuth: Oral: Metronidazole 250 mg 4 times each day or 500 mg 3 or 4 times each day in combination with bismuth subsalicylate 300 to 524 mg or bismuth subsalicylate 120 to 300 mg 4 times each day, tetracycline 500 mg 4 times each day, and a standard-dose PPI twice each day; continue regimen for 10 to 14 days
- Concomitant regimen: Oral: Metronidazole 500 mg twice each day in combination with clarithromycin 500 mg twice each day, amoxicillin 1 g twice each day, and a standard-dose PPI twice each day; continue regimen for 10 to 14 days

- Dosing for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI):
- Metronidazole is no longer a first-line antibiotic choice. "Either vancomycin or fidaxomicin are preferred agents over metronidazole for initial episodes of CDI - if access to vancomycin or fidaxomicin is limited, metronidazole is an option for an initial episode of nonsevere CDI only at a dose of 500 mg orally three times daily for ten days
- Fulminant Clostridium difficile infection: Vancomycin administered orally is the regimen of choice; in the presence of ileus, vancomycin can also be administered rectally - IV metronidazole should be administered 500 mg every 8 hours together with oral or rectal vancomycin, particularly if an ileus is present.

- Dosing for rosacea with 1% gel or cream daily, or 0.75% cream or lotion twice a day.