In order to understand the valve repair and preservation procedure, it is crucial to understand the surgical anatomy of the aortic valve unit. The aortic valve functional unit consists of the ventriculoaortic junction (AVJ), sinotubular junction (STJ), aortic leaflets, and sinuses of the aortic valve. The origin of the aorta is close to the cardiac valve, provide a bridge between the left ventricle and the systemic circulation. The internal part of the aortic root contains the leaflets, interleaflet triangle, and commissures. Typically, the coaptation height is at the mid-level between the STJ and AVJ.

**1. Ventriculoaortic Junction (VAJ):**This elliptical junction marks the transition of left ventricle outflow and aortic root. The mean diameter of VAJ size is 23 mm in the adult population with standard AV.

**2. Sinutubular Junction (STJ):**It is a part of the aortic annulus circumferential plane that joins the three commissures. The diameter of STJ is 5mm more than the base of the valve, creating a 1.3 ration between the sinotubular junction and the virtual basal annulus.

**3. Aortic Leaflets:**The cusp size is crucial to rule out prolapse or deficient tissue for reconstruction. The intraoperative measurement of cusp size/height is cumbersome. A geometric' height of a cusp is the most significant distance between the insertion of the aorta and the free center margin of the cusp. The effective height of a cusp is measure from the basal plane to the central coaptation. A successful aortic valve repair on a cutoff margin of the retracted cusps. Retracted cusps defined as having geometric height<19 mm in bicuspid valves and <16 mm in tricuspid valves.

**4. Aortic Sinuses of Valsalva:**The top of the central valve leaflet forms a stable region by the transition of the elliptical base to circular at the STJ.