There are four specific phases of VKH – prodromal, acute uveitic, chronic uveitic, and recurrent chronic phase.

The prodromal phase is often self-limited, lasts for hours to weeks, and has very subtle chorioretinal findings that are missed unless evaluated with ICG-angiography and correlated with cerebrospinal fluid analysis.

The acute uveitic phase consists of blurry vision and photophobia secondary to chorioretinal inflammation. Edema secondary to inflammation in this stage can extend to the retina, the optic nerve, or the ciliary body leading to the development of exudative retinal detachments, papillitis, and acute anatomic angle closure, respectively.

The chronic phase of the disease develops subsequently. This phase represents the formation of extraocular physical manifestations, including hearing manifestations, skin depigmentation, and ciliary depigmentation - commonly noted at the eyebrows, eyelashes, and scalp. Hearing manifestations include tinnitus, dysacusis, and hearing loss.

The recurrent chronic phase consists of symptoms of panuveitis, inflammation throughout the intraocular compartments, and subsequent vision-threatening signs such as sunset glow fundus, choroidal neovascular membranes, neovascularization of the iris, open- and closed-angle glaucoma, and subretinal fibrosis.

The VKH International Workshop has defined the three classifications of VKH disease: complete VKH disease, incomplete VKH disease, and suspected VKH disease. Complete disease indicates that both neurologic and dermatologic manifestations are present in addition to ocular disease findings. The incomplete disease presents with either dermatologic symptoms or neurologic manifestations of VKH. Suspected VKH disease presents with intraocular findings without evidence of dermatologic or neurologic manifestations. All classifications of VKH require the exclusion of other causes of intraocular findings, including a history of penetrating trauma, surgery, or infectious etiologies.