**Persistent Fetal Vasculature (PFV)**

Based on their ultrasonography and CDI characteristics, PFV cases can be classified into 4 types:

- Type I: I-shape

- Type II: Y-shape

- Type III: Inverted Y-shape

- Type IV: X-shape

Sonographic screening and CDI of PFV cases allow visualization of the vascularised membranes and definitive surgical planning. The pars plana incision and surgery can be done in types I and III, whereas types II and IV require an anterior surgical approach under direct visualization.

**Intrabulbar Tumors**

The vascularity and the RI of the orbital vessels can differentiate between malignant and benign lesions. Choroidal melanoma shows a higher PSV and a higher RI in the feeder vessels than orbital cavernous hemangiomas. The response to radiation therapy is monitored by CDI parameters like reduction in the vascularised areas, decrease in PSV, and elevation of tumor echogenicity.

**Arterial Occlusions**

The CRA occlusion (CRAO) or the OA occlusion (OAO) presents as sudden onset painless vision loss. High RI and absent flow in the CRA, with a high RI and normal flow velocities in the OA and the SPCA, suggest CRAO. Acute OAO usually presents as a hemodynamically empty orbit, with collateral circulation opening up in the chronic OAO orbits.

**Ocular Ischemic Syndrome (OIS)**

Misdiagnosis of OIS in the clinics is common and leads to missing out on the critical bailout period. OIS often presents with an absent or reverse end-diastolic flow in the OA and the CRA.

**Arteritic Anterior Ischemic Optic Neuropathy (A-AION)**

Giant cell arteritis (GCA) patients with no evident ocular involvement show a marked decrease in blood flow in bilateral orbits. The absence of flow in the LPCA, very high flow in the OA, and altered flow in the CRA are common findings with GCA.

**Carotid Cavernous Fistula (CCF)**

Evaluation of the SOV in cases of post-traumatic proptosis may show a reverse flow suggesting a flow from the orbital apex towards the globe. The waveform analysis may show an arterialized high-velocity blood flow through a low resistance blood vessel, signifying a high flow fistula between the intracavernous part of the ICA and the cavernous sinus. The SOV resumes normal venous flow in rare cases showing spontaneous resolution of CCF.

**Glaucoma**

The pathogenesis of open-angle glaucoma is a failure of autoregulation of the OBF with poor IOP control.

**Thyroid Eye Disease (TED)**

The active TED orbits show inflammatory changes and higher flow velocities. The inactive TED orbits may develop external compression of the vasculature, causing high RI and decreased flow velocities. Dysthyroid optic neuropathy (DON) can occur with low PSV in the CRA, causing ON ischemia.

**Diabetic Retinopathy (DR)**

Diabetes mellitus is characterized by neuropathy and failure of the normal autoregulation of OBF. The ischemic retina stimulates the release of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and alters the flow velocities before the onset of frank changes.

**Vascular Malformations - Infantile Periocular Hemangioma**

The orbital vascular malformations show a characteristic high flow pattern on CDI. The management of periocular hemangiomas with oral propranolol reduces the intra-lesional blood flow and PSV in the feeding vessels. The CDI findings on follow-up visits help predict the chances of complete remission.

**Age-related Macular Degeneration (ARMD)**

Exudative ARMD shows high RI and decreased arterial blood flow. This suggests a retinal and choroidal vasculature involvement in the pathogenesis of ARMD.

**Central Retinal Vein Occlusion (CRVO)**

Acute CRVO shows a rise in RI of the CRA and reduced PSV in the CRA and the OA. There are no significant changes in the hemodynamics post-intra-vitreal anti-VEGF injections.

**Central S****erous Chorioretinopathy (CSCR)**

Choroidal hyperperfusion is proposed to be the main cause of CSCR. In patients with unilateral CSCR, a decrease in RI and arterial flow velocities in both eyes suggests a systemic etiology.

**Sickle Cell Disease**

Sickle cell disease causes early microvascular occlusion, an increased RI, and decreased flow velocity in the CRA. Subsequent retinal hypoxia causes vasodilation and increases the flow velocity in the OA.

**Behcet D****isease**

Behcet disease presents with widespread vasculitis, including orbital circulation. Vascular occlusion in the retina and the choroid leads to a high RI and reduced flow velocities in the CRA and the SPCA.