Aspirin can be administered via the oral, rectal, and intravenous (IV) route.

It is available in different doses, the lowest being 81 mg, also called a baby aspirin.

- Tablet: 325 mg, 500 mg

- Delayed-release tablet: 81 mg, 325 mg, 500 mg, 650 mg

- Chewable: 81 mg

- Suppository: 60 mg, 120 mg, 200 mg, 300 mg, 600 mg

- Intravenous: 250 mg, 500 mg

**Pharmacokinetics**

Aspirin absorption from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract depends on the formulation state. When consumed as a liquid preparation, it is rapidly absorbed as opposed to tablets. Its hydrolysis yields salicylic acid. Salicylic acid has a narrow therapeutic window. If maintained within that narrow range, it provides the appropriate anti-inflammatory effect.

Aspirins absorption is pH sensitive at the level of the small intestine. Absorption is higher through the small intestine than the stomach for the same pH range. At pH 3.5 or 6.5, aspirin's intestinal absorption is greater than the gastric absorption of the compound. The stomach does not absorb aspirin at pH 6.5.

Salicylate elimination occurs through two pathways via the creation of salicyluric acid and salicyl phenolic glucuronide. Salicylic acid is renally cleared, which can be increased by raising the urinary pH. Medications like antacids can increase renal clearance as they raise urinary pH. It can cross the blood-placental barrier. It is also expressed in breast milk.

**Pharmacodynamics**

Almost 90% of COX inhibition can be achieved with the administration of 160 to 325 mg of aspirin. These effects last for about 7 to 10 days which usually correspond with the lifespan of a platelet. Prostacyclin inhibition can be achieved with the use of higher doses. This inhibition occurs in the endothelial cells of blood vessels.