PENG block appears to be the suprainguinal version of the articular branches of the femoral nerve with the added benefit of blocking the accessory obturator nerve along with the obturator nerve.

The femoral nerve, the longest branch of the lumbar plexus (from the ventral rami of L2-L4 spinal nerves), emerges from the lateral border of the psoas muscle to descend between the iliacus and psoas muscles split into two of its major divisions: anterior and posterior and give motor ( innervation of the flexors of the hip and the extensors of the knee) and sensory branches (innervation of the anteromedial part of the thigh and the medial sides of the leg and foot). The femoral nerve gives birth to a motor branch that it sends to the iliac before passing under the inguinal ligament.

The articular branches at the hip joint originate at a higher level along the course of the nerve. This explains why the femoral block or the fascia iliaca compartment block remains insufficient for hip analgesia.

The obturator nerve is formed from the lumbar plexus (anterior divisions of L2, L3, and L4), descends through the fibers of the psoas major and travels posteriorly to the common iliac arteries and laterally along the pelvic wall to divide into two branches in the obturator canal: anterior and posterior branches. The anterior branch pierces the fascia lata to become the cutaneous branch of the obturator nerve, which supplies the skin of the middle part of the medial thigh.

The accessory obturator nerve is present in 10% to 30% of patients originated from the third and fourth lumbar nerves (derived from the L2 to L4 ventral rami), often innervates the hip joint and adductor longus. The accessory obturator nerve was found to innervate the medial capsule, which has sensory fibers.

An anatomic study by Short et al. demonstrated that high branches of both the femoral and obturator nerves (and accessory obturator nerve) provide innervation to the anterior hip capsule because the anterior hip capsule receives the major sensory innervation, whereas the posterior and inferior capsules have no sensory fibers. The hip capsule is divided into 2 parts: anterior and posterior, with nociceptive fibers mostly present on the anterior part while the posterior part has mechanoreceptors.

Their anatomical path through the fibers of the psoas major and the relationship of the articular branches from these three nerves to the inferomedial acetabulum and the space between the anterior inferior iliac spine and iliopubic eminence may suggest potential sites for regional analgesia.

This implies that the deposition of local anesthetics in the fascial plane between the psoas muscle and the upper pubic branch will contribute to anesthesia of these three nerves and, therefore, to analgesic coverage for hip surgery.