One of the dangers during gastrocnemius muscle surgery is the accidental injury of the sural nerve. Furthermore, the patient may be unsatisfied with a poor cosmetic result. It is possible to divide the anatomical area for a surgical procedure into five levels, with the fifth level starting proximally and the last level ending distally.

**Reconstruction**

The medial head of the gastrocnemius can be used to detect an innervated flap; the latter is used for the recovery of several pathological pictures, such as the foot drop, muscular defects of the upper limbs, Volkmann contractures, and for the recovery of the movement of the tongue. In cases of post-surgical infection (replacement with knee joint prosthesis), a gastrocnemius muscle flap can be used to improve the clinical results of cicatrization. A medial head flap is used to improve the cicatrization of transtibial amputation intervention.

**Baker Cyst**

This popliteal cyst comes from the doctor who first described it in 1877, surgeon William Morrant Baker. These cysts are formed in the presence of an already compromised knee joint (osteoarthritis, meniscal rupture), which creates effusions from the articulation toward the posterior area of the knee, toward the bursa of the medial head of the gastrocnemius. Often, there is a joint material in the cyst coming from inside the capsule; this transit of fluids is always unidirectional. Generally, they are asymptomatic and discovered with the magnetic resonance in a knee with known functional problems. Surgical excision is used only in limited cases, with a posterior approach.

**Injury of Muscle Fibers or Tearing**

Muscle tearing or muscle distraction can be common for those who play sports. Depending on the severity of the injury, one can distinguish three types of calf muscle tears. The most serious is the third degree, which involves at least three-quarters of muscle mass. In first-degree injuries, when the lesions are modest and do not exceed 5% of muscle mass, there is no significant reduction in muscle function. The subject usually experiences a sensation of continuous cramping. In the second-degree lesion, the manifestations are those of pain; pain is felt during movement. Generally, the indications for the first two levels are conservative. In the third degree, muscular tear, hematomas, edema, and swelling may appear, the pain becomes very strong, and the subject is in a disabling condition because he can not move the leg. This lesion is felt on palpation as a depression, which testifies to the extent of the breakup.

**Achilles Tendon Disorders**

Achilles tendon (or "calcaneal" tendon) disorders are relatively common injuries. Disorders can occur in adolescents and adults, and etiologies include traumatic and nontraumatic mechanisms.  The spectrum of pathology ranges from insertional tendinitis, intra-substance tears and/or tendinopathy, and partial versus complete ruptures.

Acute ruptures of the Achilles tendon may be misdiagnosed in up to 25% of cases.  The most common misdiagnosis is that of an ankle sprain.  Missed or delayed diagnosis can be problematic for patients, and a chronically dysfunctional tendon is harder to repair surgically.

The injury mainly involves jumpers, runners, soccer players, and tennis players, realized as a consequence of a sharp muscle contraction. Treatment is surgical. Many types of tendon suture can be performed. The calcaneal tenorrhaphy is now performed with a technique that uses tiny incisions to avoid the scarring disorders related to very long incisions and the benefit of reduced recovery times. Sometimes, a reinforcing plastic is made using the tendon of the gracilis muscle plantar or the peroneus longus muscle tendon.

**Gastrocnemius Shortening**

Several diseases cause a shortening of the gastrocnemius muscle: lesions of the nervous system, central or peripheral, hereditary diseases such as myopathy and dystrophies, or acquired disease like diabetes. All age groups can be involved, from the children to the elderly. The most evident functional disturbance of this shortening is the equine foot, where the tip of the foot points toward the bottom, and the gait is characterized by the toe of the foot to the ground. First of all, it is essential to distinguish the cause of equinism, evaluate its characteristics in walking, and establish an appropriate treatment. The treatment uses conservative methods (physiotherapy, stretching, tutors, botulinum toxin) and surgical methods, such as stretching the calcaneal tendon.

The Silfverskiold test makes it possible to discriminate whether the equinism is caused by a retraction of the soleus muscle (extended knee) or the gastrocnemius muscle (flexed knee). If the ankle can be dorsiflexed with the knee bent at 90 degrees but can not be dorsiflexed with the extended knee, it is probable that the gastrocnemius muscle is shortened, but not the soleus; it can be done with a patient sitting or lying on the back.

The most recent surgical procedures use endoscopy to reduce collateral damage by creating a small cut at leg level 4; the release of the calcaneal tendon could produce an evaluation error with an excessive elongation of muscle.