Brodalumab is a monoclonal antibody approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adult patients who have failed treatment with topical and other systemic therapy.

Phase 3 studies comparing brodalumab with ustekinumab showed that at standard dosing, brodalumab was able to achieve higher rates of PASI 100, 44%, and 37% versus 22% and 19% of patients treated with ustekinumab. Brodalumab is also more effective than ustekinumab in biologic-experienced patients: 40% of patients previously treated with a biologic medication achieved PASI 100, while only 17% of biologic-experienced patients treated with ustekinumab were able to achieve the same level of efficacy. Additionally, brodalumab had a more rapid onset of action with PASI 75 responders reaching this benchmark in a median of 4.2 weeks compared to 9.4 weeks for ustekinumab.

In addition to plaque psoriasis, researchers have explored brodalumab as a potential treatment for other auto-inflammatory diseases. A phase 2 randomized control trial examining the efficacy of brodalumab for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis (PsA) showed that by week 12, almost 40% of patients treated with brodalumab (at either 140 mg or 280 mg doses) were able to achieve 20% improvement in the American College of Rheumatology response criteria (ACR 20) compared to 18% in the placebo group. By 24 weeks, 51% of patients in the 140 mg brodalumab group and 64% of those in the 280 mg group achieved improved ACR 20 response. The research revealed no statistical difference in response among patients who had received prior treatment with a biologic medication.

While results from PsA trials have been promising, phase 1b and phase 2 data evaluating brodalumab efficacy in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis who have had an inadequate response to methotrexate have not demonstrated evidence of clinical response. There is no evidence of significant improvement in ACR or disease activity scores for patients treated with brodalumab compared to placebo. Similarly, though implications point to interleukin-17 (IL-17) pro-inflammatory pathways in airway hypersensitivity reactions, brodalumab has not demonstrated effectiveness in treating moderate to severe asthma.