Endocarditis is an uncommon infection occurring every 3 to 7 per 100000 person-years. Yet, it is also the fourth most common life-threatening infection after sepsis, pneumonia, and intraabdominal abscess, with an estimated inpatient mortality rate between 15 to 30%. When endocarditis was first widely studied in the 1960s, streptococcus viridian was the most commonly identified pathogen. However, the epidemiology has shifted, with Staphylococcus aureus being the most frequently identified pathogen. While this shift is partially attributable to an increased rate of intravenous drug abuse in North America, the healthcare-associated infection has become increasingly common, representing about 30% of all endocarditis cases.

The management of endocarditis requires an interprofessional approach by infectious disease, cardiology, and cardiac surgery to manage antimicrobial therapy and assess for possible surgical intervention.

The American Heart Association 2015 Adult Infective Endocarditis guidelines and European Society of Cardiologists 2015 management of infective endocarditis guidelines serve as the basis for the following recommendation.

In patients who present with an indolent, uncomplicated course, antibiotic therapy can be delayed until cultures and sensitivities are available. However, in patients with a more acute presentation or features of complicated endocarditis, prompt empiric treatment is often required to reduce the risk of complications. The recommendation is for an Infectious disease consultation when selecting empiric antibiotic therapy as various factors influence the choice of empiric antibiotics, including patients characteristics and risk factors, epidemiological factors, recent administration of antibiotics, whether the infection was healthcare-associated, and severity of presentation.