Prior to definitive treatment, all patients should undergo investigation to determine regional lymph node involvement as outlined above.

**Local Disease**

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) has published guidelines delineating specific treatment recommendations. Treatment of Merkel cell carcinoma consists of wide local excision of the primary tumor with 1-2 cm margins to investing fascia of muscle or pericranium when feasible. Mohs micrographic surgery may be considered provided it does not interfere with SLNB. Adjuvant radiation therapy to the primary tumor site may be beneficial and should be considered in specific cases; it may be appropriate for low-risk patients with a small primary tumor (less than 1 cm) and no other adverse risk factors (such as immunosuppression or lymphovascular invasion). The benefit of adjuvant radiotherapy to the SLNB-negative basin is unclear. In specific cases when there is a potential for a false-negative SLNB, then consideration of adjuvant radiotherapy is warranted, as well as in patients with profound immunosuppression. Particularly, in head and neck disease, the risk of false-negative SLNB is higher. Radiotherapy alone without excision should be reserved for patients who are poor surgical candidates.

**Locoregional Disease**

If the disease is limited to locoregional lymph nodes, a complete lymph node dissection should be performed and/or radiotherapy to the nodal basin. For patients with clinically evident adenopathy, lymph node dissection is the recommended initial therapy, followed by postoperative radiotherapy if certain NCCN indications are met. Those without clinically palpable nodes or nodal involvement noted on imaging, but with microscopic nodal disease noted on SLNB, should be treated with radiotherapy alone. Further, patients with more extensive disease who have multiple involved nodes and/or extracapsular extension noted with lymph node dissection should also undergo adjuvant radiotherapy. Importantly, in all cases, adjuvant therapy with radiation should not be delayed, because delay has been associated with worse outcomes.

**Metastatic Disease**

Those with metastatic disease are best managed through a multidisciplinary tumor board.  NCCN guidelines recommend a clinical trial if available.  Alternatively, systemic therapy, radiation therapy, and/or surgery may be considered alone or in combination. Currently available systemic agents include cytotoxic chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Unfortunately, because of the aggressive nature of the disease, cytotoxic chemotherapy has been shown to provide patients with only three months of progression-free survival. However, immune-based therapies have demonstrated promising results in clinical trials. Specifically, pembrolizumab, nivolumab, and avelumab are anti-PD-1 and PD-L1 antibodies that function to restore active T cell response against the tumor. One study showed a median progression-free survival of nine months with pembrolizumab therapy in patients with MCC.

Furthermore, patients with a diagnosis of MCC should be followed every three to six months for three years and every six to 12 months thereafter, including complete skin and lymph node examinations.  Imaging studies may be routinely performed in high-risk patients and otherwise as clinically indicated.