The following brainstem reflexes should be carried out for evaluating the clinical integrity of the brainstem:

- The corneal reflex: The blinking of eyelids after touching the cornea with a cotton wisp or small jet of water.

- The pupillary light reflex This constitutes brisk constriction of the pupils after exposure to bright light. However,  precautions are necessary to rule out any previous eye surgeries, concurrent cataract, and use of drugs such as atropine.

- Oculocephalic reflex: Turning of the eyes in the opposite direction of head movement when the head is turned from the mid position to both sides. This should not be attempted in patients with concern for cervical cord injuries.

- Oculovestibular reflex: Lack of eye movements after 50 ml of ice-cold water is instilled into the external auditory meatus over one minute after assuring patency of the tympanic membrane.

- Gag reflex: Pharyngeal contraction after stimulating the pharynx with a spatula or tongue depressor.

- Cough reflex: Presence of cough after stimulation of the carina by a bronchial catheter.

- Response to noxious stimuli along the distribution of cranial nerves. For-example facial grimace after noxious stimulus applied on the supraorbital ridge supplied by the trigeminal nerve.

However, following confounding factors that can impede upon correct evaluation of the brainstem function must first be ruled out:

- No concurrent use of central nervous system depressant drugs or neuromuscular blocking agents

- Must wait for at least five half-lives of the drug to attempt valid evaluation if such agents have been used

- Normal core body temperature

- Normal systolic blood pressure

- No severe electrolyte, acid-base or endocrine disturbances

If the patient fulfills the above criteria and evaluation reveals the absence of brainstem reflexes, the clinician should perform apnea testing per the AAN recommendation.

**Apnea Test**

- Connect a pulse oximeter, pre-oxygenate with 100% oxygen (O2), and disconnect the ventilator.

- Deliver 100% O2 at 6 L/min through a cannula placed at the level of the carina.

- If respiratory movements are absent despite arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) of greater than or equal to 60 mmHg or a 20 mmHg increase in PCO2 over a normal baseline is noted, the apnea test is considered concluded.

The test is terminated in instances wherein there is hypotension, hypoxemia, or cardiac arrhythmias.

The absence of brainstem reflexes and an apnea test negative for spontaneous respirations validate the brain death of the patient.

Ancillary tests that can be used to diagnose brain death include:

- Flat electrical activity on at least a 30-minute electroencephalogram (EEG)

- Absence of cerebral flow beyond the circle of Willis during angiography

- No uptake of isotope within the blood vessel or brain parenchyma during a nuclear scan

- Small systolic peaks in early systole without diastolic flow or reverberating flow on a transcranial doppler

These tests are only justified when apnea testing is inconclusive, or patients are too unstable to proceed with apnea testing, or when brainstem reflexes cannot be carried out (vestibulo-ocular reflex in cervical spine injuries).