Patients with MG are often more sensitive to the depressive respiratory effects of benzodiazepines and opiates. Caution must be exercised when giving these medications. Due to the decreased amount of ACh available, these patients tend to be resistant to depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents (i.e., succinylcholine) and very sensitive to the non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents (i.e., rocuronium), so care must be taken during the induction and maintenance of general anesthesia where paralytics are used.

Depending on the procedure, volatile anesthetics may provide sufficient muscle relaxation, and if possible, negate the need to give any neuromuscular blocking agents. If needed, a shorter-acting neuromuscular blocking agent is preferred. Physiologic stress is known to cause exacerbations of MG, and undergoing general anesthesia during surgery is a known source of physiologic stress. Multimodal anesthesia aids in maintaining adequate levels of analgesia and anesthesia for these patients.  This approach can include using an epidural to help control the sympathetic nervous system response to surgery and anesthesia and decrease the overall stress response.

No one specific volatile agent is clearly superior to others, and most are deemed safe overall. Patients with neuromuscular disorders, such as myasthenia gravis, will often show a pattern of restrictive lung disease as respiratory muscles become involved. The anesthesia provider should keep this fact in mind when providing positive pressure ventilation.

A complete reversal of rocuronium or vecuronium is possible with the advent of sugammadex while avoiding the downsides of giving neostigmine to this patient population. Several reports show variability in the reversal of neuromuscular blockade even with the use of sugammadex.