Electrocautery, invented in 1875, was the forerunner of electrosurgery. Electrocautery and electrosurgery are often incorrectly used interchangeably. Unlike electrosurgery, which is alternating current, electrocautery involves direct current through a metal wire that resists the flow of energy. With this technique, a surgeon can achieve hemostasis in a wet surgical field. However, the damage to tissues may impair wound healing. Electrocautery is typically reserved for patients with pacemakers or defibrillators because there is no current flowing through the patient to compromise the device’s functioning.

In 1907, Walter de Keating-Hart and Pozzi introduced “fulguration,” which in Latin means "lightning." They postulated that this superficial carbonization which generated heat without directly applying the electrode to the skin, was ideal for treating the skin, as it could selectively destroy tumor cells by disrupting their nutritional supply. In 1911, William Clark introduced “desiccation,” which in Latin means “to dry out.” This technique dehydrated the tissue with fine sparks of energy versus the thicker sparks of electrofulguration.

Electrodesiccation and electrofulguration are used for very superficial skin lesions in a monoterminal fashion. The main difference is electrodesiccation generates a high-voltage spark which causes dehydration of the treated tissue site via direct contact with the tissue. Electrofulguration is held at a small distance from the tissue achieving superficial destruction secondary to surface carbonization. This carbonization protects the underlying tissues from the spreading of thermal heat. This electric current does not penetrate deeply, so it will not seal nearby blood vessels.

Electrocoagulation was later introduced in 1909 by Doyen as a different “recycling” technique in which the electrode touched the tissue directly, while an indifferent electrode removed the electricity and flowed back into the device. He claimed this was more effective in tumor cell destructions.

Electrocoagulation produces a moderately damped current in a biterminal manner which is higher amerage and lower voltage than electrodesiccation and electrofulguration. Electrocoagulation penetrates deeper than the electrodesiccation/fulguration. Therefore greater damage to tissues occurs. Monopolar or bipolar methods can achieve hemostasis by this electrocoagulation. A monopolar method of hemostasis includes briefly touching the bleeding vessel directly or by touching the electrode to forceps or a hemostat on the clamped vessel. Bipolar electrocoagulation occurs with bipolar forceps are applied directly to the bleeding vessel. Because the energy from the electrocoagulation device can travel several millimeters along the vessel, short bursts of energy and minimum power setting are strongly encouraged to prevent delayed bleeding.

The biterminal application of a damped, low-voltage, and high amperage current produces minimal tissue damage and lateral heat spread. Unlike other modalities of electrosurgery, it provides hemostasis simultaneously while cutting. A pure cutting method is executed by using an undamped tube current. This will cause vaporization of tissue with no hemostasis. A variety of electrodes may be used depending on the desired effect, with the most common a straight, narrow electrode to incise skin. This is employed in a swift, continuous stroke-like motion. Since it is a slightly damped current, there will be some charring present at the excised tissue margins.