The examination is subdivided into two assessments: balance and gait. It is important to note that the examiner should be near the patient at all times to provide support if the patient harbingers the risk of falling. The examination should take approximately ten to fifteen minutes to perform. The scoring system is ordinal with a range of zero to two. A score of zero means severe impairment versus a score of two, which would indicate independence. A lower total score means that there is more impairment.

Materials required: a stable, hard, and armless chair; a stopwatch; a 15-foot hallway with a smooth surface.

First, the examiner will begin with the balance assessment. The patient will start seated in a hard, armless, stable chair. The patient will be asked to rise from the seated position without using their arms or hands. Next, while the patient is standing, the examiner will ask the patient to move their feet as close together as possible. The examiner will then press on the patient’s sternum with the palm of the hand three times. This will be done once with the patient’s eyes open and then with the eyes closed. Lastly, the patient will be asked to make a 360 degree turn and sit back down in the chair. The scoring system for this portion is broken down into ten standardized scoring subsets for a total score of sixteen.

The second part of the evaluation assesses the patient’s gait. The examiner must walk alongside the patient at all times to provide support. The patient can use an assistive device if they use one regularly. The patient will start this aspect of the examination from the standing position. The patient should be told the complete set of instructions prior to initiating the test. It is also appropriate to provide cues throughout the exam if needed. For example, the patient will be told to walk about fifteen feet at a regular pace and then turn around to walk back to the starting point at a quick but safe pace. The scoring system for this portion is broken down into seven standardized scoring subsets for a total score of twelve.

The scores from both portions of the examination will be added together for a total score.

Withstanding nudge on chest (0-2)

Scoring categories and score allotment.