Patients with salivary malignancies should be managed by a multidisciplinary team of otolaryngologists, plastic surgeons, general surgeons, pathologists, radiation oncologists, medical oncologists, speech-language pathologists, psychologists, and primary care physicians. Salivary malignancies present with varying histologies and severities, often requiring multimodal therapy involving surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy.

Close communication and collaboration between the surgeons, radiation oncologists, and medical oncologists can provide a tailored approach for each patient. Difficulties in swallowing can occur from acute radiation toxicity. Patients may need a consultation with general surgery for gastric tube placement to ensure optimal nutrition perioperatively and for the duration of any adjuvant therapy. The speech-language pathologist's early post-treatment intervention can help patients regain pre-treatment function to prevent malnutrition and dependence on enteral feeding. Recurrence of salivary malignancies can occur several years, even decades, after initial treatment. Thus, the otolaryngologist, medical and radiation oncologists, and primary care physician's routine close follow-up is strongly recommended. Finally, patients may develop visible surgical scarring and facial nerve paralysis associated with depression, social anxiety, and social avoidance. Formal peer support groups and consultation with a psychologist can aid patients in addressing these latter concerns.