The **chorionic villus sampling test (CVS)**is a diagnostic, ambulatory procedure testing for chromosomal abnormalities. This test is recommended at the time of conception for women above the age of 35 if a parent is a carrier of a genetic disorder, women with abnormal ultrasound results, or women with previous children with chromosome abnormalities. Performance of the test may be transcervically or transabdominally; during the test, a small cell sample is taken from the fetal part of the placenta chorion between the 10th and 13 weeks of pregnancy. The fetus’ chromosomes are karyotyped to diagnose chromosomal abnormalities. There is a risk of miscarriage and, in some literature, limb defects when performing placenta chorion testing before the suggested testing period (before the tenth week). Other complications include vaginal bleeding, infection, rupture of membranes, and fetomaternal hemorrhage. In some cases, results can be inconclusive so that other tests may be necessary. Amniocentesis is an alternative to CVS as both are used to analyze genetic information.

The **combined test**is a screening tool used to primarily detect Down syndrome in the first trimester with a low false positive rate. This test is also known to detect trisomy 18 and 13 as well as monosomy X and triploidies at lower accuracy rates. It is comprised of ultrasound to determine nuchal translucency, pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) which correlates with aneuploidy, and free beta or total human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Ultrasound imaging is performed between 11 and 13 weeks while the collection of serum sample ranges from 9 to 13 weeks. If screening with the combined test suggests chromosomal abnormalities, CVS or amniocentesis should be offered for definitive prenatal diagnosis.

- **Ultrasound**is a safe, effective, and easily used imaging study as it functions with no radiation can be used as a diagnostic tool and can be applied bedside. This tool can detect fetal death, diagnose dysmorphologies, and localization of the placenta.

- **HCG**is a hormone synthesized by the syncytiotrophoblast cells in the fetal component of the placenta. The production of hCG in the first trimester is necessary to maintain pregnancy by promoting progesterone secretion by the corpus luteum. hCG levels peak between weeks 8 and 10. After the tenth week, hCG levels plateau and the placenta takes responsibility to produce progesterone. Blood hCG can be detected during the first week after fertilization while at-home urine pregnancy tests can detect hCG two weeks after fertilization. It has several functions including the following: promotion of progesterone production by the corpus luteal cells, angiogenesis in the uterus, growth of uterus and fetus, cell differentiation to increase syncytiotrophoblast cells, suppress immunologic attack by mother on fetus, suppress myometrial contractions during pregnancy, development of umbilical cord, and affects maternal brainstem causing morning sickness.

- **PAPP-A**is a hormone produced by the fetus and the placenta in pregnancy. This hormone promotes placental growth and function through the facilitation of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF). Therefore, PAPP-A levels increase with time of pregnancy. In some studies, the thickness of placenta also correlates with higher blood levels of PAPP-A. Chromosomal abnormalities, like trisomy 21, are significantly correlated with low blood PAPP-A.

**Placental growth factor (PIGF)**is a potent angiogenic protein factor produced by the syncytiotrophoblast. The purpose of PIGF is to facilitate the development and maturation of the placental vasculature. Low PIGF suggests placental dysfunction associated with pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction.

**Human chorionic somatomammotropin (HCS)**, also known as human placental lactogen (HPL) is produced by the syncytiotrophoblast starting in week 6. HCS functions to promote breast development and decrease maternal insulin sensitivity and increases glucose availability for the fetus. Literature indicates the measurement of HCS is clinically relevant during the third trimester as blood HCS results can predict the outcome by indicating functionality of the placenta and, indirectly, fetal growth.