PSS is a deep venous thrombosis, and, as such, the first step in the management is to initiate anticoagulation therapy, typically, via an intravenous (IV) heparin drip. Patients are given an initial bolus of intravenous (IV) heparin and then kept on a maintenance IV heparin drip. The dose of the bolus and maintenance heparin drip is weight-based. The IV heparin drip is titrated according to APTT levels or factor X levels. The affected extremity should be elevated to mitigate edema. If the patient presents within 2 weeks of the onset of symptoms, it is reasonable to consider a venogram and catheter-directed thrombolysis to reduce the clot burden. Under fluoroscopic guidance, a lysis catheter is placed to drip a thrombolytic agent such as alteplase for 24 to 48 hours. Alternatively, a pharmacomechanical thrombectomy system can be used. When using alteplase, the fibrinogen levels should be monitored closely to direct the dosing and duration of the catheter-directed lysis. When using pharmacomechanical thrombectomy, one should be mindful of the risk of acute kidney injury associated with hemolysis. If the presentation is more than 2 to 4 weeks from the onset of symptoms, heparinization alone may be initiated without thrombolytic therapy as the success of thrombolytic therapy is low beyond that window of time.

Another option for treatment is mechanical catheter-directed thrombectomy. This must be done early in the course of the disease.

Decompression of the thoracic outlet is the definitive management of PSS. This usually includes a first rib resection with some or all of the following procedures: anterior scalenectomy, resection of the subclavius muscle, resection of the costoclavicular ligament, and lysis of scar tissue/adhesions surrounding the subclavian vein. Venoplasty and/or stenting without decompression may produce favorable results but rib resection is the definitive treatment. The surgical approach can either be transaxillary or supra, infra, or para-clavicular. The timing of decompression after thrombolytic therapy is widely debated. The role of long-term anticoagulation in these patients after adequate decompression remains unclear. Some clinicians perform a venogram, often with intravascular ultrasound, 2 weeks postoperatively and decide about the duration of anticoagulation at that time. In this setting, venoplasty can be used for any residual stenosis since decompression has been achieved surgically. The use of stents is discouraged in this anatomic location due to the repetitive motion and risk of stent fracture and thrombosis.

The duration of anticoagulation in patients with underlying hypercoagulability disorders after decompression also remains unclear. In most patients, anticoagulation for 3 to 6 months following an episode of deep venous thrombosis such as PSS is reasonable. This can be achieved either via warfarin or direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC). In the case of recurrent thrombosis after decompression surgery, thrombolysis and venography are usually attempted again with the maintenance of long-term anticoagulation therapy afterward. In some patients with PSS, chronic total occlusion of the subclavian vein may persist despite adequate decompression maneuvers. Depending on the severity of the symptoms, venous reconstruction should be considered. This can be achieved with a bypass or jugular vein turndown procedure (with or without medial claviculectomy).