The findings for an individual patient with a neuronal or glioneuronal brain tumor will be variable. A detailed history of the patient’s seizure history should be obtained, including a detailed description of the seizure, whether the patient has previously been evaluated for seizures, and whether there are any family members with a history of seizures. The presence, duration, and severity of other signs and symptoms such as headache, nausea, vomiting, balance difficulties, focal weakness or sensory changes, changes to eyesight, or others should also be obtained at this time. A detailed history of current and previous diagnoses with the inclusion of current and previous prescription and non-prescription medication should also be obtained.

Next, the practitioner should perform a detailed physical exam with a particular focus on the neurological system. When possible, the examiner must evaluate for mental status changes, visual field deficits, cranial nerve dysfunction, focal neurological deficits including motor or sensory disruptions, cerebellar dysfunction, and papilledema.

For most patients, the physical examination will be within normal limits. Rarely, patients may present with acute alteration in mental status and obtundation signifying acute hydrocephalus secondary to CSF outflow obstruction, which may occur with intraventricular tumors such as central neurocytoma or with seizure.

Patients with posterior fossa lesions will often demonstrate cerebellar symptoms on examination, such as ataxia, unsteady gait, and a positive Romberg sign, among others. Other focal neurological deficits may include sensory changes or focal weakness, but again would be rare due to the indolent nature of most of these lesions and the ability of the brain to compensate. Post-ictal patients and those presenting with acute status change secondary to acute hydrocephalus will require frequent serial neurological evaluation.