The success of antimicrobial stewardship programs is deeply connected with the core elements mentioned above as guided by the CDC. The antimicrobial stewardship programs are greatly enhanced by interdepartmental communication and coordination. The significant support from below mentioned groups can play a vital role;

- Clinicians: All clinicians at any point during patient care have prescribed antibiotics to the patients. Therefore it is crucial that all clinicians fully engage and support antibiotics optimization. Hospitalists and primary care physicians are particularly essential as they comprise a majority of the prescribers. Prescribers can act as good stewards by following the **5 "D"s**of antimicrobial stewardship; right**D**rug, correct**D**ose, right**D**rug-route, suitable**D**uration, timely**D**e-escalation to pathogen-directed therapy. Example actions include making accurate diagnoses, following local antimicrobial guidelines, and timely reviewing the need for therapy.

- Pharmacy and therapeutics committee: Pharmacists are an integral part of the team. They help in developing and implementing policies that will optimize antibiotic use. For instance, integrating stewardship into order sets

- Nurses can especially play an essential role in optimizing diagnostic tests or diagnostic stewardship and patient education. Examples include triaging patients for isolation, a timely collection of culture samples before antimicrobial use, educating patients on how to take antimicrobials at discharge from the hospital.

- Microbiology lab staff can assist as a part of diagnostic stewardship by guiding proper use of the test. They also help in creating local anti-microbiogram, which help optimize antimicrobial prescriptions.

- The infection prevention team and epidemiologist assist in tracking, analyzing, and reporting antimicrobial resistance and adverse effect trends.

- Quality improvement and patient safety teams can advocate for resources dedicated to stewardship interventions.

- Information technology staff are crucial to incorporating protocols into the stewardship work map. Examples include developing prompts to review antimicrobials and their indication, incorporating order sets in electronic medical records;

- At an individual level, a patient can act as a good antimicrobial steward by using antimicrobials responsibly. Patient participation can be done by taking antimicrobials directed by the prescriber and not storing or using leftover antimicrobials. Likewise, the producer/farmer can also help by not using antimicrobials as growth promoters in the community.