If the patient has arrived within the tPA window (less than 3 to 4.5 hours since LKN) and has no contraindication to tPA, they should immediately receive alteplase/tPA or tenecteplase for the intraarterial thrombolysis. If eligible, the patient should be transferred to the angiography suite for mechanical thrombectomy (MT) within 24 hours of LKN.

First-pass effect (FPE): Successful reperfusion using a single stent retriever attempt without salvage treatment (modified Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction score 2b-3). This has recently been associated with a 90-day favorable outcome in patients with acute BAO who had stent retriever thrombectomy within 24 hours.

First-line stent retrieval has been shown to be associated with significantly lower odds of modified Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction (mTICI) 2b/3 and mTICI 3 recanalization rates when compared with direct aspiration, even though the former is associated with higher complication rate (not statistically significant).

A recent study encouraged at least three mechanical thrombectomy passes before stopping the procedure as it had a significant advantage of recanalization in BAO patients.

Patients who are not tPA candidates and have a plaque burden in the posterior circulation are manageable through acute anticoagulation or an antiplatelet regimen. Recent data support using single or dual antiplatelet therapy over anticoagulation for large artery atherosclerotic disease, particularly if there is a large infarct burden.

For intracranial atherosclerosis, it is recommended to use dual antiplatelets for 90 days after stroke and followed by aspirin only.