The pathophysiology also depends in large part on the subset of esophagitis to which one refers.

- Reflux esophagitis: Abnormal amount and frequent reflux of gastric content into the esophagus lead to mucosal injury. Several mechanisms take place in the pathophysiology of reflux. See more information in the Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) chapter. Briefly, the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) seems to have decreased tone and increased transient relaxations. These factors facilitate the anterograde flow of acid. Also, patients with large Hiatal hernias seem to have a higher incidence of reflux since they contribute to a decreased tone in the LES. In contrast, any conditions that decrease esophageal peristalsis or affects saliva content can affect the protective mechanisms in place to prevent esophageal injury, contributing to the development of reflux esophagitis.

- Medication-induced esophagitis: The pathogenesis of medication-induced esophagitis involves a direct irritant effect and disruption of cytoprotective barriers. Researchers hypothesize that prolonged contact of irritants with the esophageal mucosa can lead to damage. Medications like doxycycline, tetracyclines, and ferrous sulfate can cause local caustic injury as they have a pH of less than three once dissolved in water or saliva. Other medications such as potassium chloride can cause tissue destruction and vascular injury due to its hyperosmolar nature.

- Eosinophilic esophagitis: The pathogenesis of EoE is incompletely defined. Considerable evidence suggests that eosinophilic esophagitis is an allergic disorder induced by antigen sensitization either through foods and/or aeroallergens. Eotaxin, interleukin 5 (IL-5) and STAT6 may play important roles. Some patients have at least partially improved symptoms with acid suppression therapy suggesting that acid reflux may be a contributor.

- Radiation esophagitis: The pathophysiology involves DNA damage and cell death from high-energy electrons leading to the formation of volatile oxygen-free radicals. The radiation injury can be acute or chronic. In the acute phase, radiation destroys epithelial cells and interferes with proliferation. Small doses can lead to villous blunting and minor alterations in mucosal formation, but larger doses can denude extensive regions of the mucosa. The chronic injury seems to involve small vessel ischemic injury. Endothelial inflammation coupled with smooth muscle and fibroblast proliferation compromise blood flow into the small vessels. Excessive fibrosis and the presence of atypical fibroblasts characterizes chronic radiation injury. Progressive injury can lead to strictures, ulceration, fistula formation and even perforation.

- Infectious esophagitis: Infection esophagitis can be caused by bacterial, fungal, parasitic and viral micro-organisms. Bacterial esophagitis is the least common of all. Candida albicans infection is the most common cause of infectious esophagitis. The first step in the pathophysiology involves colonization with mucosal adherence and proliferation. The second step involves impairing the host defense mechanisms. C. Albicans is a normal component of oral flora, but it can become a problem if their number increases (e.g., with the use of antibiotics) or if the patient is immunosuppressed (e.g., by therapy with corticosteroids). Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is the most common cause of viral esophagitis. It infects the squamous epithelium leading to vesicles and then ulcerations. Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr (EBV) and varicella-zoster (VZV) are other viral causes of viral esophagitis.