Observation is the acceptable management in cases where the visual function is intact or remains stable, especially in patients who maintain a central visual acuity of 20/50 or better. Neuro-ophthalmologists will closely follow these patients with a thorough examination, including serial visual fields and peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer optical coherence tomography.

Tumor resection is almost impossible without incurring a severe visual loss, due to the intimal relationship of the ONSM to the optic nerve. However, surgical resection can be justified in cases of disfiguring proptosis where the visual function has significantly decreased or in cases of intracranial extension. If the eye with the ONSM is blind and the tumor is confined to the orbit the patient should be observed as they grow very slowly, although, some surgeons advocate surgically resecting the tumor to avoid extension to other areas. If the eye is blind and intracranial extension is present, the tumor and the nerve should be removed. Some authors favor surgical intervention as a primary treatment not only stop disease progression and reduce the risk of subsequent vision loss, but also, to some extent, reverse visual deficits that have already occurred.

Transnasal endoscopic optic nerve decompression has been recently proposed and has showed stabilization of the disease and in some cases improvement from the baseline visual deficit.

Conventional radiotherapy has been used both pre-operatively and postoperatively for many years.