There are several undesirable side effects to thiazolidinediones, particularly with long-term use. The risks versus benefits require discussion with patients, and alternative first-line agents attempted before using TZDs.

**Edema and Congestive Heart Failure**

TZDs have been shown to cause dose-related fluid retention in up to 20% of patients. Methods of fluid retention include PPAR-gamma receptors in the distal nephron and insulin-activated epithelial sodium channels in the collecting tubules. PPAR-gamma activation stimulates sodium reabsorption, acting at the same site as aldosterone. Patients with preexisting edema or concomitant insulin therapy are at higher risk of edema and should start on the lowest available dose.

There are reports of an increase in intravascular volume to the point of congestive heart failure. Thus TZDs should be used with caution in patients with diastolic dysfunction or a history of CHF. The risk of heart failure and death is higher in rosiglitazone than pioglitazone.

**Weight Gain**

Adipocytes have the highest concentration of PPAR-gamma receptors in the body. The mechanism behind the weight gain is due to a combination of factors. TZDs upregulate PPAR-gamma receptors in the central nervous system, leading to increased feeding. TZD agents expand adipose tissue mass via the maturation of preadipocytes into mature adipocytes and increase fat storage by increasing free fatty acid movement into cells. Additionally, fluid retention can increase weight.

**Fractures**

Several studies have demonstrated an increased fracture risk and decreased bone density in patients taking TZDs compared to those taking insulin or other oral agents such as sulfonylureas. Proposed mechanisms for this include PPAR-gamma activation and insulin-like growth factor down-regulation, which diverts the differentiation of osteoblasts into adipocytes and leads to bone loss.

**Bladder Cancer**

Pioglitazone has, in some studies, shown correlations with an increased risk of bladder cancer. This effect varies in a duration-dependent and dose-dependent fashion. Also, most recent analyses do not support an increased risk. In contrast, rosiglitazone was not associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer in any analysis, suggesting the risk is drug-specific and not a class effect.

**Hepatotoxicity**

Troglitazone, the original PPAR-gamma activator, was removed from the market primarily due to hepatotoxicity. However, the other agents, rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, have rarely been linked to acute liver injury.

**Diabetic Macular Edema**

Combination TZD and insulin therapy have correlated with an increased incidence of diabetic macular edema at 1-year and 10-year follow-up. However, more studies are underway to evaluate confounding factors and define the frequency of this adverse event.

**Increased Ovulation and Teratogenic Effects**

Patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome have shown an increased ovulation rate when using TZD and other insulin sensitizers. This effect may result in ovulation in some premenopausal, anovulatory women, leading to improved rates of spontaneous pregnancy. However, TZDs have also been shown to have some teratogenic potential by decreasing fetal maturation. Premenopausal women should use contraception if they are not trying to conceive and switch to another insulin sensitizer, such as metformin, after conception.