Triamcinolone administration can be oral (e.g., tablets or capsules), topical (e.g., cream and ointment), oral or intranasal topical(e.g., spray), intramuscular, or via intravitreal injection. Triamcinolone, when given orally, should be taken with meals to avoid GI discomfort. When given topically, instructions are to apply a thin layer to the affected area and rub gently. When administered as an inhalation solution, the patient must learn the proper administration technique for the correct dose.

The injectable suspension formulation is available in strengths of 5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg, and 40 mg/mL. The topical cream/ointment is available in 0.025%, 0.1%, and 0.5% formulations. There is a 0.1% dental paste formulation.

A list of some regimens for conditions organized by dosage form:

**Seasonal Allergic Rhinitis**

- In adults and children ages 12 and older: 220 mcg daily via intranasal spray (1 to 2 actuations sprays in each nostril; start with 2 actuations - do not exceed 2 actuations in each nostril per day.) Discontinue in 3 weeks if there is no improvement.

- In children:

- Ages 2 to 5: 110 mcg daily via intranasal spray (1 actuation in each nostril); do not exceed 110 mcg (1 actuation) daily in children under the age of 6. Discontinue in 3 weeks if there is no improvement.
- Ages 6 to 11: 110 mcg to 220 mcg daily via intranasal spray (1 to 2 actuations sprays in each nostril; start with 1 actuation - do not exceed 2 actuations in each nostril per day.) Discontinue in 3 weeks if there is no improvement.

**Various skin conditions**(atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, dermatitis herpetiformis, psoriasis, eczema, or lichen planus):

- Topical cream or ointment:

- In adults: apply 0.1% triamcinolone paste twice or three times daily to the affected area after meals.

**Dermatomyositis or symptomatic sarcoidosis**

- IM form:

- In adults: the dose ranges between 40 to 80 mg IM daily. Start with 60 mg for one dose; use the lowest effective dose; frequency will vary based on the condition and severity.
- In pediatrics: dose range 0.11 to 1.6 mg/kg/day divided into 3 or 4 doses.

- Topical cream or ointment:

- In adults: apply either 0.025% to 0.05% cream/ointment, or 0.1% to 0.5% cream/ointment twice or three times daily to the affected area

**Steroid Responsive Dermatoses (including atopic and contact dermatitis)**

- **Topical cream or ointment:**
- Apply a thin film of 0.025% cream or ointment to the affected areas 2 to 4 times daily.
- Injection: INject intralesionally or sub-lesional up to 0.5 mg/square inch of affected skin

**Symptomatic relief of rheumatoid arthritis, gouty arthritis, osteoarthritis**

- IM form:

- In adults: the dose ranges between 40 to 80 mg IM; repeat every four weeks.
- In pediatrics: 40 mg IM, repeat every four weeks.

**Hay fever/pollen**

- 40 to 100 mg IM as a single injection per season

**Intra-articular injection and tendon sheaths (including gout)**

- Large joints: inject 5 to 15 mg intraarticular once; may need up to 40 mg.

- Small joints: inject 2.5 to 5 mg intraarticular once; may need up to 10 mg.

- Tendon sheaths: inject 2.5 to 10 mg along the sheath once