Doxylamine is available both over-the-counter and through a consultation with a physician. It is a first-generation histamine H1 receptor antagonist that can lead to various adverse outcomes if consumed inappropriately. Over-the-counter availability of doxylamine to consumers demands the need to educate patients and the general public on appropriate antihistamine consumption and how to recognize signs of toxicity. Individuals taking doxylamine should understand the potential adverse effects and should receive instruction to store this medication in a secure location where children or other individuals at risk of ingesting a toxic dose (intentionally or unintentionally) cannot access it. Patients should also be counseled on the potential drug interactions with doxylamine, such as increased somnolence and sedation when consumed with alcohol or other central nervous system depressants because of cumulative effects.

An interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPS, and PAs), should be well-versed in recognizing the symptoms of doxylamine toxicity. They should be aware of the potential complications that can manifest, such as multiorgan failure and coma. Although most patients experience a full recovery following doxylamine toxicity, it is still vital that healthcare teams are knowledgeable and up to date on the presentation of doxylamine toxicity.

Historically, there has been significant debate around a reported correlation between using a combination product containing doxylamine and pyridoxine in the 1970s and congenital disabilities. Media and law firms launched publicity campaigns against the older formulation, which eventually resulted in the discontinuation of the drug for decades until the newer formulation received approval in 2013 for treating NVP refractory to other nonpharmacological management. Approval of the newer formulation was based on randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials supporting its efficacy and safety. It also considered extensive data concluding that combined treatment with doxylamine succinate and pyridoxine hydrochloride in pregnancy is not teratogenic. This decades-long debate and evidence reinforce the importance of evidence-based medicine.

In summary, doxylamine is a generally safe, effective over-the-counter medication that can provide patient benefit with minimal adverse events when used correctly.