Overall traumatic esophageal injuries (EI) are rare. Even among large trauma centers, the typical incidence of EI may be as low as one to two cases per month. Penetrating EI is more common than blunt EI, with a corresponding ratio of approximately 10-to-1. Among penetrating injuries, the most common etiologies in the United States are gunshot wounds (about 75%) and stab wounds (about 15%). Many penetrating EI's are associated with damage to nearby structures, including neighboring mediastinal organs (e.g., trachea, heart, lungs). Although uncommon, combined esophageal and tracheal perforations can be life-threatening. Mortality is extremely high if great vessels are also injured. Penetrating trauma to the esophageal hiatus may be associated with potential concomitant injuries to other critical structures such as the aorta, heart, liver spleen, colon, pancreas, and stomach.

The morbidity and mortality of esophageal injuries are usually determined by a combination of temporal, patient, and injury severity factors. The best prognosis is associated with early injury identification and treatment, minimal or no injuries to surrounding structures and minimal or no contamination, and an otherwise healthy patient with minimal or no co-morbid conditions. The converse is true with each of the factors being at the opposite of its corresponding spectrum. Traumatic esophageal injuries often present a diagnostic challenge, especially because of the potential for damage to surrounding tissues and concurrent contamination. Consequently, the trauma surgeon must be aware of the various mechanisms of EI, employ a high index of clinical suspicion, and act in a timely manner when an injury is suspected.