**Overview of the Treatment of Osteosarcoma**

Multimodality therapy consisting of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed by surgery and chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting, is considered the treatment of choice.

Enrollment in a clinical trial should be considered in all cases. General principles of management include,

- **Localized, low-grade**osteosarcoma****
- Wide excision is the treatment of choice.
- Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is usually not recommended, except when it is a periosteal lesion.
- If high-grade on the surgical specimen, adjuvant chemotherapy is warranted.

- **Localized, high-grade osteosarcoma**
- Neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery is the standard of care.

- Limb sparing surgery is considered in those with a good histologic response to chemotherapy. 


- Depending on margins and response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy at the time of surgery, postoperative treatment involves chemotherapy with or without local therapy (radiation and/or re-resection).

- Assessment of histological response to neoadjuvant treatment is of paramount importance in deciding the choice of chemotherapy.


- If unresectable, chemoradiation is preferred.

- **Metastatic**osteosarcomas****
- Neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by wide excision of the primary tumor, along with metastasectomy, is indicated in pulmonary, visceral, or skeletal metastases if deemed resectable.
- Chemotherapy, with or without radiation therapy, followed by reassessment of the primary site for local control, is indicated in unresectable metastatic disease.

- **Relapsed or refractory osteosarcoma**
- Resection or second-line chemotherapy or a combination of the two is preferred.

- Metastatectomy of bony metastases may be associated with poorer survival when compared to those who undergo resection of pulmonary only metastases.


- If disease progression is evidenced, palliative radiation or best supportive treatment can be offered.

**Response Assessment following Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy**

The degree of histological necrosis has been shown to correlate with the disease-free survival in patients who have received neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Huvos was the first to describe the grade of histological necrosis in biopsy specimens from patients who had been treated with Von Rosen's protocol. These were classified from grade I to IV, with grade II and IV corresponding to complete response to therapy.

**Relapsed/Recurrent Osteosarcoma With or Without Metastasis**

Treatment options include,

- If possible, surgical resection is preferred. Mostly, adjuvant chemotherapy is given.

- A 5-year survival rate of 33% may be obtained in patients in whom a second surgical remission can be achieved.
- Recommended chemotherapy regimens have been listed in the 'medical oncology' section.

- If not candidates for surgery,

- Chemotherapy with or without radiation is preferred.

In those with metastasis, dismal 5-year survival rates of 20%, which has remained unchanged over the past 25 years, underline the need to explore newer approaches.

**Supportive Management/Palliative Medicine**

The management of chemotherapy-related complications such as nausea and vomiting, anemia, neutropenic fever, fatigue, neuropathy,  and cardiotoxicity, provision of symptom directed therapy, and counseling regarding goals of care discussions, has shown improvement in the quality of life. Provision of continuity of care through home care and round the clock telephonic liaison might assume special significance, given the existing circumstances (ongoing SARS -COV -2 pandemic). Hospice should be considered early.

**Special Situations**

Surface osteosarcomas

Surface osteosarcomas are variants with comparatively lower malignant potential. Management is as following,

- Curative surgery remains the treatment of choice.

- While local resection may be recommended for conventional parosteal osteosarcoma, wider margins are recommended in patients undergoing curative resections for high-grade surface osteosarcomas (dedifferentiated parosteal osteosarcomas and high-grade osteosarcomas).

- Chemotherapy is usually not recommended in the treatment of conventional parosteal osteosarcoma after a retrospective analysis failed to demonstrate any benefit in survival.

- If high-grade areas are visualized on the histopathology specimen, treatment with adjuvant chemotherapy is advised. Though the exact benefits of chemotherapy have not been earmarked, there is a consensus that standard chemotherapy regimens be used in high-grade surface osteosarcomas.