Gentamicin is generally available in parenteral, ophthalmic, and topical preparations.

- The ophthalmic gentamicin preparations exist as ointment and solution at 0.3% concentration. They are typically used for bacterial eye infections, such as keratitis and conjunctivitis.

- The topical gentamicin ointment and cream have a concentration of 0.1% and are restricted to specific skin and subcutaneous tissue infections, which usually are secondary to abrasions, cuts, and burns.

- The parenteral route mainly encompasses intramuscular and intravenous administration, where doses of both are calculated based on the patient's weight. For moderate and morbidly obese patients, the weight for dose calculation equals 0.4 multiplied by excess body weight plus estimated ideal body weight.

- The dose of 5 to 7 mg/kg daily given intravenously (infused over 30 to 120 minutes) is the preferable way for gentamicin application in most systemic infections by sensible germs, even though the traditional dosing of 3 to 5 mg/kg/day divided into doses every 8 hours is still an option in certain scenarios.
- The daily dose may be administered intramuscularly for some non-serious infections, such as pelvic inflammatory disease without sepsis.
- Infectious endocarditis caused by staphylococci or enterococci was previously treated with gentamicin and beta-lactams, although this therapy has been abandoned since the increase in bacterial resistance rates.
- Usually combined with an anaerobicidal antibiotic, Gentamicin can be administered at a single dose of 5 mg/kg 60 minutes before surgical incision in gastrointestinal, urologic, and gynecologic procedures for surgical infection prophylaxis.

Gentamicin and aminoglycosides have some specificities in their antibacterial activity. The bactericidal capacity of aminoglycosides correlates with their peak concentration so that the greater the concentration, the greater bacterial killing. The postantibiotic effect (PAE), another feature of aminoglycosides, is the characteristic of bacterial regrowth suppression that persists a few hours after antibiotic concentration falls below the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC); high peak concentration also advantages the PAE.

**Pregnancy/Breastfeeding Considerations**

It belongs to FDA pregnancy category D medicine. Gentamicin is minimally excreted into human milk. There is a lack of data for maternal single daily doses of gentamicin. Newborn infants and older infants absorb small amounts of gentamicin, but their serum levels with maternal three times daily dosages are far below the therapeutic range attained when treating newborn infections. Hence systemic effects of gentamicin are unlikely in infants. Nevertheless, monitoring the infant for possible adverse effects on the gastrointestinal flora, such as thrush, diaper rash, diarrhea, or blood in the stool for antibiotic-associated colitis is recommended.