**Laboratory Studies**

In symptomatic infants with compatible clinical features and neuroimaging findings suggesting aspartoacylase deficiency, the diagnosis is concluded by observing elevated levels of urine NAA. Compatible clinical features include hypotonia, poor head control, and macrocephaly. A determination can be reached more specifically by detecting deficient aspartoacylase activity in cultured skin fibroblasts. If elevated urine NAA and skin fibroblast testing are diagnostic, genetic testing is obtained only for genetic counseling.

Urine levels of NAA are increased up to 200 times that of the reference range. Gas chromatography or mass spectrometry are employed for measurement.

**Prenatal Diagnosis**

Prenatal diagnosis is best accomplished by measuring NAA levels in amniotic fluid. This method utilizes a stable isotope dilution coupled with gas chromatography or mass spectrometry, and also molecular analysis.

**Neuroimaging**

A CT scan shows a characteristic low attenuation of white matter in contrast to the relatively unaffected gray matter. This difference is mainly due to spongiform degeneration and edema of the white matter. No post contrast enhancement is usually seen.

MRI features include a relatively enlarged brain, also called megalencephaly. There is typically a diffuse bilateral white matter involvement. Unlike other leukodystrophies, subcortical U-fibers are usually involved early in the disease process. T1 shows a low signal in the white matter while T2 shows a high signal in white matter. There is no post contrast enhancement. MR spectroscopy shows markedly elevated levels of NAA, and an elevated NAA:creatine ratio. The mnemonic "CaNAAvan" is useful for remembering this information.