An evaluation with a proper clinical history is essential for every disease. Specific to a gastroenteritis episode is a history of contact, child-care attendance, travel, and exposure. Despite non-specific symptomatology, healthcare professionals can still narrow their options by correctly analyzing the symptoms. For example, nausea and vomiting indicate the upper intestine; fever suggests inflammation (tissue invasion, dehydration, or coinfection). Severe abdominal pain and tenesmus indicate large intestine involvement. The presence of nausea, vomiting with absent fever, periumbilical pain, and watery diarrhea suggests a non-serious small intestine infection.

Patients with diarrhea have the risk of dehydration; initial evaluation is to identify the presence and severity. Addressing the level of acidosis can provide valuable information to determine if fluid resuscitation is needed and if it should be oral or intravenous.

Microscopic stool examination and culture can narrow the causative agent. Mucus, blood, or leukocytes may indicate the agent. The problem with this technique is that there can be false negatives at the early stage of the disease. Therefore, an XTAG GPP panel that is FDA approved uses multiplex nucleic acid technology that can detect C. difficile, toxin A/B, Campylobacter, Escherichia coli, Shigella, and Shiga-like toxins, Salmonella, Rotavirus, Norovirus, Giardia, and Cryptosporidium.

Cultures should be done as promptly as possible in children that present leukocytes in the microscopic evaluation and have bloody diarrhea. Also, patients that are immunosuppressed should get a culture. This is now done with (PCR).