In the leg, venous drainage flows proximally from the popliteal vein to the superficial femoral vein. Continuing proximally, the superficial femoral vein is joined by the deep femoral vein in the upper thigh, becoming the common femoral vein. The great saphenous vein joins the common femoral vein near the inguinal ligament. The common femoral vein becomes the external iliac vein superior to the inguinal ligament. The internal iliac vein drains into the external iliac vein, becoming the common iliac vein, and the common iliac veins join to become the inferior vena cava (IVC).

The common femoral vein is the ideal to puncture when performing central venous access at the femoral site. The common femoral vein lies within the “femoral triangle” in the inguinal-femoral region. This region is bordered by the inguinal ligament superiorly, the adductor longus medially, and the sartorius muscle laterally. Understanding the relationship of structures within the inguinal-femoral area is essential, which can be remembered using the mnemonic “NAVEL.” Moving laterally to medially, (N) femoral nerve, (A) femoral artery, (V) femoral vein, (E) space, (L) lymphatics. For the remainder of this article, the term femoral vein refers to the common femoral vein unless otherwise specified.

When obtaining central venous access in the femoral vein, the key anatomical landmarks to identify in the inguinal-femoral region are the inguinal ligament and the femoral artery pulsation. In most instances, central venous access with ultrasound guidance is considered the standard of care. Nevertheless, understanding and using anatomical landmarks are equally essential and lead to increased success when combined with ultrasound guidance.