The vasculature system is associated with a broad spectrum of diseases due to its critical function and vast network throughout the body.

1. Atherosclerosis and fatty plaque deposition in vessel walls.

2. Arteriolosclerosis which involves hardening and the loss of the intrinsic elasticity of vessels. This condition most commonly relates to hypertension and diabetes mellitus.

3. Vasculitides which involves damage of blood vessels by the immune system

4. Connective tissue disorders, such as scleroderma which can affect the vessels.

Preliminary studies on the human model indicate that mobilized peripheral blood stem cells can become a treatment to treat lymphedema; further studies are necessary to endorse this therapeutic practice.

During fetal growth, if the vessels that make up the placenta show alterations of vascular endothelial growth factor or VEGF, Angiopoietin/Tie2 signaling by the pericytes, they could cause serious placental diseases (pre-eclampsia).

Thrombotic microangiopathy is a pathological clinical condition characterized by an alteration of the vascular wall that causes the formation of multiple small thrombi in the microcirculation, with functional disorders of the various organs and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Historically it is classified in primitive forms (such as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and uremic-hemolytic syndrome) and secondary forms (from malignant hypertension, scleroderma, etc.), the latter much more rare, less severe and for which the therapy appears slightly different from primary forms. The disease is relatively rare, with an incidence of about six cases per million inhabitants per year. However, it remains a crucial diagnosis because the mortality of untreated patients is around 90%, mortality that is reduceable with the prompt execution of life-saving therapy (plasmapheresis). Early death occurs despite everything within 24 hours of presenting the disease, especially in women.

Takayasu arteritis is an inflammatory pathology that affects the aorta, its branches, and pulmonary arteries. It occurs mainly in young women. Etiology is unknown. Vascular inflammation can cause arterial stenosis, occlusions, dilations, or aneurysms. Patients may have an asymmetric pulse or unequal blood pressure measurements between limbs, limb claudication, symptoms of decreased brain perfusion and hypertension or its complications. Diagnosis is via aortic arteriography or MRI angiography. Treatment involves the use of corticosteroids and other immunosuppressants, and in case of ischemia potentially dangerous for the organs, vascular interventions such as the by-pass.

Familial hemorrhagic telangiectasia or Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome is a condition characterized by malformations of the junctions between arteries and veins, which occur directly and without the "mediation" of the capillaries. The most common clinical manifestation is represented by spontaneous and recurrent bleeding of the nose, around 12 years of age. About 25% of patients also have bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract, typically from the age of 40. Sudden bleeding can also occur in various districts (e.g., brain or lungs), with serious consequences.

Soft tissue sarcomas are rare tumors of which at least 50 subtypes are known. In adults, malignant cells are formed within the so-called soft tissues of the body and can be localized in practically all body areas. These tissues are muscles, connective tissues, blood or lymphatic vessels, nerves, ligaments, and adipose tissue. Only the biopsy allows you to find out which particular type of sarcoma it is and from which tissue it originated.