Kidney transplantation is the treatment of choice in patients with end-stage renal disease or severe chronic kidney disease as it improves the quality of life and has better survival advantages compared to dialysis. Various factors merit consideration to match the donor kidney with the recipient, as the donor kidney acts as an alloantigen. In general, when transplanting tissue or cells from a genetically different donor to the graft recipient, the alloantigen of the donor induces an immune response in the recipient against the graft. This response can destroy the graft if not controlled. The whole process is called allograft rejection.

Allograft rejection is inflammation with specific pathologic changes in the allograft due to the recipient’s immune system recognizing the non-self antigen in the allograft, with or without dysfunction of the allograft.

Both innate and adaptive immune systems play a significant role in rejection, but the T lymphocytes are the principal cells that recognize the allograft. There are other costimulatory molecules, and cytokines also play a major role in this reaction. Depending on the histopathology and immunological characteristics, renal transplant rejections can be classified broadly under the following categories:

1) Hyperacute rejection: This happens minutes after transplant, and it is related to the preformed antibody or ABO incompatibility; this is rarely seen now due to the very sensitive cross-match tests performed before the transplant.

2) Acute rejection: This can happen any time after transplant, usually within days to weeks after the transplant. It classifies into the following:

A) Antibody-mediated rejection- ABMR: which usually demonstrates evidence of circulating donor-specific alloantibodies and immunological evidence of antibody-mediated injuries to the kidney. Like inflammation of glomeruli (glomerulitis) or peritubular capillaries (peritubular capillaritis).

B) Acute T-cell mediated rejection- TCMR: which is characterized by lymphocytic infiltration of the tubules, interstitium, and sometimes the arterial intima.

3) Chronic rejection: It usually develops more than three months post-transplant. It can either be chronic antibody-mediated rejection or chronic T cell-mediated rejection.

4) A mixture of acute rejection superimposed on chronic rejection.