Pneumothorax should be considered in the setting of thoracic trauma where there are clinical signs of respiratory or circulatory compromise. Classically the findings of hypoxia, chest wall crepitus, diminished breath sounds, tachypnea, tachycardia, hypotension, tracheal deviation, and the presence of a sucking chest wound all have been used to help make the diagnosis. Many of these findings are observed in the primary survey of the trauma patient and can be obtained by the prehospital provider. It is paramount to note that some of these findings, which are used in protocolized guidelines of treatment, are somewhat unreliable and may only be late findings.

Two main procedures are used in the emergency management of pneumothorax in the prehospital setting: needle thoracostomy for tension pneumothorax and the placement of three-sided occlusive dressing for a communicating pneumothorax. The presence of thoracic trauma, absent or diminished breath sounds on auscultation, and significant hypotension and or hypoxia/respiratory failure should prompt a provider to consider needle thoracostomy to relieve suspected tension pneumothorax. Practitioners should also consider the environment of the communicating pneumothorax that has been addressed with an occlusive dressing. Although there may have been a communicating wound before treatment, once an occlusive dressing is applied, the pneumothorax can develop tension physiology.

The presence of a sucking chest wound on physical examination should prompt the provider to consider treatment for a communicating pneumothorax. The placement of an occlusive dressing is indicated in this setting, regardless of respiratory status, given the propensity for these patients to deteriorate and the innocuous nature of the dressing placement.  If there is no sign of respiratory compromise and the patient is otherwise asymptomatic, consideration of rapid transport over dressing placement is at the discretion of the prehospital provider.