Dry eye, often referred to as Dry Eye Syndrome (DES), is typically a multifactorial disease that results in improper tear film composition and symptoms of ocular discomfort. Risk factors of DES include aging, female gender, hormonal changes, systemic autoimmune disorders, decreased corneal sensation, drug effects, viral infections, diabetes mellitus, vitamin A deficiency, and graft-versus-host disease. The potential causes of dry eye fall under two distinct categories: evaporative and aqueous deficient.  Aqueous tear deficiency (ATD) can further classify as Sjögren syndrome dry eye and Non-Sjögren dry eye. In both categories of ATD, lacrimal output diminishes, resulting in disruption of the tear film. The clinical symptoms of ATD tend to be worse at the end of the day or with prolonged use of the eyes, due to reduced blink rate. Environmental factors such as low humidity can also exacerbate symptoms. The most common symptoms associated with ATD are ocular burning, foreign body sensation, photosensitivity, and blurred vision.

Another crucial clinical consideration of the lacrimal gland is dacryoadenitis or inflammation of the lacrimal gland. The majority of cases of dacryoadenitis are idiopathic in origin, with a likely unknown autoimmune contribution. Infectious dacryoadenitis is a common feature of the Epstein-Barr virus. Autoimmune dacryoadenitis is a common feature of sarcoidosis, Sjogren, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, and IgG4-related disease. Beyond these causes, derangements of the MALT may result in lymphoproliferative tumors, seen in 7% of biopsies for orbital and lacrimal gland inflammation.