Ligamentous and meniscal tears are among the most common knee injuries and typically require surgical intervention. Often, ligament repairs are done arthroscopically, with a number of different grafts such as hamstring, patellar, and allografts being used to repair the defect. Each graft poses advantages and disadvantages. Ligamentous repairs commonly require extensive rehabilitation, and athletes routinely wear a brace during an activity to prevent reoccurrence. Arthroscopy is also used to repair meniscal tears or, more commonly, to perform a meniscectomy on the damaged meniscus. Meniscectomy is a faster recovery but still requires some rehabilitation. One of the main functions of ligamentous structures and menisci is to provide stability to the joint. When these structures become compromised, the articular surfaces of the knee can be more prone to sustain damage that may lead to osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis is another form of knee pathology that can be treated surgically. There are various factors such as genetics, weight, activity, and previous injury that may contribute to and predispose an individual to osteoarthritis. Ultimately, this condition can cause great pain and discomfort with a significant decrease in functionality and quality of life. A total knee arthroplasty can be performed to treat this condition. The surgery involves the replacement of all articular surfaces of the knee with prosthetics made of metal, ceramic, or plastic. This type of surgery is more prevalent in the older population and requires extensive rehabilitation as well.