Most of the patients (greater than 95%) will be asymptomatic and develop an asymptomatic pulmonary infection that can only be detected by the intradermal paracoccidioidin test.

**Juveline Form (Acute/Subacute Paracoccydiomycosis)**

The juvenile form is seen in approximately 10% of the cases.

**Chronic Form (Reactivation Paracoccydiomycosis)**

The adult or chronic form is seen in 80 to 90% of the cases and is more frequent in adult men. Clinical manifestations are primarily related to lung infection, including fever, malaise, cough, and dyspnea. One-third of the patients will present with pulmonary sequelae such as pulmonary fibrosis, bullae, and pulmonary hypertension. As mentioned before, this is considered a reactivation and can occur months to years after the primary infection. Pulmonary involvement is the most frequent manifestation. Enlarged lymph nodes are not common, except in children. In over 50% of the cases, there is a hematogenous spread with mucous membrane involvement. It usually includes laryngeal and pharyngeal lesions resulting in dysphonia, dysphagia, and stridor, as well as perioral granulomatous plaques. Gingival involvement is frequent and may lead to tooth loss. Characteristic oral mulberry-like erosions (Aguiar-Pupo stomatitis) may be associated with nasal and pharyngeal ulcers.

Cutaneous lesions are seen in 25% of the cases. Ulcers, crusted papules, nodules, plaques, and verrucous lesions are typical. Generally, they are caused by hematologic dissemination from the lungs. In rare cases, these lesions result from direct inoculation.