Laboratory tests are done on samples obtained from body fluids. The initial test is Gram staining, which reveals pleomorphic gram-negative coccobacilli. Cultures of blood and body fluids confirm the presence of the organism. Its growth is potentiated on chocolate agar and BVCCA, which contains antibiotics (bacitracin, vancomycin, and clindamycin) in addition to chocolate agar constituents. It also determines the presence of NTHi in nasopharyngeal swabs. The sensitivity of BVCCA to grow NTHi from true positive swabs is approximately 10% higher than that for chocolate agar. Agglutination with antiserum or capsular typing with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is often done for serotyping. For rapid diagnosis, methods like immunoelectrophoresis, latex particle agglutination, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay are employed for the identification of PRP polysaccharide, in addition to ordering cultures. False-positive results are seen in urine and serum but are less common in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). In children infected by invasive NTHi, a workup for immunodeficiency is necessary to establish the precipitating factor for such infections.

Investigational methods are based on the location of the infection. If meningitis is the presenting feature, then a lumbar puncture (LP) with CSF examination is done. Hib meningitis often shows a marked pleocytosis with neutrophil predominance. The glucose levels in the CSF are decreased, and protein levels are elevated. The capsular antigen is detected in 90% of patients, and 80% demonstrate a positive CSF gram stain. To ensure a proper diagnosis, the LP is done before the administration of antibiotics. Pneumonia is often diagnosed by ordering a chest x-ray initially, and then sputum gram-stain and cultures are done for definitive diagnosis. A real-time PCR is usually done for capsule serotyping, and it also precisely differentiates NTHi from other pathogens such as H. haemolyticus, which resembles H.influenzae but is not pathogenic.

In pneumonia patients, reverse transcription (RT) PCR of respiratory secretions yields a high sensitivity (75%), specificity (80%), positive predictive value (PPV) (45%), and negative predictive value (NPV) (94%) as compared to other methods. Multiplex PCR is an advanced technique that allows detecting multiple pathogens at the same time and also identifies pathogens even after the initiation of antibiotics resulting in shorter time to diagnosis. A line probe assay (LPA) based on the mechanism of multiplex PCR and reverse hybridization using specific sequence probes can detect bacteria causing meningitis like H. influenzae, S. pneumonia, and N. meningitis. LPA has a sensitivity and specificity of 88% and 96% for Hib infections. A better and cheaper alternative to PCR is the isothermal nucleic acid amplification test (isothermal NAT), as it does not require an expensive thermocycler apparatus. A promising kind is duplex recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) because it has both sensitivity and specificity of 100% for diagnosing H. influenzae meningitis. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) can aid in quick species identification and has a high sensitivity (100%) and specificity (92%) for capsule identification.

Imaging is helpful to get a better view of the extent of the disease process, e.g., a computed tomography (CT) head scan demonstrates complications of meningitis, such as subdural effusion and orbital cellulitis. A chest X-ray is often required in the evaluation of pneumonia and shows characteristic diffuse, patchy, or lobar infiltrates. In some pneumonia cases, invasive procedures, i.e., bronchoscopy and trans-tracheal aspiration, are performed to get samples and establish a diagnosis. It is more common to find pleural and pericardial effusion with H.influenzae than other bacterial infections. The workup of epiglottitis includes a lateral neck radiograph, and the hallmark feature is a thumb-print sign, which signifies a swollen epiglottis.