The central abdominal wall is perfused by the superior epigastric artery (branch of the internal thoracic artery) above the umbilicus, and the inferior epigastric artery (branch of the external iliac artery) below the umbilicus. Venous drainage is accomplished via the internal and lateral thoracic veins superiorly, and the superficial epigastric (branch of the femoral vein) and inferior epigastric (branch of external iliac) veins inferiorly. Lymphatic drainage above the umbilicus is accomplished mainly via the axillary lymph nodes but does drain small amounts to the parasternal lymph nodes. Below the umbilicus, lymph drains to the superficial inguinal lymph nodes.

Internally, the abdomen contains two major blood vessels - the aorta and the inferior vena cava. The aorta has three main branches that serve to supply the organs of the gastrointestinal tract, which includes the celiac, superior mesenteric, and inferior mesenteric arteries. These arteries branch off of the aorta anteriorly, while arteries that supply non-GI tract structures branch either laterally or posteriorly. Examples of such include the renal or gonadal arteries.

- The blood supply of the gastrointestinal tract follows the embryonic gut regions:

- The celiac artery supplies the foregut.

- The superior mesenteric artery supplies the midgut.

- The inferior mesenteric artery supplies the hindgut.

Note: The splenic flexure is known as a "watershed" area due to dual blood supply from distal artery branches, which can result in colonic ischemia.

Venous drainage from the organs of digestion occurs through the portal system, whereas non-digestion venous drainage occurs through the inferior vena cava and its tributaries.

The portal venous system consists of the superior mesenteric vein, inferior mesenteric vein (along with the superior rectal vein), and splenic vein and its tributaries, which all join to form the portal vein. The ligamentum teres, which contains the remnant of the umbilical vein, is of clinical significance due to its connection of the portal system to the abdominal wall. In the setting of portal hypertension, patients may experience dilation of the periumbilical veins, termed caput-medusae. Additionally, gastrointestinal cancers may metastasize to the anterior abdominal wall through the lymphatics that parallel the venous drainage, termed the Sister Mary Joseph sign/nodule.