**Female**

**Incontinence**

1. Detrusor overactivity (DO): Detrusor overactivity is characterized by involuntary contractions of the bladder detrusor muscle during bladder filling, which may be provoked or unprovoked.

- Phasic DO: intermittent DO, which occurs during filling, does not necessarily cause incontinence.

- Terminal DO: DO occurring near-maximum bladder capacity, usually results in incontinence.

- Compound DO: phasic DO, with an increase in detrusor and baseline detrusor pressure with each contraction during filling.; it occurs relative to underlying neurological disease.

- High and sustained DO involves continuous detrusor contractions, with detrusor pressure not returning to baseline.

- Post micturition DO: DO occurs after voiding, usually in the presence of detrusor and/or urethral instability.

2. Stress urinary incontinence (SUI): SUI is diagnosed with urodynamics with involuntary leakage seen as a result of an increase in abdominal pressure without detrusor contraction.

- Bladder neck descent <2 cm below the inferior border of the pubic symphysis with the bladder neck is closed at rest.

- Rotational descent/cystocele and the bladder neck closed at rest

- Normal bladder position with the bladder neck open at rest and weak urethral closure

- Mixed urinary incontinence (MUI): MUI is incontinence resulting from the co-existence of both DO and SUI. The advice is to treat the most bothersome cause of symptoms first.

**Bladder Outlet Obstruction (BOO)**

BOO may occur as a result of anatomical obstruction, such as stricture, previous incontinence surgery, cystocele, urethral diverticulum, or as a result of functional sphincteric obstruction due to high-tone non-relaxing sphincter.

**Detrusor Underactivity (DU)**

DU is a lack of adequate detrusor pressure or short contraction time, leading to poor bladder emptying, often in the presence of a high PVR.

**Male**

**Incontinence**

1. Detrusor overactivity (DO): The above characteristics of DO also apply in men. However, the cause of DO in men is known to be associated with benign prostatic obstruction, as well as other causes of BOO.****DO is present in 60 to 80% of men with LUTS, and in up to 93% of men with UUI.

2. SUI: The most prevalent cause of SUI in adult men is radical prostatectomy (RP).****can be as high as 74%.

3. MUI: Incontinence due to DO as well as SUI.

**Bladder Outlet Obstruction**

Male BOO is defined as an abnormally poor urinary flow with increased detrusor pressures seen on the pressure-flow study. The ICS nomogram is useful to diagnose BOO, and the bladder outlet obstruction index (BOOI) classifies men into unobstructed (BOOI <20), equivocal (BOOI of 20 to 40), and obstructed (BOOI >40).

**Detrusor Underactivity**

The urodynamic criteria to diagnose  DU in men include a  bladder contractility index (BCI) <100, bladder voiding efficiency (BVE) of <90%, and bladder outlet obstruction index (BOOI) <20.

**Loss of Compliance**

Compliance is the measure of bladder distensibility.

**Functional BOO**

Detrusor sphincter dyssynergia (DSD) is characterized by disordered involuntary contraction of the external urethral sphincter and detrusor muscle.

DU occurs in up to 83% of spinal cord injury patients and up to 25% in patients with multiple sclerosis.