Regarding the flexion-distraction pattern of injury that plays a central role in traumatic subluxations, the injuries categorize based on the severity of the injury :

- Facet subluxation

- Unilateral facet dislocation/ facet fracture and dislocation

- Bilateral facet dislocations.

The nondisplaced facet fracture or minimal diastasis of < 1 mm can be managed with an orthosis. However, facet displacement and concurrent ligamentous injury warrant surgical fixation.

The initial aspects of handling these cases deal with the judicious application of cervical traction that helps in the following:

- Stabilization of the spine and

- Reduction of the grade of the subluxation in cases of reducible locked facet joints

Care always needs to avoid cord traction due to heavy tractional weights.

In cases with locked facets, the clinician should attempt a closed reduction under anesthesia, which is successful in almost 95% of cases.

If there is no reduction and the preoperative MR images show the presence of disc prolapse, an anterior approach is the next step, with discectomy followed by open reduction with the aid of a Casper distractor. The reduction can then take place by anterior-only fusion. The failure of reduction needs the posterior reduction of the jumped facets, followed by 360-degree global fixations in neurologically preserved patients.

The surgical plan in the management of the patient then varies according to the Meyerding grading system, the ASIA neurological status, and the relevant scoring system of the patient.

If there is a good reduction following traction, the patients can receive an anterior approach with discectomy or median corpectomy followed by in-situ bony graft fusion or the usage of allograft spacers aided with plate and screw fixations.

Sometimes, owing to financial barriers, simple graft placement can also be undertaken. In cases of failed reduction from traction, the clinician can attempt reduction following muscle relaxation after induction of anesthesia. If reduction fails in patients with ASIA 'A' and 'B' status, posterior-only fixation by interspinous wiring is justified for anatomical fixation to aid in early rehabilitation.

With regards to the AO Spine scale system, the recommended plan of management includes the following:

- A0 - conservative

- A1 - conservative, if kyphosis >15 degrees- anterior mono-segmental fusion

- A2 - conservative, if kyphosis >15 degrees- anterior bi-segmental fusion

- A3 - anterior fusion mono/bisegmental fusion

- A4 - anterior bisegmental fusion

- B1 - posterior bisegmental

- B2 - approach and fusion length depend on the A component

- B3 - anterior mono segment, in ankylosis spondylitis- posterior long segment fixation

- C1 - approach and fusion length depend on the A component

- F1 - conservative

- F2 - approach depends on the B and C components

- F3 - approach depends on the B and C components

- F4 - approach depends on the B and C components.

The asymptomatic vertebral artery injury has not been shown to hinder the operative management of the subluxations. The use of aspirin is recommended in the postoperative period. There is still no consensus for managing symptomatic vertebral artery injuries associated with traumatic cervical spine subluxations.