Delivery by Cesarean section dates to 800 BCE. Unfortunately, at the time, the procedure was only done on a deceased or dying pregnant patient. It was not until the late 19th and 20th centuries when the first cases of perimortem cesarean section-use for salvage of the fetus were described. During the 1980s, additional case reports described its use to improve the survival of the mother.

One of the most daunting scenarios to face during an emergency department (ED)/critical care shift is the sudden, adverse change in a pregnant patient's health. These occurrences are rare and are the result of pre-existing conditions with severe, unforeseen medical, obstetric complications. This is also the scenario when patients arrive in extremis from a traumatic insult. An astute physician must be prepared and ready to do what is appropriate to save the life of the mother and the fetus. This includes considering a perimortem Cesarean section (C-section) (PMCS). A perimortem C-section is defined as a C-section performed during imminent cardiac arrest or active cardiac arrest, with the ultimate goal to successfully resuscitate the mother and improve fetal survivability. It is also referred to as resuscitative hysterotomy

PMCS is now a rarely performed procedure as the pregnancy-related death rates are overall low. Although the incidence of PMCS has not been well documented, the incidence of cardiac arrests during pregnancy is 1/30,000. Prior to 1986, only 188 cases were reported. From 1986 to 2004, only 38 additional cases were reported in the United States. The majority of them were performed in the ED setting, and occasional reports document pre-hospital scenarios. Despite the scarcity of data, with expedited deliveries, fetal survivability can be as high as 70%, with successful maternal resuscitations. Of the 38 case reports mentioned earlier, additional data revealed that the most common causes of maternal arrest requiring to PMCS were trauma, pulmonary embolism, cardiac causes, sepsis, and eclampsia. In the Netherlands, a retrospective questionnaire and medical survey review over 15 years (1993 through 2008), revealed 55 pregnant patients who suffered cardiac arrest, and only 12 (22%) of them had a PMCS.