Patients with Volkmann ischemic contracture have a typical history and physical examination. A displaced supracondylar fracture of the humerus is the most commonly associated injury with Volkmann contracture of the forearm. The key signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome develop well before the actual contracture and fibrosis of the muscles. Pain is the initial symptom, followed by pallor, pulselessness, paresthesias, and paralysis: commonly referred to as the 5 Ps of compartment syndrome.

Volkmann contracture can be classified according to the Tsuge system into three grades: mild, moderate, and severe.****

**Mild**

This is a localized type of contracture in which only parts of the flexor digitorum profundus are affected. It commonly presents as flexion of a limited number of fingers, 2 or 3, usually involving the middle and ring fingers. Sensory loss is minimal, if at all present.

**Moderate**

This is a classic type of contracture in which flexor digitorum profundus and flexor pollicis longus are primarily involved. Superficial muscles such as flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, and flexor carpi radialis may also be affected. Fibrosis of the mentioned muscles leads to a typical claw hand picture, which presents as flexion of all five digits as well as the wrist. Sensory impairment in regions of the median and the ulnar nerve is also common.

**Severe**

This type of contracture develops in extreme cases and presents as the involvement of both flexors and extensors. This results in severely distorted contractures with pronounced sensory deficits. Long-standing moderate Volkmann contractures have the potential of eventually developing into severe Volkmann contractures.