The pathophysiology of Capgras syndrome lacks clarity due to its rare nature. Coltheart et al. described a dual factorial hypothesis of the delusional belief validated by the brain's imaging studies. The first prevents familiar faces from inducing an emotional response, while the second controls the ability to reject the delusional belief.

Undesirable effects from the right hemisphere and frontal lobe dysfunction result in low self-monitoring, ego boundaries, and familiarity with stimuli. Lesions on the bifrontal or right hemisphere cause a disconnection between the frontal lobes and the right temporal-limbic lobes or system, essential for the reconciliation of information about the self-identification of the subject.

**Psychodynamics of Capgras Syndrome**

In a review of the first five case reports of CS, Capgras noted that each case was distinct, and no single pattern emerged. The study revealed that the doubles were always of people tied to the patient with strong affective ties.

In their early studies in the 1920s, Capgras and Carrette discussed oedipal problems in women. They stated that this syndrome does not occur in men and that it was peculiar in women. Capgras also found feelings of strangeness in a few cases. Mechanisms suggested by many hypotheses by Capgras showed that a patient becomes aware of changes in their responses to significant persons in their lives. These dynamic changes may occur as a result of genuine changes in the other person.

Berson stated that psychodynamic explanations cluster around four primary themes that emphasize oedipal problems, feelings of strangeness, problems with ambivalence, and pathological splitting of internalized object representations.

**Violence in Capgras Syndrome**

A previous study has shown associations between CS with aggression and homicide.