**Medications**

The ideal agent for PPS depends on the level of sedation needed for the procedure based on the amount of perceived pain or discomfort encountered during the procedure. The agent of choice should provide adequate analgesia, sedation, and anesthesia with quick onset and short duration to allow the performance of a procedure with quick recovery and discharge. PPS can vary from anxiolysis for nonpainful procedures to sedation for painful procedures, and the agent of choice should reflect the goals of sedation. Benzodiazepines, ketamine, propofol, ketamine with propofol, nitrous oxide, and etomidate are all well-studied agents used in PPS.

For nonpainful procedures, pediatric patients often need anxiolysis alone, and benzodiazepines with concomitant emotional and physical support are often effective for most pediatric patients. For minor painful procedures such as cleaning wounds or laceration repair, moderate analgesia and anxiolysis are required. Regimens include intranasal fentanyl or dexmedetomidine, nitrous oxide, and sub-dissociative dose ketamine. For major painful procedures such as fracture or dislocation reduction, the goal is dissociative amnesia that provides amnesia and analgesia.

**Nonpainful Procedures**

Midazolam

- Dose: PO/PR 0.5 milligrams/kg.  IV/IM 0.05 to 0.1 milligrams/kg (maximum 6 mg/dose).  Intranasal 0.3 to 0.5 milligrams/kg (maximum 10 mg/dose)

- Onset: PO/PR 20 to 30 min.  IV 3 to 5 min. IM 10 to 20 min.  Intranasal 5 to 10 min. Note: oral/rectal administration has a slow onset and is less predictable.

- Duration: 0.5 to 2 hours

- Comments: It functions as an anxiolytic. Midazolam solutions are acidic and intranasal administration is associated with stinging pain and can cause increased secretions.  Midazolam should be prepared in 1mg/ml solution for children less than 15 kg in body weight, where solutions that greater than 1 mg/mL are not recommended.

Pentobarbital

- Dose: PO 3 to 5 milligrams/kg

- Onset: 30 minutes

- Duration: variable

- Comments: Works as a sedative. No analgesia. Variable efficacy. Long recovery times.

Nitrous Oxide

- Dose: Inhaled starting at 100% O2 and increasing concentration nitrous oxide to effect.  Maximum 70% nitrous oxide/30% O2 ratio.

- Onset: 30 seconds (peak effect 3 to 5 minutes)

- Duration: Effects decrease 70% 3 minutes after discontinuation

- Comments: Dissociative, contraindicated with pneumothorax, bowel obstruction, and increased intracranial pressure. Associated with nausea and dysphoria. Teratogenic, contraindicated in pregnancy. It can also be used for some minor painful procedures, including laceration repair, dental procedures, and lumbar puncture.

**Minor Painful Procedures**

Fentanyl

- Dose: Intranasal 1.5 micrograms/kg (maximum 0.5 mL per nare)

- Onset: 10 minutes

- Duration: 20 minutes

- Comments: Works as an analgesic. Equivalent to IV morphine. Little to no adverse effects. Advantage of being short-lived.

Subdissociative dose ketamine

- Dose: IV 0.3 milligrams/kg IV.  Intranasal 1 milligram/kg

- Onset: Variable

- Duration: 60 minutes

- Comments: Analgesic and amnestic without full dissociation at the above dose. Subdissociative doses are sufficient for minor procedures such as laceration repair or abscess drainage but not sufficient for major painful procedures.

Dexmedetomidine

- Dose: Intranasal 0.5 to 2 micrograms/kg

- Onset: 25 minutes

- Duration: 85 minutes

- Comments: Hypnotic and sedative. Longer time to onset and longer duration than other agents. No respiratory or hemodynamic compromise.

**Major Painful Procedures**

Propofol

- Dose: IV 1 to 2 milligrams/kg, followed by repeat doses of 0.5 milligrams/kg as needed

- Onset: Seconds

- Duration: 6 minutes

- Comments: Hypnotic, sedative. No analgesia. Rapid onset with short duration of action producing motionless anesthesia. Causes respiratory and cardiovascular depression. Increased dosing requirement for younger patients.  Causes burning pain at the injection site.

Etomidate

- Dose: IV 0.2 to 0.3 milligrams/kg

- Onset: Seconds

- Duration: 5 to 15 minutes

- Comments: Hypnotic, sedative.  No analgesia. Causes cardiovascular and respiratory depression. Avoid in patients with increased muscle tone (e.g., cerebral palsy) due to the risk of myoclonic jerks.

Ketamine

- Dose: IV 1 to 1.5 milligrams/kg.  IM 4 to 5 milligrams/kg

- Onset: IV 1 to 2 min. IM 3 to 5 min

- Duration: IV 15 minutes. IM 30 to 45 minutes

- Comments: Works as a dissociative analgesic agent with motionless anesthesia. Respiratory and cardiovascular stimulant. Acts as a bronchodilator. Can cause increased intraocular pressure, intracranial pressure, salivation, and laryngospasm. The risk of airway obstruction, apnea, and laryngospasm is higher in infants <3 months, so patient age under 3 months is an absolute contraindication to ketamine use. It is emetogenic. Consider pretreatment with ondansetron. Midazolam coadministration does not reduce the risk of emergence agitation.

Propofol + Ketamine

- Dose: IV Propofol 1 milligram/kg, Ketamine 0.5 milligram/kg

- Onset: 1 minute

- Duration: Propofol minutes; Ketamine 15 to 45 minutes

- Comments: Decreased dosing requirement of both agents. Lessens respiratory and cardiovascular depression, emetogenesis. Increased risk of oxygen desaturation compared to ketamine as a single agent.

**Reversal Agents**

Naloxone

- Dose: Infants and children <5 years old or <20 kg: IV 0.1 milligrams/kg/dose, IM 0.1 milligram/kg/dose; Children >5 years old or >20 kg: IV 2 milligrams/dose, IM 2 millgrams/dose.  Infants, children, and adolescents: intranasal 4 mg, endotracheal 2 to 3 times the IV dose

- Onset: One minute

- Duration: 15 to 30 minutes

- Comments: Opiate reversal. The dose can be repeated every two to three minutes to effect.  May need to repeat doses every 20 to 60 minutes if the duration of action of opioid used is longer than naloxone. The onset of action is slightly delayed in intranasal administration.

Flumazenil

- Dose: IV 0.01 milligrams/kg (maximum dose 0.2 mg) given over 15 seconds. May repeat dose after 45 seconds, then every minute to a maximum total cumulative dose of 0.05 milligrams/kg or 1 mg

- Onset: One minute

- Duration: 45 minutes

- Comments: Benzodiazepine reversal. Avoid use in chronic benzodiazepine users as it can induce seizures.

After the procedure, the patient should be monitored until recovery is complete and they resume the pre-sedation level of consciousness.