The management of rashes in the pediatric population requires an interprofessional team. There are many causes of rashes in infants, and the presentation is diverse. Thus, when in doubt, the primary care clinicians and nurses should refer these patients to a pediatrician or a dermatologist. Not all rashes that occur in the perineum area are due to candida and delays in diagnosis and treatment only lead to more morbidity.

Laboratory technicians need to be included in the healthcare team to enhance healthcare team outcomes while treating PSD. With routine perineal swabs, laboratories may plate the specimen on MacConkey agar in search of enteric stool pathogens. This medium will not grow GABHS and will miss the diagnosis of PSD. Therefore, the clinician needs to communicate with the laboratory to search for GABHS and ensure the laboratory plates the specimen on blood agar. This simple communication will minimize an unnecessary delay in identifying the causative organism and therefore, any delay in treatment.

Nursing and pharmacy both play an essential role in the management of perianal streptococcal dermatitis. Nursing can administer medication and also counsel patients and parents about applying topical agents properly. The pharmacist can also consult on appropriate antimicrobial agent selection and also offer additional patient (parental) counseling on drug therapy. Both nursing and pharmacy need an open communication channel with the treating clinician to report any concerns they may have. Only with this type of open and collaborative interprofessional team approach can the management of perianal streptococcal dermatitis offer the best patient outcomes. [Level 5]