Hyperphosphatemia, in general, can be caused due to:

- Excessive phosphate load

- Decreased renal excretion

- Transcellular shifting

- Hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypoparathyroidism

1. **Excessive phosphate load:**

An acute increase in phosphate load can be due to exogenous or endogenous causes. Phosphate being the major intracellular anion, massive tissue breakdown due to any cause can lead to the release of intracellular phosphate into the extracellular fluid. Massive tissue breakdown can result from rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis syndrome, or severe hemolysis.

- **Tumor lysis syndrome:**Tumor lysis syndrome is caused mostly due to cytotoxic therapy in patients with conditions of rapid cell turnover, such as lymphomas and leukemias. Lysis of cells leads to the release of phosphate, causing hyperphosphatemia, accompanied by hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia, and hypocalcemia.

- **Exogenous phosphate:**This is most commonly due to the ingestion of large amounts of phosphate-containing laxatives.

- **Vitamin D Intoxication:**Vitamin D intoxication increases intestinal absorption of dietary phosphate and calcium.

2. **Decreased renal excretion:**

As discussed above, 90% of daily phosphate load gets excreted by kidneys; a decrease in renal function causes decreased secretion and increased retention of phosphate.

High serum phosphate levels are seen only in the late stages of chronic kidney disease. Activation of compensatory mechanisms, including an increase in fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) and parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion, prevent an increase in serum phosphate during the early stages of CKD. Both FGF 23 and PTH increase fractional excretion of phosphate per functioning nephron, compensating for the progressive loss of functioning nephron mass. As CKD progresses, these mechanisms are unable to overcome the input of phosphate from dietary intake, leading to hyperphosphatemia.

Renal failure also results in reduced synthesis of calcitriol and secondary hyperparathyroidism, causing increased osteoclastic bone reabsorption and release of calcium and phosphate into the circulation. Metabolic acidosis in renal failure can also contribute to hyperphosphataemia by the cellular shift of phosphate from cells.

**Tumor Calcinosis**: Tumoral calcinosis is a rare syndrome characterized by calcium salt deposition in different periarticular soft tissue regions.  It primarily manifests during childhood or adolescence as painless, firm, tumor-like masses around the joints such as hips, shoulders, and elbows.  They can also present with painful hyperostosis in the long bones, e.g., the tibia. Recessive mutations in UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosamine: polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferase 3 (GALNT3) and  fgf23 cause deficiency ofFGF23, reducing renal phosphate excretion and causing hyperphosphatemia. Mutations in Klotho results in FGF23 resistance resulting in decreased activity and hyperphosphatemia.

GALNT3 is responsible for the O-glycosylation of FGF23, which is essential for the secretion of biologically active intact FGF23. Homozygous or compound heterozygous GALNT3 mutations result in defects in the post-translational modification of FGF23, producing tumoral calcinosis. Mutations in the FGF23 coreceptor alpha-Klotho gene lead to end-organ resistance to  FGF23.

**3. Transcellular shift:**Lactic acidosis and diabetic ketoacidosis can rarely cause massive cellular shifts of phosphate out of the cells.

**4. Pseudohypoparathyroidism****(PHP):**This is a rare condition characterized by a  resistance to PTH at its receptor. Its manifestations include low serum calcium, high serum phosphate, and inappropriately high PTH levels.

PTH resistance can result from impaired cAMP generation, accelerated cAMP degradation, or impaired cAMP-dependent protein kinase activation. Impaired production of cAMP and the defects in the Gsa protein, which couples PTH1Receptor to adenylyl cyclase, are most common. As this signal transduction pathway is used by many G-protein–coupled receptors(GPCRs), reduced responsiveness to numerous other hormones, including thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), is also seen.

**Hypoparathyroidism:**This is a rare disease that results in hypocalcemia. The most common cause is an injury to or removal of the parathyroid gland during anterior neck surgery. Symptoms include paresthesias, muscle cramps, seizures, and laryngospasm.

It can also result from mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) gene resulting in hypoparathyroidism, mucocutaneous candidiasis, adrenal insufficiency, and malabsorption. AIRE plays a role in shaping central immunological tolerance by building the thymic microarchitecture, facilitating the negative selection of T cells in the thymus, and inducing a specific subset of regulatory T cells.  The mutation in this gene leads to a form of hypoparathyroidism called autoimmune polyglandular failure type 1 (APS1), also called autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). In this disease, hypoparathyroidism is usually the first of multiple autoimmune endocrine disorders to appear.****

**Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO):**Defects include short stature, shortened fourth metacarpals and other bones of the hands and feet, rounded face, obesity, dental hypoplasia, and soft-tissue calcifications/ossifications and cognitive impairment. Patients with Pseudohypoparathyroidism have AHO and PTH resistance resulting in hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Patients with pseudo-pseudo hypoparathyroidism (pseudo PHP) have an AHO phenotype but no impairment in mineral metabolism, i.e., normal calcium and phosphate levels.