Patient-centered care involves the patient in preoperative discussion in proposed decision making. Educating patients preoperatively may aid in decision making to manage post-operative expectations. General Surgeons see and manage the majority of patients with anal fistula; however, involving a colorectal surgeon in complex cases is essential as they are trained more specifically in these conditions than the general surgeon. For example, ACGME requirements for graduation of general surgery residents only require a total of 20 anorectal procedures, however, accredited colorectal surgery fellowships require a total of 60 anorectal procedures including 20 fistula procedures.

Colorectal surgeons are also trained in the treatment of fecal incontinence and thus are better equipped to diagnose and treat this potentially preventable complication. There is evidence that the care of anal fistulas in patients with Crohn disease is improved when a multidisciplinary team is utilized as these patients often have difficulty obtaining their required medications and other issues with care.

A Cochrane review published in 2010 showed the concomitant fistula treatment at the time of incision and drainage of abscess decreased persistence of fistula or abscess without an increase in complications. There is a shortage of evidence of comprehensive care for fistulas that are not secondary to Crohn disease, but with improved imaging techniques and the knowledge that MRI may change operative outcomes, coordination between surgeons and radiologists is becoming essential in effective planning for patients with complex disease.