The typical presentation of RP involves complaints of visual disturbances beginning early in life. Usually, this includes a relatively vague sense of being unable to see well in low-light situations or those requiring rapid adaptation from light to dim environments. Some individuals note difficulty driving at night, as oncoming headlights and other sources of bright light in the environment make it difficult for them to readjust to the darkness afterward. Narrowing of the visual fields is not initially obvious but will become apparent over time.

A genetic pedigree for the patient's family will be critical to determine the type of inheritance pattern and assist with prognosis. A complete history and review of systems are needed to identify other systems affected in addition to the visual impairment to identify syndromic variants of RP. Additionally, a review of possible exposure to infectious diseases or toxins that might produce a "mimic" of the disease should be undertaken.

Physical findings include the "classic triad" seen on a fundoscopic exam of bony spicule pigmentation, vascular narrowing, and abnormal pallor of the optic disc. These may not be evident early in the disease, and the degree to which abnormalities are seen is variable with the severity of the disease. Other associated physical findings may include subcapsular cataracts and macular edema. While the external examination of the eye is usually normal, RP patients are at higher risk for keratoconus compared to the general population. Still, the development of keratoconus is quite rare.