Intra-arterial opacification of approximately 250 Hounsfield units is typically required for diagnostic CCTAs. An injection rate of 5 cc to 7 cc per second is sufficient for most adults to achieve this level, often using a total of 50 cc to 120 cc of iodinated contrast.

Biphasic injection protocols involve the injection of contrast followed by saline. This technique minimizes streak artifact from high concentrations of contrast on the right side of the heart. If images of right-heart structures are also desired, triphasic injection protocols can be used where contrast, contrast-saline, and saline are injected sequentially.

Several techniques can be employed to reduce patient radiation exposure during CCTA while maintaining diagnostic accuracy. Setting a scan range limits radiation exposure to only the structures being examined. In the case of CCTA, the scan range is typically the inferior aspect of the tracheal bifurcation to the lower cardiac border. Tube potential relates to the energy of the x-ray beam used during the CT scan. Typical adult CCTA protocols will use 100 kV to 120 kV. Higher tube potentials result in enhanced tissue penetration and reduced image noise, as the cost of significantly increased radiation exposure. Tube currently relates to the number of photons per unit of time. Increasing tube current can also reduce image noise, which may be necessary for larger patients, but also results in increased radiation exposure. Anatomy-based tube current modulation techniques can selectively adjust tube current when the x-ray beam is directed through less dense tissue, such as lungs, reducing radiation exposure. ECG-based tube current modulation uses ECG triggers to reduce tube current during phases of the cardiac cycle where cardiac motion is most prominent, typically early and mid-systole. During these phases motion artifacts are more common, reducing the CCTA’s diagnostic sensitivity.

Newer data acquisition techniques attempt to minimize patient exposure to ionizing radiation while preserving diagnostic accuracy.  Prospective ECG triggered acquisition is preferred in patients with controlled heart rates. Using the patient’s ECG, the x-ray tube is only activated during mid-diastole. At sub-optimal heart rates, end-systole can also be used. This results in significant patient radiation exposure reduction at the cost of also reducing the available diagnostic data set.  In patients with irregular heart rhythms or high heart rates, retrospective ECG gating can be used. In this technique, data are obtained during the entire cardiac cycle, but images are only generated from pre-determined portions of the cardiac cycle.

Scan protocols for CCTA are fairly standardized. The first image obtained is typically an anterior-posterior scout image that allows the determination of the scan range. The next stage involves non-contrast-enhanced image acquisition for the determination of a CAC. Finally, if the patient’s heart rate is adequately controlled, contrast-enhanced images are obtained using a prospective ECG-gated method, where possible.