The Pecs I block is performed with the patient supine, with the patient's arm next to the body or abducted 90 degrees. The coracoid process is located on ultrasound in the paramedian sagittal plane. The caudal border of the transducer can then be rotated laterally to allow for an in-plane needle trajectory. This rotation also allows for visualization of the pectoral branch of the thoracoacromial artery. The correct interfascial plane is confirmed by the opening of the space between the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor. The recommended volume is 0.2 mL/kg of a 0.25% bupivacaine or 0.5% ropivacaine.

The Pecs II block is performed with the patient in the same position as the Pecs I block. The first injection is identical to a Pecs I block, whereas the second injection is made at the level of the fourth rib. The transducer is placed at the midclavicular line and angled inferolaterally to visualize the axillary artery, axillary vein, and second rib. The transducer is then moved laterally until the pectoralis minor muscle, and serratus anterior muscle are identified. The transducer is then moved further laterally so the third and fourth rib can then be identified. The local anesthetic is then deposited in two separate interfascial places. The first injection of approximately 0.2 mL/kg of 0.25% bupivacaine or 0.5% ropivacaine is deposited between the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor. The needle then gets advanced using ultrasound guidance, and the second injection of 0.2 mL/kg of 0.25% bupivacaine or 0.5% ropivacaine is made between the pectoralis minor and serratus anterior. The depth is usually 1 to 3 cm for the interfascial plane between the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor,  and 3 to 6 cm for the interfascial plane between the pectoralis minor and serratus anterior.

The local anesthetic for the blocks should be injected in 5 cc increments, with aspiration after each 5 cc to avoid intravascular injection. Catheters can be placed in the interfascial planes if prolonged postoperative pain is expected. Approximately 10 cm of the catheter should be advanced into the space to avoid inadvertent dislodgement of the catheter. The last 10cc can be injected through the catheter to confirm that the catheter is correctly positioned and not intravascular.

The Pecs II block is also possible by targeting the deeper interfascial plane first, injecting between the pectoralis minor and serratus anterior, then withdrawing the needle to the more superficial interfacial plane, injecting between the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor.