M. chelonae is a nonmotile, non-spore-forming, gram-positive, acid-fast bacillus. It is a large bacillus with a beaded appearance. M. chelonae is a non-chromogen and classified under group IV of Runyon classification. It is grouped in M. chelonae/M. abscessus group among the six groups of rapidly growing mycobacterium. While rapid growers form colonies in seven days, M. chelonae colonies take longer with a mean incubation period of 15 days and may take up to six to eight weeks. M. chelonae grows best at 30-32° C. Other mycobacterial in the same group as M. chelonae are M. abscessus and its three subspecies. Biochemically, M chelonae are nitrate negative, do not tolerate 5% NaCl, and fail to turn dark brown when grown on ferric ammonium citrate (iron uptake). M. chelonae and M. abscessus can be separated biochemically by the utilization of the citrate (4). M. chelonae is 100% citrate positive unlike M. abscessus, which is 80% citrate negative. M. chelonae is catalase positive and oxidase negative. The biochemical methods are inadequate for clinical use. Currently, molecular techniques are frequently used for the diagnosis of atypical mycobacterial infection.

M. chelonae is one of the most pathogenic rapidly growing mycobacteria (RGM). In immunocompetent patients, the most common clinical scenario is the localized skin infections, infection after an invasive procedure, or catheter-related infection. Pulmonary infections due to M. chelonae are rare, but colonization is common in cystic fibrosis patients. Disseminated and invasive infections are seen in immunocompromised patients. Person to person transmission has not been documented.Cervical lymphadenitis in children can occur but is rare. Mycobacterium avium intracellulare and Mycobacterium hemophilum are more frequently associated with cervical lymphadenitis in children compared to M chelonae.