Thiazide diuretics exert their diuretic effect via blockage of the sodium-chloride (Na/Cl) channel in the proximal segment of the distal convoluted tubule (DCT). When the Na/Cl channel is blocked, decreased levels of sodium cross the luminal membrane, thus decreasing the action of the sodium-potassium (Na/K) pump and decreasing Na and water passage to the interstitium.

The method of activation of thiazide diuretics is to cause a change in Na concentration distal to the DCT. Subsequently, ionic channels and pumps work to balance disrupted Na levels. This secondary change to balance Na levels produces many adverse effects. The MOA and its effects on the nephron will be more thoroughly discussed below and will be referred to in the adverse effects section.

The blockage of the Na/Cl channel causes an increase in sodium and water retention in the lumen and a decrease in Na in the DCT.  At the same time, blockage of the Na/Cl channel increases the flow of ions through the Na/Ca channel, resulting in increased calcium reabsorption into the interstitium in exchange for Na return to the DCT.

Inhibition of the Na/Cl channel in the proximal segment of the distal convoluted tubule results in increased delivery of sodium to the distal segment of the distal convoluted tubule and collecting tubule. This increase in Na increase causes the aldosterone-sensitive Na/K pump to increase sodium reabsorption in the principal cells. This exchange increases Na transfer into the interstitium and increases K transfer into the collecting tubules and lumen. This loss of K then causes intercalated cells in the collecting tubule (CT) to increase K reabsorption via the K/H+ pump and is also aldosterone-mediated.

Through aldosterone-mediated sodium retention that is precipitated by an increased Na flow to the CT, the CT will exhibit increased reabsorption of Na and excretion of both K and H ions into the urine.