Procainamide is a medication used to manage and treat ventricular arrhythmias, supraventricular arrhythmias, atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation, AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia, and Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome. It is a Class 1A antiarrhythmic agent.  This activity reviews the literature, indications, action, and contraindications for procainamide as a valuable agent in the treatment of arrhythmias.

Procainamide was initially approved by the US FDA in 1950 and fell out of favor due to its side effect profile and the development of newer antiarrhythmics. Procainamide usage has increased in recent years, and it is now seen as a viable option for several arrhythmias.

Procainamide has been used for chemical cardioversion in atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation. These are common arrhythmias seen in emergency department patients, but there is no consensus for optimal management. Stiell et al. looked at the usage of IV procainamide in 341 patients over five years. Adverse events were infrequent and included hypotension, bradycardia, atrioventricular block, and ventricular tachycardia. There were no cases of torsades de pointes, cerebrovascular accidents, or death. Most patients (94.4%) received a discharge to home. IV procainamide had a 52% conversion rate of atrial fibrillation to normal sinus and a 28% conversion rate from atrial flutter to normal sinus.

One recent major study looked at the difference between amiodarone and procainamide in stable ventricular tachycardia. The PROCAMIO study has concluded that in patients with stable ventricular tachycardia, procainamide should be considered over the traditionally used amiodarone due to faster resolution of the arrhythmia, fewer major cardiac events, and is more efficacious in a subgroup of patients with structural heart disease.

Researchers have also studied the utility of procainamide compared to lidocaine in terminating sustained ventricular tachycardia in patients with structural heart defects. In this retrospective study from Circulation Journal, procainamide was found to be more effective than lidocaine in the termination of the arrhythmia.

Procainamide is indicated in patients with Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome as it is important for acute termination of antidromic AV re-entrant tachycardia in stable patients. In particular, because the use of an AV nodal blocking agent in this patient population may enhance conduction down the accessory pathway and therefore induce ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation.

Procainamide has also historically been used in diagnostic testing for Brugada syndrome; this was known as the “procainamide challenge,” which produces the standard Brugada-like pattern on ECG, which may have been otherwise unnoticed and thus identifying patients at risk for sudden cardiac death. However, this usage has fallen out of favor, as it has low sensitivity for detecting Brugada-like patterns and may also put the patient at risk of going into ventricular arrhythmia.