Imaging plays an essential role in the diagnosis and management of bicornuate uterus. There are multiple modalities available for this purpose which are as follows-

- **Hysterosalpingography**- This is the most seasoned and most broadly utilized method for assessment of an instance of infertility. During hysterosalpingography, an oil or water-based contrast is infused through an endocervical catheter into the uterine cavity. This contrast opacifies the uterus and will portray the endometrial orifice of the uterus. Under fluoroscopic direction, different pictures of the uterus and uterine tubes are taken, which can help in surveying the endometrial cavity, patency of the fallopian tubes, and sophisticated communications with Mullerian anomalies. While applying to the conclusion of bicornuate uterus, the intercornual angle is estimated. If two horns of uterus are evident with an intercornual point more noteworthy than 105 degrees, it is named as the bicornuate uterus.

- **Ultrasound**-This is the mainline imaging performed when a patient first visits the facility; it is reasonable and noninvasive with no introduction to radiation. 2D ultrasonography is accessible at each training; however, 3D ultrasonography is increasingly precise and reliable. 3D ultrasonography has a sensitivity of 99% and specificity of 100% in the separation of the bicornuate uterus from the septate uterus. Another examination done saw 3D ultrasonography as profoundly dependable. A progression of 2D pictures is taken during ultrasonography to make a 3D volume of the uterus. Coronal views are the most significant as they give data about the endometrial pit alongside the serosal surface of the uterus. The serosal surface appraisal assumes a remarkable job in the separation of the septate uterus from the bicornuate uterus. Z strategy is the most dominating method used to acquire midcoronal views.

- **MRI**- MRI It is the best quality level for the conclusion of the bicornuate uterus because of its noninvasiveness, absence of radiations, and producing pictures in numerous planes. It is equipped for giving data about the uterine structure and its fundal surface, the anatomy of the vagina, cervix, along the entire pelvis. A precise methodology has been formulated for differential diagnosis of Mullerian peculiarities in MRI. The initial phase in this procedure is to decide whether Mullerian hypoplasia is available. With hypoplasia, the differential can be Mayer Rokitansky Kuster syndrome or unicornuate uterus. If no hypoplasia is seen, the subsequent stage is an evaluation of the uterine fundal form. On the off chance that a split more than10 mm is found in the fundus, it is a fusion anomaly (bicornuate/didelphys uterus). Be that as it may, with parted less than 10 mm, it focuses on a resorption peculiarity (septate/arcuate uterus). Further separation among bicornuate and didelphys uterus is finished by taking a look at the tissue between two horns. If it is available, the uterus is bicornuate, while its nonattendance focuses on didelphys uterus. Twofold cervix shows up as owl eyes on MRI in bicornuate bicollis uterus.