Angiogenesis begins at day 17 of embryo life at the splanchnic mesoderm of yolk sac wall, and later the paraxial mesoderm as vasculogenesis progresses. The process initiates with hemangioblasts, which divide into two categories: primitive hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) and endothelial precursor cells (EPCs, or otherwise known as angioblasts). Hematopoiesis begins at the yolk sac of extraembryonic mesoderm, and flattened EPCs initiate vasculogenesis at the embryonic discs. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) arise from intraembryonic splanchnic mesoderm as blood islands then join the liver for expansion before relocating to bone marrow and other lymphatic organs as the embryo matures. The products eventually flow to vessels known as arteries, veins, and capillaries.

EPCs form the “tubes” or vessels that eventually become arteries and veins through which blood can circulate. They develop and differentiate based on the factors excreted by EPC cells. Vessels form via angiogenesis and vasculogenesis. Flattened EPCs form, migrate, and coalesce in the process of vasculogenesis. The cells then bud and sprout to new vessels from existing endothelial cords in the process of angiogenesis. Vascular intussusception then occurs to separate the blood vessels, and finally, existing vessels are walled off via intercalation.

As angiogenesis is taking place, a primitive heart tube begins to form at day 18 as well. By week 4, body folding carries the primitive heart tubes to ventral thorax while the aortic arches start to develop and elongate in a craniocaudal succession. Of importance to note is the dorsal aorta outflow tract bilaterally that fuses midline by the end of the fourth week. Dorsal aorta eventually develops ventral, lateral, and posterolateral branches.

The ventral branches are significant for the vitelline system in the yolk sac wall and are divided to the abdominal foregut, midgut, and hindgut and mature into the body’s gastrointestinal arteries. Lateral branches of the descending dorsal aorta become vasculature supplying suprarenal glands, gonads, and kidneys. Posterolaterally, vasculogenesis occurs from paraxial mesoderm located between developing somites and eventually fuses with dorsal aorta. These branches are known as intersegmental branches and are visible along cervical, thoracic, and lumbar region by the end of the third week of embryology development. Some examples of intersegmental vessels include intercostal and vertebral arteries and veins. Intersegmental vessels then continue to expand its network to form multiple anastomoses with each other through the process of vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Among these numerous anastomoses of the intersegmental vessels are the internal thoracic, superior and inferior epigastric arteries and veins.