There is no longer any question that breastfeeding has many health benefits for both the mother and the infant. In fact, the WHO recommends exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life and, if possible, continue breastfeeding to age 18 months. Unfortunately, many women stop breastfeeding in the postpartum period because of the development of breast abscesses. The treatment of a breast abscess is usually with antibiotics, image-based aspiration, or incision and drainage.

While a breast abscess may sound like a trivial localized infection, there are no standard guidelines on its management. With the specialization of breast surgeons, many patients are needlessly admitted to the hospital and undergo unnecessary surgical procedures. Further, because of the nonuniformity in management, recurrence rates of breast abscess are also high. Because of nonuniformity in managing these patients, the outcomes also vary.

- A radiologist to help make the diagnosis through imaging and perhaps aspirate the abscess

- Consult with a general surgeon on the management of a multiloculated abscess

- Infectious disease and pharmacist consultation to determine the choice of antibiotics

- Lactation nurse to educate the patient on nipple hygiene, hand washing, and preventing engorgement of the breast

- Nurse practitioners monitor the patient in an outpatient setting to ensure that the breast abscess is resolving. If the condition persists, one should always consider ruling out infection, malignancy, or a granulomatous disorder.

With an interprofessional approach to management, the treatment for a breast abscess can be optimized as an outpatient, leading to lower healthcare costs. In addition, the risks of missing an unknown breast mass like cancer are also reduced because the patient is seen and examined by a team of healthcare professionals.

**Outcomes and Evidence-based Medicine**

Because of the heterogeneity in management methods of breast abscess, there is, in fact, not enough data to state if needle aspiration is a better option than incision and drainage for a breast abscess. In addition, it is not known if an antibiotic should always be administered to women undergoing incision and drainage or aspiration. The few case series available reveal that the outcome for most women is excellent with any of these methods, but it is not known which is superior. However, with all three methods, recurrence of breast abscess is common. Thus, it is highly recommended that a standardized interprofessional approach be developed to manage breast abscess, lower the rates of recurrence, and improve outcomes.

With the lack of evidence-based medicine, it is important to err on the side of aspiration and prevent the empirical prescribing of antibiotics. Surgery should only be a last resort option in complex cases.