Dyslipidemia is a silent disease in most patients, and primary care providers should be conducting universal dyslipidemia screening. Nursing staff and doctors obtaining history should ask directed questions to obtain family history that might suggest genetic dyslipidemia and identify higher-risk populations. With the childhood obesity epidemic, screening for lipid disorders is crucial.

A coordinated interprofessional healthcare team is an approach best-suited to addressing familial dyslipidemia in children and pre-adults. Once dyslipidemia is identified and confirmed, appropriate referrals to a nutritionist for dietary changes, along with appropriate counseling for lifestyle changes, such as increased exercise and cessation of smoking and alcohol, are recommended.

If the lipid disorder persists and needs pharmacotherapy, referrals to a pediatric endocrinologist or lipidologist should be made. A pharmacist can also provide input to the patient and interprofessional team on possible medication interventions based on the specifics of the case.

Patients with dyslipidemia benefit from multidisciplinary team care, which includes their primary care doctor, nutritionist, cardiologist, and lipidologist/endocrinologist. Patient education regarding appropriate diet, medication, medication adverse effects, physical activity, and routine lab monitoring is crucial, and interprofessional measures, including nursing staff, dieticians, and pharmacists, are essential to case management.

All clinicians and other interprofessional team members are responsible for documenting all interactions and interventions with the patient in the medical record, so everyone managing the case has access to the same accurate and up-to-date information. If any team members note any concerns, they must be at liberty to contact other team members to ensure proper patient care and the best outcomes possible. [Level 5]