Pathology related to testosterone involves either over-production, under-production, receptor insensitivity, or impaired metabolism of testosterone. The following are a few of the more common and highly tested testosterone pathologies.

Over-production of androgens can occur in the following conditions: polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), adrenal virilization/adrenal tumors, ovarian or testicular tumors, Cushing syndrome, and as a result of exogenous steroid use. To better understand some of these pathologies it is important to note the differences between testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). DHEA is a relatively weak androgen produced by the adrenals and ovaries/testes. DHEA serves as a precursor for other hormones including testosterone and estrogen. The sulfated form of DHEA, DHEAS, is specific for the adrenal glands. In polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), abnormal gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion leads to an increase in LH secretion. LH stimulates androgen production by ovarian theca cells which leads to hirsutism, male escutcheon, acne and androgenic alopecia in women affected with PCOS.

Decreased production of testosterone can occur with aging, certain medications, chemotherapy, hypothalamus-pituitary axis disorders, primary hypogonadism, cryptorchidism and orchitis, and with genetic disorders such as Klinefelter and Kallmann syndrome. Klinefelter syndrome is the most common congenital abnormality that results in primary hypogonadism. In Klinefelter, there is dysgenesis of seminiferous tubules and loss of Sertoli cells which leads to a decrease in inhibin levels and a resultant increase in FSH. FSH upregulates aromatase leading to increased conversion of androgens to estrogens. In Klinefelter, there is also Leydig cell dysfunction which leads to decreased testosterone levels and an increase in LH due to loss of negative feedback. In Kallmann syndrome, failed migration of GnRH-producing neurons leads to lack of GnRH. No GnRH results in a decrease in LH, FSH, testosterone, and sperm count. Specific to Kallmann syndrome, in comparison to other causes of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, is defects in the sensation of smell (hyposmia or anosmia).

5-alpha reductase is an enzyme that converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. Male patients with 5-alpha reductase deficiency present with normal female or male genitalia or ambiguous genitalia at birth due to lack of dihydrotestosterone. These patients have a male internal urogenital tract (anti-Mullerian hormone is still present). At puberty, adolescents with this enzyme deficiency, who may have been raised as girls due to lack of secondary male characteristics, begin to develop male secondary sex characteristics and have primary amenorrhea. These patients will have normal testosterone and LH, low DHT, and an increased testosterone-to-DHT ratio. In contrast to 5-alpha reductase deficiency, androgen insensitivity is a condition in which patients lack functional androgen receptors resulting in under-virilization. These patients, like those with 5-alpha reductase deficiency, have a 46 XY karyotype. In contrast, however, these patients have normal female external genitalia and usually undescended testes. In adolescence, they experience primary amenorrhea and breast development but have no pubic or axillary hair and lack the deepening voice changes that occur with puberty. They will have a blind vaginal pouch and abnormal internal reproductive organs (fallopian tubes, uterus, and the upper portion of the vagina) due to the production of the Mullerian inhibiting factor. These patients will have high levels of testosterone and LH.

Impaired testosterone metabolism can occur in certain cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). In classic CAH (95% of cases), due to 21 hydroxylase deficiency, newborns usually present with ambiguous genitalia and later develop salt wasting, vomiting, hypotension, and acidosis. A marked increase in 17-hydroxyprogesterone is diverted towards adrenal androgen synthesis and leads to hyperandrogenism. Hyperandrogenism impairs hypothalamic sensitivity to progesterone leading to a rapid rise in GnRH synthesis and thus increased LH and FSH. Elevations in LH and FSH lead to increased gonadal steroid production (17-hydroxyprogesterone, DHEA, testosterone, LH, and FSH). Diagnosis is with adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation test showing exaggerated 17 hydroxyprogesterone response.