Schizophrenia is a debilitating psychiatric disorder characterized by positive symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions, and negative symptoms, such as apathy, depression, and deficits in cognitive functioning.

The discovery of the role of 5HT-2A receptor antagonism in reducing the adverse motor effects caused by D2 receptor blockade has significantly improved treatment options available for those with schizophrenia. However, even with the repertoire of antipsychotics introduced in the past few decades, they have generally been more effective against positive symptoms rather than negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Additionally, they are associated with an increased incidence of adverse metabolic effects, such as weight gain and hyperprolactinemia.

One such medication, lumateperone, is a recently FDA-approved antipsychotic that provides a unique mechanism of action for treating schizophrenia.

In addition to its favorable side effect profile, lumateperone demonstrates a unique pharmacodynamic profile not found in other second-generation atypical antipsychotics in that it interacts with glutamatergic pathways in addition to dopaminergic and serotonergic pathways. As a result, it provides a distinctive mechanism of action to treat schizophrenia.

Lumateperone effectiveness in treating acutely exacerbated schizophrenia has shown to be statistically significant vs. placebo in a four-week Phase II and Phase III clinical trial at 42 mg/day as well as a 6-week phase III trial.

There are also suggestions that patients currently stable on an antipsychotic may show symptomatic improvement when adding lumateperone as an adjunctive treatment.

Lumateperone has been studied for bipolar depression with positive outcomes in one trial, and in the other trial, lumateperone did not separate itself from the placebo.

Lumateperone is currently approved for the treatment of schizophrenia in adults. In addition, it has also been approved as either a monotherapy or an adjunctive treatment with lithium or valproate for treating bipolar depression associated with bipolar I and II disorder.