Yellow fever is a reportable infection. Once the virus is contracted, symptoms develop after 3 to 6 days. There is no specific treatment, but severe cases require aggressive supportive care and hydration. Patients should be managed in the intensive care unit (ICU) and closely monitored for disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), hemorrhage, kidney, and liver dysfunction. Coagulopathy is managed with fresh frozen plasma, and renal failure may require dialysis. Even though yellow fever is not transmitted from person to person, isolation of the individual should be undertaken until the diagnosis is confirmed. Universal precautions are required when looking after patients with yellow fever although person-person transmission of the virus is unlikely. Infected patients should avoid mosquitoes, as they may transmit the virus to mosquitoes, which can serve as vectors for infection other patients.

Since there is no effective treatment or vaccine, prevention is critical.  This is best accomplished by avoiding mosquito bites entirely. Even very short periods outdoors can lead to exposure to mosquito bites, so people should wear proper protective clothing. This protection includes long sleeves, long pants, socks, and closed-toe shoes. Pant legs can be tucked into socks to prevent bites to exposed ankles. Transmission is common during the warmer months, and mosquitoes may bite through very thin clothing, so treating clothing with repellents containing permethrin, DEET, oil of lemon eucalyptus, or other EPA-registered insect repellants will reduce this risk. Permethrin should not be applied directly to the skin, but when applied to clothing, it provides protection even after the clothing is washed. Transmission is most frequent when mosquitoes feed, between dawn and dusk, so outdoor activities during this period should be avoided. However, one of the mosquitos responsible for transmitting the virus, Aedes Aegypty, feeds during the daytime; so there is no safe time during the day for a traveler without repellent and wearing protective clothing. Travelers should sleep in air-conditioned spaces or use mosquito nets or screens to prevent bites during sleep. Standing water is a breeding ground for mosquitoes, so flower pots, buckets, and other containers should be drained. Children’s wading pools should be emptied and stored on their sides, and tire swings should have holes drilled into the bottom to allow trapped water to drain.

There is a safe and highly effective live-attenuated vaccine available to prevent yellow fever. A single dose confers lifelong immunity and is effective within 30 days for 99% of patients. Patients with relative contraindications to live attenuated vaccine who plan to travel to endemic areas should review the recommendations for vaccination prior to travel.