**Hypoxic Pulmonary Vasoconstriction**

Lung isolation and OLV result in a de facto pulmonary shunt, as blood continues to flow through the pulmonary vasculature of the non-ventilated lung.  An admixture of the oxygenated and deoxygenated blood from the ventilated and non-ventilated lungs, respectively, causes a decrease in systemic PaO2 for a given FiO2. This reduction in PaO2 is mitigated by hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV), which is the pulmonary vasculature constriction in response to decreased oxygen tension. At its maximum, HPV will reduce perfusion of the non-ventilated lung by 40% to 50%.  The remaining pulmonary shunt results in a PaO2, roughly half of that during two-lung ventilation for a given FiO2.  Because mechanical ventilation with high FiO2 is typically used during lung isolation and OLV, PaO2 usually remains above 100 mmHg, a level that is well tolerated systemically.

However, the full effect of HPV is only reached after approximately two hours of OLV, such that problems with hypoxemia are more frequent and profound shortly after lung isolation is achieved.  Additionally, several factors inhibit HPV and worsen oxygenation during lung isolation and OLV, including hypocapnia and hypothermia. Calcium channel blockers and vasodilators can also inhibit HPV.  Volatile anesthetics inhibit HPV, but this effect is minimal with modern agents and is further minimized during OLV because the non-ventilated lung is minimally exposed. However, general anesthesia significantly contributes to decreased PaO2 through the resulting development of atelectasis in the ventilated lung, mainly if chemical paralysis is utilized.

**Physiologic Effects of Positioning During Lung Isolation**

If lung isolation and OLV are utilized to facilitate surgical exposure, the patient is usually positioned in the lateral decubitus position with the non-ventilated operative side superior to the ventilated non-operative side. During two-lung ventilation in the lateral decubitus position, gravity results in approximately 60% of cardiac output going to the dependent lung while the remaining 40% goes to the nondependent lung.  When OLV is initiated, this preferential perfusion of the dependent lung improves VQ matching and oxygenation.  Conversely, if lung isolation is used to prevent the spillage of secretions, purulence, or blood from one lung to the other in the intensive care setting, patients are more frequently positioned either supine or with the diseased lung in the dependent position such that gravity helps to prevent contamination of the healthy lung.  This positioning worsens VQ matching, and the resulting decrease in PaO2 may be more exaggerated than in the operative setting.

**Ventilator Management During Lung Isolation**

Principles of lung-protective ventilation should be applied to lung isolation and OLV to minimize acute lung injury and other complications. Low tidal volumes (4 to 6 mL/kg ideal body weight) during OLV have been shown to decrease the incidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome, reduce pulmonary infiltration, and promote oxygenation.

Hypoxemia during OLV should be approached systematically. If lung isolation and OLV are being utilized to facilitate surgery, the surgical team should be made aware of the patient’s hypoxemia and a potential return to two lung ventilation coordinated such that instruments can be withdrawn prior to lung reinflation. If the patient is stable and the hypoxemia is relatively mild, a logical first step is to confirm the correct placement of the airway device being used to achieve OLV using FOB.