Kasten et al. best describe the use of HVLA for rib somatic dysfunction. and Pierce-Talsma et al. describe it for ribs 2 to 10:

- The patient is placed in a supine position with the physician on the opposite of the dysfunctional rib; the angle of the rib will feel more posterior since it is "stuck" either up or down in comparison to the rib above and below.

- The patient crosses their arms across their chest such that the arm on top is the same side as the posterior rib.

- The healthcare provider then rolls the patient towards them and places their thenar eminence on the dysfunctional rib between the transverse process and the rib angle.

- Then the patient is rolled back onto the thenar eminence. The clinician flexes the patient to the posterior transverse process just below the dysfunctional rib with their opposite hand.

- The patient takes a deep breath in, and as they exhale, apply force from the healthcare provider's abdomen through the patient's elbow to the posterior rib.

- At the end of exhalation, just prior to the patient inhaling, apply an HVLA thrust from the healthcare provider's abdomen straight down to the posterior rib.

- The thenar eminence against the posterior rib will feel a thrust, and the articulation may be palpated.

- A "popping" or "cracking" sound may also be heard

- After the HVLA technique is complete, the healthcare provider should reassess the area of somatic dysfunction.

- The technique may be repeated if additional somatic dysfunction is found.