Wilms tumors are still relatively rare, but survival for most patients is quite good, especially for those with "favorable" histology who are diagnosed early and receive proper treatment. The majority of patients first present to the pediatrician, nurse practitioner, or primary care provider. These clinicians need to be vigilant about infants with abdominal pain as the cause may be Wilms tumor. The key to improved survival is a prompt referral to the oncologist. Because the diagnosis is often devastating to the families, a mental health nurse should provide counseling in concert with the clinician. The pharmacist should educate the family about the chemotherapeutic medications and their adverse effects. The oncology nurse should educate the family on the surgery, the post-operative care, and follow up as well as assist the clinician in monitoring the patient and providing regular follow-up.

Social workers should be involved early in the care so that the patient has adequate support and does not miss out on treatment.

An interprofessional team approach is necessary for patients deemed candidates for surgery, as the recovery is prolonged and can be associated with complications. The message to the family should be consistent and realistic. Only through such an approach can client-patient relationships can be improved and hopefully translate into positive outcomes.

New approaches are being developed for those who do not initially respond well to treatment. Bilateral Wilms tumor can be particularly challenging and require close coordination between oncologists, pediatricians, nurse practitioners, primary care providers, radiologists, and surgeons in the timing and implementation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with bilateral nephron-sparing surgery or nephrectomies.