Histology is similar to fibrous dysplasia, except in OFD, osteoblastic rimming is present. Fibroblast proliferation surrounding islands of woven bone with osteoblastic rimming and mitotic figures may have giant cells. OFD is characterized by the osteoid tissue, fibrous tissue, and a small number of epidermoid cells. An immunohistochemical assay is mandatory in some cases to detect epidermoid cells, which are not visible on standard hematoxylin and eosin staining because of their small number.

It is sometimes difficult to histologically differentiate between OFD and adamantinoma (AD). A large tissue specimen is required for differentiation. The fibrous and epithelial component amounts can vary widely even within the same tumor, and sampling error is a significant concern with percutaneous or other limited biopsy specimens. Several cases have been published in which lesions initially diagnosed as OFD on small biopsy were finally diagnosed as AD after adequate diagnostic tissue was taken.

OFD is characterized by a loose, often storiform fibrous background containing spicules of woven bony trabeculae lined by a layer of osteoblasts. Although this histologic appearance is quite similar to fibrous dysplasia (hence, their similar names), fibrous dysplasia typically lacks the distinctive osteoblastic rimming of the bony trabeculae. Additionally, OFD demonstrates a zonal architecture, in which more immature woven bone trabeculae are located centrally. However, moving outwards toward the periphery of the lesion, the trabeculae become more numerous, larger, and more mature and lamellar.