Non-IgM MGUS needs a thorough set of investigations to exclude this disease entity from the other plasma cell neoplasms. Investigations should include complete blood count (CBC), bone marrow aspirate/biopsy (BMA/BMB), immunohistochemical analysis (IHC), serum calcium and creatinine, serum protein electrophoresis and immunofixation, urine protein electrophoresis and immunofixation, serum-free light chains (FLC) assay, quantification of immunoglobulins, immunophenotyping utilizing flow cytometry and cross-sectional imaging studies.

CBC/peripheral smear is usually normal. However, some cases may show rouleaux formation. BMB usually shows 3% to 5% mature plasma cells (less than 10%) evenly scattered or in occasional small clusters. CD138 is useful in highlighting these plasma cells in the BMB. IHC of the plasma cells for kappa and lambda will demonstrate monoclonal restriction. MGUS is characterized by the presence of a monoclonal (M) protein which is produced by clonal plasma cells and detected by serum and urine protein electrophoresis, and immunofixation of the serum and urine. Immunophenotyping shows monoclonal plasma cells that are CD38+ (bright) cells with an aberrant CD56 population (may also be negative). Molecular testing for non-IgM MGUS has shown that this disease entity usually shows a normal karyotype because of the relatively small number of plasma cells. Some patients show chromosomal alterations of PCM that include: t(11;14), t(4;14), t(14;16), deletions of 13q and hyperdiploid. No clinical correlation for these genetic alterations has been found in non-IgM MGUS.

The 2019 International myeloma working group (IMWG), consensus recommends the following approach for cross-sectional imaging in MGUS:

Whole-body imaging is recommended only in high-risk MGUS. Since IgM-MGUS usually progresses to Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia and not multiple myeloma, routine bone imaging is not recommended.

In suspected high-risk non-IgM MGUS, a whole-body CT to rule out multiple myeloma is recommended. CT scan has superior sensitivity compared with a skeletal survey for the detection of osteolytic lesions in patients with multiple myeloma.

If whole-body CT is not available, conventional skeletal survey or whole-body MRI are alternatives.

In patients with equivocal findings on whole-body CT (or conventional skeletal survey) in whom there is a concern for myeloma development, a whole-body MRI is recommended (or MRI of the spine and pelvis if whole-body MRI is not available).

If whole-body CT is positive, a PET/CT should be done. A follow-up bone imaging is not recommended unless there are signs of progression to symptomatic disease (e.g., pain or increase in serological parameters).

In patients with MGUS with positive imaging findings for focal and osteolytic lesions, other malignancies should be ruled out as well. If needed, a biopsy of such a lesion should be performed.