Synovial sarcoma is one of the most common subtypes of soft-tissue sarcoma. The clinical presentation is non-specific, and the most common presentation is secondary to the mass effect of a growing lesion. Uterine LMS may present with abnormal uterine bleeding. Diagnosis follows histopathology, and clinical imaging helps determine the tumor's stage. A pathologist trained in diagnosing STS is needed to establish histology and accurately grade cancer. Similarly, a team of musculoskeletal radiologists and interventional radiologists must interpret the images (CT scans and MRI) and determine the best region/route to biopsy the mass. An experienced surgeon can also pursue an open incisional biopsy, which is seldom needed.

Patients diagnosed with synovial sarcoma should receive treatment at centers that regularly experience a high volume of such patients. The principles of treating a patient diagnosed with synovial sarcoma require close coordination of interprofessional team members between the surgical oncology, radiation oncology, and medical oncology teams. Where early-stage synovial sarcoma (also called localized synovial sarcoma) is almost always treated surgically with perioperative radiation, metastatic synovial sarcoma is incurable and is treated with chemotherapy.

Adjuvant chemotherapy is more prevalent in pediatrics and young adults. Hence a pediatric oncologist must be included in the tumor board. A team of skilled surgical oncologists/ orthopedic oncologists trained in the management of soft-tissue sarcoma is critical in caring for a patient diagnosed with synovial sarcoma. Radiation oncologists decide the best modality of RT that would be necessary for the patient's treatment. In addition to this, they also coordinate with surgeons to deliver intra-operative RT.

Synovial sarcoma is quite sensitive to chemotherapy. The medical oncologist ensures that a proper regimen gets chosen according to the presentation of the patient. The drugs involved in treating synovial sarcoma include a host of cytotoxic and targeted agents that come with unique toxicities. A board-certified oncology pharmacist trained in managing chemotherapy and nurses trained in delivering chemotherapy are critical parts of the interprofessional team that will improve patient outcomes by assisting with the coordination of care and patient education. The pharmacist will verify all dosing, assist in specific agent selection and alternate regimens, counsel on adverse effects, and collaborate with nursing on administration. Nursing staff will monitor patients' responses and adverse effects following administration. These examples of interprofessional coordination will optimize results for patients with synovial sarcoma. [Level 5]

The treatment modalities used for patients with synovial sarcoma have undergone testing in phase II and III trials with Level I evidence described above.