**Diagnostic Pitfalls**

- Urinary tract infections are primarily a clinical diagnosis, and expert opinion should be sought before initiating treatment of an isolated positive result in an otherwise asymptomatic patient, the only exception being asymptomatic bacteria.

- Quite often, clinicians end up treating the positive culture report rather than a genuine urinary tract infection. Most often, a positive culture in an asymptomatic patient can be traced to poor sampling technique.

- Another confusing scenario is that of a septic, delirious elderly patient who is unable to provide a history or demonstrate adequate examination signs to help localize a septic source. Quite frequently, these patients are treated as having a presumed UTI in the absence of a clear alternative septic source.

- UTI-associated radiological changes can sometimes take several months to resolve and must be interpreted with care in cases of recurrent or persistent infections.

- UTI must be considered a differential diagnosis when evaluating a patient with a pelvic inflammatory disease or an acute abdomen.

- Male patients with urinary tract infections should also be screened for sexually transmitted infections.

- Interstitial cystitis is frequently misdiagnosed and treated as a UTI and must be considered as an alternative diagnosis in patients who keep presenting with cystitis symptoms without positive cultures.

- "Sterile pyuria," with persistent urinary WBCs but negative standard urine cultures, could indicate tuberculosis which requires special cultures.

- Bacterial infections only tend to account for 80% of all urinary tract infections, and antibiotics may sometimes prove ineffective.

- Spinal cord injury patients with a UTI may present with increased spasticity or autonomic dysreflexia.

- Since there is no way to clinically distinguish obstructive pyonephrosis (a surgical emergency) from acute pyelonephritis (treated medically), consider reasonable urinary tract imaging (ultrasound, CT scan) in all cases of presumed pyelonephritis; especially in those who fail to improve on appropriate antibiotics.

**Management Pitfalls**

Frail, elderly, or debilitated patients with nonspecific signs such as unexplained falls or changes in mental status are often suspected of having a UTI. While this is correct, such nonspecific changes are not reliable predictors of a UTI, and antibiotics may not help in these situations unless urine studies confirm the UTI.

Multidrug-resistant infections are becoming a major source of in-hospital mortality and morbidity. Suppressive antibiotic regimens are sometimes used in poorly responding or resistant cases. A dedicated infectious disease team should optimally guide these presentations, as long-term suppressive antibiotics have a unique set of complications.

Long-term antibiotic prophylaxis must also be used with caution, as it will increase the risk of resistance and change the susceptibilities of colonized organisms. Occasionally, residual urinary symptoms may take several months to resolve or might never resolve (especially in patients with indwelling catheters, post-prostatectomy cases, post-bladder surgery, or radiotherapy) and do not always indicate a genuine urinary tract infection.

Long-term prophylaxis with nitrofurantoin is associated with hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Patients should be counseled accordingly.

It helps to identify predisposing factors for the infection and correct them if possible. For example, a diabetic patient would benefit from improving glycemic control. Renal tract anatomic abnormalities should be assessed to see if an intervention is appropriate (renal calculi, BPH, ureteric strictures). Immunocompromising factors may be addressed if possible (steroids, HIV). Finally, nephrotoxic medications should be avoided whenever possible in patients with any degree of renal compromise. If unavoidable, care should be taken to use the optimal dose and duration of therapy with regular, routine monitoring of renal function.

Finally, do not hesitate to ask for assistance from your local infectious disease specialists. Their primary mission is the optimal management of complicated, difficult, and complex infections.