Hemorrhoids are widespread in society, and while easy to diagnose, the treatment is not always satisfactory. The disorder is best addressed by an interprofessional team dedicated to anorectal conditions.

All members of the healthcare team see patients with hemorrhoids in different settings, depending on the acuity and severity of the disease. Understanding the degree of prolapse of internal hemorrhoids helps the healthcare professional choose the adequate treatment and provide an appropriate education. Correct diagnosis of an acutely thrombosed external hemorrhoid leads to proper treatment promptly, which increases overall patient safety and satisfaction.

Several vital clinical recommendations are published for practice

- Increasing fiber intake is useful as a first-line medical treatment option.

- Grades 1 to 2 hemorrhoids can have successful treatment in an office setting with rubber band ligation.

- Excisional hemorrhoidectomy is only for grade 3 or 4, recurrent, or symptomatic hemorrhoidal disease.

Patient education is vital because hemorrhoids are preventable. The nurse, dietician, and pharmacist should encourage the patient to avoid constipation, drink ample water, be physically active, add fiber to the diet, and refrain from using too many pain medications (which cause constipation). The overall outcomes following surgery vary from good to poor. Residual pain and recurrence are not uncommon after almost every procedure. Interprofessional team management involving clinicians, nursing, and pharmacy can drive better patient outcomes. [Level 5]