The disease usually goes through several stages:

- Previtelliform/subclinical stage - The fundus is normal in an asymptomatic infant or child. However, EOG is abnormal.

- Vitelliform stage or egg yolk stage - Best vitelliform macular dystrophy gets its name from this stage, and this stage typically presents in infancy or early childhood. An egg-yolk like round or oval yellow smooth elevated lesion with a well-defined margin is seen at the macula. The size is 0.5 to 2 disc diameters, and the lesion usually centers on the fovea but not in every case. The size/site/shape/stage of the lesion may not be very symmetrical. Vision is usually normal or minimally affected despite the drastic fundus appearance. The lesion(s) may be multiple and extramacular and be very large with a geographic shape.

- Pseudohypopyon stage - The vitelliform deposits gravitate down in the subretinal space with a horizontal upper level, usually at puberty. The fluid above this deposit is clear. One hypothesis is that the retinal pigment epithelium takes up the yellow deposit, and heavier material gravitates down. Vision is usually good at this stage. After a change of head position for 60 to 90 minutes, the pseudohypopyon may shift.

- Vitelliruptive stage or scrambled egg stage is due to the breakup of the smooth and uniform vitelliform material giving a nonhomogenous look. Visual acuity starts to deteriorate at this stage. A small area or areas of pigmentation/atrophy may be noted.

- Atrophic stage- The vitelliform material is no longer visible, and there is an area of atrophy and pigmentation which may simulate geographic atrophy due to age-related macular degeneration. Marked visual deterioration is present. This stage usually occurs after 40 years of age.

- Cicatricial and choroidal neovascularization - Subretinal bleed may be present due to CNVM. This stage is associated with poor vision and may lead to subretinal fibrosis.