As transplant candidates have an increased incidence of bone disease when compared to the general population, these patients should ideally be evaluated and managed appropriately before the transplantation.

The recommendations for evaluation of transplant candidates vary based on the underlying disease process and the organ transplanted. The AASLD (The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases) and AST (American Society of Transplantation) 2013 guidelines recommend that all patients planned for liver transplantation undergo a bone density scan (DXA scan) and get treated if diagnosed with osteoporosis before the transplantation. The KDIGO (Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes) guidelines 2017 recommend checking calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, and PTH levels at regular intervals after kidney transplantation until levels stabilize.

Most authors recommend that all transplant candidates should undergo the following tests for evaluation:

- DXA scan to evaluate for osteoporosis or osteopenia

- Radiographs of the thoracic and lumbar spine, or vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) by DXA scan to screen for vertebral fractures, and

- Screening for vitamin D deficiency and other secondary causes of osteoporosis such as hyperparathyroidism, alcohol abuse, chronic smoking, hypogonadism, and the use of offending medications such as heparin and loop diuretics.

The long waiting period for most of the transplantations should be utilized for identifying the secondary causes of osteoporosis and potentially treating them before the transplantation. In patients found to have osteoporosis or related fractures before transplantation, appropriate treatment should be initiated immediately. In patients with no osteoporosis or fractures before transplantation, preventive therapy after transplantation is most appropriate.