It should be stressed that if chordoma is entertained in the differential diagnosis, there should be careful planning of any biopsy as the biopsy tract needs to be included in the ultimate resection of the chordoma to decrease the risk of local recurrence.

Despite the low-grade status of chordomas, they have a high recurrence rate and significant mortality. Five-year survival is approximately 50% overall but improved with complete resection with negative margins to a 65% 5-year survival rate. Surgical resection with positive margins is approximately 50% 5-year survival, and if the chordoma is inoperable 5-year survival is approximately 40%.

Macroscopically chordomas are soft, gelatinous tumors and may have hemorrhage present. Microscopically they consist of fibrous septa separating lobules of physaliferous (bubbly) cells with an extensive myxoid stroma and rare mitotic figures.

Chordomas can be divided into four subtypes: conventional, poorly differentiated, dedifferentiated, and chondroid. Conventional (classic) chordomas are the most common variety and may show areas of dedifferentiation. Poorly differentiated chordomas are more common in young adult and pediatric patients as well as skull base chordomas. Poorly differentiated chordomas show a loss of the gene INI-1. Dedifferentiated chordomas typically are the fastest growing and most aggressive chordomas and can also have a loss of INI-1 and are more common in pediatric patients. Chondroid chordoma describes chordomas that are difficult to distinguish from chondrosarcoma on histology. Typically chordomas express the gene brachyury, whereas chondrosarcomas do not express the brachyury gene.

Chordomas have been reported to dedifferentiate into high-grade spindle cell tumors, which portend a worse prognosis.