Individual features of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy are not unique to pseudohypoparathyroidism and are observed in other disorders as described below.

**Brachydactyly-mental retardation syndrome or AHO-like syndrome (HDAC4 loss of function mutation or 2q37 microdeletion):**Brachydactyly, obesity, developmental delay, mental retardation, behavioral disorders are the common manifestations. Mild PTH resistance may be observed in AHO-like syndrome but not ectopic ossification.

**iPPSD4 or Acro-dysostosis type 1 (PRKRA1A mutation):**Facial dysostosis and nasal hypoplasia, generalized, severe brachydactyly, and PTH resistance ± other hormonal resistance. A subset of patients with AHO with no abnormalities in theGNAS1 gene have mutations in the PRKRA1A gene.

**iPPSD5 or Acro-dysostosis type 2 (PDE4D mutation):**Generalised and severe brachydactyly type E, facial dysostosis and nasal hypoplasia, mental retardation, decreased interpeduncular distance (PDE4D loss of function mutation). A subset of patients with AHO with no abnormalities in the GNAS1 gene have mutations in the PDE4D gene.

**iPPSD6****(PDE3A mutation):**Short stature, brachydactyly E, hypertension, posterior inferior cerebellar artery loop.

**Isolated brachydactyly E**:HOXD13 mutation.

**Brachydactyly E with short stature, PTHLH type****(PTHLH mutation):**Dental problems, learning difficulties, facial dysmorphism

**Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome**: Milder generalized brachydactyly E without carving of the phalangeal epiphyses, sparse hair, bulbous tip of the nose, thin upper lip, growth hormone deficiency, hip malformation.

**Turner syndrome**: Short stature, short IV metacarpal (no shortening of TP1), ovarian insufficiency, cubitus valgus, Madelung deformity