Shoulder dislocations

The glenohumeral joint is by far the most commonly dislocated joint of the body, accounting for up to 45% of dislocations. Anterior dislocation accounts for 96% of cases and is often the result of a force directed to the shoulder joint while the arm is in abduction and external rotation. Posterior dislocation is the second most common direction of dislocation, accounting for 2% to 4% of cases. Posterior dislocations are usually due to indirect mechanisms such as electric shock or convulsions, causing contraction of the relatively stronger internal rotators of the shoulder (latissimus dorsi, pectoralis major, and subscapularis muscles).

Glenohumeral joint dislocation has an incidence of approximately 17 per 100,000 a year, with a peak incidence among males in the 21 to 30 year age range and females in the 61 to 80 year age range. Treatment typically involves analgesics and closed reduction, with some patients requiring subsequent surgical correction, especially those with concurrent soft tissue injuries resulting in recurrent shoulder dislocations.

Adhesive capsulitis

Adhesive capsulitis is a disorder of unclear cause in which the glenohumeral capsule becomes inflamed and stiff, significantly restricting motion and can cause chronic pain. The pain is usually constant, worse at night. Incidence is approximately 3% of the general population, with some controversy over this number due to concerns of over-diagnosis of this disorder. It occurs more commonly in women aged 40 to 70 years of age.

Rotator cuff injuries

The tendons of the rotator cuff are often under heavy strain as they function in stabilizing the glenohumeral joint. Therefore, the pathology of these rotator cuff tendons is relatively common. Rotator cuff conditions are the most common source of shoulder pain for primary care office visits.