Alcohol-based sanitizers are very effective at quickly destroying various pathogens and that too without the need for water, plumbing, and drying facilities. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), alcohols have excellent activity against gram-positive bacteria, gram-negative bacteria, enveloped viruses, non-enveloped viruses, mycobacteria, and even fungi. Numerous studies have also documented the in-vivo antimicrobial activity of alcohols and the effectiveness in removing clinical strains of Acinetobacter baumannii, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecalis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Candida albicans from profoundly contaminated hands of human volunteers.

A study published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases evaluated the virucidal activity of alcohol-based hand sanitizers  (ABHS) against re-emerging viral pathogens, such as Ebola virus, Zika virus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). It determined that these pathogens, as well as other enveloped viruses, could also be efficiently inactivated alcohol. This further supports the use of ABHS in healthcare settings and viral outbreaks. More recently, alcohol-based sanitizers are also considered effective in preventing the hand-to-mucous membrane transmission of SARs-CoV-2, the pathogen responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic across the world. Alcohol-based sanitizers are thus considered useful in both hospital and community settings.

Keeping in mind its excellent coverage against nearly all pathogens and lack of resistance development, alcohol-based hand sanitizers can be used in various settings, including clinics, hospitals, acute care facilities, emergency medical centers, mobile healthcare units, and nursing homes, and the community in general.