Incision and drainage are the standard of care for breast abscesses. If the patient is seen in a primary care setting by a provider that is not comfortable in performing these procedures, the patient may be started on antibiotics and referred to a general surgeon for definitive treatment. Needle aspiration may be attempted for abscesses smaller than 3 cm or in lactational abscesses. Non-lactational abscesses have a higher rate of recurrence and often require multiple drainage procedures. Incision and drainage have lower recurrence rates, but they are more invasive than needle aspiration and may lead to scarring and possible poor cosmesis. If there is a recurrence of an abscess after needle aspiration, incision and drainage should be performed. If there is a large cavity, follow incision and drainage, packing of the cavity may be done to promote further drainage and prevent the skin incision from healing before drainage is complete. Typically, these wounds heal fairly quickly. If the cause of the abscess is an obstructed or ectatic lactiferous duct, surgical excision may be necessary.

A course of antibiotics may be given before or following drainage of breast abscesses. There are many options for treatment, and consideration must be given to the possible pathogens involved based on the patient's history. It is also important to consider if the patient is breastfeeding and whether the antibiotics given are safe in breastfeeding patients. Cultures should be obtained to guide antibiotic therapy, especially in recurrent breast abscesses. Some of the antibiotics to be considered are nafcillin, Augmentin, doxycycline, Trimethoprim, clindamycin, or vancomycin. Antibiotics may be required for 4-7 days.

Patients with large breast abscesses or signs of sepsis should be considered for admission to the hospital. Large breast abscesses may need incision and drainage in the operating room, packing of the wound for healing by secondary intention, and possibly intravenous antibiotics.

Pain control with NSAIDs and/or prescription narcotics should also be considered.

If a breast abscess has been diagnosed, the infant should not be breastfed on that breast to prevent transmission of the infection.