The Monro-Kellie hypothesis states that the total intracranial volume (composed of brain tissue, cerebrospinal fluid, venous blood, and arterial blood) should always remain a constant since the cranium is a rigid and non-expansile container. When an additional compartment is introduced (like a hematoma), there must be a compensatory reduction in another compartment in order to prevent intracranial hypertension. Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is defined as mean arterial pressure (MAP) – intracranial pressure (ICP). When the ICP increases, the CPP will be reduced and can lead to secondary cerebral ischemia and infarct. The goal of TBI management is to prevent this secondary insult.

The following are the different types of TBI commonly encountered

**Concussion**

This is usually a mild TBI without any gross structural damage and occurs secondary to a nonpenetrating TBI. It usually results from acceleration/deceleration forces occurring secondary to a direct blow to the head. It causes a transient altered mental status, which can range from confusion to loss of consciousness. This cannot be diagnosed with a routine computed tomogram (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. Special sequence MRI like diffusion tensor imaging and functional MRI may result in earlier diagnosis of concussion.

Second impact syndrome: The initial event is often a concussion, but if the patient (often an athlete) starts to play without fully recovering from this and sustains another injury, there can be a rapid evolution of malignant cerebral edema, ensuing over a short-time course of time.

Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE): This is usually a delayed manifestation of repetitive mild TBI. This is common in athletes and can lead to psychiatric disturbances and suicidal behavior, attention deficits, and derangements in memory and executive functions.

**Extra-axial Hematoma**

Extra-axial hematomas include both epidural hematomas (EDH) and subdural hematomas (SDH). EDH usually results from bleeding from the middle meningeal artery and its branches or a fracture and is usually acute.

**Contusion**

Contusions (bruising of the brain) can be a coup or contrecoup type. Coup contusions occur at the site of impact, whereas contrecoup injuries typically take place on the contralateral side of impact, usually the basi-frontal lobe and anterior temporal lobe.

**Traumatic Subarachnoid Hemorrhage (SAH)**

Subarachnoid hemorrhage is most commonly caused by trauma and results from the tearing of small capillaries with blood subsequently entering into the subarachnoid space. It commonly occurs over the convexity, whereas SAH secondary to aneurysmal rupture occurs in the basal cisterns.

**Diffuse Axonal Injury (DAI)**

This can underlie mild to moderate TBI and potentially results from any shearing, stretching, or twisting injuries to the neuronal axons. This phenomenon is mainly seen at the junction of the gray and white matter where neuronal axons are entering a more dense, fatty (myelinated), and less fluid-filled white matter. Such shearing forces cause the neuronal axon to be stretched, and the subsequent damage to the cytoskeleton may lead to axonal swelling, increased permeability, calcium influx, detachment, and axonal death. Diffuse laminar necrosis is typically seen on autopsy.