**Laboratory Evaluation**

Trauma patients seen in the trauma bay with the appropriate mechanism of injury should receive a standard set of laboratory tests. This may include but is not limited to a comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood count, coagulation parameters, and lactate level.

**Radiographic Evaluation**

A chest X-ray and focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) exam are frequently used as adjuncts in the secondary survey.  For patients with mediastinal injury, chest  X-ray may show pneumomediastinum in the presence of esophageal or tracheobronchial injury.  The presence of mediastinal widening on a chest X-ray may indicate hemopericardium or bleeding from the great vessels. The FAST exam can help detect the presence of blood in the pericardium with high sensitivity and specificity. However, the practitioner must be aware of possible false negatives in the patient with concurrent hemothorax where pericardial blood can be emptying into the thoracic cavity.

In addition to a FAST exam, a formal echocardiogram can be used to detect hemopericardium, tamponade physiology, or cardiac injury.  For patients with blunt cardiac injury, an EKG should be obtained and troponins should be checked. A normal EKG with negative troponins essentially rules out blunt cardiac injury. Patients with a hemodynamic compromise along with an abnormal EKG or troponin should have a formal echocardiogram to evaluate for blunt cardiac injury.

In the hemodynamically stable patient, CT scan can be used to detect traumatic mediastinal injuries. CT scan can provide important information on the traumatically injured patient. For victims of penetrating trauma, it can define the trajectory of the penetrating object, telling the clinician of the mediastinum was traversed. CT scan can also detect esophageal or tracheobronchial injuries from both blunt and penetrating trauma. Oral contrast with the CT scan can opacify the esophagus and help detect esophageal injuries. In addition, IV contrast given with CT scan can help find vascular injuries such as aortic transections.

A double contrast esophagogram can also be a helpful adjunct to rule out an esophageal injury. A water soluble contrast is given orally or via a nasogastric tube that has been pulled back into the proximal esophagus. Films are taken after administration of the contrast, and if no leak is detected, the process is repeated with barium.

**Endoscopic Evaluation**

For patients with a significant mechanism, a bronchoscopic and endoscopic evaluation may be warranted. Esophagoscopy can help determine if there is trauma to the esophagus. In addition, bronchoscopy can allow for evaluation of the tracheobronchial tree for injury.