Clinical and experimental data have shown that nummular headache originates peripherally. Hence, stimulation of scalp structures reproduces this pain. Decreased pressure pain threshold areas (PPT’s) remain confined to the symptomatic area in these patients, and topographic pressure pain sensitivity maps are similar to healthy subjects except for decreased PPT’s in the areas involved.

Transdiploic and intradiploic nerves are thought to be involved in the pathophysiology of nummular headaches. These nerves connect the structures of the scalp to dura mater. Recent evidence suggests that a lesion or dysfunction of these nerves produces a sharply circumscribed area of pain similar to a nummular headache. Although there are hypotheses regarding the involvement of pericranial nerves, the lack of response to peripheral nerve blocks and the occasional presence of a sagittal PPT’s divided by the midline negate this hypothesis.

Finally, nummular headache is not associated with any psychiatric disorders, anxiety, and depression. Migraine and tension headaches may be concurrently present with a nummular headache but are not related. This evidence proves once again that the central origin of nummular headache is unlikely. Because of the above evidence, nummular headaches have a provisional classification as epicrania. Epicrania include headaches that arise from epicranial tissue such as internal and external layers of the skull, all the layers of the scalp including epicranial nerves and arteries.