Turner syndrome may be prenatally diagnosed by chorionic-villus sampling or amniocentesis. Turner syndrome should be suspected when a prenatal ultrasound shows fetal hydrops, cystic hygroma, or cardiac defects. The diagnosis requires confirmation after birth with karyotype testing. Occasionally, the karyotype can be normal if it is mosaicism, and if there is a strong suspicion, a FISH study is an option in addition to the karyotype. Genetic testing with karyotype analysis is necessary to confirm the diagnosis in individuals with characteristic clinical features described above. The first step is a karyotype analysis with peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

In adolescence, the patients can present with either delayed onset of puberty or amenorrhea. Elevated levels of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) are suggestive of Turner syndrome, and the anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) may be a more sensitive marker for predicting ovarian failure.

Following a diagnosis of Turner syndrome, management includes evaluation for other associated abnormalities like cardiac anomalies, renal anomalies, and learning disabilities. Screening should be a part of the baseline evaluation, and patients should undergo periodic screening thereafter. At initial diagnosis, patients should get renal ultrasonography and cardiovascular evaluation, including echocardiography in infants and children, and MRI in older girls and women.

Some of the screening laboratory tests include:

At four years of age and above: serum TSH to screen for autoimmune thyroiditis and tissue transglutaminase with total IgA to screen for celiac disease.

At ten years of age and above: fasting blood glucose, glycated hemoglobin, ALT, AST, serum creatinine, and urinalysis to screen for diabetes mellitus, fatty liver, and kidney disease.