Early in embryonic development, just three weeks post-fertilization, gastrulation occurs. Gastrulation is the process that results in the development of three distinct germ layers. These layers include the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. Each of these three tissue layers contributes to an integral portion of the mature gastrointestinal tract. Endoderm produces the lining of the intestinal walls, including the associated glandular structures.

Following gastrulation, primitive gut tube development begins as a hollow chamber of endoderm is then surrounded by mesodermal cells. The endodermal cells extend and fold at the anterior and posterior aspects of the tube. This process yields the primitive gut tube, which joins adjacent to the embryonic yolk sac to form a closed tube.

Gut differentiation continues, and at about six weeks post-fertilization, the rapidly dividing and replicating midgut outgrows the abdominal cavity and herniates through the umbilical ring as a u-shaped midgut loop with a cranial and caudal limb and the vitelline duct as its apex. The development of the midgut then continues external to the abdominal cavity and embryo until roughly week ten of development. The cranial limb of the midgut loop produces the distal duodenum, the jejunum, and a proximal portion of the ileum. The caudal limb forms the remaining ileum, cecum, appendix, ascending colon, and proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon. The herniated midgut loop continues to elongate and rotates counter-clockwise when viewed anteriorly with the superior mesenteric artery as its axis for rotations. The midgut rotates 270 degrees around its primary blood supply, the superior mesenteric artery, during herniation and subsequent hernial reduction as it returns to the abdominal cavity.

Upon re-entering the abdominal cavity, the midgut segments lie in temporary positions within the abdominal cavity, with the cranial limb entering first and settling into the center and the caudal limb wrapping around it. From this point, the differential growth of segments of the midgut results in their repositioning to typical adult positions. For example, the cecal bud producing the mature cecum settles to a position inferior to the liver within the right upper quadrant. Eventually, differential growth allows the cecum to descend to a position at the right iliac fossa, and the distal end of the cecal bud forms the appendix. Any disruption or peritoneal fusion during the developmental descent of the cecum may lead to atypical positioning of the cecum and appendix in the adult.