The mainstay in the evaluation of acute stroke is a non-contrast-enhanced computed tomogram (CT) scan. Although contrast enhances the quality of a CT image, it is not recommended due to the possibility of the stroke resulting from a hemorrhagic rather than ischemic cause. In a patient with hemorrhagic stroke, giving contrast would not only exacerbate the hemorrhage, but given that contrast is toxic to human cells, it would also result in further damage.

A stroke can categorize as acute (less than 24 hours), subacute (24 hours to five days), or chronic (weeks). Due to the cytotoxic edema in acute stroke, one would visualize hyper-attenuation with effacement of cortical sulci and lack of differentiation between the gray and white matter. Conversely, vasogenic edema is present with subacute stroke, and it is during this stage in which mass effect and subsequent herniation are of the highest risk. Chronic strokes are also hypo-attenuating and demonstrate the loss of brain tissue.

A CT angiogram may also help to visualize the entire cerebral circulation beginning from the aortic arch to determine the exact etiology of the stroke. However, CTA also carries the same limitations as a CT with contrast due to its use of contrast; this is a beneficial technique to determine etiologies such as aneurysms or arteriovenous malformations.

Although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the gold standard for the detection of various pathologies, they are not routinely used for acute stroke for a variety of reasons. MRIs take much longer to complete than CT scans and are not good at detecting the intracellular edema seen in the acute phase of a stroke. One huge exception to this is diffusion-weighted MRI, which can still illustrate the acute phase of stroke and can be completed fairly quickly at some centers. Standard MRI images such as T1 and T2 imaging, however, can detect sub-acute stroke as they can visualize vasogenic edema.

Although the stroke of the anterior circulation of the brain is far more common, 20% of ischemic events in the brain involve the posterior circulation (vertebrobasilar system). When an ischemic event does occur in the posterior circulation, it is most commonly due to atherosclerosis, embolism, or arterial dissection.

**Atherosclerosis**

Large vessel atherosclerotic disease most commonly results in thromboembolism but can also cause hemodynamic instability leading to ischemia. Large vessel atherosclerotic disease was responsible for 35% of posterior circulation strokes, while small vessel disease accounted for only 13% of these strokes in a recent meta-analysis.

**Cardioembolism**

Unlike the vertebral and basilar arteries, ischemia, specifically in the PCA, is potentially attributable to embolism from the heart, aorta, or vertebral arteries. Since a vast majority of the cerebral blood flow goes through the internal carotid arteries, only 20% of cardiac emboli end up in the posterior circulation. Cardioembolism may result from a variety of causes, which include prosthetic heart valves, atrial fibrillation, valvular disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, and congestive heart failure.

**Arterial Dissection**

Arterial dissection is a very uncommon cause of a posterior circulation stroke and does not present in the PCA without concomitant involvement of the basilar or vertebral arteries; this is because dissection in the posterior circulation is due to cervical trauma. This condition can present in young active adults or patients in a recent motor vehicle accident. Carotid artery dissections account for 15% of strokes occurring in the young adult population (15 to 49 years old).

Treatment for ischemic stroke includes the use of tPA (tissue plasminogen activator) within 3 to 4.5 hours since onset and with absolute confidence that there was no hemorrhagic etiology. Patients will also initiate pharmacologic therapy, including antiplatelet agents such as aspirin or clopidogrel. Additional variables requiring control include blood pressure, blood sugar, and lipids. Nevertheless, physicians must always treat the underlying cause (atrial fibrillation, etc.).