Many disorders are known to have detrimental effects on both visceral and cutaneous elastic tissue. Marfan syndrome, caused by autosomal dominant mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene (FBN1), results in a defective scaffold for elastin deposition. Stains of aortic and cutaneous tissue samples from animal models of Marfan syndrome demonstrated decreased density and increased fragmentation of elastic lamellae and fibers, with tangled microfibrils.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), also known as Grönblad-Strandberg syndrome, is a progressive, genodermatosis typically inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Mutations in the ATP-binding cassette subfamily C member 6 (ABCC6) gene result in ectopic calcification of elastic fibers in connective tissue throughout the body.

Verhoeff’s stain has also been used in the visualization of elastic fibers within elastofibromas. Elastofibromas are rare, ill-defined tumor-like growths composed of irregular and enlarged elastic fibers. They present as a firm, deep, rubbery, slow-growing mass, with a characteristic periscapular location deep to the skeletal musculature.

The Verhoeff stain is particularly useful in the evaluation of pathologies of the elastic lamina found within elastic arteries, such as the aorta. The degenerative changes of the valvular leaflets seen in senile aortic stenosis may be visualized, in part, using the Verhoeff stain. One defining characteristic of early stenotic lesions is aortic-side subendothelial thickening with displacement and fragmentation of the internal elastic lamina, visualized on Verhoeff staining.

The Verhoeff stain has also been commonly utilized in dermatopathology. Normal hair follicles are typically embedded within a sheath of elastic fibers. Histological alterations of the presence and distribution of follicular elastin can be used to differentiate various forms of alopecia, particularly those with a scarring or fibrosing etiology.

Unique distributions of elastic fibers can be identified by Verhoeff staining of several cutaneous neoplasms and similar lesions.

Hereditary and acquired disorders of cutaneous elastic tissue are commonly initially evaluated by skin biopsy, for which the Verhoeff-van Gieson stain may be utilized to visualize elastic fibers. Disorders of increased elastic tissue include focal elastosis and elastomas, while disorders of diminished elastic fibers include anetoderma, nevus anelasticus, cutis laxa and perifollicular elastolysis, among others.