In the U.S., 68% of households have pets. There are 45 million dog owners and 77 million cat owners.

Zoonoses constitute 61% of infectious diseases, 75% of emerging infectious diseases, and 80% potential bioterrorism pathogens.

Per the last report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Department of the Interior, and U.S. Department of Agriculture, the eight most important zoonoses in the U.S., based on their pandemic potential, severity, economic impact, local potential, and bioterrorism risk, are influenza, salmonella, West Nile virus, plague, coronaviruses, rabies, brucella, and Lyme disease.

Important statistics about each zoonotic disease:

- Influenza has caused several outbreaks in different countries in the last few decades, especially H1N1 swine flu in 2009 & H5N1 avian flu since 2003.

- Salmonella is the most common cause of zoonotic outbreaks in the USA in the last decade, per the CDC.

- WNV is the most common mosquito-borne zoonosis in the USA. It is estimated that there are 70 unreported cases for each reported case of the disease.

- Plague is endemic in western states - California, Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico. The incidence rate is 1-17 cases/year.

- Coronaviruses: SARS caused >8000 infections in 2003 in Southeast Asia. MERS has infected >2000 people since 2012.

- Rabies: There are around 40,000 exposures reported per year in the U.S., which costs the health system $225 million to $500 million for post-exposure prophylaxis alone. There were only nine established rabies in humans from 2008 to 2019 due to stray animal control, rabies vaccine, and oral rabies vaccine baiting programs.

- Brucella: Almost all cases in the U.S. are related to immigrants, imported animals, or unpasteurized milk. There are around 100 reported cases annually.

- Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in the U.S., with 20,000 cases/year; 95% of the cases belong to 12 states in the Northeast & Mid-Atlantic U.S.

- Leptospira is the most common zoonotic disease worldwide. Most cases in the U.S. are seen in Hawaii in farmers, veterinarians, and surfers.

- RMSF is the most common rickettsial disease in the U.S., with 600 to 1200 cases/year, mainly in the Southeastern and South Central U.S., especially North Carolina and Arkansas.

- Hanta: The Sin Nombre & Seoul strains are found in the U.S., mainly Utah, Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico.

- Babesiosis: B.microti is seen in the Northeastern states, and B.divergens is seen in Europe.

- Toxoplasma: 30% of the US population are asymptomatic carriers.

- Giardia is one of the most common gastrointestinal parasites in the U.S.