The treatment is mostly geared towards avoiding lifestyle activities that exacerbate the symptoms. Patients may adapt to avoiding physical activity but this may worsen the disease because serum CK rises with loss of aerobic fitness. It may also result in the decreased capacity of muscles to utilize alternate fuels to overcome the block in glycogenolysis. Moreover, there is a marked reduction in the expression of proteins needed for metabolism and calcium hemostasis in non-exercising muscles.

There is evidence proving the beneficial effects of moderate-intensity graded aerobic exercise therapy. Patients reported less significant exercise intolerance and earlier appearance of second wind with this intervention. A balanced weight-lifting approach also lessens the severity of symptoms in some patients.

Howell et al proposed that sodium valproate could cause the up-regulation of the myophosphorylase enzyme. The findings of that study suggested that sodium valproate could be a potential management option for McArdle disease; however, more randomized trials are needed.

It has been noted that creatine may improve ATP storage and exercise tolerability. However, in a trial, high-dose creatine monohydrate resulted in poor exercise tolerance and a significant increase in exercise-induced myalgia. The investigators proposed an explanation that inadequate adaptation to better electromechanical efficacy results in excess muscle contractility during exercise and thus a resultant worsening of symptoms.

Certain dietary interventions which confer favorable effects include taking a sugary meal before planned exercise—for example, having a drink containing 37 g sucrose 5 minutes before exercise reduces initial symptoms of exercise intolerance. A diet rich in carbohydrates results in much better outcomes in comparison to a protein-rich diet. Other nutritional agents that were helpful for some patients but could not yield convincing outcomes during actual experimental studies include branched-chain amino acids, depot glucagon preparations, verapamil, dantrolene sodium, vitamin B6, high dose D-ribose, and high-dose creatine ingestion.