**Comprehensive Cardiovascular Care for COVID-19 Patients**

Cardiac care needs to be optimized for COVID-19 patients with an aim for early detection and management of cardiac ailments with the simultaneous aim at triaging cases and proper protection to prevent or minimize COVID-19 exposure.

**ACE inhibitors (ACEI)/ Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARB)**

Early in 2020, a controversy grew regarding the safe usage of these drugs in COVID-19 patients. The current consensus agrees to the continued use of these medications.

**Remdesivir**

Remdesivir is an antiviral (RNA polymerase inhibitor) drug used to treat COVID-19. A multicenter, double-blind RCT from China studied Remdesivir for adult patients hospitalized for severe COVID-19. The study showed a reduction in clinical improvement in the treatment group compared with controls, but the difference was not significant.

The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued an emergency use authorization for remdesivir in all patients hospitalized with COVID-19. Thus far, no prominent cardiovascular side effects have been reported with Remdesivir, although these may become apparent with future use during the COVID-19 pandemic.

**Hydroxychloroquine and Chloroquine**

Hydroxychloroquine****was introduced as a potential treatment for COVID-19 patients based on an open-label, single-group study from France.

Chloroquine has been noted to cause atrioventricular blocks and prolonged QTc, especially when combined with azithromycin.

**Azithromycin**

Azithromycin was commonly used in combination with hydroxychloroquine as a treatment early in the pandemic. However, several studies of this combination have not shown any clinical benefit.

**Lopinavir-ritonavir**

Lopinavir and ritonavir are protease inhibitors approved by the FDA for HIV-1 infection. In a recent study published in the New England Journal of Medicine, researchers observed no survival benefit after treatment with lopinavir-ritonavir in hospitalized adults with severe COVID-19.

**Steroids**

The World Health Organization has recommended using systemic steroids to treat COVID-19 infection.

**Aspirin**

In a retrospective study, the use of low-dose Aspirin in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 was associated with better outcomes.

**Tocilizumab**

Tocilizumab,****an anti–IL-6 receptor antibody, has been investigated to treat hospitalized COVID-19 patients.

**Convalescent Plasma**

Convalescent plasma for the treatment of COVID-19 patients is obtained from individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 and have generated an immune response. Small randomized trials and case studies have shown some benefit from convalescent plasma in hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19, especially if given early in the disease course.

**Ivermectin**

Ivermectin was introduced as a potential treatment for COVID-19 patients. Ivermectin is an antiparasitic drug used to treat Strongyloides and onchocerciasis infection. A Meta-analysis by Dr. Andrew Hill investigated Ivermectin in 18 randomized clinical trials. There was a 75% reduction in mortality found in moderate or severe infection in six randomized trials. In another randomized trial of 476 patients, Ivermectin did not shorten the duration of the infection. Multiorgan failure was reported in four patients. The FDA has issued a warning against using Ivermectin to prevent or treat COVID-19 infection.

**Vaccination**

The SARS-CoV-2 genetic sequence was published in January 2020, and since then, researcher teams worldwide have been working actively to develop a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2. More than 90 vaccines are being developed at this time.

Immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia developed after ChAdOx1nCov-19 Vaccination was reported as a rare complication developed in several cases. Mechanism of the thrombocytopenia similar to heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.

No significant cardiac complication has been reported with any of the vaccines thus far.