Patients with rumination syndrome commonly report dyspepsia, vomiting, and abdominal pain. The syndrome is characterized by rapid (usually within 10 minutes) regurgitation after a meal. The regurgitation can persist for 1 to 2 hours after finishing a meal. The most common reasons for referrals to gastroenterologists include perceived gastroparesis, vomiting of unknown origin, and refractory gastroesophageal reflux disease.

Obtaining detailed history is important as many patients are not able to differentiate between vomiting and regurgitation. Vomiting is a forceful action in which the individual cannot keep the vomitus within the oral cavity. Regurgitation is usually effortless without gagging, or retching and the individual can keep the regurgitant within the oral cavity. If expectoration occurs, it is voluntary. Nausea is usually absent, and the regurgitant is usually undigested, recognizable, and frequently pleasant in taste. Some patients can predict the onset of regurgitation as they have an impending abdominal pain known as the premonitory urge, which can be severe enough to result in physical distress. Frequent regurgitations can also result in significant weight loss and dehydration.

Past medical history commonly includes depression, anxiety, and somatic disorders. Gastroesophageal reflux does not exclude the diagnosis of rumination syndrome. Eating and feeding disorders should be taken into consideration and ruled out accordingly. Severe weight loss, electrolyte abnormalities, dental erosions, and malnutrition are uncommon in primary rumination syndrome unless underlying eating disorders are present. Although the frequency of these findings is still higher in patients with rumination syndrome when compared to healthy age-matched controls.