Treatment for knee osteoarthritis can be broken down into non-surgical and surgical management. Initial treatment begins with non-surgical modalities and moves to surgical treatment once the non-surgical methods are no longer effective. A wide range of non-surgical modalities is available for the treatment of knee osteoarthritis. These interventions do not alter the underlying disease process, but they may substantially diminish pain and disability.

**Non-Surgical Treatment Options**

- Patient education

- Activity modification

- Physical therapy

- Weight loss

- Knee bracing

- Acetaminophen

- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)

- COX-2 inhibitors

- Glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate

- Corticosteroid injections

- Hyaluronic acid (HA)

The first-line treatment for all patients with symptomatic knee osteoarthritis includes patient education and physical therapy. A combination of supervised exercises and a home exercise program have been shown to have the best results. These benefits are lost after 6 months if the exercises are stopped. The American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons (AAOS) recommends this treatment.

Weight loss is valuable in all stages of knee osteoarthritis. It is indicated in patients with symptomatic arthritis with a body mass index greater than 25. The best recommendation to achieve weight loss is diet control and low-impact aerobic exercise. There is moderate evidence for weight loss based on the AAOS guidelines.

Knee bracing in osteoarthritis includes unloader-type braces that shift the load away from the involved knee compartment. This may be useful in the setting where either the lateral or medial compartment of the knee is involved, such as in a valgus or varus deformity.

Drug therapy is also the first-line treatment for patients with symptomatic osteoarthritis. A wide variety of NSAIDs are available, and the choice should be based on physician preference, patient acceptability, and cost. The duration of treatment with NSAIDs should be based on effectiveness, adverse effects, and past medical history. There is strong evidence for NSAID use based on the AAOS guidelines.

Glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate are available as dietary supplements. They are structural components of articular cartilage, and the thought is that a supplement will aid in the health of articular cartilage. No strong evidence exists that these supplements are beneficial in knee OA; in fact, there is strong evidence against the use according to the AAOS guidelines. There are no major downsides to taking the supplement. If the patient understands the evidence behind these supplements and is willing to try the supplement, it is a relatively safe option. Any benefit gained from supplementation is likely due to a placebo effect.

Intra-articular corticosteroid injections may be useful for symptomatic knee osteoarthritis, especially where there is a considerable inflammatory component. The delivery of the corticosteroid directly into the knee may reduce local inflammation associated with osteoarthritis and minimize the systemic effects of the steroid.

Intra-articular hyaluronic acid injections (HA) injections are another injectable option for knee osteoarthritis. HA is a glycosaminoglycan found throughout the human body and is an important component of synovial fluid and articular cartilage. HA breaks down during the process of osteoarthritis and contributes to the loss of articular cartilage as well as stiffness and pain. Local delivery of HA into the joint acts as a lubricant and may help increase the natural production of HA in the joint. Depending on the brand of HA, it can either be produced from avian cells or bacterial cells in the laboratory and therefore must be used with caution in those with avian allergies. While this is a prevalent treatment option, it is not highly supported in the literature, and there is strong evidence against its use based on the AAOS guidelines.

**Surgical Treatment Options**

- Osteotomy

- Unicompartmental knee arthroplasty (UKA)

- Total knee arthroplasty (TKA)

A high tibial osteotomy (HTO) may be indicated for unicompartmental knee osteoarthritis associated with malalignment. Typically an HTO is done for varus deformities where the medial compartment of the knee is worn and arthritic. The ideal patient for an HTO would be a young, active patient in whom arthroplasty would fail due to excessive component wear. An HTO preserves the actual knee joint, including the cruciate ligaments, and allows the patient to return to high-impact activities once healed. It does require additional healing time compared to an arthroplasty, is more prone to complications, depends on bone and fracture healing, is less reliable for pain relief, and ultimately does not replace cartilage that is already lost or repair any remaining cartilage. An osteotomy will delay the need for arthroplasty for up to 10 years.

**Indications for HTO**

- Young (less than 50 years old), active patient

- Healthy patient with good vascular status

- Non-obese patients

- Pain and disability interfering with daily life

- Only one knee compartment is affected

- A compliant patient who will be able to follow postoperative protocol

**Contraindications for HTO**

- Inflammatory arthritis

- Obese patients

- Knee flexion contracture greater than 15 degrees

- Knee flexion less than 90 degrees

- If the procedure will need greater than 20 degrees of deformity correction

- Patellofemoral arthritis

- Ligamentous instability

A UKA also is indicated in unicompartmental knee osteoarthritis. It is an alternative to an HTO and a TKA. It is indicated for older patients, typically 60 years or older, and relatively thin patients, although, with newer surgical techniques, the indications are being pushed.

**Indications for UKA**

- Older (60 years or older), lower demand patients

- Relatively thin patients

**Contraindications for UKA**

- Inflammatory arthritis

- ACL deficiency

- Fixed varus deformity greater than 10 degrees

- Fixed valgus deformity greater than 5 degrees

- Arc of motion less than 90 degrees

- Flexion contracture greater than 10 degrees

- Arthritis in more than one compartment

- Younger, higher activity patients or heavy laborers

- Patellofemoral arthritis

A TKA is the surgical treatment option for patients failing conservative management and those with osteoarthritis in more than one compartment. It is regarded as a valuable intervention for patients who have severe daily pain along with radiographic evidence of knee osteoarthritis.

**Indications for TKA**

- Symptomatic knee OA in more than one compartment

- Failed non-surgical treatment options

**Contraindications for TKA**

**Absolute**

- Active or latent knee infection

- Presence of active infection elsewhere in the body

- Incompetent quadriceps muscle or extensor mechanism

**Relative**

- Neuropathic arthropathy

- Poor soft-tissue coverage

- Morbid obesity

- Noncompliance due to major psychiatric disorder or alcohol or drug abuse

- Insufficient bone stock for reconstruction

- Poor health or presence of comorbidities that make the patient an unsuitable candidate for major surgery and anesthesia

- Patient’s poor motivation or unrealistic expectations

- Severe peripheral vascular disease

**Advantages of UKA vs. TKA**

- Faster rehabilitation and quicker recovery

- Less blood loss

- Less morbidity

- Less expensive

- Preservation of normal kinematics

- Smaller incision

- Less post-surgical pain and shorter hospital stay

**Advantages of UKA vs. HTO**

- Faster rehabilitation and quicker recovery

- Improved cosmesis

- Higher initial success rate

- Fewer short-term complications

- Lasts longer

- Easier to convert to TKA