Barium-contrast esophagram as the initial test is typically used to identify anatomic abnormalities of the esophagus. An ulcer niche is generally round or oval and may be surrounded by a smooth mound of edema. Shallow ulcers and erosions are recognized on double contrast radiographs as tiny collections of barium in the distal esophagus near the gastroesophageal junction which sometimes is surrounded by a radiolucent halo of the edematous mucosa.

Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy evaluation, provides a mechanism for direct visualization, stratifying and management of esophageal ulcers, can also exclude malignancy, and perform therapy. Esophageal ulcers caused by herpes simplex appears as lesions that usually affect the squamous mucosa of the distal esophagus where the earliest manifestation is a vesicle, although this early stage is rarely seen on endoscopy. The lesions combine to form ulcers (usually less than 2 cm), with normal-appearing intervening mucosa. The ulcers are well defined and have a "volcano-like" appearance.

Esophageal ulcers in cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, tend to be linear or longitudinal and broad-based. The endoscopic presentation of white, mucosal, plaque-like lesions is highly indicative for candida esophagitis.

Peptic ulcerations are irregular or linear shaped, multiple and more prominent in the distal esophagus on endoscopy. Pill-induced ulcerations are usually singular and deep, occurring at points of stasis, with sparing of the distal esophagus. The ulcers may range in size from 1  mm or 2 mm to several centimeters. Remnants of the offending pill may occasionally be identified at the site of injury. Esophageal strictures may be noted on upper endoscopy, especially in patients with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), quinidine, and potassium chloride-induced esophagitis. Helicobacter pylori antigen testing and/or serology should be done in all patients diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease.