The most feared complication following carboxyhemoglobin toxicity is brain damage, divided into persistent neurologic sequelae (PNS) or delayed neurologic sequelae (DNS). Vision loss, loss of coordination, cognitive impairment, personality/mood changes, short-term memory loss, dementia, psychosis, incontinence, and parkinsonism have been reported. Fortunately for some, these symptoms may be transient. With the persistent subgroup, some degree of neurological damage is present acutely and does not resolve. Delayed onset includes those who develop sequelae days to weeks after exposure. The estimated incidence of delayed-onset complications is estimated to be 10% to 30%; however, it is difficult to estimate since neuropsychiatric and cognitive testing is highly variable, depends on age and intelligence quotient (IQ), and is difficult to assess change due to unknown pre-exposure baseline. The best-identified risk factors for developing neurologic complications include early and obvious deficits and loss of consciousness. Carboxyhemoglobin levels do not correlate with the degree of damage and are a poor predictor; however, more recent studies investigate the utility of neuron-specific enolase and S100B as biological markers.

Cardiac ischemia is also a feared complication. Due to hypoxia and inflammatory changes, carbon monoxide exposure can exacerbate angina and cause cardiac injury, especially in those with underlying cardiovascular disease but potentially in patients with non-diseased coronary arteries. A rise in troponin after carbon monoxide toxicity inferred a higher mortality rate; however, this data did not distinguish those with pre-existing cardiovascular disease.