Most atelectasis that appears during general anesthesia leads to transient lung dysfunction that resolves within 24 hours after surgery.  Nevertheless, some patients develop significant perioperative respiratory complications that can lead to increased morbidity and mortality if not treated. Atelectasis is preventable through avoidance of general anesthesia, early mobilization, adequate pain control, and minimizing parenteral opioid administration. When general anesthesia use is unavoidable, the use of continuous positive airway pressure, the lowest possible FiO2 during induction and maintenance, PEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure), lung recruitment maneuvers, and low tidal volumes will help prevent the development of atelectasis.

Changing position from supine to upright increases FRC and decreases atelectasis.

Additional pharmacologic treatment options include mucolytic agents (acetylcysteine) and recombinant human DNase (dornase alpha) in patients with cystic fibrosis. The aforementioned nebulized medications are particularly beneficial in patients with atelectasis secondary to mucous plugging of the airways.

Fiberoptic bronchoscopy also has a role in the management of atelectasis. In one study single-suction, fiberoptic bronchoscopy led to improved lung function and reversal of atelectasis in 76% of cases.  Bronchoscopy should always be the intervention when there is a high suspicion for a mechanically obstructed bronchus and coughing/suctioning have not been successful. Bronchoscopy is also indicated when less invasive efforts, such as early ambulation, incentive spirometry, bronchodilators, and humidity,  have not been successful within 24 hours of their initiation.

Employing early preventative strategies and valuing prompt recognition/diagnosis will not only improve patient outcomes, but it will also significantly decrease cost.