Ingestion or dermal exposure to phenol concentrations greater than 5% should receive a referral to an emergency department for evaluation. Consultation with a regional poison control center in the United States is possible by calling 1-800-222-1222.

The management of a phenol poisoned patient should focus first on primary supportive measures such as ensuring a patent airway, supporting ventilation and oxygenation, and hemodynamic support as needed.

There have been proposals for a variety of decontamination agents for external decontamination of phenol exposure.  However, low molecular weight (300-400MW) polyethylene glycol (PEG) is the currently accepted decontamination fluid.

Gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal is generally not recommended following phenol ingestion. The risk of aspiration in the setting of phenol induced seizures likely outweigh the potential benefit of activated charcoal.  Furthermore, activated charcoal may obscure or confuse the visualization of gastrointestinal endoscopic findings. Upper endoscopy should be a consideration for patients following phenol ingestion to grade the degree of esophageal injury.

Management of extensive surface area phenol burns should take place in conjunction with a regional burn center. Extra-corporeal removal of phenol by hemodialysis is not recommended. However, hemodialysis may be necessary to manage the complications of phenol toxicity. Patients with systemic manifestations of phenol toxicity should be admitted to a monitored setting for at least 24 hours. Asymptomatic patients with normal vital signs and laboratory findings may obtain release from emergency care after 6 to 8 hours of monitoring.