α-globin chain genes are located on chromosome 16. There are normally four genes in total (αα/αα), two inherited from each parent. When there is a deletion in any number of the α globin gene, α-thalassemia manifests. The most common presentation is anemia of varying degrees, which is dependent on the number of deleted genes, affecting the amount of α globin chain production.

**Types of Alpha-thalassemia**

**α-Thalassemia Silent Carrier (αα/α-):**When one α gene is deleted, it is known as a silent carrier of α-thalassemia. There is still enough production of α-chains to ensure a normal hemoglobin synthesis. The patient remains asymptomatic, and the mutation is benign. But mild anemia can occur in some instances, like increased stress or pregnancy. These patients can pass on the mutation to their future progeny, which may or may not manifest as the thalassemia disease state.

**α-Thalassemia Minor (αα/–) or (α-/α-):**Occurs when two α genes are deleted. So now normal α globin chain production is reduced to half. In adults, an increased rate of production of red blood cells can compensate, up to some extent,  for the decrease in α chain production, thus balancing the amount of α and β globin chains. Patients are usually asymptomatic, and any anemia, if present, is mild.

**Hemoglobin H Disease (α-/–):**The state of a compound heterogeneity for α-thalassemia silent carrier and α-thalassemia minor results in Hb H disease, which varies in severity from mild anemia, which is non-transfusion dependent thalassemia (NTDT) to the more severe end where it may be a transfusion-dependent thalassemia (TDT). The excess of β globin chains aggregates to form tetramers known as Hemoglobin H (Hb H). Hb H often precipitates within RBCs, causing damage to the RBC membrane and resulting in hemolytic anemia.

This disease has a broad phenotypic spectrum. HbH disease may not be diagnosed until adulthood. The patients may suffer from splenomegaly, mild jaundice, and sometimes characteristic thalassemia-like bone changes due to extramedullary erythropoiesis. Sometimes the patients may also develop gallstones and suffer acute episodes of hemolysis following infections or exposure to oxidant drugs.

**α-Thalassemia Major (–/–):**In homozygous states, the most severe and fatal form of thalassemia results, namely, Hb Bart hydrops fetalis. In newborns, there occurs an excess production of γ globin chains. These γ globin chains form tetramers resulting in hemoglobin Barts (Hb Barts). Hb Barts has increased oxygen affinity and is inefficient in oxygen unloading at the tissue level of the developing fetus, resulting in hydrops fetalis, rendering the fetus non-viable.

The clinical characteristics seen here are the prenatal onset of generalized edema accompanied by severe pleural and pericardial effusions. These are a result of congestive cardiac failure resulting from severe anemia. Extramedullary erythropoiesis, hepatosplenomegaly, and a large placenta are also seen.

Thalassemias are known to be extremely heterogeneous at the molecular level. Over 200 different mutations of α-thalassemias have been found. The thalassemias are most frequently seen in southeastern and southern Asia, the Middle East, Mediterranean countries, and North and Central Africa; however, due to increased global movement and the mixing of various ethnicities, thalassemias have now become increasingly common in Northern Europe and North America.