Diagnosis with a chronic and progressive neurological disease can be a frightening experience for many patients. Patient education plays a pivotal role in long term management and follow up of Fahr disease due to its incurable and progressive nature.

**Support Groups**

A patient might experience a wide range of emotions, such as fear, anger, depression, anxiety after the diagnosis. Talking to other people suffering from other neurodegenerative diseases may help them to share experiences and information.

**Physical and Exercise Therapy**

Exercise can help patients feel better physically and mentally. It helps to improve balance, flexibility, strength, prevent the development of contractures, quality of life, and socialization. Strengthening and stretching exercises should be advised. Studies have shown that aerobic exercises like walking, riding a stationary bicycle, water aerobics, etc. in patients with parkinsonism features are energizing.

**Fall Prevention**

Patients and caretakers are encouraged to make home safe as much as possible by:

- Eliminating loose rugs, which leads to tripping

- Adequate lightening

- Using shower or tub grab-bars

- Decreasing clutter in the house

**Driving Safety**

As long as no motor symptoms are there, patients can drive, but driving ability should be re-evaluated from time to time, especially if the motor or cognitive decline is observed. If patients start developing seizures, patients are encouraged to discontinue driving. Advise them to use other means of transportation like walking, cabs, public buses, trains.