**Exogenous Endophthalmitis**

Patient presentation is most commonly unilateral and can vary, ranging from asymptomatic to symptoms of a painful eye, conjunctival injection, photophobia, corneal edema, iritis, vitritis, anterior chamber cells, floaters, or reduced vision. On examination, a hypopyon, which represents a layer of white blood cells in the anterior chamber, can occur in most cases of bacterial endophthalmitis and up to 80% of postcataract cases. Funduscopic examination reveals intraocular inflammation, which often obscures the view of the retina with white blood cells that create a "hazy" look. The type of intraocular inflammation can also be a clue, with bacterial endophthalmitis having diffuse intraocular inflammation. In contrast, fungal endophthalmitis will present with "clumps" of inflammation in the aqueous or vitreous. Using ultrasound B-scan can help identify vitritis or chorioretinal infiltrates.

**Endogenous Endophthalmitis**

Endogenous endophthalmitis is most often unilateral, but up to a third of cases have bilateral involvement. Diagnosing endogenous endophthalmitis requires a high degree of suspicion with the presence of systemic risk factors. However, a clinical diagnosis of endogenous endophthalmitis is always difficult as it has a high false-negative rate, and multiple clinic visits may be required to confirm the diagnosis. Some patients may present asymptomatically, while symptomatic patients might present with symptoms such as hypopyon, vitritis, conjunctival injection, corneal edema, iritis, anterior chamber cells, or reduced visual acuity. White infiltrate originating in the choroid and protruding into the vitreous cavity is a key diagnostic finding of endogenous endophthalmitis. The presence of endogenous endophthalmitis is generally not a major concern in patients with life-threatening sepsis secondary to a bacterial etiology, and hence the diagnosis of endogenous endophthalmitis may be delayed with other morbidities under acute management. A 2015 study helped stratify the likelihood of endogenous endophthalmitis as a diagnosis:

- Positive endogenous endophthalmitis

- Uveal tissue abscesses
- Hypopyon greater than 1.5 mm
- Vitreous exudates
- Visible arteriolar septic emboli
- Necrotizing retinitis
- Perivascular hemorrhages with inflammatory
- Panophthalmitis
- Corneal infiltrates of ulcer

- Possible endogenous endophthalmitis

- Hypopyon greater than 1.5 mm
- Vitreous haze with no visible exudates
- Chorioretinal lesions
- Optic neuritis
- White reflex in neonates
- Scleritis

- Probable endogenous endophthalmitis

- Conjunctival injection or chemosis
- Anterior chamber inflammation but no hypopyon
- Absence of vitreous haze
- Lid edema 
- Fever