The discipline of lifestyle medicine has advanced vastly over the years as patients with NCDs pursue tangible outcomes of their lifestyle diseases. Issues of concern throughout the field include implementing lifestyle medicine into practice following certification by healthcare professionals. Barriers include time restrictions, reimbursement issues, and inexperience in clinically counseling patients.

Fifteen core lifestyle medicine competencies were established in 2009 by the American College of Preventive Medicine (ACPM), aiding PCPs in their approach to incorporating lifestyle medicine into their practice. The core competencies are further subclassified from their main four components: Leadership, Assessment Skills, Management Skills, and the Use of Office and Community Support. (Table 1)

Strategies for incorporating wellness into the clinic, medical office, or other healthcare settings include essential leadership, assessment, and management skills, alongside support from the interdisciplinary team of healthcare professionals in each patient's care.

- The promotion and practice of healthy behaviors

- Exhibit a thorough understanding of how lifestyle behavior implementation impacts patient health positively.

- Physician-patient relationships and camaraderie with family members enforce positive lifestyle behaviors.

- Assess and evaluate patient predispositions, such as social, psychological, and biological, and their impacts on patient health outcomes.

- Assess a patient's readiness, willingness, and capability to change lifestyle health behavior.

- Conduct a thorough lifestyle-related history and physical examination implementing the lifestyle "vital signs" in the assessment.

- Implement nationally recognized guidelines for patients with chronic diseases

- Build rapport with patients and their families to maintain behavioral and lifestyle changes by utilizing evidence-based counseling strategies

- Establish collaboratively written action plans (lifestyle prescriptions) for behavior change with patients and their families.

- Implement a team-based approach to practice

- Application of office-based methods, techniques, and technologies to uphold lifestyle medical care

- Measure patient outcomes to enhance the quality of lifestyle behaviors and interventions

- Proper use of community resources that support healthy lifestyles.

Table 1: The 15 core competencies of lifestyle medicine for the clinic visit.