# Continuing Education Activity

Entamoeba coli is one of many non-pathogenic protozoa found in humans. It is transmitted through fecal-oral contact, and the mature cyst can be found in contaminated water. Typically, these protozoa inhabit the large intestinal tract and can be identified in diagnostic stool specimens. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the evaluation and treatment of Entamoeba coli.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Entamoeba coli infection.
- Explain the evaluation of Entamoeba coli infection.
- Review the management options available for Entamoeba coli.

# Introduction

Entamoeba coli is one of many non-pathogenic protozoa found in humans.Entamoeba coli, a nonpathogenic protozoan, from those that cause significant disease. The complete name of the protozoan is usually used to avoid confusion with the bacterium Escherichia coli.

# Etiology

Entamoeba coli is transmitted through fecal-oral contact.

# Epidemiology

Entamoeba coli is global in its distribution, with the highest prevalence in regions with inadequate sanitation, typically in rural areas.

Intestinal parasitic diseases are common in developing countries. In a hospitalized population in Iran, random stool samples showed a prevalence of Entamoeba coli infection in 4.6%.

In a study of 193 children in Malawi, East Africa, Entamoeba coli was found in approximately 10.4% of the sample.

Fresh vegetables can carry parasites and infect a person when consumed unwashed or washed with contaminated water. A study in Tunisia showed that fresh vegetable samples contain helminth eggs and protozoan cysts eggs in 12.5% of the cases; Entamoeba coli was found in 1.6%.Entamoeba coli composed 18.2% of that percentage.

# Pathophysiology

Entamoeba coli, similar to other Entamoeba specifies, has three distinct morphological forms: trophozoite, pre-cystic stage, and cystic stage.Entamoeba coli is rare but may be seen.Entamoeba coli can swallow other organisms, such as Giardia lamblia, which may compete for its food source.Sphaerita species fungus.

The pre-cyst form begins when the trophozoite starts to slightly change its shape, becoming more spherical and containing two nuclei. The cyst is typically 10 to 35 μm in diameter and is a colorless spherical shape.Entamoeba coli is the eight-core nuclei, which develops as the cyst begins to mature. In the octonucleate cystic form, the glycogen vacuole is reabsorbed. Occasionally, the nuclei may replicate until it has 16 nuclei in total. The mature cyst is rich in glycogen with a refractile wall.

Colonization of the host first begins with the ingestion of mature cysts through contaminated food and water sources, typically via fecal-oral contamination. The cyst is hard due to its strong cell wall and can survive up to weeks in an external environment, and this quality allows it to survive the stomach's acidic environment. Cysts release trophozoites in the small intestine forming daughter trophozoites that are minimally motile and migrate to the colon. Entamoeba species, like most of the protozoans, reproduce by binary fission to form two daughter cells. Trophozoites in the colon multiply by undergoing binary fission and slowly reduce in size to first transform into the pre-cyst phase and then to the cyst phase. These cysts undergo mitosis until it becomes octonucleated or occasionally developing 16 nuclei. Host feces release mature octonucleate cysts of Entamoeba coli. Trophozoites found in the stool outside the body are rapidly destroyed, and if ingested, would not survive exposure to the gastric environment.

# History and Physical

Most patients with Entamoeba coli infestation remain asymptomatic, and often, the protozoan is discovered incidentally.Entamoeba coli.

# Evaluation

Ova and parasite testing can be performed to help distinguish between different amoebae species. Testing via microscopy will show the presence of protozoa; however, it is essential to differentiate between Entamoeba coli and the pathogenic amoeba, Entamoeba histolytica.Entamoeba coli cyst due to the refractile wall.

On initial microscopy, the cyst of Entamoeba coli typically has eight nuclei, while Entamoeba histolytica typically has four. The peripheral chromatin is coarse and irregularly clumped for Entamoeba coli and fine, evenly distributed for Entamoeba histolytica. The karyosome of Entamoeba coli is irregular, large, and eccentric, with Entamoeba histolytica having a small, round, and centrally located karyosome.

More advanced tests are available, usually to differentiate between pathogenic and nonpathogenic Entamoeba species. These advanced tests include isoenzyme analysis, antibody detection test, antigen detection test, immunochromatographic assays, and electron microscopy.Entamoeba coli.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment is not indicated for Entamoeba coli infection.

If the patient is symptomatic and no other organism or causes are found, treatment may be indicated. For those with persistent symptoms and no other infection source, treatment can be initiated. In one study, patients with gastrointestinal symptoms for many years with no other diagnosis were found to consistently had Entamoeba coli in the stool and were treated with diloxanide furoate 500 milligrams three times daily for ten days.Entamoeba coli infection. Metronidazole 400 mg orally three times a day is also effective. Patients typically stop developing symptoms within five days.

# Differential Diagnosis

Patients with only Entamoeba coli in stool are typically asymptomatic.

- Bacterial pathogens: Escherichia coli, Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter, and Clostridium difficile

- Inflammatory bowel disease

- Ischemic bowel disease

The differential diagnosis for cyst or protozoa in the stool can include:

- 
Entamoeba histolytica

- 
Chilomastix mesnili

- 
Endolimax nana

- 
Entamoeba dispar

- 
Entamoeba hartmanni

- 
Entamoeba polecki

- 
Iodamoeba buetschlii

# Prognosis

The prognosis of patients with Entamoeba coli is excellent, as most patients are asymptomatic.

# Complications

Complications from Entamoeba coli infection are limited as patients are usually asymptomatic.

# Consultations

The following consultations are required:

- Internal medicine

- Epidemiology

- Microbiology laboratory

- Pharmacy

- Social worker

# Deterrence and Patient Education

If Entamoeba coli are found in stool samples, it may persist for days to years. Treatment is typically not needed. Patients can reduce the chances of getting parasitic infections such as Entamoeba coli by maintaining proper hand hygiene and avoiding contaminated food and water. Entamoeba coli is found globally and more prevalent in areas with poor sanitation.

When traveling to areas with a high prevalence of low sanitation:

- Avoid drinking tap or well water. Avoid ice cubes, which are commonly made from tap water.

- Avoid eating raw fruits and vegetables that are cleaned with tap or well water.

- Avoid street vendors.

- Drink bottled beverages and use bottled water to brush your teeth.

- Wash hands with soap and water frequently, particularly after touching animals, before eating, and after using the restroom.

- Boil water before drinking.

- Use gloves if you need to touch feces.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Entamoeba coli is one of many non-pathogenic protozoa found in humans.

- It is transmitted through fecal-oral contact.

- Typically, mature cysts are ingested from contaminated water and food sources.

- The highest prevalence occurs in areas with inadequate sanitation, typically in rural areas.

- Entamoeba coli has three distinct morphological forms: trophozoite, pre-cystic stage, and cystic stage.

- The most distinguishing feature is the eight-core nuclei, which develops as the cyst begins to mature.

- The cyst is hard due to its strong cell wall and can survive up to weeks in an external environment.

- Trophozoites found in the stool outside the body are rapidly destroyed, and if ingested, would not survive the gastric environment.

- Most patients with Entamoeba coli infestation remain asymptomatic, and often protozoan is discovered incidentally.

- Patients may rarely show gastrointestinal symptoms such as loose stools, colicky abdominal pain, and flatulence.

- Ova and parasite testing can be completed to help distinguish between different amoebae species.

- It is essential to distinguish between Entamoeba coli and the pathogenic amoeba, Entamoeba histolytica.

- Stool samples should be taken at different times to ensure adequate specimens for testing.

- Reverse line hybridization assay is the fastest and most specific method of DNA analysis.

- Treatment is not indicated for Entamoeba coli infection.

- If the patient is symptomatic and no other organism or causes are found, treatment may be indicated.

- Patients can reduce the chances of getting parasitic infections such as Entamoeba coli by maintaining proper hand hygiene.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Entamoeba coli is a common protozoan found in stool worldwide. It is essential to identify and differentiate this non-pathologic protozoan from those causing significant disease. Infection with Entamoeba coli is a sign of fecal-oral contamination. Prevention through proper hand hygiene and avoidance of contaminated food and water. Patient education through multiple medical professionals, such as nursing staff, pharmacists, and physicians, is essential so patients can reduce infection chances. Patients should be advised to see physicians for further workup if gastrointestinal symptoms develop.