The history obtained in voice evaluation should include the description of the voice problems, such as the quality of the voice, fatigability, pitch range, loudness, phonatory effort, breathlessness or presence of conversational dyspnea, and/or impaired singing voice. Patients should also be questioned about past voice disorders and treatments, surgeries, medical history, current medications, environmental factors, and voice habits (hygiene). Understanding which component the patient finds most bothersome is critical.

Associated signs and symptoms with dysphonia that would be concerning for laryngeal malignancy may include weight loss, aspiration, and/or dysphagia. In later stages of laryngeal cancer, dyspnea and otalgia may be present. Other symptoms to ask about include cough and hemoptysis, which could indicate signs of malignancy. Questions about the history of reflux such as heartburn are also pertinent. Patients presenting with dysphonia should be screened for a history of smoking, alcohol use, neck radiation, and/or family history of head and neck cancer.

Hoarseness may be the only abnormal physical exam finding. Voice can be assessed both formally and informally while engaging the patient in conversation, at which time the clinician can evaluate the following components of voice: quality, pitch, nasality, loudness, prosody, and articulation. It is also important to note if any of the following are present: aphonia, tremor, glottic fry, diplophonia (two spontaneous pitches perceived simultaneously), and wet voice.

An auditory-perceptual evaluation of the voice is performed; the two most common systems are the GRBAS and CAPE-V scales. The GRBAS scale is the gold standard in evaluating the perception of voice and assesses the following components: grade (degree of voice dysfunction), roughness (irregularity), breathiness (air escape), asthenia (weakness), and strain (excessive effort) with each parameter graded on a 4 point scale with 0 being normal and 3 being severe.

In addition to the perceptual voice assessment, a full head and neck examination should be performed at the initial encounter. Attention should be given to the patient’s respiratory pattern, noting any patterns of breath-holding or habitual use of residual air.