**Synthesis of Endogenous Melatonin**

Endogenous melatonin is a hormone produced naturally, synthesized, and secreted primarily in the pineal gland. Melatonin production begins with tryptophan, which is converted via a several-step pathway to serotonin in other parts of the brain. Some serotonin produced makes its way to the pineal gland, converted to melatonin in a cyclic, light-dependent process.

The conversion of serotonin to melatonin is controlled by the hypothalamus's suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the coordinator of the body's circadian rhythms. Information about low light to dark conditions travels from the retina along the retinohypothalamic tract to the SCN. The SCN, in turn, sends signals through the sympathetic nervous system to the superior cervical ganglia, which innervates the pineal gland.

Sympathetic stimulation of the pineal gland upregulates the production of the enzyme arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT). AA-NAT functions to convert serotonin to N-acetyl-serotonin, the rate-limiting step in melatonin formation. This intermediate is then converted to melatonin. Studies have shown that bilateral surgical removal of the superior cervical ganglia or SCN in rats stops AA-NAT activation and eliminates the rhythmic pattern of melatonin secretion, which disrupts the sleep-wake cycle.

**Functions of Endogenous Melatonin**

The best-known purpose of melatonin is its role in the promotion of sleep. Melatonin is released from the pineal gland into the third ventricle and from there into circulation. Melatonin is involved in regulating the body's sleep-wake cycles through its interactions with the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus and the retina, promoting sleep and inhibiting wake-promoting signals via interactions with its MT1 and MT2 receptors.

**Biological Mechanism of Melatonin According to Current Research**

- Cancer suppression: Activating tumor suppressor genes such as p53, oncostatic activity, modulation of estrogen and androgens, immunomodulation, increased cytokine production leading to cancer suppression.

- Bone deposition: MT2 receptors are found on osteoblasts, suggesting a role for melatonin in regulating their function.

- Metabolic disorders: Anti-oxidative effects, anti-inflammatory effects, regulation of lipid and glucose metabolism.

- Cardiovascular diseases: Anti-hypertensive effects

- GI conditions: Anti-oxidative effects, anti-inflammatory effects

- Neurodegenerative disorders: Activation of mitochondrial cell survival pathways that may protect against neurodegeneration caused by mitochondrial dysfunction. Regulation of apoptosis. Prevention of vasoconstriction of cerebral arteries.

- Mental disorders: Anxiolytic; the melatonin receptor agonist agomelatine, is approved to treat depression in Europe.

- Pain syndromes: Anti-nociceptive, anti-inflammatory, and analgesic effects

- Reproductive functions: Involvement in several pathways resulting in a reduced risk of complications, gonadotropic secretion, and higher rates of mature oocytes and quality embryos.