Amantadine is an antiviral agent with mild antiparkinsonian activity. Amantadine was used in the early 2000s for Influenza A treatment. A 2006 meta-analysis showed that the drug decreased influenza symptoms by one day and decreased the severity of fever and other symptoms. However, high resistance levels have emerged recently, initially from Asia and now in North America. As of 2011, the CDC does not recommend treatment or prophylaxis of influenza A due to the high resistance levels.

Amantadine is now used mostly for Parkinson disease. Clinical trials have shown that amantadine decreases bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor symptoms. There is a combined synergistic effect with added levodopa, which is converted to dopamine by striatal enzymes in the CNS. There can be a transient benefit to the drug, so short-term therapy for patients with the mild disease is best.

Besides the two FDA-approved usages of amantadine, a few other diseases can benefit from amantadine. Clinical trials have conflicting results for the reduction of chorea in Huntington disease. The 2012 American Academy of Neurology guidelines suggests amantadine is likely effective in decreasing chorea, although the degree of effect is unknown.

**FDA-labeled Indications**

- Parkinson disease: Drug-induced extrapyramidal reactions

- Influenza A: Prophylaxis and treatment

**Non-FDA Approved Indications**

- Huntington disease: Chorea

- Multiple sclerosis: Fatigue

- Restless leg syndrome

- Traumatic brain injuries