Understanding the spleen and issues related to the spleen is of great clinical significance because despite it not being a vital organ, issues thereof can potentially be life-threatening. Understanding the function of the spleen and how those functions and responsibilities may be taken up by red bone marrow, the liver, and lymph nodes allow for the spleen to be classified as a no-vital organ and treatment decisions can be made on this basis. Such treatments may include repair, partial splenectomy, or even complete splenectomy as previously cited.

The spleen is one of the abdominal organs with the greatest incidence of injury, with rupture being a big concern possibly justifying splenectomy to avoid excessive hemorrhaging into the peritoneal cavity. A rupture is characterized by a break of the capsule encasing the spleen and disruption of the parenchyma beneath. Such rupture may be caused by blunt force or penetrating trauma. It is also important to note that splenic rupture should be watched for in the presence of left rib fractures as it is not uncommon for a rib bone fragment to puncture the spleen.

The spleen may also become enlarged (splenomegaly) for a variety of reasons. Some of these reasons include viral or bacterial infection, vein blockages and related increased venous pressure, cancer, and circulations issues relate to abnormal cells. Splenic enlargement poses a risk for splenic rupture which may warrant surgical removal. An enlarged spleen may be palpable allowing for detection upon physical examination and may be further evaluated via radiographic imaging studies.

It is also important to note the clinical significance of spleen removal when discussing splenic injury and justification of removal. With the absence of a spleen, individuals lose some of their immunological potentials, resulting in the lesser potential to combat disease and infection. Those without a spleen are also more susceptible to specific infections including those brought upon by Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, and Haemophilus influenzae. Thus, it is recommended that patients who have a surgical history of splenectomy be vaccinated accordingly to reduce vulnerability. Sickle cell disease also may warrant the use of immunizations and vaccinations to aid the immunological response that may be impaired by the abnormal interaction the irregular cells may have in the spleen thereby preventing optimal splenic function.