Patients commonly present to emergency departments, primary care offices, or specialty clinics with musculoskeletal injuries. The initial management of an acute traumatic limb injury involves a thorough history and physical evaluation of the injury, which includes a motor, sensory, and neurovascular examination. Injuries that result in instability require immobilization, decreasing the likelihood of further damage, protecting soft tissues, alleviating pain, and accelerating healing. Instability may result from direct injury to the bones (fracture), joints (dislocation), or the soft tissues such as the muscles (strain) or ligaments (sprain). Following the diagnosis of an unstable injury, a splint may be the best treatment option and is loosely defined as an external device used to immobilize an injury or joint and is most often made out of plaster. A splint must be differentiated from a cast, to determine the best form of immobilization based on the clinical scenario. Contrary to a splint, a cast is a circumferential application of plaster that rigidly immobilizes a particular joint or fracture. Because of their circumferential restrictive nature, casts are not placed in the acute post-injury setting as they do not accommodate for soft tissue swelling.

Different forms of splints may be fashioned depending on injury location and position of immobilization needed. The goal of splinting is to correct and restore anatomic length, rotation, and angulation of a patient-specific injury. Splints are treatments utilized by a variety of medical personnel as either a temporizing or definitive management strategy for stable fractures.