M. tuberculosis causes tuberculosis. M. tuberculosis is an alcohol and acid-fast bacillus. It is part of a group of organisms classified as the M. tuberculosis complex. Other members of this group are, Mycobacterium africanum, Mycobacterium bovis, and Mycobacterium microti. Most other mycobacteria organisms are classified as non-tuberculous or atypical mycobacterial organisms.

M. tuberculosis is a non-spore forming, non-motile, obligate-aerobic, facultative, catalase-negative, intracellular bacteria. The organism is neither gram-positive nor gram-negative because of a very poor reaction with the Gram stain. Weakly positive cells can sometimes be demonstrated on Gram stain, a phenomenon known as "ghost cells."

The organism has several unique features compared to other bacteria such as the presence of several lipids in the cell wall including mycolic acid, cord factor, and Wax-D. The high lipid content of the cell wall is thought to contribute to the following properties of M. tuberculosis infection:

- Resistance to several antibiotics

- Difficulty staining with Gram stain and several other stains

- Ability to survive under extreme conditions such as extreme acidity or alkalinity, low oxygen situation, and intracellular survival(within the macrophage)

The Ziehl-Neelsen stain is one of the most commonly used stains to diagnose T.B. The sample is initially stained with carbol fuchsin (pink color stain), decolorized with acid-alcohol, and then counter-stained with another stain (usually, blue-colored methylene blue). A positive sample would retain the pink color of the original carbol fuchsin, hence the designation, alcohol and acid-fast bacillus (AAFB).