Fludeoxyglucose F18 (FDG) is a positron-emitting radiotracer used with positron emission tomography (PET) to diagnose and monitor various conditions. Standard imaging modalities such as X-ray, CT, and MRI allow great detail visualization of healthy and diseased tissue. However, some diseases do not have structural anatomic abnormalities or do not manifest until later stages. Therefore, functional imaging techniques like PET scans can complement structural modalities to overcome some deficiencies. PET scan uses radiotracers injected into the patient before the scan to visualize the blood flow and metabolic and biochemical activities in diseased and healthy tissues. FDG is a glucose analog that tends to accumulate in the tissue with high glucose demand, like tumors and inflammatory cells.

Neurology: The FDA-approved use of FDG in neurology is to identify regions of abnormal glucose metabolism associated with foci of epileptic seizures. It can also help visualize the changes in glucose metabolism in various parts of the brain, which helps in diagnosing various neurological conditions like Alzheimer's disease and brain trauma. (Off-label)

Oncology: In oncology, FDG is FDA approved for evaluating, staging, and monitoring treatment for cancers such as non-small cell lung cancer, lymphomas, colorectal carcinoma, malignant melanoma, esophageal carcinoma, head and neck cancer, thyroid carcinoma, and breast cancer.

Cardiology: The FDA-approved indication of FDG is for identifying left ventricular myocardium with residual glucose metabolism and evaluating left ventricular dysfunction when used together with myocardial perfusion imaging. FDG can also help visualize atherosclerosis resulting from the accumulation of macrophages and myocardial ischemia. (Off-label)

Inflammatory Conditions: The clinical application of FDG in infectious and inflammatory diseases is in orthopedic infections, rheumatologic conditions, osteomyelitis, ileitis, and vasculitis. (Off-label)