It is important to understand the anatomic considerations of the orbit as it pertains to completing nerve blocks for regional anesthesia and achieving an akinetic globe. The orbit consists primarily of adipose tissue, and the globe itself is located in the anterior part. The ophthalmic nerve, a branch of the trigeminal nerve, is responsible for the sensory innervation of the globe.

All of these nerves except the trochlear nerve transverse through the muscular cone of the orbit, thus injection of local anesthetic in this area can reliably provide akinesia to the globe, thereby blocking both sensory and motor innervation. Because of the proximity to these nerves in the muscular cone, there is a risk for inadvertent puncture of the optic nerve and vasculature of the orbit.

When injecting the local anesthetic, it is important to keep the injection needle extraconal when possible to minimize the risk of puncturing important structures resulting in vision loss, nerve damage, and bleeding. In terms of physiology, the understanding of intraocular pressure is an important concept in regards to delivering and managing anesthesia in eye surgeries. Intraocular pressure is described as the pressure the contents of the eyes produce on the surrounding wall. Increases in this pressure can have detrimental effects secondary to impairments in perfusion, resulting in a decrease in blood flow to ocular structures, including the retina, choroid, and optic nerve. Normal intraocular pressure is considered approximately to be 10 mm Hg to 21 mm Hg.

There is a substantial increase in intraocular pressures during ophthalmic surgeries. Moreover, an injection of 0.5 mL into the intravitreal space has the potential to increase intraocular pressure by over 150% compared to pre-injection levels. These fluctuations in pressure can compromise perfusion to the retina and optic nerve, resulting in visual impairment following surgery.