**Subtalar Joint Without Ultrasound Guidance**

The foot is positioned so a view of the lateral aspect of the ankle can be obtained. With the foot in perpendicular position relative to the leg, palpate inferior and anterior to the distal tip of the lateral malleolus. When the depression in this region, associated with sinus tarsi, is palpated, a marking can be made. Cleaning of the area and cutaneous analgesia of the region can be done at this point.

Next, with the 20-gauge needle attached to the end of an empty 10 ml syringe, the joint is entered by directing the needle horizontally across the ankle while keeping it in line with the lateral malleolus (see media item 1).

Keeping negative pressure on the syringe plunger during this process and feeling for the subtle pop of penetrating the synovial membrane will allow the physician to known when the joint has been accessed. The presence of synovial fluid in the syringe should indicate success. Draining of effusion and/or injection of medication can commence at this point in the procedure. Due to the limited size of the ankle joints, switching of syringes to continue removing effusion after the syringe is full will rarely be required.

Pressure with gauze should be applied to the skin after withdrawing the needle, which can be followed by an adhesive bandage/dressing.

**Subtalar Joint With Ultrasound Guidance**

The foot is positioned so a view of the lateral aspect of the ankle can be obtained. With the foot in perpendicular position relative to the leg, palpate anterior to the distal tip of the lateral malleolus. The ultrasound transducer can then be placed in short axis to the foot just anterior to the lateral malleolus directly over the sinus tarsi. The image on the screen should show the echogenic talus on one side of the screen and the echogenic calcaneus on the other side with the sinus tarsi residing in between. Cleaning of the area and cutaneous analgesia of the region can be done at this point.

Next, with the 20-gauge needle attached to the end of an empty 10 ml syringe, the joint is entered by directing the needle posteromedial towards the sinus tarsi keeping the needle horizontally across the ankle in line with the lateral malleolus (see media item 2).

**Tibiotalar Joint Without Ultrasound Guidance**

The foot is positioned, so a view of the anteromedial aspect of the ankle can be obtained. With the foot in perpendicular position relative to the leg, palpate approximately 1 cm anterior to the distal tip of the medial malleolus. Keeping posterior and medial to the extensor hallucis longus and tibialis anterior tendons (can be made easier to palpate with asking the patient to dorsiflex their great toe), a marking can be made between the palpated medial malleolus and tendons. Cleaning of the area and cutaneous analgesia of the region can be done at this point. Next, with the 20-gauge needle attached to the end of an empty 10 ml syringe, the joint is entered by directing the needle in a slightly posterolateral direction across the ankle while keeping it in relative parallel relation with the dorsum of the foot, the horizontal plane of the tibiotalar joint (see media item 3).

**Tibiotalar Joint With Ultrasound Guidance**

Placement of the ultrasound transducer should be longitudinal and just lateral to the extensor hallucis longus and tibialis anterior tendons. Setting the ultrasound depth to approximately 4 cm should provide a view of the anterior surface of the tibia on one side and the curving dome of the talus on the other side. The desired tibiotalar joint resides between these two bony landmarks (see media item 4). The entrance with the syringe into the joint is performed in the same manner as is done without the ultrasound and detailed above. The location at which to enter the skin with the syringe can be made more precise with the use of the ultrasound image to guide how proximal or distal on the ankle to enter the skin.

**Proper Disposition of Synovial Fluid for all Methods of Collection**

- Sterile tube: Send for culture for aerobic bacteria, anaerobic bacteria, and fungi

- EDTA or heparinized tube: Send for white blood cell count with differential

- Fluoride tube: Send for glucose level

- Clear glass tube: for visual inspection and any other indicated studies

- Slides: Order for gram stains to be performed and polarized light microscopy for crystal examination