While the exact cause of prostate cancer is unknown, variations in the DNA leading to mutations or aberrant gene fusions could be the initiating event. However, there are strong risk factors that facilitate the development of malignancy. Older age, western African ancestry, family history of prostate cancer, especially with segregation of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene variations, Lynch syndrome, obesity, unhealthy diet style, inadequate beta-carotene, alcohol consumption, smoking, and specific medications are known risk factors with increasing evidence of their contributions to the underlying etiology.

**Epidemiology**

Most men with prostate cancer will not die from the disease. In the United States, the 5-year overall survival rate is 99%.

Prostate cancer is more common in developed countries than in the Third World.

In 60% of countries worldwide (112/185), prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy.

The worldwide incidence of prostate cancer is 30.7 per 100,000, and the global mortality rate is 7.7 per 100,000.

According to the World Cancer Research Fund International, the nations with the highest per capita incidence and mortality rates of prostate cancer are:

Countries with the Highest Prostate Cancer Incidence per 100,000:

- Guadaloupe (184)

- Martinique (168)

- Ireland (111)

- Barbados (110)

- St. Lucia (103)

- Estonia (102)

- Puerto Rico (101)

- France (100)

- Sweden (99)

- Bahamas (98)

Countries with the Highest Prostate Cancer Mortality Rate per 100,000:

- Zimbabwe (42)

- Barbados (40.3)

- Haiti (40.2)

- Zambia (40.1)

- Jamaica (39.4)

- Trinidad and Tobago  (38.9)

- Bahamas (36)

- Dominican Republic (35)

- St. Lucia (33)

- Ivory Coast (30)