Periodontal disease refers to a disease process that involves one of the four supporting structures surrounding a tooth, collectively known as the periodontium. These structures include the gingiva (gums), alveolar bone, cementum, and periodontal ligament. Gingivitis is a term used to describe inflammation of the junctional epithelial cells caused by bacteria and debris accumulation between the gum line and surface of the tooth. It is the mildest and most common form of periodontal disease, as it is present in up to 90% of the population. While gingivitis is potentially reversible with an improvement in oral hygiene, progression to periodontitis is irreversible and can have devastating effects. Periodontitis refers to a chronic, destructive, inflammatory disease state that occurs when bacteria penetrate deeper into the gingival tissue; this leads to a host immune response that attempts to defend against bacteria but causes periodontal destruction. Periodontitis leads to progressive alveolar bone loss and subsequent loss of the affected tooth.

The etiology of periodontal disease can be attributed to several factors, which can be categorized as modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors. Modifiable risk factors include tobacco smoking, poor oral hygiene, diabetes, and pregnancy. One of the most important modifiable risk factors is tobacco smoking, as the risk for periodontal disease is 5 to 20 times higher in people who smoke compared to those who do not smoke.Porphyromonas gingivalis, a key microbe involved in the pathogenesis of gingivitis.

Non-modifiable risk factors for gingivitis and associated periodontal disease include age and genetic disorders. The literature shows that the inflammatory response to plaque deposition in older individuals contains a significantly higher number of inflammatory cells than in younger individuals. Additionally, aging increases the risk of inadequate oral hygiene practices, further contributing to the increased risk of gingivitis and periodontal disease in the older population. Finally, genetic disorders such as Down syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and Crohn disease have proven to increase the risk of gingival disease.

The most common initial presentation of early gingival disease is when an asymptomatic patient is discovered to have gingivitis during a routine dental visit. While symptoms are rare in early disease, the most common initial manifestation in early gingival disease is bleeding gums during brushing and flossing. Halitosis is another common symptom early in the disease. Patients at high risk who do not regularly visit the dentist often experience manifestations of late gingival disease, such as pain with chewing food, receding gums, and even loss of teeth. This deterioration is why routine dental screenings are vital in identifying early disease and initiating early treatment.