HLH is characterized by a dysregulated innate immune system, specifically NK cells and CD 8+ cytotoxic T-cells. In a healthy immune system, NK cells and CD 8+ cytotoxic T-cells produce two cytolytic enzymes: perforin and granzyme. These proteins are packaged into granules that are discharged into the immunologic synapse between the effector and target cell. Perforin forms destabilizing pores in the target cell's membrane allowing for the entrance of the strongly proteolytic granzyme as well as osmotic shifts, which result in target cell degradation. In patients with HLH, this process is disrupted through specific genetic mutations or acquired through some highly immunogenic stimulus (a viral infected or malignant cell). The ineffective interaction between NK cells, CD 8+ cytotoxic T-cells, and their targets leads to a vicious cycle of inflammation. More and more cytotoxic cells are recruited but remain unable to rid the body of the pathologic antigen, and a massive increase in circulating cytokines occurs. This hypercytokinemia leads to widespread activation of macrophages and the resultant hemophagocytosis and excessive, organ-damaging inflammation, which characterizes the disease.

The first genetic mutations identified in primary or familial HLH were located in the PRF1 gene, which encodes for perforin.

Early research into HLH demonstrated high levels of serum soluble interleukin 2 receptor (sIL-2R) in affected children. Additionally, levels correlated well with disease activity. (2786434) Since the discovery of sIL-2R, many other cytokines have been implicated in the pathophysiology of the disease, including interferon-gamma (INF-y), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and IL-2. Limited success has been demonstrated in experiential studies of their related inhibitor antibodies.