Global data on causes of stillbirth are limited due to difficulty in assigning causation.

The Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network study found stillbirth risk factors known at the start of pregnancy accounted for only a small fraction of stillbirth risk.  Only prior stillbirth or pregnancy loss from preterm birth or fetal-growth restriction demonstrated predictive value.

The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health Development (NICHD) created the Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network. It evaluated the cause for stillbirth at 20 weeks or greater between 2006 and 2008 in 59 hospitals in five US states. The main causes of stillbirth in the US were obstetrical, including abruption and multifetal gestation complications and spontaneous labor or rupture membranes before viability. This study showed the cause of stillbirth could be assigned in 75% of cases when a systematic evaluation is performed, as will be outlined below.

**Placental Abnormalities:**

Fetal growth restriction and placental abnormalities are the most prevalent findings in stillbirth. Most pregnancies with these findings, however, do not result in stillbirth.

Placental factors such as a placental abruption are found in six percent of stillbirths.

**Diabetes**

Diabetes increases stillbirth risk up to five times.

**Race**

Non-Hispanic, black women in the U.S. have a higher rate of stillbirth (11 per 1000 births) compared to other racial groups. This group also has a higher incidence of diabetes, hypertension, premature membrane rupture, and abruption may account for the higher rate of stillbirth.

**Obesity**

Obesity is an independent risk factor for stillbirth, even after controlling for diabetes, smoking, gestational diabetes, and preeclampsia. Obesity is a major health problem in developed countries and is defined as a body mass index greater than 30 kg/m2. Nonobese women have a stillbirth risk of 5.5 per 1000. The risk is 8 per 1000 for BMI 30 to 39.9 kg/m^2 and 11/1000 for BMI greater than 40 kg/m^2.

**Age**

The risk of stillbirth is augmented by advanced maternal age due to an increased risk for aneuploidy and medical complications of pregnancy. Even after controlling for these risk factors, maternal age over 35 has an increased risk for stillbirth, which is accentuated by nulliparity. At age 40, the risk is 1/116 for a nullipara and 1/304 for a multipara.

**Substance Misuse**

Smoking tobacco increases the risk of stillbirth, both antepartum and intrapartum (15/1000). Quitting by the beginning of the second trimester reduces the risk to that of a nonsmoker.

The direct cause for stillbirths associated with alcohol consumption has not been identified, yet the risk is well documented. In pregnancy, 11.5% of pregnant women consume at least one drink in 30 days, and 3.9 % consumed four or more drinks on at least one occasion over a period of 30 days. The odds ratio for stillbirth associated with alcohol use is 1.36 (95% CI: 1.05-1.76).

In pregnancy, 4.4% of women use illicit drugs. There is a 1.5 OR for stillbirth associated with opioid use in pregnancy (95% CI: 1.3-1.8) and a 5.1 OR for stillbirth associated with methamphetamine use in pregnancy (95% CI: 3.7-7.2).

The most common finding in pregnancy complicated by substance use is growth restriction. Placental dysfunction, vasoconstriction, hypoxia, and alteration in endogenous chemicals responsible for regulating optimal wellbeing, are attributed to the increased risk of stillbirth associated with substance misuse.

**Gestational Age >38 weeks**

Stillbirth risk is increased by early and late-term gestational age. Induction of labor after 40 weeks may decrease the risk of stillbirth and cesarean delivery. 145  The risk of stillbirth at 37 weeks is 0.21/1000. At 38 weeks, the risk of stillbirth in pregnancies managed expectantly is equivalent to those managed by induced delivery. At 42 weeks, the risk of stillbirth is 1.08/1000.  When considering the benefit of inducing labor to reduce stillbirth, other factors, including neonatal and maternal adverse outcomes, must be considered. At 41 weeks, over 1400 deliveries would have to be induced to prevent one stillbirth. 22914394 Induction of labor is recommended after 42 weeks and might be considered after 41 weeks of gestation.

**Hypertension**

Chronic hypertension increases stillbirth risk three-times.

**Birth Defects**

Congenital defects, defined as physical or biochemical abnormalities, occur in 1/33 pregnancies and are associated with a higher risk of stillbirth. The detection of congenital defects prenatally may impact antenatal surveillance policy in hopes of reducing the risk of stillbirth. Stillbirth risk is 11/1000 for bladder exstrophy and 490/1000 for the limb-body-wall complex; even for isolated congenital defects not affecting major organs, the risk of stillbirth increases. The risk for stillbirth associated with cleft lip with cleft palate is 10/1000,  transverse limb deficiencies 26/1000, longitudinal limb deficiencies 11/1000, and the amniotic band associated limb defects 110/1000. The increased stillbirth risk for sacral agenesis is 13/1000, isolated spina bifida 24/1000, and holoprosencephaly 30/1000 may be underestimated due to failure to account for elective termination of pregnancy.

**Polyhydramnios**

Polyhydramnios complicates 1% to 2% of pregnancies. It is defined as an amniotic fluid index over 24 cm or a deepest vertical pocket of fluid greater than or equal to 8 cm, as assessed by abdominal ultrasound. Fifty percent of the time, the cause of polyhydramnios is idiopathic. In these cases, there is an association with an increased risk for fetal macrosomia, as well as two to five times increased relative risk of stillbirth.

The relative risk for stillbirth is 7.7 for persistent polyhydramnios compared with pregnancies with resolved polyhydramnios. Compared with pregnancies unaffected by polyhydramnios, the risk of stillbirth for women with polyhydramnios increases with gestational age, with the lowest risk at 26 weeks gestation, seven times increased relative risk at 37 weeks, and 11 times increased relative risk at 40 weeks. The risk persists even after excluding confounding variables and sharply increases at term.

**Oligohydramnios**

Oligohydramnios is defined as an amniotic fluid index (AFI) less than or equal to 5 cm, or a maximum vertical pocket of under 2 cm. The deepest vertical pocket is the preferred measurement since the AFI detects more cases of suspected oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios, which results in more inductions of labor with no improvement in perinatal outcome.

Oligohydramnios is associated with an increased risk for small for gestational age fetuses and stillbirth. For stillbirth, the risk is 11.54 (95% CI: 4.05-32.9).

**Umbilical Cord**

The umbilical cord may be implicated in stillbirth; however, a nuchal cord may be present in up to 30% of normal births. Evaluation of evidence of cord obstruction or circulatory compromise is necessary when evaluating for the cause of stillbirth.

**Late-onset Prenatal Care**

Late-onset prenatal care and prior home delivery are independent risk factors for subsequent adverse perinatal outcomes.

**Multiple Gestations**

Twin gestations increase the stillbirth rate by four times (19.6/1000), and for higher-order multiples, the rate is even higher at 30/1000.

Rhesus immunization, gestational hypertension, and gestational diabetes showed a higher odds of stillbirth but did not reach statistical significance**.**

**Infection**

Infection as a cause of stillbirth may be underrepresented because signs and symptoms of infection are often undetected, and evaluation for infection is often not conducted.Escherichia coli 29%, group B streptococcus (GBS)12%, enterococcus 12%, and rarely Listeria monocytogenes. The placental evaluation found evidence of infection in 99% of culture-positive cases. Non-bacterial organisms causing stillbirth included cytomegalovirus 8%, parvovirus 3%, syphilis 2%, and herpes simplex virus 2%. Infection is unlikely the cause of stillbirth unless it results in significant autopsy or placental findings. Serologic screening for toxoplasmosis, chlamydia, rubella, or herpes is usually not indicated when these infections are not detected on placental or autopsy examination.

Group B streptococcal infection is linked to the cause of stillbirth in 1% of stillbirths in developed countries and 4% in African countries.  These estimates are poor given the low quality of collected data. In Mozambique, the rate of group B streptococcal associated stillbirth was 17%, which may be due to the high rate of screening performed there.

Having a treated chlamydia infection before or during pregnancy does not increase the risk for preterm delivery, intrauterine growth restriction, or stillbirth.

**Antiphospholipid Syndrome**

Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), in addition to thrombotic events, has been linked to stillbirth since 1984.

An increased risk for pregnancy morbidity in women with (APS) is seen in women with a history of systemic lupus erythematosus, thromboses, previous adverse pregnancy outcomes, and low complement levels in the first trimester.

Clinical criteria for the diagnosis of APS include a confirmed history of a thrombotic event without evidence of inflammation in the vessel wall, one or more unexplained fetal deaths after 10 weeks gestational age, three or more deaths before the 10th week of gestation, or a preterm delivery due to eclampsia, preeclampsia with severe features or other placental insufficiencies.

Currently, available treatment for APS remains associated with an unsuccessful pregnancy 20% to 30% of the time.

Lifelong anticoagulation is recommended for anyone with antiphospholipid syndrome and a prior thrombotic event. With pregnancy diagnosis, warfarin must be stopped, and low molecular weight heparin started. Unlike warfarin, which crosses the placenta and increases the risk for fetal teratogenicity and hemorrhage, LMWH does not cross the placenta and is safe for the fetus.

A personal or family history of thromboembolism appears to have an increased risk for stillbirth.

**Intrahepatic Cholestasis**

Intrahepatic cholestasis may affect 0.1% to 2 % of pregnant women.