PS type I is characterized by brachycephaly (due to bi-coronal synostosis), maxillary hypoplasia, hypertelorism, prognathism, and dental abnormalities; broad thumbs and great toes, variable brachydactyly-syndactyly, and having normal intelligence.

The clinical features of PS type II are cloverleaf skull (Kleeblattschadel type craniosynostosis), which is usually associated with hydrocephalus, maxillary hypoplasia with resultant proptosis, a “beak-shaped” nose, inferiorly displaced ears, and ankylosis of elbow joints. It is usually associated with mental and neurological impairment and visceral abnormalities.

The clinical findings in patients with PS type III are like those present in PS type II, except for the cloverleaf skull deformity. Additional features include short anterior cranial fossa base, natal teeth, proptosis, and various visceral abnormalities (hydronephrosis, pelvic kidneys, and hypoplastic gallbladder). In PS III also, patients have mental and neurological maldevelopment and may develop seizures after birth.

Tracheal cartilaginous sleeve (TCS) is an airway malformation, seen in PS, in which distinct tracheal rings cannot be identified. Instead of the normal tracheal rings, a continuous segment of cartilage extends from the sub-glottis to the carina. This abnormality is also seen in Apert and Crouzon syndromes. The presence of TCS can make the prognosis poor due to the ensuing respiratory complications.

Sometimes, patients may have associated cleft palate, choanal atresia, tracheomalacia, a congenital fusion of vertebrae, Arnold-Chiari malformation, and imperforate anus.

The main ophthalmological findings seen in PS are proptosis, squint, papilledema, and iris colobomas.