All of the discussed antiseptics are administered topically onto the skin surface. However, the application may differ depending on the antiseptic, concentration, and/or formulation. The two most widely administered antiseptic surgical scrub agents in dermatologic surgery are chlorhexidine and povidone-iodine.

Chlorhexidine-based scrubs are generally composed of 0.5% to 4% chlorhexidine in alcohol or aqueous base typically combined with detergent. Recent evidence suggests that it provides a bactericidal activity for 24 hours after a 2-minute application, making it a useful antiseptic for anticipated long procedures. However, as chlorhexidine can cause irreversible keratitis and middle ear ototoxicity (with sensorineural deafness), topical administration is relatively contraindicated for skin preparation involving or adjacent to the eye and conchal bowl.

Chloroxylenol 3% surgical scrub solution may be safely substituted and used for these areas. Chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG) is a commonly used antiseptic recommended by the Centers for Disease Control for skin cleansing before central venous catheter insertion in adults and children. Current guidelines do not recommend using CHG as an antiseptic in neonates due to a lack of sufficient safety data in premature infants. However, chlorhexidine is commonly used worldwide for off-label indications in neonatal intensive care units (NICU).

Povidone-iodine scrubs are composed of 7.5% to 10.0% povidone-iodine, typically in an aqueous or alcohol base, and are occasionally combined with detergent. The scrub is painted on a clean skin surface and allowed to dry. The product must dry to be bactericidal with a preferred minimum of 2 minutes drying time, although the latter can vary depending on the product used as the scrub. Clinicians can safely use povidone-iodine aqueous scrubs near the eye and conchal bowl.

Given the advantages of chlorhexidine and povidone-iodine, other antiseptics are used less often or are primarily historical in dermatologic surgery. Briefly, isopropyl alcohol comes as a solution and is often used as a swab to cleanse the skin before a biopsy. Hexachlorophene scrub is an emulsion, while benzalkonium and hydrogen peroxide are both solutions. All are primarily historical with regards to antisepsis in dermatologic surgery.