The patient with OSSN typically presents to the outpatient department with complaints of the presence of the fleshy mass or a round lump in the eye, excessive irritation, redness, foreign body sensation, itching, reduced visual acuity due to astigmatism or visual axis involvement. The conjunctival OSSN is present in the bulbar conjunctiva, which may slowly encroach over the limbus and cornea. It can rarely also present as bilateral or multifocal mass.

OSSN is clinically defined as an elevated grey white lesion with irregular borders and having a tuft of blood vessels. It usually has a major blood vessel associated with it called the sentinel or feeder vessel.

**OSSN Morphological Classification**

- **Papillomatous**- Benign OSSN, pink to cherry red, exophytic, strawberry-like. They are stippled red in appearance, and the red areas are due to the fibrovascular core of the lesion. They have bimodal age distribution and growth characteristics. In the pediatric population, they pedunculated multiple lesions involving fornix and caruncle or eyelid margin. In adults, they are sessile, single present in conjunctiva and limbus.

- **Leukoplakic**- They are preinvasive. These have surface hyperkeratinization associates with the thickening and whitish appearance of the tumor.

- **Gelatinous**- They are circumscribed and have the hairpin configuration of conjunctival vessels. They are divided into nodular and diffuse types. The nodular type is localized, has well-defined margins, and spread to nearby lymph nodes. In contrast, the diffuse type is less common and involves conjunctiva masquerading as chronic conjunctivitis. This is slow-growing, with tumefaction occurring late in the disease process.

The various morphological patterns of OSSN show considerable overlap, and it usually becomes difficult to differentiate benign from preinvasive and invasive masses. The large tumor masses invading deeper structures are usually suggestive of malignancy.

**Corneal OSSN**

They are preinvasive. The surface is mottled, translucent, opalescent, and has a ground glass sheet kind of appearance. The margins are sharply defined and have fimbriated or pseudopodia-like borders. They are avascular. The corneal involvement is due to the spread of abnormal epithelial cells from the nearby limbus. The convex leading edge spread in the form of an advancing arc. In addition, white dots are seen over the greyish epithelium. Corneal OSSN is either stationary or slow-growing, indolent, and known for recurrence.

Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has the same morphological presentation as CIN, but the conjunctival mass is more plaque-like elevated, and immobile. Bilateral lesions are rare but may be keratinized and papillary in appearance. They have feeder vessels invading the SCC, which is suggestive of epithelial basement membrane disruption.

Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is a more aggressive variant and mimics SCC clinically. This is usually misdiagnosed and picked up after multiple recurrences of SCC. It can arise anywhere on the conjunctiva and ocular surface. They are more invasive than SCC and can have metastases to regional lymph nodes.