# Continuing Education Activity

Tracheal injury is an uncommon occurrence seen primarily after healthcare procedures, blunt and penetrating trauma, and caustic inhalations. Damage to the trachea carries with it a high potential for morbidity and mortality with improved prognosis linked to early recognition, and proper management and inversely related to the number of concomitant injuries. Options for treatment include variations on minimally invasive bronchoscopic procedures to open surgery. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of tracheal injury and reviews the role of the healthcare team in managing patients with this injury.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the anatomic structures that run close to the trachea.
- Describe the clinical findings and appropriate tests to identify a tracheal injury.
- Outline the critical considerations for managing a patient’s airway with a tracheal injury.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by tracheal injuries.

# Introduction

The trachea is a tube-like structure beginning at the base of the cricoid cartilage and extending to the carina. It has cervical and thoracic portions, separated at the level of the thoracic inlet above and below respectively. It includes 18 to 22 D-shaped rings which are cartilaginous anteriorly and laterally and membranous posteriorly. Blood supply to the cervical portions of the trachea comes from branches of the subclavian artery where they enter laterally and anastomose superiorly, inferiorly, and anteriorly. Thoracic portions receive their blood supply from the bronchial arteries which branch off the aorta. The trachea is near the esophagus, vagus nerve, recurrent laryngeal nerves, thyroid, carotid arteries, jugular veins, innominate arteries and veins, the pulmonary trunk, the azygos vein, and the aorta with the vertebra and spinal cord posteriorly.

With so many vital structures adjacent to the trachea, the majority of patients with tracheal injuries may expire before arrival at an emergency department. The major causes of tracheal injury include iatrogenic, blunt trauma, penetrating trauma, inhalation and aspiration of liquids or objects.

One of the most crucial factors for reducing morbidity and mortality is early detection.

# Etiology

Iatrogenic causes include percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy, endotracheal intubation, and rigid bronchoscopy.  With endotracheal intubation, certain situations predispose the patient to complications including emergency, the skill of the operator, improper use of a stylet, use of a high-pressure cuff, and manipulation of the tube with a blocked cuff.  Patient-specific risk factors for iatrogenic tracheal injury include age between 50 and 70, elevated BMI, female gender, and long term use of corticosteroids.  Most iatrogenic tracheal injuries tend to occur in the posterior membranous portion of the trachea.

Blunt trauma primarily affects the thoracic trachea. In the cervical trachea, blunt trauma will typically cause damage to the cartilaginous portions. For blunt thoracic trauma, three theories exist to explain the cause of tracheal injury. The first primarily occurs in crush injuries where increased force causes shortening of the anteroposterior axis and widening the transverse axis with lungs remaining in contact with the chest wall and causing increased tension on the carina and resultant separation. The second theory suggests that with the glottis closed increased pressure within the trachea causes rupture of the intercartilaginous membrane. The third suggests that rapid deceleration like that seen in motor vehicle accidents causes shearing forces between the more affixed carina and the looser lung tissue.

Although penetrating trauma occurs more frequently in the cervical portions of the trachea, it can occur anywhere along the path of the trachea and involve any of the adjacent structures. More caution is necessary with penetrating gunshot wounds due to the force of the blast.

Both inhalation and aspiration cause damage to the mucosal lining of the trachea, leading to inflammation, ulceration, and softening of the cartilaginous portions.

# Epidemiology

Currently, the incidence of tracheobronchial injury among trauma patients with chest and neck injuries, including those who died, is between 0.5 and 2%.

# History and Physical

In a retrospective analysis of 20 patients with tracheobronchial injury, researchers identified 45% by history and physical.

# Evaluation

X-ray is the initial modality for the evaluation of the trauma patient and may show signs indicative of tracheal injury, including subcutaneous emphysema, pneumomediastinum, or a “fallen lung” sign.  The “fallen lung” sign is where the lung presents in a dependent position held on to the hilum by its vascular attachments.

# Treatment / Management

When evaluating a patient with a tracheal injury early detection, proper airway management, and appropriate treatment of the trachea and possible concomitant injuries are key. As discussed previously early detection requires a high degree of suspicion, physical exam findings, and radiographic or bronchoscopic identification. Once a tracheal injury has been identified, the first question that needs to be addressed is what to do with the patient’s airway. The ideal method for securing the airway in patients with tracheal injury is the awake placement of an endotracheal tube over a flexible bronchoscope and inflation of the cuff distal to the site of injury. Patients with tracheal injury may benefit from awake intubation in order to limit apnea and loss of the smooth muscle tone. Paralysis for intubation may lead to the collapse of a trachea that is already distorted and traumatized and being held open by the surrounding musculature. In situations where the patient is rapidly desaturating, hemodynamically unstable, and/or awake intubation is not tolerated rigid bronchoscopy with inhalation induction may be the method of choice. This method is especially beneficial if clots, tissue, or strictures impair viewing the area of injury.  However rigid bronchoscopy is more difficult in patients with cervical instability who are unable to extend the neck. Tracheostomy should be considered in patients with concomitant craniomaxillofacial injury or in whom previous attempts at endotracheal intubation were unsuccessful. Additionally, patients with penetrating cervical injuries could undergo the insertion of a tracheostomy tube directly through the site of injury thereby preserving tissue for future repair.

Conservative management in select patients is superior to surgical treatments.

Stenting has become a mainstay of treatment for tracheal injuries.  The two broad categories of stents are metallic and silicone with metallic stents having varying degrees of coating and both classes being offered in straight, T, and Y shapes to accommodate the variety of injuries that can occur. Placement of both classes of stents can be performed by a rigid or flexible bronchoscope. With regards to either modality ensure to secure the airway distal to the location requiring stenting and observe for potential complications. Complications of stents include migration, fracture, infection, biofilm formation, and obstruction with either defective mucus passage, or granulation tissue.  Future advancements in stent technology may yield drug-eluting stents, 3-dimensional printed stents, and biodegradable products to reduce the complications seen with conventional stents.

Surgical management even in patients with delayed identification of tracheal injury has proven beneficial in restoring lung function and reducing complications.

Once access has been obtained to the injured area, carefully debride the wound margins in preparation for primary closure using a 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable suture. Transverse wounds should be closed using a simple interrupted suture. Longitudinal repairs are most amenable to a continuous suture. In circumstances where extensive damage has occurred, circumferential resection with end to end anastomosis may be necessary and except for injuries to the carina is preferred to partial debridement with attempted primary repair. When the blood supply is impaired and there is a concern for dehiscence covering with pericardial or mediastinal fat flaps could be of benefit. In all closures, an absorbable suture should be used with the knots on the outside to avoid granuloma and stricture formation and potential lifelong irritation.

After repair, closed thoracic drainage and negative intrathoracic pressure may aid in the expansion of the lungs and occlusion of the repaired defect.

# Differential Diagnosis

With blunt and penetrating trauma being common causes of tracheal injury, adjacent structures are likely also to be involved. Concomitant injuries to the larynx, bronchi, lung parenchyma, the esophagus, the recurrent laryngeal nerve, vagus nerve, carotid arteries, jugular veins, pulmonary trunk, aorta, and surrounding musculature require clinical consideration.

# Prognosis

While mortality decreased from 36% before 1950 to 9% in 2001, prognosis greatly depends on early detection, the presence of concomitant injuries, and the cause of the injury.

# Complications

While the immediate complication of tracheal injury is airway collapse, many additional complications need to be considered even with appropriate management. Pulmonary infections, sepsis, and multi-organ system failure are major contributors to mortality.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

With iatrogenic and traumatic causes of tracheal injury predominating, there are areas where both patients and providers can work to decrease the incidence of this condition. Utilization of low-pressure cuffs on endotracheal tubes, correct endotracheal tube size, avoidance of over inflation, and appropriate use of stylets and bougies are a few of the things providers can do to avoid tracheal injury. For difficult intubations and suspected tracheal injury use of flexible bronchoscopes allow visualization of potential injury and avoidance of creating false passages and/or worsening of tracheal injury.

Continued training and utilization of advanced trauma life support by healthcare providers will continue to reduce the mortality of tracheal injuries.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Tracheal injury requires the collaborative efforts of multiple professionals. Care begins with emergency medical services to increase the number of tracheal injuries that survive en route to the emergency department.

With 70 to 80% of medical errors occurring due to poor communication and understanding with a vast majority of those occurring in trauma situations, it is crucial to have good interprofessional collaboration.  A Scopic review of interprofessional collaboration in trauma situations found successful teams to have fluid interactions, collaborative leaders, and post-trauma analysis. The interactions were further described as a transformation from individuals in a team with independent actions to a team with interdependent actions. Successful leaders were found to be collaborative amongst not only their own team but also between disciplines.