**Acute:**

Classic acute toxicity presents with gastroenteritis followed by hypotension.

Gastrointestinal: Gastroenteritis is the most common symptom seen with acute toxicity. Doses under 5mg results in nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Symptoms begin minutes to hours after ingestion and typically resolve within 12 hours, but symptoms may persist for days after exposure. The classic description of diarrhea is as "rice water" or cholera-like diarrhea that may be bloody. Arsenic has effects on the gastrointestinal mucosa leading to vasodilation and sloughing of mucosal tissue which can lead to vesicle damage.

Cardiovascular: Hypotension is another hallmark characteristic of arsenic poisoning, secondary to dehydration and volume loss. Reports exist of EKG abnormalities have been noted hours to days after exposure including QTc prolongation, QRS lengthening, non-specific ST changes, T wave flattening, and additional cases of torsades de pointes.

Pulmonary: Cough, dyspnea, chest pain may be seen, more commonly with inhalation. Non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema can present from increased capillary permeability.

Renal: Proteinuria, hematuria and acute renal failure have been reported hours to days after exposure.

Neurologic: Classically, neurologic symptoms occur in the subacute phase, weeks after exposure; however, there are reports of neurologic symptoms occurring hours after exposure including headache, delirium, encephalopathy, and seizures.

**Subacute (1 to 3 weeks):**

Neurologic: Reversible sensorimotor polyneuropathy is a well-documented symptom of arsenic toxicity, typically seen one to three weeks after acute exposure, but it may occur insidiously with chronic exposure. Dysesthesias predominately occur in a stocking-and-glove distribution, starting with the soles of the feet and ascending. In severe toxicity, clinicians have noted a loss of deep tendon reflexes, vibratory sensation, temperature sensation, weakness and gait disturbances. Additionally, there are reports of headaches, confusion, memory loss, seizures, and delirium.

Hematology: A wide variety of hematologic abnormalities exist, including leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, basophilic stippling and anemia ranging from normochromic, normocytic to hypochromic, microcytic as well as hemolytic anemia.

**Chronic:**

Dermatologic: Multiple dermatologic signs have been documented, prominently diffuse or spotted hyperpigmentation, described as having a "raindrop appearance" which may be preceded by hypopigmentation occurs six months to three years after exposure. Reynolds-Aldrich-Mees lines or more classically described Mees lines occur in approximately 5% of patients. Mees’ lines show a 1 to 2mm wide transverse white bands across the fingernails presents 4 to 6 weeks after exposure. Other dermatologic signs include palmer-planter hyperkeratosis, eczematoid lesions, warts, and alopecia.

Arsenic exposure has links to basal cell carcinoma, as well as squamous cell carcinoma secondary to hyperkeratosis. Skin cancer in arsenic exposure has presented in sunless exposure on palms, soles, and abdomen.

Hepatic system: Arsenic has links to angiosarcoma, hepatomegaly, ascites, and non-specific abdominal pain.

Reports exist of gangrene of extremities also called "Blackfoot disease" from contaminated drinking water in Taiwan.

Lung and bladder cancer also have correlations with exposure to inorganic arsenic.

**Arsine Gas**

Symptoms of arsine toxicity include garlic breath odor, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, chest pain, loss of balance, tachycardia, fever, and renal failure 1 to 12 hours after exposure. Four to 48 hours after exposure, port wine hue urine, reddish stained conjunctiva, and jaundice describe as "slate-bronze skin" has been reported. Physical examination may reveal liver, spleen tenderness. Direct effect on the myocardium can occur which may relate to conduction disorders, heart block and asystole. Mees lines may be observed weeks following exposure.