Making the diagnosis of PAD should factor in the patient’s history, physical exam, and objective test results. Key points in the history include an accurate assessment of the patient’s walking ability. Many patients do not explicitly report the classic claudication symptoms of cramping calf pain after walking 2 blocks that resolves with rest. Some patients may walk very little because of other physical ailments or limitations. Other patients may not volunteer any information about walking unless specifically asked. Important aspects of the history also include cardiovascular risk factors such as smoking, hypertension, high cholesterol, and diabetes.

On physical exam, patients with PAD may have diminished or absent lower extremity pulses. This finding can be confirmed with the ankle-brachial index (ABI), an objective, bedside measure of lower extremity arterial perfusion. As its name implies, the ABI compares the systolic blood pressure at the ankle to the systolic pressure in the arm. A manual blood pressure cuff should be placed just above the ankle while locating the posterior tibial artery or dorsalis pedis artery with a handheld Doppler probe. While listening to the Doppler signal, the blood pressure cuff is inflated until it obliterates the Doppler signal. As the cuff slowly deflates, the pressure at which the Doppler signal returns is recorded as the systolic ankle pressure. The same steps are repeated for the other pedal artery and the other leg. Likewise, the brachial pressure can be measured with a blood pressure cuff on the upper arm and a Doppler probe positioned over the radial or ulnar artery at the wrist. The ABI is the highest systolic pressure measured at each ankle divided by the higher of the two systolic brachial pressures. A normal ABI ranges from 0.9 to 1.3. PAD is defined as an ABI less than 0.9 and most patients with claudication have an ABI between 0.5 and 0.9. Patients with extremely low ABI’s (less than 0.5) usually have ischemic rest pain or tissue loss. An ABI greater than 1.3 indicates arterial wall stiffening which can occur in patients with diabetes or renal failure. If a cuff pressure of 250mmHg does not obliterate the Doppler signal, the ABI is classified as “non-compressible.” Patients with falsely elevated (greater than 1.3) or non-compressible ABI’s require alternative imaging or physiologic studies to confirm the diagnosis of PAD.

A common mistake when taking an ABI involves failure to measure the brachial pressure in both arms. Using the higher brachial pressure as the denominator for both ankle pressures ensures that the ABI will not be underestimated in patients with upper extremity blood pressure discrepancy due to subclavian artery stenosis. Other measures to increase the accuracy of the ABI include having the patient rest supine for at least 5 minutes to allow their blood pressure to stabilize and choosing an appropriately sized blood pressure cuff. The bladder length of the cuff should be 80%, and the width of 40% of the circumference of the extremity.

Blood work may reveal altered renal function and abnormal electrolyte levels. Elevation in CRP, D-dimer and interleukin 6 have been associated with diminished exercise tolerance.

Doppler studies are done to determine the site of blood flow occlusion and flow velocities. In addition, CT angiography and MRA can help determine the sites of occlusion and assess if the patient is a candidate for angioplasty or bypass surgery.

In patients with ulcers, transcutaneous oximetry is a rapid method of assessing perfusion. Finally, an ECG may reveal the presence of an arrhythmia which may be the cause of an embolic event.