The diagnosis of Kawasaki disease is clinical.  You can use the mnemonic "Warm CREAM" or "FEBRILE" to help remember the criteria (see Table).  The fever is the most consistent presentation, is minimally responsive to antipyretics, and typically remains higher than 38.5 degrees Celsius.

**Table: Warm CREAM and FEBRILE Mnemonics for KD Criteria**

Warm = Fever for > 5 days

- C = Conjunctivitis without exudate

- R = Rash

- E = Edema or erythema of hands or feet, followed by desquamation and nail changes

- A = Adenopathy, often unilateral, cervical node > 1.5 cm

- M = Mucosal erythema, fissures or crusting of lips or strawberry tongue

- F = Fever for > 5 days

- E = Enanthem of mucosal membranes

- B = Bulbar conjunctivitis

- R = Rash, erythematous, polymorphous

- I = Internal organ involvement: coronary, abdominal, pneumonitis, hepatitis, orchitis

- E = Extremity changes, initial edema, and erythema, desquamation, nail changes

Incomplete Kawasaki disease should be a consideration in children with fevers of five or more days and two or three of the major criteria.  It is more common in younger infants and older children.

- Hemoglobin low for age

- White blood count (WBC) > 15,000/mm

- Platelet count > 450,000/mm

- Serum albumin < 3.0 g/dl

- Elevated alanine aminotransferase

- Urine WBC > 10/high-power field

There are no other required laboratory or diagnostic imaging studies necessary after a clinical diagnosis of KD, except an echocardiogram.  However, some studies may be useful in the case of incomplete disease in an attempt to help narrow the diagnosis when not meeting all of the clinical criteria.  Suggested studies include complete blood count (CBC), metabolic panel, ESR, CRP, and urinalysis.  Mild-moderate normocytic anemia is characteristic of the acute disease phase, while thrombocytosis is present in the subacute phase.

If obtained, blood cultures, stool cultures, antinuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-streptolysin O (ASO) titers would be negative in KD cases.

An echocardiogram should be performed during the acute phase of the disease to rule out coronary artery aneurysm (CAA).  The proximal left anterior descending and right coronary arteries are most commonly affected.

Cardiac stress testing for reversible ischemia has been recommended as Level A for children with KD and known CAAs.