# Continuing Education Activity

Morgagni hernias are rare congenital diaphragmatic defects that can lead to bowel obstruction and incarceration if not repaired. Surgery can be performed through either an open incision or minimally invasive techniques through the chest or the abdomen. As most of these defects are not discovered until later in childhood or adulthood, the long-term prognosis is good, with a low recurrence rate. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of Morgagni hernias and explains the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of Morgagni hernias.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with a symptomatic Morgagni hernia.
- Review the surgical options for the repair of a Morgagni hernia.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients affected by a Morgagni hernia.

# Introduction

A Morgagni hernia is one of four types of diaphragmatic hernias; the other types include a Bochdalek hernia, where the defect is posterolateral, a hiatal hernia, where the defect is at the esophageal hiatus, and a paraesophageal hernia, where the defect is located adjacent to the esophageal hiatus.

# Etiology

Morgagni hernias, especially when discovered in infancy or early childhood, are known to be associated with other congenital anomalies, with the incidence ranging from 34% to 50%.

# Epidemiology

The estimated incidence is between 1 in 2000 and 1 in 5000 live births, although the true incidence is unknown.

# Pathophysiology

A Morgagni hernia is located posterolaterally to the sternum and is caused by a failure of the pars tendinalis part of the costochondral arches to fuse with the pars sternalis.

# History and Physical

The presence of a Morgagni hernia usually presents later in life than a Bochdalek hernia, with patients noting respiratory and upper gastrointestinal symptoms as their main complaint.

# Evaluation

The definitive diagnosis is made radiologically and first includes an anterior-posterior and lateral chest radiograph.

# Treatment / Management

Current recommendations for the ventilator initial settings in managing congenital diaphragmatic hernia include; 1. PIP; less than 25 cm H2O, 2. a PEEP of 3–5 cm H2O, 3. a rate of 40–60 breaths/min to maintain Paco2 between 50 and 70 mmHg.

Due to the risk of incarceration, it is recommended that all Morgagni hernias should be surgically repaired; however, the approach to repair and type of repair is still under debate. The hernia defect can be approached either through an abdominal approach or through a thoracic incision. A posterolateral right thoracotomy is made through the six intercostal spaces when utilizing the thoracic approach.

When approaching repair from an abdominal approach, the repair can be performed either through an open laparotomy incision or with minimally invasive laparoscopic techniques. The advantages of an abdominal approach include the ability to identify and repair bilateral defects and evaluate and repair other intra-abdominal pathology, such as malrotation, during the same operation.

In 1997, Georgacopulo was the first to report a successful laparoscopic repair of a Morgagni hernia in a child.

# Differential Diagnosis

If a loop of bowel is seen herniating through the defect on the chest radiograph, the differential could also include a pericardial cyst, loculated pneumothorax, or a hiatal hernia.

# Prognosis

For defects found in infancy, the risk factors for mortality are those associated with prematurity, such as low birth weight, early gestational age, and low APGAR scores, or due to the other congenital anomalies were seen with a Morgagni hernia. Although pulmonary hypoplasia is not commonly seen, identification prenatally and the size of the defect, including a sac, may make a difference in outcomes; however, the lifelong implications for children are unknown.

# Complications

Due to concern for bowel obstruction, strangulation, volvulus, and/or necrosis, which can occur in up to 10% of cases, it is recommended that even asymptomatic patients should be referred for surgical correction.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

A Morgagni hernia is a rare type of congenital diaphragmatic defect.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Patients who are symptomatic from a Morgagni hernia can range in presentation from repeated chest infections or intermittent gastrointestinal complaints to persistent vomiting, tachycardia, and rebound tenderness consistent with acute strangulation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with Morgagni hernias may present with respiratory symptoms, gastrointestinal complaints, or may be asymptomatic.