# Continuing Education Activity

Viral meningitis is the inflammation of the meninges caused by a virus. It is most common in young children but is seen across all age groups. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of viral meningitis and explains the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with viral meningitis.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the common etiologies of viral meningitis. 
- Review the typical presentation of patients with viral meningitis. 
- Outline the treatment and management options available for viral meningitis.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the management of viral meningitis and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Meningitis is the inflammation of the meninges with an associated abnormal cell count in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

# Etiology

Enteroviruses (Coxsackie or Echovirus groups) are the most common cause of viral meningitis across all age groups; parechoviruses are also common in children.

# Epidemiology

Viral meningitis most commonly occurs in young children, with the incidence decreasing with age.Haemophilus influenza type B, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Neisseria meningitidis have significantly decreased cases of bacterial meningitis.

Enteroviruses rank as the most common cause of viral meningitis in many places in the world, with up to 12 to 19 cases per 100000 population annually in some high-income countries.

Half of the patients with WNV encephalitis have long-term neurological or psychological sequelae.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) meningitis can be present during seroconversion, occurring in 10 to 17% of symptomatic seroconversion illnesses, with a small number progressing to chronic meningitis.

VZV can cause viral meningitis, more commonly with reactivation than in primary infection. Varicella meningitis can occur without cutaneous lesions.

HSV 1 and 2 can cause viral meningitis. HSV-1 is more commonly associated with sporadic encephalitis, while HSV-2 can cause a benign recurrent viral meningitis; meningitis usually occurs in the absence of genital lesions or a history of prior genital herpes infection.

# Pathophysiology

Meningitis is an inflammatory pathology of the meninges surrounding the brain.

# History and Physical

The clinical findings of viral meningitis can vary by age and immune status.

Older infants and children may have a biphasic fever, first peaking with systemic constitutional symptoms and a second febrile phase with the onset of neurological signs.

It is important to obtain a travel history in patients with suspected viral meningitis, as many viruses have specific geographical distributions.

# Evaluation

A lumbar puncture is necessary unless there are contraindications such as focal neurologic deficits, papilledema, recent seizures, age 60 or greater.

Because of the lack of clinical findings to help distinguish between viral and bacterial meningitis and the risk of untreated bacterial meningitis, there has been much interest in identifying predictors of bacterial meningitis. The bacterial meningitis score (BMS) was originally developed for and validated in children with meningitis. The score is comprised of four laboratory predictors (positive Gram stain, CSF protein over 80 mg/dL, peripheral absolute neutrophil count greater than 10000 cells/mm3, CSF absolute neutrophil count over 1000 cells/mm3) and one clinical predictor (seizure at or before the presentation). A positive Gram stain is worth 2 points, and the other predictors are worth 1 point each if present. The negative predictive value for a score of 0 was 100%; a score of more than 2 predicted bacterial meningitis with 87% sensitivity.

In adults, researchers have studied individual predictors of bacterial rather than viral meningitis. In one study, these predictors included CSF glucose less than 34 mg/dL, CSF WBC over 2000 cells/mm3, CSF neutrophils greater than 1180, CSF protein over 220 mg/dL, and a ratio of CSF to blood glucose less than 0.23.15.

# Treatment / Management

Most viruses causing meningitis have no specific treatment other than supportive care.

Because of the difficulty in differentiating viral from bacterial meningitis initially, empiric antibiotic therapy is usually indicated until bacterial meningitis is ruled out.

# Differential Diagnosis

Partially-treated bacterial meningitis should merit consideration scenario if the patient received prior antibiotic exposure.Brucella, and fungal meningitis or encephalitis.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of viral meningitis without associated encephalitis is generally good.

# Complications

Enterovirus meningitis typically has a benign course, while enterovirus encephalitis can result in long-term neurological sequelae. Significant morbidity and mortality follow enteroviral meningitis in neonates and immunocompromised patients. Some subtypes of enterovirus, such as EV71 and EV68, are associated with more severe neurological disease and worse outcomes. The most common severe complications of enteroviral meningitis are meningoencephalitis, myocarditis, and pericarditis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The spread of pathogens causing viral meningitis is commonly through the fecal-oral route, so good hand hygiene is essential in prevention. Some causes of meningitis are preventable by vaccination.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Infants and young children may present with fever, irritability, and non-specific symptoms such as lethargy and decreased oral intake, with a lack of meningeal signs.

Utilization of PCR tests to diagnosis viruses such as enterovirus, HSV, and VZV can decrease the length of stay and reduce antibiotic administration.

There are no reliable clinical indicators to distinguish bacterial from viral meningitis, though certain laboratory and clinical predictors can help identify patients at low risk for bacterial meningitis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Viral meningitis can occur at age any but is most common in younger age groups. Because of the lack of apparent distinguishing features between viral and bacterial meningitis on initial presentation, an interprofessional team with strong medical knowledge and open communication is essential in providing appropriate care to these patients. Pharmacists can recommend empiric antibiotic coverage until there is confirmation of a diagnosis of viral meningitis. Nurses who look after patients with viral meningitis should know the disorder, what potential complications can arise, and when to call the clinician. The treatment of viral meningitis, for the most part, is supportive but residual sequelae of the disease are not uncommon; hence follow up with the primary care provider, and nurse practitioner is necessary. Interprofessional collaboration is crucial for optimal results in the management of viral meningitis, as with any condition. [Level 5]