Methylprednisolone is a widely-used drug in multiple fields of medicine, mainly due to its anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive properties. Interprofessional healthcare team members, including nurses, pharmacists, mid-level practitioners, and clinicians, should be aware of its broad spectrum of clinical applications, both labeled and off-labeled indications while considering its contraindications and individualizing its use based on the patient's comorbidities and tolerance of side effects. Of particular importance, patients receiving methylprednisolone should undergo monitoring for the development of hyperglycemia, hypertension, peptic ulcer, osteoporosis, and hidden infections.

Clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) will be prescribing or ordering the medication. Nursing will administer if inpatient and can monitor for adverse effects in both inpatient and outpatient settings. Pharmacists should be involved to verify dosing and perform medication reconciliation. Both pharmacists and nurses need to alert the healthcare team if they encounter any issues of concern. All these interprofessional healthcare team members need to communicate and collaborate across interprofessional lines to ensure optimal therapeutic results. [Level 5]

As with all glucocorticoids, methylprednisolone's adverse effects are both dose- and duration-dependent and can range from non-serious displeasing appearance to those that are life-threatening. Interprofessional coordination and care between healthcare workers are needed to ensure that methylprednisolone dosage remains minimal and for the shortest period necessary to achieve the treatment goals. Preexisting comorbidities that may become exacerbated when treated with methylprednisolone require management, and that patients under treatment should be monitored by the pharmacist, nurse, and clinician for adverse effects, identifying who may benefit from additional intervention. An interprofessional team approach will lead to the best outcomes. [Level 5]