The clinical significance of the submandibular triangle is vast due to the complex anatomy present in and around this region. Pathology arising in the submandibular triangle includes infectious, immunologic, and neoplastic processes.

The most common pathology arising in the submandibular triangle is sialadenitis or inflammation of the submandibular salivary gland. Sialadenitis in the submandibular gland is typically caused by sialolithiasis, consisting of a precipitated stone that blocks salivary flow through the submandibular gland duct or Wharton’s duct. This usually results in postprandial unilateral painful swelling in the submandibular triangle with resulting edema and reddening of the skin. Sialadenitis caused by sialolithiasis is diagnosed clinically and confirmed with imaging such as ultrasound, computerized tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging. Treatment of acute sialadenitis includes antibiotic therapy, hydration, NSAIDs, and gentle massage. Antibiotic coverage for the treatment of sialadenitis is aimed at the coverage of both aerobic and anaerobic pathogens. Treatment of sialadenitis secondary to sialolithiasis may necessitate surgical removal of the obstructing stone by either open surgery or sialendoscopy. Other infectious etiologies of sialadenitis include pathogens related to insufficient oral hygiene, HIV, and mumps. Mumps infection is most commonly seen in the parotid gland manifesting as parotitis. However, cases of sialadenitis isolated to one or both submandibular glands have been reported.

Non-infectious, immunologic pathology arising within the submandibular gland include chemical sensitivities and autoimmune disorders. One such chemical sensitivity includes sialadenitis caused by iodide contrast dye. The pathophysiology of iodide-associated sialadenitis is thought to be due to an elevated concentration of salivary iodine, resulting in swelling of the duct mucosa and impairment of salivary excretion. Another cause of non-infectious sialadenitis includes autoimmune immunoglobulin G4-related sialadenitis (IgG4-RS). IgG4-RS typically presents as bilateral inflammation of the submandibular and/or parotid glands with associated xerostomia from a reduced salivary flow. Unlike Sjogren’s syndrome, IgG4-RS occurs more commonly in males that are typically middle-aged and presents serologically with elevated IgG4 and IgE levels. IgG4-RS is progressive and causes fibrosis of the submandibular gland. Diagnostic workup usually consists of imaging with ultrasound or positron emission tomography (PET) and is confirmed with biopsy. The first line of treatment for IgG4-RS involves glucocorticoid therapy. Studies suggest that early intervention with glucocorticoids results in reduced fibrosis and improved clinical outcomes.

Neoplasms that arise in the submandibular triangle can be divided into benign and malignant masses. Evaluation of these masses involves imaging studies with ultrasound, computerized tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), followed by fine-needle aspiration biopsy for confirmation. Treatment of all neoplasms requires surgical resection. The degree of surrounding tissue and lymph nodes surgically removed in addition to the mass is case-dependent and is a function of the etiology and aggressiveness of the neoplasm. The most common benign neoplasm seen in the submandibular triangle is a pleomorphic adenoma, followed by adenolymphoma, also known as Warthin’s tumor. The most common malignant neoplasm is adenoid cystic carcinoma, followed by mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is statistically the most common overall malignancy of the salivary gland, but the second most common malignancy of the submandibular gland. Both malignant neoplasms are aggressive in nature, and rapid diagnosis followed by surgical excision improves morbidity and mortality. Other benign and malignant neoplasms arising from within the submandibular triangle have been reported but are exceedingly rare in incidence.