Briefly, translation can be broken down into three phases initiation, elongation, and termination. Initiation consists of identifying the exact site in the sequence of nucleotides in an mRNA to begin translation. This process has significant differences between eukaryotes (described here) and prokaryotes. Upon identification of the start site for translation, elongation ensues as the ribosome moves along the mRNA “reading” groups of three nucleotides that specify each amino acid added to the growing polypeptide chain. Finally, termination occurs when the ribosome encounters one of three termination codons, and the completed protein gets released from the ribosome.

Translation begins with the assembly of an 80S initiation complex on mRNA. This process involves identifying appropriate codon to initiate translation. The AUG codon specifies the amino acid methionine and virtually all proteins specified by the genetic code begin with methionine. In eukaryotes, the AUG used to initiate protein synthesis is usually the first AUG downstream of the cap structure, found at the 5’ end of the mRNA. A protein complex known as eIF4F recognizes the cap structure. The eIF4F complex then recruits the 43S pre-initiation complex comprised of 40S subunits together with a ternary complex formed of the initiator tRNA (Met-tRNA), eIF2, and GTP to the 5’ end of an mRNA. The 40S complex subsequently scans down the mRNA until encountering the first AUG and the 48S initiation complex forms. In addition to eIF4F and eIF2, multiple other initiation factors facilitate the formation of the 48S initiation complex. At this point, the 60S ribosomal subunit joins the 48S initiation complex, all initiation factors are released, and the elongation phase of translation is set to begin. In the 80S initiation complex, the initiator Met-tRNA is base-paired to the initiating AUG in the ribosomal P site with the next codon of the mRNA positioned in the ribosomal A site. Translational re-initiation facilitation occurs by the interaction of the eIF4F complex with both the 5’ cap and the 3’ polyA tail of an mRNA.

As with initiation, elongation requires the use of non-ribosomal proteins known as elongation factors. Eukaryotic EF1A (eEF1A) forms ternary complexes with aminoacyl-tRNAs and GTP.  These ternary complexes enter the empty A site of the ribosome and if an appropriate codon-anticodon interaction forms between the incoming aminoacyl-tRNA and the codon in the A site, GTP will be hydrolyzed and eEF1A released. At this point, the peptidyl-transferase site of the ribosome catalyzes peptide bond formation as the free amino group of the incoming aminoacyl-tRNA attacks the ester bond linking the growing polypeptide to the tRNA in the ribosomal P site. The resultant uncharged tRNA occupying the P site moves to the E (exit) site and leaves the ribosome. The growing polypeptide chain previously in the P site is now elongated by one amino acid as it transfers to the aminoacyl-tRNA in the A site.  The peptidyl-tRNA in the A site is then translocated to back to the P site with the help of eEF2 and GTP. The A site is now empty, and the entire process is repeated over and over again as the ribosome moves down the mRNA.

Termination occurs when eRF1, a release factor structurally analogous to tRNA, recognizes termination codons in an mRNA and recruits eRF3 to hydrolyze the polypeptide chain from the tRNA occupying the P site. Termination of translation completes by the dissociation of the ribosomal subunits, which are now capable of initiating another round of protein synthesis. Multiple ribosomes can translate a single mRNA simultaneously forming complexes known as polysomes.