Empiric antimicrobial therapy in native valve endocarditis targets the three most common pathogens: staphylococcus, streptococcus, or enterococci.

- Initial antibiotic therapy for critically ill patients before cultures and sensitivities:
- Ampicillin + gentamicin + flucloxacillin or oxacillin
- Vancomycin + gentamicin (if PCN allergic)
- Vancomycin + gentamicin + rifampin if early prosthetic valve endocarditis (under one year) or healthcare-associated endocarditis

For patients with gram-positive cocci in clusters found on gram stain, monotherapy with empiric vancomycin every 8 to 12 hours dosed to maintain a concentration of 15 to 20 mg/kg is appropriate. When cultures and sensitivities are available, antibiotics coverage should be narrowed. If the patient is found to have methicillin-sensitive endocarditis, then nafcillin or oxacillin dosed up to 12g per day divided dosed every four to six hours. Vancomycin has less effective bactericidal action than penicillin or beta-lactamase-based therapies. As such, it should be limited to patients with severe reactions to PCN or beta-lactamase or patients with MRSA. In patients who have methicillin-resistant staph aureus, monotherapy with vancomycin 30mg/kg or daptomycin 6 to 10mg/kg is the treatment of choice. Historically, combination therapy using a beta-lactam with an aminoglycoside was formerly the treatment of choice. However, aminoglycosides in combination with vancomycin have increased the risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity while providing minimal to no survival benefit. As such, the American Heart Association now discourages concomitant aminoglycoside use with vancomycin for use in MRSA.

- MSSA

- Native  

- Four to six weeks of oxacillin 
- Four to six weeks of cefazolin or cefotaxime is the recommendation for patients with non-anaphylactic PCN allergies.


- PVE

- Six weeks of oxacillin + 6 weeks of rifampin + 2 weeks gentamicin
- Six weeks of cefazolin or cefotaxime + 6 weeks of rifampin + 2 weeks gentamicin if PCN anaphylaxis
- Six weeks of vancomycin + 6 weeks of rifampin + 2 weeks gentamicin if PCN anaphylaxis

- MRSA or PCN/beta-lactam anaphylaxis

- Four to six weeks of vancomycin or daptomycin

For patients found to have streptococcus, determination of penicillin susceptibility is an important consideration. PCN susceptibility in Streptococcus is defined as (MIC less than or equal to 0.125 mg/L) and is associated with cure rates exceeding 95%. Patients with uncomplicated NVE and normal renal function can have a two-week course of Gentamicin and penicillin G or ceftriaxone. Ceftriaxone and gentamicin are both dosed once daily, so this therapy is ideal for outpatient antibiotic therapy. Intermediate PCN susceptibility, defined as (MIC  0.25 – 2 mg/L) requires at least a four-week course of antibiotics with at least two weeks of gentamicin.

- PCN sensitive Streptococcus (MIC less than or equal to 0.125 mg/L)

- Native Valve Endocarditis

- Two weeks of penicillin G or ceftriaxone and gentamicin (only for non-complicated NVE and normal renal function)
- Four weeks of penicillin G or ceftriaxone or amoxicillin (ESC only)
- Four weeks of vancomycin if PCN allergic and unable to sensitize


- Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis

- Six weeks of penicillin G or ceftriaxone or amoxicillin for PVE
- Six weeks of vancomycin (if PCN allergic and unable to sensitize)

- PCN resistant Streptococcus (MIC  0.25 – 2 mg/L) 

- Native Valve Endocarditis 

- Four weeks of penicillin G or ceftriaxone + 2 weeks of gentamicin
- Four weeks of vancomycin +/- gentamicin (ESC) if PCN allergic


- PVE

- Six weeks of penicillin G or ceftriaxone + 2 weeks of Gentamicin
- Six weeks of vancomycin + 2 weeks of gentamicin (ESC) if PCN allergic

Enterococcus infective endocarditis typically results from Enterococcus faecalis (95%) or Enterococcus faecium (3%). Enterococci is difficult to treat as they have several defense mechanisms that allow resistance to a wide range of antibiotics such as aminoglycosides, beta-lactams, and vancomycin. One important factor to consider when treating enterococci is aminoglycoside resistance. High-level aminoglycoside resistance (HLAR) has a MIC greater than 500 mg/L, and aminoglycoside therapy is inappropriate. Successful eradication requires combination synergistic bacteriocidal therapy for at least 4 to 6 weeks. Combination therapy frequently consists of either two cell wall inhibitors or an aminoglycoside with a cell wall inhibitor. The treatment of choice for susceptible enterococcus infection is ceftriaxone and ampicillin for both HLAR and non-HLAR enterococci.

- Enterococcus

- Six weeks of ampicillin + ceftriaxone (for both HLAR and nonHLAR)
- Four to six weeks of amoxicillin + gentamicin (not for HLAR)
- Six weeks of vancomycin + gentamicin (if PCN allergic)