Psychodynamic psychotherapies provide a framework for understanding individuals from various considerations, with the overall goal of providing symptom remission, increased functioning, and greater fulfillment. These treatments can be used in concert with biological approaches to treatment and behavioral, social, and other treatment approaches.

Medication management sessions that utilize psychodynamic psychotherapy techniques can often give providers a framework to understand the causes of resistance to treatment, negative reactions to medications, and other complicating factors in prescribing.

**Short-term vs. Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy**

Modern psychodynamic psychotherapy has also taken different forms, which are often separated into Long-Term and Short-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapies. Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy is generally considered open-ended, whereas short-term psychodynamic psychotherapies typically last 12 to 15 sessions per treatment course and no greater than 40 sessions.

Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy is often focused on a specific presenting problem, and the practitioner strives to keep the psychotherapy focused on this specific problem. There are several models of short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy, including Time-Limited Psychotherapy, Short-Term Anxiety-Provoking Psychotherapy, Intensive Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy, Supportive-Expressive Therapy, and Brief Dynamic Interpersonal Therapy, among several others.

ISTDP was developed by Habib Davanloo from the 1960s to the 90s. Davanloo initially developed short-term dynamic psychotherapy that he subsequently refined into intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy through video recordings and study. The goal of ISTDP is to rapidly facilitate access to unconscious emotions by focusing on and overcoming resistance and defense. ISTDP has been studied in a wide variety of disorders and has also shown cost-effectiveness.

Supportive-Expressive therapy (SE therapy) helps facilitate an understanding of relationship patterns within a therapeutic relationship. SE therapy has also shown benefits for various disorders, including depression, generalized anxiety disorder, opiate dependence, and cocaine abuse. Supportive techniques are used to strengthen the therapeutic relationship, and various interpretations are provided to increase the patient's self-understanding.

**Evidence-based Medicine and Psychodynamic Psychotherapy**

As noted earlier, psychodynamic psychotherapy is often criticized for having a limited evidence base.

Evidence-based medicine developed from the work of three major influencers: Alexander Flexner, Archibald Cochrane, and David Sackett. In 1910, Flexner published a comprehensive review of medical schools in the United States, critiquing many schools' models of medical education using a variety of metrics. His fundamental notion was that physicians should be trained with a strong foundation in science and the scientific method.

Later, Cochrane became interested in empirically studying and demonstrating treatment efficacy after he experienced ineffective treatment for his sexual dysfunction. He had pursued psychoanalysis for personal study and initial treatment of this dysfunction, which was later concluded to be likely secondary to tuberculosis or porphyria (or some combination thereof).

Beginning in 1981, Sackett, a clinical epidemiologist at McMaster University in Ontario, Canada, led a group that advocated for evidence-based medicine and scoring evidence by levels of strength. He also recommended the following key components of evidence-based medicine: "the patient's expectations and wishes, the provider's clinical skills, and the best available evidence."

All three individuals contributed significantly to advancing science and medicine, along with greater effectiveness and public trust in medical treatments. However, psychoanalysis was marginalized in this era of empiricism due to the inherent challenges of studying it in an empirical setting. These challenges arose both from psychoanalysis' self-isolation from empiricism and the limitation that many of its hypotheses are unfalsifiable and challenging to prove or subject to an RCT.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), which originally developed from cognitive therapy (Beck) and rational emotive behavior therapy (Albert Ellis), provided more easily testable and falsifiable hypotheses and methods, which later demonstrated effectiveness in studies. As such, CBT and related therapies quickly gained traction as evidence-based treatments.

CBT and psychodynamic therapy have been compared in head-to-head studies, many of which have shown positive results from both treatments. An RCT comparing CBT and short-term psychodynamic supportive psychotherapy conducted similarly to supportive-expressive therapy demonstrated no significant difference in outcome measures on HAM-D scoring.

Another study comparing panic-focused psychodynamic psychotherapy and CBT for panic disorder showed similar results between both. However, the earlier age of onset of panic disorder as well as a lower expectancy of the patient for meaningful change, predicted worse outcomes for both treatments, with panic-focused psychodynamic psychotherapy being more affected.

Psychodynamic psychotherapy has demonstrated neurological changes in specific brain regions, particularly the right superior and inferior frontal gyri and the putamen.

The transdiagnostic application of CBT modalities emerged from individual, diagnosis-based protocols. This movement led to the development of a Unified Protocol, interpreted as the end of CBT-centric psychotherapy and the resurgence of psychodynamic psychotherapies, with a de-emphasis on diagnostic stratification and increased emphasis on principle-based treatment.