TRC is often associated with sudden onset of floaters, vision loss, hazy vision, pain, and/or photophobia. Small, active peripheral lesions, may be asymptomatic. There is often an absence of systemic signs as well.  When present, systemic symptoms mimic an acute flu-like illness, including fever, lymphadenopathy, and malaise. In the immunocompromised patient, toxoplasmic encephalitis may be present and associated with new-onset neurological complaints and/or the diagnosis of a brain abscess. Cerebral toxoplasmosis is found in 10% to 34% of autopsies on patients with HIV/AIDS

Toxoplasma causes a necrotizing chorioretinitis that appears as a yellow-white chorioretinal lesion with indistinct margins combined with an overlying focal vitreous infiltrate (described as “a headlight in the fog”) adjacent to an old chorioretinal scar. A localized lobular perivasculitis may occur around arterioles in the area of the active lesion (called Kyrieleis plaques)

**Systemic Toxoplasmosis**

In congenital toxoplasmosis cases, the mother may have been asymptomatic or have had mild mononucleosis-type symptoms.  In contrast, the newborn may present with prematurity, intrauterine growth restriction, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, myocarditis, pneumonitis, various rashes and neurologic findings that include chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus, intracranial calcifications, microcephaly, and seizures. Some of the neurological findings may only become apparent months to years later. The classic triad of neurological findings consists of chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus, and intracranial calcifications.

In immunocompetent patients (as in the case of pregnant mothers), acquired toxoplasmosis generally presents with mild systemic findings that are often not recognized. However, in immunocompromised patients, for example, those with AIDS or those on immunosuppressive therapy, necrotizing chorioretinitis may be so severe as to resemble acute retinal necrosis (necrotizing herpetic retinitis). Neuroimaging is essential in these patients because central nervous system toxoplasmosis has been reported in up to one-third of AIDS patients with retinal findings