Clostridial infections usually arise in traumatized tissue but also can arise spontaneously. The infection involves deeper tissue such as a muscle which can lead to a rapidly spreading infection along tissue planes, and patients often present with sepsis. The infection may develop hours to weeks after the initial trauma and inoculation. The inoculation of the bacteria does not always cause gas gangrene, and there are host and organism factors that determine the progression to infection. Immunocompromised patients and those with local tissue hypoxia (due to trauma or poor vascular supply) are most at risk. The most common organisms that cause these infections are Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium septicum, and Clostridium histolyticum. C. septicum is the most common cause of spontaneous gas gangrene associated with G.I. abnormalities, such as colon cancer. C. perfringens and C. histolyticum are more commonly associated with post-traumatic infections.

More recently in the literature, Clostridium sordellii, an uncommon pathogen, has been reported to cause fatal shock syndrome and gas gangrene of the uterus after medical abortion with oral mifepristone and vaginal misoprostol. Clostridium sordellii is also on the rise associated with the use of black tar heroin injections, more commonly referred to as “popping.” This organism has also had increased incidence as the cause of deep tissue infections associated with childbirth and infections after gynecologic procedures including septic abortions, which can cause gas gangrene of the uterus.