Triacylglycerol Synthesis

They are synthesized in two ways: (1) from the FFAs produced as a byproduct of lipoprotein lipase’s effect on chylomicrons and VLDL, and (2) from a glycerol moiety derived from glucose. In the liver and adipose tissue, glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) provides the glycerol moiety. The liver can convert glycerol to G3P via an intermediate or directly because it has the enzyme glycerol kinase. Adipose cells lack this enzyme and must produce G3P solely via an intermediate. The storage of TAGs in adipose tissue is mediated by insulin, which stimulates adipose cells to secrete lipoprotein lipase and to take up glucose, which converts to glycerol (via a DHAP intermediate) for triacylglycerol synthesis. In this process, glucose converts to DHAP, which is reduced by NADH to form G3P. Ultimately, G3P reacts with two fatty acyl CoA molecules to form phosphatidic acid. The phosphate group is cleaved to form a diacylglycerol, which reacts with another fatty acyl CoA to form a triacylglycerol.

Triacylglycerol Hydrolysis

As stated previously, during times of energy deprivation, WAT is stimulated by hormonal and biochemical signals to increase lipolysis. Lipolysis proceeds in an orderly and controlled manner, with different enzymes acting at each step. The current model of lipolysis identifies three major enzymes involved: ATGL, HSL, and MGL. Catecholamines, particularly norepinephrine, are the primary activators of fasting-induced lipolysis, while other hormones also have an effect. These include cortisol, glucagon, growth hormone (GH), and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).

Dietary compounds, such as caffeine and calcium, also stimulate lipolysis. Each of these substances binds and act on their respective membrane-bound receptors and elicit a signaling cascade using a common second messenger, cyclic AMP. Cyclic AMP then binds to and activates protein kinase A (PKA). Once PKA is enzymatically active, it phosphorylates HSL, the most important of the three enzymes involved in initiating lipolysis because it is enzymatically activated in all stages of hydrolysis. ATGL performs the first step of TAG hydrolysis, generating diacylglycerols and FAs. Its activity is tightly regulated by two accessory proteins: CGI-58 and G0S2. CGI-58 coactivates the hydrolase activity of ATGL and G0S2 inactivates the hydrolase activity of ATGL. HSL performs the second step and hydrolyzes DAGs, generating monoacylglycerols and FAs. MGL is selective for MGs and generates glycerol and the third FA.

Fatty Acid Metabolism

Short and medium-chain fatty acids diffuse freely into the cytosol and mitochondria of cells. Long-chain fatty acids must undergo protein-mediated transport across the cell membrane into the cytosol via fatty acid translocase (FAT) or fatty acid-binding protein (FABP). Acyl-CoA synthase then converts the fatty acids to fatty acyl-CoA. The fatty acyl-CoA must now be transported into the mitochondria through the outer mitochondrial membrane and is done so by carnitine palmitoyltransferase-I (CPT-I) where it becomes fatty acyl-carnitine. The fatty acyl-carnitine is then transported across the inner membrane into the mitochondrial matrix by carnitine acyl-translocase (CAT) and converted back to fatty acyl-CoA by palmitoyltransferase-II (CPT-II) where it is now ready for oxidation.

Beta oxidation

Beta oxidation is the degradation of fatty acids by removing two carbons at a time. It is the primary pathway for catabolism of fatty acids and takes place in the mitochondrial matrix of tissues such as the liver, muscle, and adipose. Two-carbon fragments are successively removed from the carboxyl end of the fatty acyl-CoA, producing NADH, FADH, and Acetyl CoA, which is used in the TCA cycle to make ATP. Fatty acids with odd numbers of carbon ultimately yield one mole of propionyl-CoA, which is converted to succinyl CoA so that it is usable in the TCA cycle. Beta oxidation is also important as the primary regulator of movement through the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex. When rates of fatty acid oxidation are high, PDH activity decreases, which limits glycolysis, which is significant because patients with a deficiency in fatty acid oxidation have a compensatory increase in glucose oxidation and impaired gluconeogenesis.

Ketone synthesis

Ketone levels are low during normal feeding and physiological status. They are used by the heart and skeletal muscles to preserve the limited glucose for use by the brain and erythrocytes. During the fasting state, fatty acids are oxidized in the liver to acetyl CoA, which converts to the ketone bodies acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate. These high levels of ketones also inhibit PDH activity and fatty acid oxidation, to conserve glucose and permit entry into the brain where they can serve as sources for energy. Normally during a fast, muscle metabolizes ketone bodies as rapidly as the liver releases them preventing their accumulation in the blood. If ketones increase sufficiently in the blood, this can result in ketoacidosis, which is especially prevalent in people with type I diabetes and require close monitoring.