While the advent of new diagnostic techniques and the ability to integrate information from different diagnostic modalities has made it possible to understand the brain structure and function and help localize brain pathologies, there are no tests or objective biological markers indicated as criteria for diagnosing a psychiatric disorder according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.

A careful history and physical examination are fundamental tools for diagnosing and treating psychiatric disorders. Essential components of a patient's history include present illness, past medical history, psychiatric history, substance abuse, family and social information, and medication use. This history will provide insight into the patient’s current illness, predisposing factors like genetic vulnerabilities and low socioeconomic status, current life stressors, family dynamics, and support systems available to the patient. In some cases, medications that have worked for another family member may suggest that patient will benefit from it.

The physical examination starts by examining the patient's general appearance and begins as the physician sets an eye on the patient. The overall patient well-being and nutritional status may be assessed just through observation. A patient may appear messy or bizarre with clothing that may not be appropriate for the setting. Other important aspects that can be evaluated include the patient's psychomotor activity, the patient's mood and affect, and the patient's thought process and thought content. The clinician can observe whether the patient's movements are slow down or if the patient is fidgeting and agitated. The should evaluate patient speech patterns and determine if their thoughts are goal-directed or disorganized. Finally, assessing the patient's thoughts for any delusions, hallucinations, or suicidal and homicidal thoughts, among others, is essential.

A patient's history can help guide specific organ systems' physical examination to focus their attention first. For example, during an assessment of subconjunctival, a patient's pale and dry appearance may suggest self-neglect and inadequate dietary intake due to depression, schizophrenia, and AN. The skin examination is performed for evidence of cuttings marks associated with a borderline personality disorder, depression, and even eating disorders. Other systems-specific physical exams may be based on the patient's history that gives the physician a prompt for further assessment.