Grossly, Wilms tumors are usually well-circumscribed and have a pseudo-capsule.

Histologically, Wilms is divided into "favorable" and "unfavorable" histologies.

"Favorable" Histology: Ninety percent of Wilms tumors will demonstrate "favorable" histology, which generally has a better prognosis. Classical histological features of a "favorable" Wilms tumor include a triphasic pattern of blastema, epithelial, and stromal tissues.  The blastema is the most undifferentiated and possibly the most malignant component.  It consists of collections of small, round blue cells with very active mitotic activity and overlapping nuclei.

The epithelial component can demonstrate wide variations in differentiation from an early tubular formation with primitive epithelial rosette-like structures to differentiating tubules or glomeruli-like structures, representing nephrogenesis at different developmental stages.

The stromal component may include densely packed undifferentiated mesenchymal cells or loose cellular myxoid areas. The latter areas may be difficult to distinguish from non-tumorous stroma associated with chemotherapy-induced change. Heterologous differentiation of neoplastic stroma in the form of well-differentiated smooth or skeletal muscle cells, fat tissue, cartilage, bone, and even glial tissue is present in some cases, especially in tumors that have undergone preoperative chemotherapy.

Even with "Favorable" histology, the loss of heterozygosity at 1p and 16q loci tend to have a worse prognosis. For this reason, when Wilms tumor tissue is available, it should be checked cytogenetically for 1p and 16q deletions.

"Unfavorable" Histology: Wilms tumors with "unfavorable" histology will demonstrate much higher degrees of anaplasia and are associated with a relatively poorer prognosis and survival.

Anaplasia is histologically defined as hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei that are three times larger than adjacent cells and have abnormal mitotic figures. Anaplasia is associated with a poor response to treatment.