Major burns damage tissues directly and result in distortion of the anatomy making traditional airway management, monitoring, and hemodynamic access challenging. Additionally, developing a cytokine-mediated inflammatory response results in pathophysiologic effects both locally and distantly from the injury. This response can be described in two distinct phases: burn shock (ebb) followed by a hypermetabolic (flow) phase. The inflammatory response begins minutes after tissue destruction resulting in sensitization and irritation of the pain fibers.

The burn shock or ebb phase occurs during the first 24 to 48 hours of a severe (or major) burn; a severe burn is defined as a collection of second and third-degree burns comprising equal to or greater than 20% total body surface area (TBSA).  Burn shock is characterized by reduced end-organ perfusion and diminished cardiac output mainly due to losses in intravascular volume. Essentially, this is a distributive shock state. Intravascular volume losses result in edema formation at directly burned areas and unburned sites. Hemoconentration of red blood cells occurs due to significant volume extravasation into adjacent tissue. This edematous state can obscure views of the glottic opening during direct laryngoscopy. Reduction in cardiac output is a complication of intravascular volume loss and direct myocardial depression, and increased systemic vascular resistance. In this phase, a rise in systemic vascular resistance occurs due to a surge of catecholamines and antidiuretic hormone constricting blood vessels and inhibiting flow.  Even with aggressive fluid resuscitation, only partial compensation can be obtained due to an imbalance of the cellular transmembrane ionic gradient and reduction of sodium ATPase activity which may persist for days after the initial burn injury.

The hypermetabolic or flow phase of a severe burn develops 48 to 72 hours after the initial injury and is characterized by increased oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production. Cardiac output improves compared to the burn shock phase resulting in better end-organ perfusion. Cardiac output may increase up to 2 to 3 times the normal range due to tachycardia and decreased systemic vascular resistance during this phase, further mimicking sepsis.  As a result of decreased vascular resistance, blood flow subsequently improves to all organs.  Arteriovenous shunting may occur, resulting in increased venous oxygen saturation. Resorption of edema may result in pulmonary edema, further compounding the damage from inhalational injuries from smoke. If excessive fluid resuscitation is given during the burn shock phase, the consequences of such actions would be observed during the hypermetabolic phase as fluid is resorbed, potentially making weaning from the ventilator intraoperatively troublesome. The hypermetabolic phase is generally characterized by the release of catabolic hormones as well as insulin resistance. The resultant effects of this are protein catabolism (i.e., muscle wasting) and hyperglycemia.  Glucocorticoid and inflammatory cytokines increase during this phase, thus increasing the caloric needs of a severely burned patient. The hypermetabolic phase can last up to 2 years.

Once the burn has reached a total body surface area (TBSA) of approximately 25% to 30%, the inflammatory response produces systemic effects altering the physiology of a burn patient.

The initial pathophysiologic alterations/complications during the burn shock (ebb phase) can be summarized by the organ system as follows:

- Cardiovascular

- Increased capillary membrane permeability (loss of intravascular proteins to the interstitial compartment)
- Vasoconstriction (increased systemic vascular resistance)
- Decreased myocardial contractility (decreased cardiac index, stroke volume, and blood pressure)
- Metabolic acidosis (decreased kidney perfusion)
- Overall result: systemic hypotension with reduced end-organ perfusion

- Pulmonary

- Pulmonary edema
- Increased susceptibility to bronchospasm due to bronchorrhea
- Overall result: Potential adult respiratory distress syndrome development

- Integumentary 

- Fluid loss through compromised skin
- Generalized edema when BSA of burn exceeds 25%
- Circumferential burn of chest/abdomen/limb may result in compartment syndrome.
- Impaired ability to regulate temperature
- Overall result: Need for aggressive fluid resuscitation and special attention to circumferential burns

- Immunologic 

- Downregulated immune response
- Overall result: Increased susceptibility to infection