A timely diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism (PE) is crucial because of the high associated mortality and morbidity, which may be prevented with early treatment. It is important to note that 30% of untreated patients with pulmonary embolism die, while only 8% die after timely therapy.

The most common symptoms of PE include the following: dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, cough, hemoptysis, presyncope, or syncope. Dyspnea may be acute and severe in central PE, whereas it is often mild and transient in small peripheral PE. In patients with preexisting heart failure or pulmonary disease, worsening dyspnea may be the only symptom. Chest pain is a frequent symptom and is usually caused by pleural irritation due to distal emboli causing pulmonary infarction.

Less common presentations include arrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation), syncope, and hemodynamic collapse.

Apart from symptoms of PE, it is crucial to look for the risk factors for venous thromboembolism (VTE) to determine the clinical probability of a PE.

On examination, patients with PE might have tachypnea and tachycardia, which are common but nonspecific findings. Other examination findings include calf swelling, tenderness, erythema, palpable cords, pedal edema, rales, decreased breath sounds, signs of pulmonary hypertension such as elevated neck veins, loud P2 component of second heart sound, a right-sided gallop, and a right ventricular parasternal lift might be present on examination.

PE is a well-recognized cause of sudden cardiac arrest (8%).