A patient presenting with acute renal colic symptoms should be investigated with a urinalysis and a non-contrast CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis.  A KUB and renal ultrasound can be an alternative, but the non-contrast CT scan is the gold standard for evaluating flank pain, especially if associated with any hematuria. A KUB is recommended immediately after the CT scan if any significant stones are found to aid in tracking the progress of the stone and to determine its radio-opacity. Calcium oxalate stones are likely to be visible on the KUB if they are large enough, usually 2 to 3 mm or larger.  The evaluation of any underlying hyperoxaluria will be considered separately.

A chemical analysis of all urinary calculi should be done whenever possible, and their composition should be studied for determining the possible etiology. Calcium oxalate monohydrate (whewellite) and calcium oxalate dihydrate (weddellite) assume dumbbell and pyramid crystalline forms in the urine, respectively. This may sometimes be of some help in determining the underlying cause as pure calcium oxalate monohydrate is typically seen in primary hyperoxaluria, whereas both pure and mixed calcium oxalate stones (monohydrate and dihydrate) are seen in secondary hyperoxaluria.

Any patient suspected of hyperoxaluria should be tested for urinary oxalate excretion by collecting a 24-hour urine sample. This should preferably not be done in the hospital but rather by the patient at home while on their regular diet and usual activities. The testing is best done at a lab that does large numbers of urinary chemistries. It is typically done in combination with other urinary chemistries as part of the evaluation of kidney stone formers for nephrolithiasis prevention and prophylactic treatment.  The other chemistries tested are typically urinary volume, pH, calcium, citrate, creatinine, magnesium, phosphate, uric acid, sodium, and serum calcium and uric acid.

For most practical purposes, a normal 24-hour urinary oxalate level in adults would be 40 mg or less with an "optimal" level of 25 mg or less. Urinary oxalate concentration should be 20 mg oxalate/1000 ml urine or less.

A urine oxalate to creatinine ratio is also widely utilized, although the age-specific normal limits should be used for comparison.

Mild or moderate hyperoxaluria (usually from 40 to 60 mg a day) is generally considered dietary.

Correcting the 24-hour urine oxalate level for the patient's body surface area is somewhat controversial. The corrected value is not typically given on the 24-hour urine laboratory reports, just the usual normal reference range. If using the body surface area, the urine oxalate excretion is <0.45 mmol/1.73 m^2 per 24 hours. Urinary oxalate excretion of more than 1.0 mmol/1.73 m^2 per 24 hours is typically seen in primary hyperoxaluria or enteric hyperoxaluria. Some experts argue that the surface area correction is relatively meaningless as the crystals and stones will form based solely on the relative supersaturation level, which is not dependent on body surface area measurements.

Repeat 24-hour urine testing is recommended about every 3 months until optimal levels are obtained and at least yearly thereafter.

The diagnosis of primary hyperoxaluria is rare and unusual. More often than not, it becomes apparent only after the development of end-stage renal failure (ESRD) and dialysis.

- An episode of renal calculi in a child, especially if younger than 5 years.

- Recurring episodes of calcium oxalate renal calculi in adults.

- Hyperoxaluria of greater than 100 mg/24 hours, although these high levels can also present in enteric hyperoxaluria. In enteric hyperoxaluria, calcium excretion is usually <100 mg/day, the patient often has chronic diarrhea, and there is usually severe hypocitraturia. Patients who have undergone gastric bypass surgery, such as a Roux-en-Y procedure, are far more likely to have enteric hyperoxaluria rather than primary hyperoxaluria as the cause of their calcium oxalate stone disease.

- Any patient diagnosed with calcium oxalate nephrocalcinosis, which is the deposition of calcium oxalate within the renal tissue. If this nephrocalcinosis is accompanied by a decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR), it is even more suggestive of primary hyperoxaluria. (However, nephrocalcinosis may also be caused by calcium phosphate deposition from renal tubular acidosis, which is the more common presentation.)

- A patient diagnosed with renal failure but without a clear underlying cause for it or a history of renal calculi.

- If the renal stones sampled from the patient are indicative of primary hyperoxaluria type 1, which are calcium oxalate monohydrate (whewellite) calculi.

To differentiate between type 1 and 2 biochemically, glycolate and glycerate levels are useful, if elevated. Raised urinary glycolate level is seen in primary hyperoxaluria type 1 and glycerate in type 2.

An associated renal injury is common in cases of primary hyperoxaluria, which might lead to a decrease in GFR, which would, in turn, lead to a decrease in oxalate excretion. Initial urinary oxalate measurements can sometimes be misleading, and hence a plasma oxalate concentration would be needed in these situations. A normal plasma oxalate level is between 1 to 5 μmol/L.

Confirmatory tests include direct genetic testing or measuring the AGT enzyme activity following a liver biopsy. Non-invasive definitive diagnosis of primary hyperoxaluria is provided by testing for AGXT, GRHPR, and HOGA1 genes.

Genetic testing for primary hyperoxaluria is recommended by the American Urological Association Guidelines if urinary oxalate is >75 mg/day (or >0.85 mmol/24h/1.73 m).

**Genetic Screening for Nephrolithiasis and Primary Hyperoxaluria**

In the US, a totally free genetic screening panel for nephrolithiasis, (particularly primary hyperoxaluria type 1), is currently available from Invitae at no cost to patients, physicians, or insurers. It is also available in selected countries outside the United States. The screening panel is recommended for all patients, both adults and children, with a family history of primary hyperoxaluria or a 24-hour urinary oxalate level >75 mg (or >0.85 mmol/24h/1.73 m). Children with a history of nephrocalcinosis, hyperoxaluria, or nephrolithiasis may also qualify. The screening is done from a DNA source such as a saliva specimen, buccal swab, or a blood sample. For more information, call 1-800-436-3037 in the US or 1-415-930-4018 worldwide. (email: www.invitae.com/contact, www.clientservices@invitae.com, or globalsupport@invitae.com)

In the US, free telephone-based genetic counseling is currently available for primary hyperoxaluria patients through InformedDNA at 888-475-3128.