# Continuing Education Activity

The aortic valve lies at the junction of the left ventricle and aorta and is a semilunar valve with three leaflets. It allows unidirectional blood flow from the left ventricle to the aorta and the rest of the body. Because of the highly complex and sophisticated cellular and molecular functions, the thin valve leaflet can withstand extreme mechanical and hemodynamic forces with every cardiac cycle. Various factors including age and congenital defects can compromise the normal valvular function leading to a wide variety of complications. This activity reviews the pathophysiology of aortic pathology, the indications, and contraindications to aortic valve replacement, and the types of valve replacements that exist. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with aortic valve disease.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the pathophysiology of aortic valve disease.
- Describe the indications for aortic valve replacement.
- Review the complications of aortic valve replacement.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for enhancing care coordination and communication to advance the management of patients with aortic valve disease and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

The aortic valve is a semilunar valve with three leaflets, which lies at the junction of left ventricle and aorta. It allows unidirectional blood flow from the left ventricle to the aorta and the rest of the body. Because of the highly complex and sophisticated cellular and molecular functions, the thin valve leaflet can withstand extreme mechanical and hemodynamic forces with every cardiac cycle.

Although bicuspid aortic valves (BAV) are the most common congenital abnormality, congenital valve defects can range from aortic atresia (missing or incomplete closure of aortic valves) to a sub or supra-valvular stenosis. BAV is reported to have an incidence of 1 to 2% with a male predominance. Lack of microfibrillar proteins during valvulogenesis has been reported to affect the leaflet development where two leaflets are fused to form one large leaflet. It frequently correlates with aortic abnormalities such as aortic dilation (root, ascending and arch) and coarctation of the aorta.

Congenital abnormalities including BAV can lead to various valvular complications including aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation leading to an increased risk to infective endocarditis, which has a reported incidence of 12 to 39% in BAV.

Aortic stenosis (AS) is a narrowing of the valve aperture reducing the aortic valve area. Increased resistance to blood flow and transvalvular pressure gradient causes increased left ventricle workload causing hypertrophy. Its prevalence increases with age and can be as high as 4.6% in people greater than age 75 years. Being the most common valvular disease in Europe and America, estimates are that 3.5 million people in England alone will have AS by the year 2020.

AS can be asymptomatic or can cause symptoms of syncope, angina and heart failure.

Aortic regurgitation (AR) is the backflow of blood from the aorta to the left ventricle when the valve leaflets fail to coapt. Common causes include congenital defects, calcific degeneration, infective endocarditis, rheumatic fever, and trauma.

On physical examination, AR murmur is blowing, high-pitched, diastolic, and decrescendo, beginning soon after the aortic component of S (A); it is loudest at the 3rd or 4th left parasternal intercostal space. It also has associations with various other murmurs including:

- “Mid-systolic murmur” because of rapid ejection of an overload of blood from the left ventricle,

- “Austin Flint” murmur is mid-to-late diastolic murmur due to partial closure of mitral valve during ventricular systole because of regurgitant flow from aortic valve,

- “Cole-Cecil” is a diastolic murmur due to the fusion of an aortic murmur with the S3 because of simultaneous filling of the left ventricle from left atrium and AR

**History of Valvular Surgery**

Dr. Theodore Tuffier, in 1912, used his finger to free the fused leaflets of a stenosed aortic valve.

**Mechanical heart valves**are known to last for approximately 25 years. Seventy different mechanical heart valves have been developed since 1960.

Increased thrombogenicity has been a significant issue, for which valves underwent several modifications such as measures to reduce metal contact by covering the struts with cloth and using Silastic shields. Other issues included hemolysis due to excessive rubbing of the ball against the sewing ring and occlusion of coronary ostia because of high profile. Despite these issues, these valves showed the feasibility of prosthetic valve enabling Starr-Edwards to draw design criteria. Basic points included that the valves should be chemically inert, biocompatible, a-traumatic to blood, and non-thrombogenic.

In 1965, Kay-Shiley’s non-rotating disc valve replaced the ball with a single disc but demonstrated poor hemodynamics and hemolysis and was discontinued. Bjork-Shiley in 1969 developed a tilting-disc valve, which overcame the problems with the single-disc valve. Free rotation of disc between metal struts allows it to open by tilting at a 60-degree angle. Bjork-Shiley replaced the flat with the convexo-concave disc to create a larger orifice in 1975 but were the object of a recall due to fracture of welded struts.

Medtronic Hall valve developed by Dr. Karl Hall and Robert Kaster is the most common tilting disc valve. Perforation in the middle of the disc served as a guide and an improved tilting angle.

Predisposition for thrombosis, embolism, need for lifelong anticoagulation therapy are drawbacks of mechanical valves.

**Bioprosthetic valves**can either be an allograft (cadaver or Ross procedure) or, a xenograft (native or pericardium). The Ross procedure involves replacing the diseased aortic valve with the patient’s own pulmonary valve (autograft) and replace the pulmonary valve with aortic or pulmonary allograft. The pulmonary autograft grows with the patient and does not induce an immunologic response. The most common xenografts are porcine aortic valves and bovine pericardial valves.

Lonescu-Shiley developed xenograft valves by using bovine pericardium on a titanium stent in 1971 but was later withdrawn in 1987 due to structural failure including abrasive tears because of fabric-tissue interface and leaflet calcification. Carpentier-Edwards bovine pericardial valve overcame those issues by making some structural modifications, like stitching pericardium to the inside of the fabric and using flexible stent posts.

Although biological valves have better hemodynamics compared to mechanical valves, they have a shorter lifespan because of calcification, which stiffens the valve leaflets.

Tissues engineering, a field in regenerative medicine restores and maintains the function of living tissues. Skin graft for burn victims is an example. **Tissue engineered heart valves (TEHV)**are perceived to be non-thrombogenic, and infection resistant. With advancement in material science and culturing techniques, there is the possibility of a TEHV valve that is capable of growing, remodeling and repairing itself as the patients grow.

**Polymeric valves**have been around for over 50 years, but because the earlier versions were prone to calcification and degradation, they were not widely used and instead only used in bridge devices like artificial hearts and left ventricular assist devices. Besides the advantage that they can be produced in various shapes and sizes,

# Anatomy and Physiology

The heart has four chambers (right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium, and left ventricle) and four valves (tricuspid, pulmonary, mitral, and aortic valves). Valves between the atriums and ventricles (tricuspid and mitral) are called “atrioventricular” valve and valves between arteries and ventricles (aortic and pulmonary) are called “arterioventricular” valves. The aortic and pulmonary valves are also called semilunar valves because of their half-moon-like shape. Atrioventricular valves are considered to be the active structures because their attachment to the heart muscle through papillary muscles and fibrous cords makes them respond to myocardial contractions. Semilunar valves historically were considered functioning passively in response to blood flow since they do not have a direct attachment of the mobile part of the leaflet to the myocardium.

Although it is partly true, it now is known that valve’s sophisticated design and complex cellular components play an essential role in maintaining normal valve function.

The aortic valve, like other valves, permits the blood flow in one direction, from the left ventricle to aorta. It is reported to open and closes over 100,000 times a day and 3.7 billion times in a lifespan. Aortic valve has three leaflets (movable parts) and three sinuses, which are cavities behind the leaflets. Two of these sinuses have apertures of right and left coronary arteries, hence are called right coronary sinus and left coronary sinus. The third sinus is a blind sac and is called non-coronary or posterior sinus.

# Indications

While medical treatment has not shown to prevent or delay the onset of valvular disease,

AS is classified based on effective orifice area (EOA), the jet velocity, the ejection fraction, and the transvalvular pressure gradient. Two of the most common approaches to determine EOA are Gorlin formula and continuity equation. Doppler echocardiography is used to determine velocity time integral (VTI), which is the smallest cross-sectional area of the stream, to estimate EOA using continuity equation. However, it sometimes overestimates the severity, which can lead to unnecessary intervention.

Due to the growing success of TAVR, ACC/AHA guidelines for the indications of AVR changed in 2014.

1) Patients considered to be at prohibitive risk for surgery and a predicted post-TAVR survival longer than 12 months (class I indication, level of evidence B).

2) As an alternative to SAVR in patients considered to be at high risk for surgery (class IIa indication, level of evidence B).

**SAVR Versus TAVR**

From 2004 to 2008, aortic valve replacement (AVR) had a mortality of 2.8%.  Due to porcelain aorta and high surgical risk, 1/3 of the patients with severe AS aged greater than 75 are deemed unsuitable for aortic valve replacement.

Andersen et al. demonstrated the feasibility of TAVR in 1992 using a porcine aortic valve folded into a balloon expandable stent.

In patients with systolic dysfunction, TAVR has shown to normalize ventricular-arterial coupling, decrease LV hypertrophy and restore normal LV function.

**Sequelae of TAVR**

Major complications associated with TAVR are para-valvular leaks, stent migration, conduction disturbances, and stroke.

Para-valvular leakage (PVL) or LVOT obstruction can occur due to stent migration or rotation if the calcific nodules on the native valves are not sufficient to anchor the stent.

Two large randomized trails compared TAVR and SAVR in high-risk patients and revealed that TAVR is associated with a stroke rate from 4 to 5%, which is highest amongst percutaneous cardiac interventions. FDA requires all TAVR patients to have a follow-up CT to look for signs of leaflet immobility since reduced leaflet motion has been shown to associate with an increased incidence of strokes and transient ischemic attacks.

Direct, or near direct, contact of the bioprosthetic valve and coronary ostium can lead to coronary obstruction, which correlates with a high mortality rate.

Conduction abnormalities due to compression of atrioventricular (AV) node or His bundle can occur due to oversized valves and if the stent positioning is too deep into the left ventricle outflow tract (LVOT). On the other hand, positioning the valvular prosthesis supra-annularly can increase the risk of coronary ostia occlusion. The need for a permanent pacemaker in PARTNER A Cohort was not significantly different for the patients undergoing TAVR versus SAVR. Siontis and colleagues found that conduction abnormalities were 2.5 times more prevalent with self-expandable valves compared to balloon-expandable valves. They also suggested that male sex, baseline conduction abnormalities, and intra-procedural AV block were predictors of a permanent pacemaker placement after TAVR.

Vascular sequelae are independent predictors of death. Major vascular complications arise after retrograde delivery through the femoral arteries due to the size of trans-catheter valves in a collapsed state. It can lead to dislodging of calcific debris from arteries and can lead to stroke.

Logistic EuroSCORE and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality (STS-PROM) algorithms are the two most frequently used death-prediction models used for TAVR patients. The trans-apical approach has correlated with a higher mortality rate than the transfemoral route.

# Clinical Significance

Aortic valve replacement is a life-saving procedure. The aortic valve is often affected by either become leaky (aortic insufficiency) or partially blocked (aortic stenosis). Current aortic valve replacement approaches to treat the condition include a sternotomy, minimally invasive cardiac surgery, and transcatheter aortic valve replacement.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Because there are several options today for managing aortic valvular disease, it is important to have an interprofessional team of nurses, cardiologists, and cardiac surgeons assess the patient and make a universal recommendation that includes patient education. The type of treatment recommended usually depends on patient age, comorbidity, personal preferences, surgeon experience, contraindications to anticoagulation, and lifestyle.