**Pediatric CPR**

By definition, infant CPR applies to patients whose age is less than one year. Child CPR applies to patients from one year of age through puberty. From puberty onward, adult CPR guidelines apply. The modifications for infant and child CPR are listed below. All other aspects of CPR follow the adult guidelines, including starting the process with the Compression first (CAB) sequence and the rate of compressions being 100 to 120 per minute. The sternum should be depressed to a depth of approximately one-third of the anteroposterior diameter of the chest; this is about two inches in the child and 1.5 inches in the infant.

**Child CPR Modifications**

Chest compressions on a child are performed by placing the heel of one or two hands (depending on the size of the child) over the lower half of the sternum. The chest is compressed to a depth of approximately two inches at a rate of 100 to 120 per minute. After 30 compressions, administer two sequential breaths and return to chest compressions. Continue the cycle of 30 compressions to two breaths until help arrives.

**Infant CPR Modifications**

Chest compressions on an infant are performed by placing two fingers on the sternum just below the nipple line. The infant's chest is compressed to a depth of approximately 1.5 inches at a rate of 100 to 120 per minute. After 30 compressions, administer two sequential breaths and return to chest compressions. Continue the cycle of 30 compressions to two breaths until help arrives.

**In-hospital CPR**

Multiple rescuers are generally available in the hospital setting, and ventilation is usually performed with a bag-valve-mask (BVM) device. BVM ventilation needs to be performed by a provider skilled in its use. If the patient is not intubated, CPR is done by one provider performing chest compressions while the second provider provides breaths with BVM ventilation. The ratio of compressions to breaths in this situation changes to 15 compressions to two breaths. Once a patient is intubated, it is unnecessary to perform cycles of compressions and ventilation--chest compressions are performed continuously, while rescue breaths are given independently via the BVM at a rate of 10 per minute (one breath every six seconds). Novice operators frequently tend to provide BVM ventilations at a higher rate than this.