Following a rattlesnake envenomation, complications can occur as a result of the envenomation itself or from its therapy.

**Hypersensitivity:**A feared complication associated with treatment using Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab****is anaphylaxis or anaphylactoid reactions. Delayed hypersensitivity reactions or serum sickness can also occur. Serum sickness may be treated with a 5 to 7-day course of oral steroids.

**Necrosis:**Tissue necrosis is the most well-known complication associated with rattlesnake envenomations. One study performed in Arizona included 77 patients with upper extremity rattlesnake bites, of which approximately 40% demonstrated evidence of tissue necrosis.

**Infection:**Although tissue necrosis is associated with infection. However, infection without tissue necrosis is very uncommon in Crotalid envenomations, estimated to be approximately 3% in one study.

**Rhabdomyolysis:**Due to the ability of rattlesnake venom to induce myonecrosis, rhabdomyolysis can occur, and with it, associated kidney injury. If CPK is rising reassess the extremity for signs of compartment syndrome, which usually will respond to additional antivenom administration.

**Delayed venom effects:**Even after initial control, a delayed-onset of one or more venom manifestations, including local swelling occurs in approximately half of the patients treated with antivenin.

**Compartment syndrome:**Compartment syndrome is a rare occurrence in rattlesnake envenomations.[12] These cases will likely resolve with antivenin administration and conservative medical management.