**Components of the Machine**

Adaptive optics equipment has four main components.

- A wavefront sensor to detect and measure the optical aberrations in the light rays reflected from the eye. It consists of a lenslet array, each of which samples a part of the light wave. Shack- Hartmann wavefront sensor (SHWS) is commonly used.

- A deformable mirror to correct the detected aberrations. The actuator receives inputs from the wavefront sensor and modifies the surface of these mirrors. This helps correct the higher-order and any significant lower-order aberrations in the light beam.

- A control system to calculate the required correction level and receive feedback, and

- Image acquisition and processing device to capture the corrected waveform and generate an image.

Adaptive optics is not a stand-alone technology and has been combined with pre-existing imaging equipment, like the fundus camera, optical coherence tomography, and scanning laser ophthalmoscope.

**Adaptive Optics flood Illumination Technology (AO FI)**

AO components like the SHWS and deformable mirrors are combined with a high-resolution fundus camera. This setup helps image the spacing and directionality of the cones and pick up any fluctuations in cone reflectance. Since it uses an incoherent light source, the exposure time is brief, reducing the time required for image capture. However, this system is limited by its reduced axial resolution.

**Adaptive Optics Scanning Laser Ophthalmoscope  (AO SLO)**

Dreher et al. were the first to combine AO with SLO devices in 1989.

**Adaptive Optics Optical Coherence Tomography (AO-OCT)**

This system overcomes monochromatic aberrations and helps in the reduction of speckle size. This enables three-dimensional imaging of individual photoreceptors, ganglion cells, retinal pigment epithelium, lamina cribrosa, and nerve fiber layer.