Treatment for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency includes avoiding malnutrition-related complications and improving the patient's quality of life. Documentation of body weight and body mass index along with anthropometric measurements, Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan, and screening for nutritional deficiencies (albumin, international normalized ratio, vitamins D, A, and E level, vitamins B and folate) should be performed for all patients diagnosed with EPI at presentation and at least every year to assess the response to replacement therapy and progression of the disease.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is recommended to treat EPI and resultant malnutrition. it could be enhanced by increasing doses, enteric coating, gastric acid suppression, and proper administration during meals.

Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy (PERT) is the main treatment of EPI. A combination of pancreatic enzymes (lipase, amylase, and protease) prevents malabsorption and restores the normal physiological digestive process. The enteric coating of the enzymatic supplement provides protection from gastric acidity and dissolves afterward in the duodenum in response to alkaline PH. Some patients might require reducing gastric acidity in the case of reduced bicarbonate secretion to dissolve the enteric coat.

The dose needed for enzyme replacement differs between patients depending on the severity of the deficiency and individual needs. Moreover, high doses of supplements don't come without complications, so the lowest effective dose should be used. The current recommendation is 25000 to 40000 units of lipase taken with meals or half with snacks, then titrated according to response to a maximum of 75000 to 90000 units of lipase per meal. In case of poor response, gastric acid suppression and excluding other potential causes for symptoms should be considered.

Dietetic management includes advice about keeping with a normal diet as possible, along with small frequent meals, avoidance of fat restriction, and very high fiber diets. A referral is recommended to a dietician for a review of dietetic history along with anthropometric measures plus counseling and support.

EPI in cystic fibrosis can be treated by pancreatic enzyme replacement with cautious dosage increments in line with energy consumption.

A promising approach is the use of stem cell technology. It includes pluripotent stem cells to produce pancreatic exocrine cells, but it is still under research.