Incidence is commonly confused with prevalence. Incidence is the rate of new cases or events during a specified period; whereas, prevalence is the total cases present at one specific time, both new and old cases. Incidence occurs when the new case is diagnosed, and each new case diagnosed increases the prevalence. Prevalence decreases when the disease is cured, or the patient dies. The cure for a disease or death of a patient does not affect the incidence of the disease. In the image below, the incidence is the new additions to the reservoir, the prevalence is the total number in the reservoir, and cure/death decreases the reservoir. The incidence is a measure of the risk of getting the disease during a specified period; whereas, prevalence is a measure of how much burden of the disease there is in the population at one specific moment in time.

A second common error with incidence is not adequately defining the population at risk. Incidence specifies the number of new diagnoses for the at-risk population of a disease. Changing the specified population will also change the incidence. For example, the incidence of stroke is approximately 250/100,000 people-year for all individuals in the United States. The incidence decreases to 24/100,000 people-year if we only look at those ages 15 to 54. The incidence increases to 391/100,000 people-year if we only look at those older than 54 years.  Thus the incidence differs between different populations (age groups in this example).  Let us look at breast cancer as a second example where incidence is different between groups.  The incidence of invasive breast cancer in females in the United States is about 161/100,000 people-year versus the incidence of 1.6/100,000 people-year for males in the United States.  We can see a 100 fold difference in the incidence of invasive breast cancer between females and males in the United States.

Additionally, we must be careful to ensure all of the individuals included in the population used to calculate the incidence are truly at risk. For example, each year approximately 61,380 individuals are diagnosed with uterine cancer.  If we used the total United States population of 324 million, we would calculate an incidence of 18.9/100,000 people-year. In reality, only females are at risk for uterine cancer, and thus only females should be used as the population at risk. Assuming there are approximately 157 million females in the United States, we would calculate a more accurate incidence of uterine cancer of 39/100,000 people-year in the United States. Thus the use of the wrong population at risk can have significant effects when calculating the incidence.