Four fascial compartments in the lower leg contain muscles to the leg and foot and critical neurovascular structures. While a BKA divides all compartments, a thorough grasp of the relevant anatomy is vital in controlling blood loss intraoperatively and preventing known complications.

The anterior tibial compartment lies anterolateral to the spine of the tibia and anterior to the fibula. Within the fascia lie the tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus, and peroneus tertius. Also in the anterior compartment are the deep peroneal nerve and the anterior tibial artery and vein.

The anterior tibial artery is the main blood supply to the anterior compartment of the leg, with reinforcement by the perforating branch of the peroneal artery. The lateral compartment lies posterior to the anterior compartment and directly lateral to the fibula. This contains the peroneus longus and brevis and the superficial branch of the peroneal nerve for much of its course. It derives the arterial supply from the branches of the peroneal artery.

The posterior leg holds both the superficial and deep compartments, the superficial containing the soleus, gastrocnemius, and plantaris muscles. The deep, muscular compartment contains the tibialis posterior and the great and common toe flexors. The tibial neurovascular structures lie within the deep compartment. The posterior tibial artery is the main blood supply of this compartment. It is essential to understand the vascular anatomy of the leg as skin flaps for amputation are planned according to the blood supply.

The popliteal artery is the continuation of the superficial femoral artery and is the blood supply below the knee. It begins in the popliteal fossa, inferior to the popliteus muscle. The popliteal artery branches are the anterior tibial artery, posterior tibial artery, sural artery, medial superior genicular artery, lateral superior genicular artery, middle genicular artery, lateral inferior genicular artery, and medial inferior genicular artery. The arterial supply to the tibia is multifaceted. Branches of the anterior tibial artery supply the proximal metaphysis and epiphysis from the periphery via periosteal branches. The nutrient artery supplies the diaphysis. This artery penetrates the tibia posteriorly, distal to the soleal line near the center of the tibia, and sends branches toward the proximal and distal ends of the diaphysis.

The penetrating branches of the posterior tibial artery supply the distal metaphysis and epiphysis from the periphery.

The arterial supply of the proximal epiphysis and metaphysis of the fibula is through branches of the anterior tibial artery and, more distally, by the fibular artery. This blood supply is noteworthy as graft reconstruction surgery of the mandible often uses the proximal fibula. Venous drainage of the tibia is via the anterior and posterior tibial veins, and fibula drainage is via the fibular vein. These veins drain into the popliteal vein.

The lymphatic drainage of the tibia and fibula is to the superficial and deep inguinal lymph nodes.

Branches from the tibial nerve supply the knee joint and provide innervation to the proximal tibia. Distally, branches from nerves supplying the overlying muscle innervate the tibia below. These are branches of the deep femoral nerve and the tibial nerve. The sciatic nerve divides proximal to the popliteal fossa into the common peroneal (fibular) and tibial nerve—the common peroneal nerve winds around the fibular neck. The peroneal nerve innervates the posterior lateral lower leg. It allows for eversion and dorsiflexion. The superficial peroneal nerve is a cutaneous branch of the peroneal nerve and is responsible for sensation in the upper two-thirds of the posterior lateral leg.

The superficial peroneal nerve branches terminate at the deep crural fascia, dividing into the medial and intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerves. These nerves supply the dorsal surface of the foot, except for the dorsal webbed space between the first and second toe.

The deep peroneal nerve innervates the first- and second-toe webbed space. The tibial nerve is responsible for inversion and plantar flexion. The sural nerve is a cutaneous branch of the tibial nerve and provides sensory for the anteromedial lower leg. Cutaneous branches of the tibial nerve provide sensation to most of the plantar surface of the foot.

Muscles demonstrating origin/insertion footprints on the tibia include:

- Tensor fasciae latae inserts on the lateral (Gerdy) tubercle of the tibia.

- Quadriceps femoris inserts anteriorly on the tibial tuberosity.

- Sartorius, gracilis, and semitendinosus insert anteromedially on the pes anserinus.

- Horizontal head of the semimembranosus muscle inserts on the medial condyle.

- Popliteus inserts on the soleal line of the posterior tibia.

- Tibialis anterior originates at the upper two-thirds of the lateral tibia.

- Extensor digitorum longus originates at the lateral condyle of the tibia.

- The soleus and flexor digitorum longus originate at the posterior aspect of the tibia on the soleal line.

- Muscles associated with the fibula:
            
              
- The biceps femoris tendon inserts on the fibular head.
              
              
- The fibularis longus and fibularis brevis tendons insert into the lateral fibula.
              
              
- The extensor digitorum longus and extensor hallucis longus tendons insert on the medial fibula.
              
              
- The fibularis tertius (FT) is a small muscle in the anterior compartment of the leg that inserts on the anterior surface of the distal fibula.