Although this technique can be quickly learned and mastered by any surgeon (dermatologist, general surgeon, plastic surgeon, burn specialist) who is conversant with the basic principles of skin grafting, at present, it is probably best for dermatologists who have observed and assisted in few procedures under the apprenticeship of a dermatology surgeon experienced in this technique.

However, the primary objective of developing this technique, i.e., empowering all medical professionals involved in the care of patients with vitiligo and/or CNHU's with this straightforward and cost-effective technique, is not difficult to achieve. Inter-specialty exchange of knowledge and skills during focused conferences and/or workshops on skin grafting, vitiligo surgery, management of CNHU's, etc. are already becoming popular globally. Inclusion of JODHPUR TECHNIQUE in the program of such inter-specialty CMEs, preferably with video demonstration, may serve the purpose of realizing the objective as mentioned earlier.

Similarly, training of surgical nurses/technicians as proficient assistants to the surgeon is also relatively straightforward and easy. It must be undertaken at individual centers to improve therapeutic outcomes and prevent complications.

This procedure requires coordination from the entire interprofessional healthcare team.

**CURRENT EVIDENCE LEVEL OF JODHPUR TECHNIQUE******

- **For vitiligo - LEVEL 5**[two published case series involving a total of 455 vitiligo lesions treated with Jodhpur technique]

- **For CNHUs - LEVEL 5**[one published case report, one large case series under publication process & expert opinion]