Allopurinol is a relatively safe medication, although adverse effects can occur.

Due to the destabilization of intra-articular uric acid microtophi on initiating any urate-lowering therapy, there is an increased incidence of acute gouty flares, especially during the initial few months. To prevent this, patients should start an anti-inflammatory agent such as colchicine, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), or low-dose prednisone (only in patients who cannot take colchicine or NSAIDs) before or at the same time as initiating allopurinol.

Maculopapular pruritic rash, and gastrointestinal adverse effects, including nausea and diarrhea, are other common adverse effects. Laboratory abnormalities can occur, including transaminitis and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Other less common and rare adverse effects include liver necrosis, granulomatous hepatitis, cholestatic jaundice, interstitial nephritis, and vasculitis.

Fontana R. et al. conducted research on eleven patients with suspected allopurinol-induced liver damage. The researchers found that hepatoxicity was associated with the following alleles: HLA-B*58:01, HLA-B*53:01, and HLA-A*34:02. The median age was 60 years, 54% were men, and 63% were African-American.

Allopurinol maintenance therapy may increase thyroid-stimulating hormone, which might result from subclinical hypothyroidism.

Allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome (AHS) is a rare severe adverse effect of allopurinol with an incidence of about 1 in 1000, with a high mortality rate of 20% to 25%. The mechanism is a T-cell-mediated immune reaction to oxypurinol. The highest risk is in the first few months of therapy, especially with higher starting doses of allopurinol. Concurrent diuretics, especially thiazide use, renal insufficiency stage 3, or higher, are major risk factors. Patients of Korean, Han Chinese, and Thai descent with HLA-B*5801 genotype are at a very high risk of AHS. Clinical features of AHS include Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, vasculitis, hepatocellular injury, acute kidney injury, fever, leukocytosis, and eosinophilia.

Lavu A. et al. reported on a patient with Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN) caused by allopurinol. The patient’s clinical presentation gradually resolved with the discontinuation of allopurinol therapy. The patient was found to have the HLA-B*58:01 allele. The investigators recommend pharmacogenomic testing for the HLA-B*58:01 allele before initiating allopurinol therapy to prevent SJS and TEN in susceptible patients.

Several drug interactions exist with allopurinol. The most important drug interaction is with azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine, both metabolized by the enzyme xanthine oxidase. Using any xanthine oxidase inhibitor such as allopurinol in a patient on azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine can cause severe agranulocytosis and pancytopenia.