There is no clear definition for ventricular infection and no accepted diagnostic criteria. It is unclear whether ventriculitis, catheter-related infections, and positive CSF cultures describe the same condition. True infection, contamination, colonization, or suspected ventriculostomy-related infection are hard to distinguish (Table 1).

Ventriculitis secondary to meningitis (commonly known as pyogenic ventriculitis) is more common in infants. Risk factors are related to low host immunity (cancer, HIV, diabetes, alcoholism, etc.) and higher virulence of the causative organism. Often, when meningitis fails to respond to antibiotics, or when it recurs, ventriculitis should be considered.

Typical organisms include gram-negative species followed by Staphylococcus species.

The incidence of ventricular catheter-related ventriculitis (or healthcare-associated ventriculitis) ranges from 0 to 45% depending on the insertion technique and management (commonly less than 10%).

Catheter-related ventriculitis is associated with significant morbidity and mortality, especially with gram-negative organisms (approaching 58% in some studies).Staphylococcus (most common), Corynebacterium, Bacillus, Micrococcus, or Propionibacterium species.Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii) and drug-resistant organisms has been attributed to the use of antibiotic prophylaxis targeting gram-positive bacteria and prolonged hospitalization.

In ventriculitis following head trauma, Streptococcus
pneumoniae and gram-negative rods are the most common pathogens.Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Streptococcus pyogenes) cause infections in patients with skull base fractures and persistent CSF leaks.