The superficial temporal artery (STA) is the major branch of the temporal artery, which originates from the external carotid artery, arising above the takeoff of the internal maxillary artery. The STA then runs through the posterior portion of the parotid gland, beneath the facial nerve, and then crosses the posterior aspect of the zygomatic arch before branching into frontal and parietal branches, running within the temporalis muscle of the skull. The STA may dilate for unknown reasons and cause migraine headaches, which can be lessened with botox injections. The STA may also be involved with giant cell arteritis, an idiopathic inflammation of the artery, which necessitates a manually guided biopsy of the STA for diagnosis. This latter pathology can respond to oral steroid administration.

In the past, the STA has been used to bypass middle cerebral occlusion or stenotic diseases by anastomosing the STA to the middle cerebral artery through a burr hole in the skull. This technique is only rarely used today for vascular disease. However, the STA can serve as a bypass vascular graft for specific head and neck tumors where other arteries to facial structures need to be sacrificed. The arterial supply to the temporal bone is also partly from the ascending pharyngeal artery of the external carotid artery. The AICA or anterior inferior cerebellar artery is a significant supplier of the internal auditory canal and cranial nerves VII and VIII. The venous drainage is from inferior and superior petrosal veins into the jugular fossa of the skull base, and then into the internal jugular vein.