# Introduction

First described by Ruggero Oddi in 1887, the sphincter of Oddi (SO) is a smooth muscle sphincter located in the second portion of the duodenum.

# Structure and Function

The sphincter of Oddi is a muscular valve responsible for controlling the flow of bile and pancreatic secretions through the ampulla of Vater into the second part of the duodenum. It is composed of three layers of concentric smooth muscle that surround the common bile duct, the main pancreatic duct, and the ampulla of Vater. The papilla of Vater includes the sphincter of Oddi and its overlying mucosa. So far, the sphincter of Oddi has been identified to have at least three functions:

- To prevent reflux of duodenal contents, thereby preventing the accumulation of sludge and particulate matter in the bile ducts and thus helps to reduce the risk of cholangitis.

- To regulate the flow of bile and pancreatic secretions.

- To allow retrograde filling of the gallbladder to occur.

The sphincter of Oddi serves as a great example of the hormonal regulation of smooth muscle. The most important of these hormones is cholecystokinin (CCK). It is released from enteroendocrine cells in response to the digestion of a meal; this stimulates the contraction of the gall bladder, resulting in emptying pancreatic secretions and bile into the common bile duct. CCK has been demonstrated to cause the release of VIP and nitric oxide by intrinsic neurons of the sphincter of Oddi, resulting in a decrease in sphincter tone, ultimately leading to the release of the backed-up contents into the duodenum to aid with digestion. Somatostatin is another noteworthy hormone shown to increase the sphincter of Oddi tone. In contrast, motilin and secretin serve the opposite effect by decreasing the sphincter of Oddi tone and allowing the flow of contents from the gallbladder and pancreas.

# Embryology

The sphincter of Oddi is a concentric ring of muscle originating from the mesenchyme surrounding the pre-ampullary portion of the bile and pancreatic ducts. Initially, it begins as a transverse slit in the circular smooth muscle at the junction between the duodenal wall and the bile and pancreatic ducts. The sequence of the sphincter of Oddi differentiation follows a timeline.

- Week 10: sphincter of Oddi begins differentiation

- Week 12: the bile and pancreatic ducts emerge through the transverse slit of the concentric smooth muscle of the duodenum

- Week 16: the muscularis propria extends outside the fenestra to the upper end of the ampulla

- Week 28: the muscularis propria is differentiated almost to the distal end of the ampulla

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

In about half of individuals, the retroduodenal artery (i.e., the posterior superior and anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal arteries) forms an arterial plexus that provides the primary blood supply to the region of the sphincter of Oddi. The remaining half receives blood supply to the sphincter of Oddi directly from one of the major branches of the retroduodenal artery, with the most likely branch being the posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery.

The superior pancreaticoduodenal artery is a branch from the gastroduodenal artery, itself arising from the hepatic artery branch from the celiac trunk. The lymphatic drainage of the sphincter of Oddi follows the drainage of the encompassing ampulla of Vater, which drains into the posterior pancreatoduodenal lymph nodes, followed by the lymph nodes around the superior mesenteric artery, and finally into the para-aortic lymph nodes that follow their well-described path of drainage.

# Nerves

The sphincter of Oddi possesses a complex intrinsic set of neural innervation. Currently, two ganglionated plexuses are recognized:

- Myenteric plexus, which lies between the sphincter's muscular layers

- Submucosal plexus

There have also been a few subpopulations discovered in animal models that helped the understanding of the intrinsic innervation of the sphincter of Oddi. One of these described subpopulations was in guinea pigs and was found to be immunoreactive to choline acetyltransferase and served to provide an excitatory effect, thereby increasing the sphincter of Oddi tone. Researchers also found a second, smaller subset of neurons in the sphincter of Oddi that was immunoreactive to nitric oxide (NO) synthase and expressed vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and neuropeptide Y (NPY).

As opposed to the intrinsic neural innervation of the sphincter of Oddi, its extrinsic innervation is not very well understood but is thought to display characteristics similar to that of most of the biliary tract. This neurology includes parasympathetic nervous system innervation originating from the vagus nerve and sympathetic nervous system innervation originating from the superior mesenteric ganglion following the inferior pancreatic duodenal artery.

The sphincter of Oddi is also thought to be part of bidirectional signaling pathways. There seems to be a bidirectional connection between the sphincter of Oddi and the gallbladder; the electrical activity of the gallbladder has been shown to inhibit the sphincter of Oddi contraction reflexively. Similar to the aforementioned bidirectional system, there also exists evidence of a subpopulation of neurons demonstrating bidirectional signaling between the duodenum and sphincter of Oddi ganglia as part of an excitatory cholinergic pathway.

# Physiologic Variants

Concerning the sphincter of Oddi musculature, only size variations have been described. Of clinical significance is the existence of hypertrophic sphincter of Oddi smooth muscle in a small proportion of patients, which increases the risk of stenosis. Hypertrophic smooth muscle may also represent a risk factor for chronic obstructive pancreatitis or a cause for biliary-type pain.

# Surgical Considerations

Surgeons encounter the sphincter of Oddi in many surgical and nonsurgical procedures, so a proper understanding of potential variations in arterial supply is crucial in avoiding undue harm. About 5% of the population's distance between the retroduodenal artery and the papillary orifice is less than 35 millimeters. This proximity creates a small risk of hemorrhage during procedures that require entry through the sphincter of Oddi, such as an ERCP with sphincterotomy, sphincteroplasty, or surgical interventions.

# Clinical Significance

Perhaps one of the most clinically significant topics on the sphincter of Oddi is sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (SOD). Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction is defined broadly as the impairment of the sphincter's ability to perform its normal functions of controlling the flow of contents into the duodenum, as mentioned above.

The main clinical feature of sphincter of Oddi dysfunction is intermittent bouts of epigastric and right upper quadrant pain often precipitated by meals. The pain may last between half an hour and up to several hours and most commonly presents in women between the ages of 20 and 50 years, although it can present at any age and in both sexes.

- Nausea and vomiting, which may be mistaken for a gallbladder attack

- Transient increase in liver function tests (LFT) or pancreatic enzymes

- Delay in the emptying of contrast from the CBD or PD while in the supine position

- Radiating pain in the region of the back, shoulder, or scapula

- Dilation of the CBD or PD

While all the above are typical symptoms and findings associated with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, all of these factors are not present in every patient with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. SOD is often broken down into two main categories: (1) stenosis and (2) dyskinesia.

**Sphincter of Oddi Stenosis**

Any process that involves a narrowing of the sphincter of Oddi, excluding dysfunction inherent to the sphincter muscle itself, is described as a sphincter of Oddi stenosis.

**Sphincter of Oddi Dyskinesia**

While sphincter of Oddi stenosis represents a physical impairment due to damage, inflammation, or neoplastic processes, the sphincter of Oddi dyskinesia represents a less understood motility disorder.

- A paradoxical response to endogenous hormones due to dysfunctional neurologic pathways may cause sphincter of Oddi dyskinesia.

- The sphincter of Oddi dyskinesia may lie at the hormonal and neurotransmitter level leading to the sphincter of Oddi hypertension.

**Sphincter of Oddi Dysfunction Diagnosis and Management**

The gold standard test to diagnose sphincter of Oddi dysfunction remains Sphincter of Oddi manometry (SOM), which involves using ERCP techniques and knowledge of manometry to directly examine the motor activity of the sphincter of Oddi.

The Milwaukee stratification was used in the EPISOD randomized clinical trial, whose key result was that patients with type III SOD do not benefit from endoscopic sphincterotomy.

Other tests besides manometry for investigating the function of the sphincter of Oddi include quantitative hepatobiliary scintigraphy (HBS) and fatty meal ultrasonography (FMU). These tests are non-invasive, in contrast to manometry. HBS is a nuclear medicine test in which a tracer is used to demonstrate biliary flow, and the use of intravenous CCK can augment the diagnostic potential of this technique.