**Prenatal Diagnosis**

The autosomal recessive nature of ICD means a higher risk of inheritance among consanguineous families. In a case series performed by Okada et al., eight out of the 18 families had consanguinity. Five families were first cousins, two were second cousins, and one family had grandmothers who were both first cousins.

Manifestations of ICD are recognized at birth, with death occurring within the first decade of life at an average of five years.

Aula et al. was the first group to comment on prenatal diagnosis in ICD. They suggested prenatal diagnosis be made by checking the levels of lysosomal hydrolases in extracellular fluids. They assayed enzymes N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase, N-acetyl-beta-galactosaminidase, beta-glucosidase, beta-galactosidase, alpha-mannosidase, and N-aspartyl-beta-glucosaminidase from samples of amniotic fluid, amniotic cells, fetal skin fibroblasts, and placental fibroblasts. When the amniotic fluid levels of these enzymes were compared with the enzyme levels from a normal pregnancy, there were several-fold increases in the ICD-affected pregnancy. They recorded a 5-fold increase in the levels of beta-galactosidase, a 7-fold increase in the levels of beta-glucosidase and alpha-mannosidase, a 6-to-10 fold increase in the levels of N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase, and an 8-to-20 fold increase in the levels of N-acetyl-beta-galactosaminidase. However, the enzyme levels of beta-glucosidase were decreased in the amniotic cells and fetal fibroblasts. The other enzymes showed similar changes. The characteristic cytoplasmic inclusions were also present in amniotic cell cultures and fetal fibroblasts. The amniotic cell cultures had a smaller amount of inclusions when compared to the fetal fibroblasts.

Hexosaminidase is another enzyme that may be elevated in maternal serum. As a diagnostic marker, Hug et al. suggested that mothers with a more than 15-fold increase in the serum levels of hexosaminidase, compared with enzyme levels in normal maternal serum, were likely to bear a child with ICD. They believed the proximity between the maternal serum and the trophoblastic cells played a role in the elevation of the serum level of the enzyme.

Parvathy et al. devised a trimester-based prenatal diagnostic plan. First-trimester prenatal diagnosis can be performed by demonstrating the intracellular deficiency of G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase from a chorionic villus specimen, with the second-trimester diagnosis being established by looking for the enzyme deficiency within amniotic fluid cells. The trimester-based diagnosis was reinforced by looking for the intracellular lack and extracellular elevation of several lysosomal enzymes in fetal cell cultures and enzyme elevations in maternal serum. Confirmatory tests should be performed when the initial testing is indefinite or when the sample is insufficient. Prenatal diagnosis based on enzyme elevation can be similarly applied to Hunter syndrome and Tay-Sachs disease.

Owada et al. suggest that relying on enzyme elevations, detection of inclusion bodies, and measuring uptake of radioactive material may not be as reliable or realistic to perform due to their time-consuming natures. Elevations of lysosomal enzymes in normal amniotic fluid may be present depending on the gestational age. Their study emphasizes the value of finding altered characteristics of enzymes rather than altered levels of enzymes. Concerning alpha-mannosidase, its Km in high-risk pregnancies had values ranging from 1.20 to 1.46 x 10^-3 mol/l, whereas the value in non-high-risk pregnancies had values of 2.63 x 10^-3 mol/l and 3.03 x 10^-3 mol/l. The alpha-mannosidase from high-risk pregnancies also had a relative resistance to heat as two of their samples functioned normally while being heated to 56 degrees Celsius for 20 minutes. Further, the enzyme showed an optimal pH of 3.5 compared with the control's pH of 5.

Examination of the placenta may also provide clues pointing to ICD. The macroscopic examination may not show distinguishing features, but the syncytiotrophoblast layer will show characteristic inclusions. The cytotrophoblast layer may be normal.

Pregnancy may be complicated by polyhydramnios or end poorly with stillbirth and infant death.

With such non-invasive and safer methods, patients may not need invasive prenatal testing. However, these ultrasound findings are not pathognomic as several other aneuploidies, such as Turner syndrome and Down syndrome, may also show the same features. Achondroplasia, Russell-Silver syndrome, and Shprintzen syndrome also add to the differentials based on imaging findings alone.

In a mother without a previous history of having a fetus with an ICD, ultrasound identification of such features cannot guarantee a diagnosis. Further adding to the uncertainty behind this method, clinical suspicion of ICD should warrant additional ultrasound examinations as the routine 20-week ultrasound assessment may not identify these features.

In the report by Lees et al., their patient had a routine 20-week ultrasound, with the 30-week ultrasound showing femurs below the 5th percentile and an increased echogenicity surrounding the periosteum of the humerus and femur. They decided to perform a 30-week ultrasound due to the mother's previous history of delivering a baby with ICD and because the patient developed polyhydramnios in the presenting pregnancy.

Yuksel et al. suggest that a prenatal diagnosis of ICD should be considered even in mothers without a family history of ICD. Chromosomal analysis may help rule out other differentials. They ascertain a definite diagnosis by measuring the G1cNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity in chorionic villi or cultured amniocytes.

**Diagnosis**

History of a mother having a baby with ICD in the past or having a baby with dysmorphic features matching those of ICD may warrant subsequent investigation. The diagnosis is usually made between 6 months to 12 months of age.

The clinical and lab reporting similarities between ICD and rickets often lead to late recognition. The similarities may be attributable to the exact chromosome location (chromosome 12) of the genes encoding the GNPTAB and the vitamin D receptor. The significance of the proximity has to be explored further. Though similar PTH (parathyroid hormone) and calcidiol levels can be seen in both ICD and rickets, an exaggerated decrease in calcidiol and increased PTH point more towards the latter.