**Hair Function**

Hair serves many functions, including protection, body temperature regulation, facilitation of perspiration, sensation, aesthetics, and psychosocial health. Hair protects our skin from UV radiation in areas that are more hair dense. Hair can retain heat when we are cold and stand on end with the contraction of arrector pili muscles, promoting heat loss through sweat production when we are hot. Hair can also contribute to tactile sensation by transmission through the hair follicles. Socially, hair can be a symbol of beauty and health, contributing to confidence in an individual's psychosocial well-being.

**Nail Function**

The functions of the finger and toenails include protection from injury and infection, help with grasping and manipulating objects, aesthetic and cosmetic purposes, augmentation of sensation. The sheer strength of the nail mediates protection as a direct result of keratinization and the preservation of the cuticle, onychodermal band, and lateral nail folds to prevent infection.

**Sebaceous Gland Function**

Sebaceous glands are essential for the secretion of sebum that serves to lubricate the skin and protect the skin against friction, but also contribute to the modulation of bacterial and fungal growth by the presence of triglycerides and proteolytic enzymes.

**Sebum Secretion**

The process of sebum secretion begins with the proliferation of cells at the basal layer (the secretory portion of the gland).

- Cells become pushed to the center of the gland towards the excretory duct.

- Fatty material is then formed and accumulates in the cytoplasm.

- Cells burst and die as they accumulate sebum and are pushed further from the basal layer.

- Sebum empties onto the hair.

- Contraction of arrector pili muscle can speed up secretion.

**Sweat Gland Function**

**Eccrine**(cholinergic sympathetic stimulation)

****There are three main functions of the eccrine glands:

- Protection: by preserving the skin's acidic composition and protect from microbial overgrowth.

- Thermoregulation: the production of sweat that cools the skin surface and reduces body temperature.

- Excretion: by the excretion of water and electrolytes

**Apocrine**(adrenergic sympathetic stimulation)

The main functions of the apocrine glands are not fully known, but there is pheromone secretion through sweat, which may influence sexual attraction, secretion of lubricating material assisting with increased frictional resistance, and androgenic activity shown by the activity of 5α-reductase, and stimulation of function at puberty.