Since the first transplant in 1984, over 1200 cases have been reported. Major problems limiting the transplant to all patients include finding a matched donor, the risk associated with the procedure, including graft vs. host disease, and cost. If there is a transplant mismatch, there is a high risk of morbidity and mortality. HSCT is safest when a matched donor is available, but unfortunately, only a few transplant candidates have such donors. Even with this, there is still a 9 percent risk of graft rejection and a 15 percent risk of chronic graft-versus-host disease. As a result, scientists are looking for various ways to reduce these complications, including the use of less toxic medications and finding other stem cell sources like related and unrelated cord blood, haploidentical transplant, and myeloablative allogeneic transplant. The unrelated cord blood stem cell transplant and haploidentical stem cell have been found to be less successful due to an increase in graft vs. host disease.

Many of the medications used as immunosuppressives are toxic and can cause infertility. These agents can also induce secondary malignancy in these patients. A good example is a case study on a patient who developed a Sertoli-Leydig tumor reported after stem cell transplantation.

Bone marrow donors are unlikely to get severe complications from donating their marrow cells. However, there has been a report of chronic pain in these patients. In a prospective study by Shaw et al., they found that 11% of teenage females around the age of 13 to 17-years-old reported grade 2 to 4 pain compared to 3% in males in the same age group. Therefore, these patients should also be followed carefully to address pain-crisis syndrome.