The utility of the SPECT scan lies in its ability to provide detailed physiological information about the tissues. This is accomplished via the production and administration of radioactive tracer compounds, also known as probes. These probes generally consist of a detectable (via gamma camera) radioactive isotope coupled with a biologically active ligand specific to the tissue being imaged.

On the other hand, iodine-123 has a much longer half-life of 13 hours, leading to a greater concentration of detectable iodine in the target organ compared to the background. However, the longer half-life and greater localized concentration of iodine-123 increase the dose of radiation to the organ. Because of the short scan time, clear images, and low associated radiation dose, Tc is often the preferred isotope for most clinical applications. However, iodine isotopes are highly preferred for studies of iodine-consuming tissues such as the thyroid gland.

While the isotope chosen by the clinician is important, SPECT imaging depends on more than just the selection of the correct radioisotope. The success of the SPECT scan requires the isotope to be successfully bound to a biologically active ligand, which will interact with the body tissues to deliver the isotope to the desired location. For example, Tc can be linked to a compound known as hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (HMPAO), which is able to cross the blood-brain barrier and is taken up as a metabolic substrate by brain tissue. Since HMPAO uptake is directly correlated with metabolic activity, cerebral SPECT studies can show areas of increased brain activity as well as areas of anatomically normal but metabolically deranged brain tissue, which would otherwise not be seen on conventional imaging. This makes SPECT a useful modality in the workup of cerebral perfusion disorders and dementia.

SPECT imaging has also found great utility in the field of cardiovascular disease, particularly in the assessment of myocardial perfusion during stress testing. For this purpose, Tc is bound via coordination complex to 6 methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI) groups to form a tracer compound known as sestamibi. The lipophilic MIBI groups are able to cross myocardial capillary membranes and deliver Tc into the cells of the myocardium at a rate proportional to blood flow. This allows the clinician to diagnose, assess, and evaluate perfusion defects of the heart. The scan may also be linked to the patient’s heartbeat via electrocardiography, and this type of study is known as a multi-gated acquisition scan (MUGA). MUGA produces detailed information about the perfusion and functionality of the heart at different points of the cardiac cycle. Thallium was commonly used for myocardial SPECT in the past but has been largely phased out in favor of Tc.