The vast majority of bursitis will heal on its own. However, there are several modalities for improving the patient's pain and ensuring a return to complete functionality of the affected area. Conservative treatment involves the use of rest, ice, compression, and elevation for symptomatic improvement.

Patients should be educated on proper ergonomics for avoiding exacerbating movements, and certain superficial bursa can be protected with padding for those in whom prolonged pressure on the elbows or knees is an everyday occupational occurrence. A foam donut can be used for patients with ischial bursitis, and stretching as well as core strengthening exercises both play a role in improving and alleviating symptoms.

For bursitis occurring near the Achilles tendon, proper-fitting footwear that reduces pressure on the area should be encouraged. For analgesia, NSAIDs and/or acetaminophen are first-line agents. For the deeper bursa, corticosteroid injections, sometimes with a local anesthetic, can provide symptomatic relief.

Local injections of corticosteroid are not recommended for the superficial bursa, however, as this carries an increased risk of iatrogenic septic bursitis, local tendon injury, skin atrophy, or draining sinus tracts. Another danger of corticosteroid injections is that it may improve pain and therefore, delay the diagnosis of another condition, such as a rotator cuff tear, in which there is an optimal time frame for surgical repair. In general, the evidence supporting the use of corticosteroid injections for chronic bursitis is lacking, and a recent study suggested no benefit. Physical therapy and range of motion exercises play a role in increasing the strength of the muscles that support the area around the bursa. This is particularly important in subacromial bursitis, where immobilization may result in atrophy, retraction, and a frozen shoulder.

In bursitis caused by systemic inflammatory conditions, it is important that the physician treats the underlying condition. For septic bursitis, systemic antibiotics with activity against gram-positive organisms are the first line therapy. The majority of patients with septic bursitis can be treated as an outpatient with oral antibiotics, and admission is only required if systemic or whole-joint involvement is suspected, or if the patient appears unstable. For certain recalcitrant cases, the bursa can be excised surgically, usually by endoscopic or arthroscopic procedures.