The number of persons that need to be treated in order to prevent 1 death over a given time period (such as 1 year) has not been published, since no studies have evaluated an absolute risk reduction for TACE, and the number may be very high.

The Society of Interventional Radiology defined technical success as expected catheter placement and administration of the selected particles and drug, which should occur at a rate of at least 98%.

Clinical success is defined as successful tumor necrosis resulting in either down-staging or lengthened survival. No national organization is known to have set a recommended threshold for this parameter. Survival rates significantly improve in patients just missing meeting criteria for surgery who have:

- Good performance status

- Good underlying liver function

- Low tumor burden

**HCC Downstaging**

Down-staging by the “best minimally invasive method” (for example, RFA, TACE, PEI, or some combination) was successful in 21 of 30 patients that met the following criteria as reported by Yao

- One lesion 5 cm - 8 cm

- Two or 3 lesions, at least 1 of which was between 3 to 5 cm, with total tumor diameter less than 8 cm, or

- Four to 5 lesions all less than 3 cm with total tumor diameter less than 8 cm

In a study that included patients under 65 years old who had no contraindications for liver transplant other than not meeting the Milan criteria, 34 of 62 were down-staged.

However, a given patient's chance of success for downstaging may be much lower if the patient does not share similar baseline characteristics.

**HCC Lengthened Survival**

Three randomized trials

Patients at an intermediate stage (BCLC stage-B) were found to have a median survival of about 16 months. With 1 or more TACE sessions in the setting of HCC, patient survival extended to a median of up to 19 to 20 months.

**Metastatic Disease**

The expected survival benefit for patients with tumors metastatic to the liver is even more variable than it is for patients with HCC, and results generally are not as encouraging as for patients with HCC. TACE is typically used for palliation only following systemic chemotherapy.

Alternatives to TACE depend on the patient's liver tumor and overall functional status as mentioned above. Other than opting for no treatment, other potential mainstream therapies accepted by the NCCN depending on the patient include:

- Intravenous (IV) chemotherapy

- External beam radiation

- Tumor ablation with heat (microwaves or radio waves) or cold (cryoablation) via percutaneous or open surgical approaches

- Embolization of the tumor's feeding arteries with inert particles only (bland embolization) or with radioactive particles (radioembolization).