Depending on disease severity and pathology, patients with tracheomalacia may need input from a variety of interprofessional team members. Primary care and emergency medicine triage nurses and physicians should be aware of the variety of ways patients with tracheomalacia may present. They should be mindful of the potential of acute airway obstruction and apneic attacks and suspicious of subglottic pathology in those children presenting with recurrent croup or atypical wheeze. Acutely unwell patients require nursing staff to obtain vitals, attach appropriate monitoring, and aid with resuscitative measures. If the patient is particularly ill, anesthesiologists may be needed to secure the airway. All of the above will facilitate diagnosis and enable appropriate referrals to reduce delays in treatment.

After the diagnosis of tracheomalacia is made by respiratory pediatric physicians and radiologists, interprofessional input is often required to optimize the management of the disease. Physiotherapists may need chest physiotherapy to aid with secretions and reduce respiratory infections. Speech and language therapists, along with dieticians, can provide an assessment of feeding and nutrition to ensure adequate growth and development is made in children. Cardiothoracic and otorhinolaryngology surgeons may be needed to guide further surgical intervention if conservative management fails. Communication between the interprofessional team and accurate documenting of the patient's progress or lack thereof must be maintained at all stages of the patient journey to ensure the best possible care.