Sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors are antihyperglycemic agents acting on the SGLT-2 proteins expressed in the proximal convoluted tubules. These drugs exert their effect by preventing the reabsorption of filtered glucose from the tubular lumen. To date, there are four SGLT-2 inhibitors: canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin, and ertugliflozin that are approved by Food Drug Administration (FDA) for their use in adults. The indications for use vary per agent, but all four agents are approved for use in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) to improve blood sugar control adjunct to diet and exercise.

**FDA-approved indications for SGLT-2 Inhibitors**

- Improvement of glycemic control in type 2 diabetes mellitus(adjunct to diet and exercise)

- Reduction of major adverse cardiovascular events (nonfatal myocardial infarction and nonfatal stroke, cardiovascular death) in patients with type 2 DM and established cardiovascular disease.

- To decrease the risk of cardiovascular hospitalization and death for heart failure in patients with HFrEF (heart failure with reduced ejection fraction-NYHA class II-IV)

- Reduction of the risk of eGFR decline and hospitalization in patients with chronic kidney disease at risk of progression.

- Improvement of cardiovascular outcomes in patients with HFpEF (Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction)

- Dapagliflozin is now FDA-approved for the treatment of heart failure across the full spectrum of left-ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), including HFrEF, HFpEF, and HFmrEF (Heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction- LVEF of 40–49%)

**Off-label use of SGLT2 Inhibitors**

- Management of obesity in combination with glucagon-like peptide -1 receptor agonists.

- Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD): AACE recommends SGLT2 inhibitors as adjunctive therapy in patients with type 2 DM and NAFLD.

Canagliflozin was the first SGLT-2 inhibitor approved on March 29, 2013; it is indicated in adult patients with type 2 DM to improve blood glucose control in addition to diet and exercise. It is also shown to decrease the risk of cardiovascular (CV) adverse events in type 2 DM subjects with underlying CV illness and minimize the risk of end-stage renal disease (ESRD), CV mortality, hospitalization for heart failure, and albuminuria in patients with diabetic nephropathy.

Dapagliflozin received FDA approval in January 2014. The drug is indicated in adult patients with type 2 DM to improve blood glucose control in addition to diet and exercise. Other indications include minimizing the hospitalization attributed to heart failure in type 2 DM patients with underlying CV illness or several CV risk factors, decreasing the risk of CV mortality and hospitalization in adult subjects with underlying heart failure, and decreasing ejection fraction (EF) with New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification II-IV.

In May of 2023, the FDA expanded the indication of dapagliflozin to include heart failure across the entire spectrum of left-ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). This includes HF with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF) and preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF).

Soon after the approval of dapagliflozin, empagliflozin was the third SGLT inhibitor to receive approval from the FDA in August 2014.

The latest SGLT inhibitor to receive approval from the FDA was ertugliflozin in 2017 and is indicated for adult subjects with type 2 DM to improve the control of blood glucose in addition to diet and exercise.

According to the AHA/ACC/HFSA Guidelines, in patients with HFrEF (ejection fraction ≤ 40%), SGLT2 inhibitors decrease hospitalization related to heart failure and cardiovascular mortality, irrespective of type 2 diabetes. In patients with type 2 DM and established CVD or at high cardiovascular risk, SGLT2 inhibitors are suggested to reduce HF hospitalizations. Consequently, guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) for (HFrEF) now includes SGLT-2 inhibitors. Dapagliflozin and empagliflozin are included in GDMT for stage C HFrEF(Structural heart disease with symptoms of heart failure).

According to KDIGO guidelines, SGLT2 inhibitors are recommended for patients to prevent CKD progression. Clinicians must recognize that the recommendation does not apply to immunocompromised patients with a kidney transplant. SGLT2 inhibitors are also beneficial for patients with CKD who do not have diabetes; however, the evidence is strong for patients with type 2 diabetes. SGLT2 inhibitors with established clinical benefits in diabetic kidney disease include canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, and empagliflozin.