Managing drug-drug interactions related to warfarin and its sequelae should involve an interprofessional approach involving laboratory technicians, nurses, pharmacists, and physicians. The first step in managing these interactions often comes at the time of warfarin prescribing. Physicians should work closely with pharmacists to avoid prescribing medications that have interactions. If these medications are essential, adjusting the patient's warfarin dose may be necessary with close follow-up and monitoring early in the treatment regimen. The patient should also receive education on the prevalence of these interactions, many of which exist with drugs or supplements that do not require a prescription.

In the event of toxicity, physicians must rapidly assess bleeding risk or the degree of bleeding and identify less common complications of warfarin therapy. Coordination with a pharmacist, blood bank technician, and nursing staff are often required to quickly obtain and administer appropriate reversal agents and appropriately monitor response to therapy. Pharmacists can recommend dosing changes and/or reversal agents, which the nursing staff will deliver. Emergent bleeding can represent an "all hands on deck" situation, and coordinated care across professional lines is critical for efficient therapeutic action. Only by working together can the interprofessional healthcare tea minimize drug-drug interactions with warfarin and rapidly treat those that were not preventable, leading to optimal patient care. [Level 5]