The pin index safety system (PISS) is a precise configuration of pins and holes that facilitate the connection between a specific medical gas cylinder and the delivery system of these gases.

**System Overview**

Typically, the medical gases supplied to anesthesia machines or workstations are delivered via pipeline from a central piping system. The most commonly used gases are oxygen, medical air, and nitrous oxide; however, when gas delivered via pipeline is contaminated, fails, or is unavailable, cylinders containing medical gas may be used as an alternative source. Orientation and support of the cylinder are provided by the hanger yoke assembly of the anesthesia machine. Unidirectional airflow and effective seal are also set by the hanger yoke, and without appropriately placed pins on both the cylinder and yoke, an appropriate seal is not achieved. A special washer or gasket

**History**

The first anesthetic machine, known as the Boyle apparatus, was debuted in 1917; however, the PISS was not instituted until the 1950s. Before the use of the PISS, gases were differentiated from each other by the colors of the cylinders and tubing. To prevent the incorrect tubing from being attached to the cylinder (through either human error or old tubing losing its distinctive and critical color), the Ministry of Health in Great Britain

Major organizations, including the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA), were made aware of the vulnerabilities of medical gas delivery systems during World War II. This war resulted in a high volume of surgeries that manifested the need for an improvement in anesthetic and surgical safety.