The corpus luteum is very important clinically. What is termed luteal support involves the administration of progestins to encourage the uterine lining to support an implanted fertilized egg. These progestins complement the corpus luteum. A luteal phase defect results from the inability of the lining of the uterus to respond to hormones produced by the corpus luteum, which is a common cause of infertility. Another clinically significant topic concerning the corpus luteum is the use of oral contraceptives. Combined oral contraceptive pills contain two hormones, estrogen, and progesterone, which suppress FSH and LH, thus inhibiting ovulation. Additionally, this suppression will cause degeneration of the corpus luteum resulting in a drop in progesterone levels, which inhibits normal implantation of the fertilized ova and placental attachment. In addition to the importance of progesterone in maintaining pregnancy, the corpus luteum also releases relaxin, which softens the pubic symphysis for parturition. Another clinically significant role of the corpus luteum is how exogenous hormones may manipulate it. The belief is that the supraphysiologic levels of steroids secreted during the luteal phase in patients undergoing IVF cause a corpus luteum dysfunction; this is because of the inhibition of LH release secondary to the secretion of these hormones that act via negative feedback actions at the hypothalamic-pituitary axis level, thus suppressing stimulation of progesterone. Exogenous progesterone or HCG can provide essential luteal support in patients undergoing IVF.