Identifying patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy who would benefit from revascularization in addition to guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) is important. All patients with HFrEF should be on optimal medical therapy, irrespective of the presence or absence of viable myocardium.

**Medical Therapy**

Beta-Blockers: Selected beta-blockers carvedilol, metoprolol, and bisoprolol in maximum tolerated doses have proven mortality and morbidity benefit in HFrEF patients. (ACC/AHA Class IA).

ACEIs/ARBs/Angiotensin-Neprlisyn inhibitors (ARNI): RAAS inhibitors (particularly Enalapril) and ARNI (Sacubitril-Valsartan) also have a mortality benefit (ACC/AHA Class IA). ACEI and ARNIs should not be used together, and a washout period of at least 36 hours should be given before transitioning from ACEI to ARNI. (ACC/AHA Class IA )

Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists (MRA): Spironolactone and eplerenone are proven to reduce mortality and morbidity and are recommended with LOR Class IA by ACC/AHA for NYHA Class II-IV heart failure and LVEF <35%. (ACC/AHA Class IA)

Hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate: The combination reduces mortality and morbidity and is used predominantly in African American patients with NYHA Class III-IV HFrEF despite receiving beta-blockers and ACEI (Class IA). These drugs can be used as alternative preload and afterload-reducing agents in patients who cannot be on ACEI/ARBs/ARNI due to hypersensitivity, hypotension, and renal failure.

Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 (SGLT2i) Inhibitors: SGLT2i (empagliflozin and dapagliflozin) are shown to reduce heart failure-related hospitalization and cardiovascular mortality in patients with symptomatic HFrEF irrespective of the presence of type 2 diabetes (ACC/AHA Class I).

**Coronary Artery Revascularization**

CABG surgery is done for the left main disease, triple vessel disease, complex coronary artery disease, and patients with CAD and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. Percutaneous coronary intervention with balloon angioplasty and stent placement is done for uncomplicated single or two-vessel disease.

**Device-Based Therapies for Cardiomyopathy-Related Arrhythmias**

An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) is used in patients with end-stage cardiomyopathy with non-viable myocardium as a prevention against sudden cardiac arrest from malignant ventricular arrhythmias. Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) synchronizes LV and RV contraction in HFrEF, prevents heart failure progression, and improves symptoms.

ICD is indicated for the primary prevention of sudden cardiac death in patients with LVEF <35%, NYHA class II/III heart failure who have been on maximally tolerated doses of beta blocker, ACEI/ARNI, and MRA for 90 days, and with survival for more than a year. Patients with LBBB with a QRS duration of 150 msec or more and NYHA Class II, III symptoms on GDMT benefit from its upgrade to a CRT device.