Routine laboratory evaluation is not generally required in well-appearing patients with diarrheal illness as the disease is often self-limiting. However, they may support clinical suspicion and guide treatment in patients with concerning signs or symptoms suggesting systemic illness. Patients with suspected EHEC/STEC infection should have a baseline complete blood count (CBC) and a basic metabolic panel (BMP) obtained. Obtain stool cultures in patients with prolonged diarrheal illness, in patients with systemic signs or symptoms, and those with dysentery.E. coli are not distinguishable from one another based solely on appearance; therefore, further biochemical tests are necessary.

E. coli are non-spore-forming, flagellated, and facultatively anaerobic. They have the inherent ability to ferment lactose and produce indole, and before PCR-based assays, E. coli were identified via selective culture media.E. coli are classically grown on MacConkey agar, culture media containing lactose. E. coli also produces indole during metabolism, and bacterial growth on MacConkey agar with indole production is diagnostic for E. coli. EHEC/STEC can also ferment sorbitol. Therefore, to further distinguish EHEC/STEC from other E. coli strains, bacteria are grown on sorbitol-containing media. Interestingly, non-O157:H7 EHEC strains that do not ferment sorbitol have recently been identified by PCR. As PCR-based assays become more readily available, these strains will continue to be more frequently identified. All patients with inflammatory diarrhea acquired outside of the United States should have stool cultured for E. coli, as well as Salmonella, Shigella, and Campylobacter.

While molecular diagnosis is not required in mild illness, specific pathogens can be identified via PCR-based assays. ETEC is distinguished by the identification of LT and ST genes. EPEC is identified by the detection of the pEAF plasmid or its encoded BFP factor. EAEC is identified through the detection of the AggR regulon. EHEC/STEC is identified through the nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) of Shiga toxin 1 (Stx1) and Shiga toxin 2 (Stx2).

Summary

- E. coli

- Gram-negative bacilli, non-spore-forming, flagellated, facultatively anaerobic
- Ferments lactose (grows on MacConkey agar)
- Catalase positive
- Oxidase negative

-  ETEC

- Culture: MacConkey agar, indole producing
- Molecular diagnosis: LT or ST genes

- EHEC/STEC

- Culture

- O157:H7: Sorbitol-MacConkey agar, indole producing
- Non-0157:H7: MacConkey agar


- Molecular diagnosis: NAAT of Stx1 and Stx2

- EIEC

- Culture: MacConkey agar (glucose and xylose), indole producing
- Molecular: NAAT of lacY

- EPEC

- Culture: MacConkey agar, indole producing
- Molecular diagnosis: pEAF plasmid or BFP factor

- EAEC

- Culture: MacConkey agar, indole producing
- Molecular diagnosis: AggR regulon

For patients with extraintestinal illness, culturing blood, urine, or sputum will identify E. coli. Many gram-negative bacilli have developed antibiotic resistance genes, and E. coli is no exception. Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) -producing E. coli confer resistance to most beta-lactamase antibiotics (e.g., cephalosporins, monobactams, etc.). In contrast, carbapenemase-producing E. coli strains possess genes conferring resistance to carbapenems (e.g., imipenem, ertapenem, and meropenem).