As prune belly syndrome has manifestations in nearly every major organ system, it truly is a diagnosis that requires a large team of specialists. The role of the neonatologist or pediatrician is vital to appropriately navigate the early management and workup of a child born with prune belly syndrome. Pediatric surgery and urology consults are important initially to manage the classic triad of symptoms. Other specialists should be consulted (cardiology, orthopedic surgery, pulmonology, gastroenterology, pediatric surgery, cardiac surgery) depending upon where the work-up leads.

As prune belly syndrome is a condition with variable severity and with multisystemic manifestations, patients are best managed by the interprofessional team. In severe cases with poor outcome, families should be thoroughly informed about the condition of the infant (or fetus), and appropriate, timely counseling should be provided. They should be helped to make informed decisions, and all the ethical considerations should be addressed by the team of experienced specialists.

In patients with less severe manifestations, it is of utmost importance to educate and support the parents of infants born with prune belly syndrome through the early perinatal period and ensure that they understand the importance of continued follow-up and surgical planning. Many parents will be relieved to know that the prune belly syndrome will improve over time, not every patient needs complex reconstructive surgeries and that their child will potentially live a normal life with the ability to have kids of their own in the future should they so desire.

For parents, it is essential to educate them that orchiopexy should be done near the six months age mark, and this time frame is also an appropriate period to plan an abdominal wall reconstructive surgery, if necessary. Urinary tract reconstruction is usually avoided unless they develop recurrent febrile urinary tract infections or demonstrate progressive renal deterioration. Occasionally children will need temporizing urologic interventions such as a cutaneous vesicostomy in order to safely drain the bladder while infants grow in preparation for more definitive surgeries such as ureteral reconstruction and reimplantation at a later age. Clinicians can refer families with PBS to peer support groups for further resources such as Prune Belly Syndrome Network.

Prune belly syndrome patients often require surgical procedures and are at a higher risk of anesthetic complications because the deficiency in abdominal wall musculature, which compromises their cough effectiveness, potentially leading to retention of pulmonary secretions and subsequent pneumonia. During hospitalizations, they should also be closely watched for the development of atelectasis for the same reason.

Whenever catheterization is indicated, whether for voiding cystourethrogram or obstruction of the bladder outlet necessitating foley drainage, nursing plays a key role in assuring that proper sterile technique is utilized during catheter placement and that proper catheter hygiene is continued with the foley remains in place.

Patients with prune belly syndrome do appear to be at a higher risk for testicular malignancy, but it is no higher than that of non-prune belly syndrome patients with cryptorchidism. This is one more reason that placement of the testes into the scrotum in a timely manner is necessary to both reduce the risk of developing malignancy as well as enhancing the detection of potential tumors.

The only way to improve outcomes is by managing these patients with an interprofessional team with close communication. Because of the multisystem organ involvement, most patients need lifelong follow up by the pediatrician, nurse practitioner, social worker, urologist, and the primary care provider.

Each of these clinicians has a particular role and contribution to make the overall team. Physicians will manage the case overall, and decide which specialists, as outlined above, will be necessary. Nursing will coordinate ongoing care and can offer counsel and direction to parents, and in surgical cases, they are on the front lines for post-surgical care. If antibiotics are necessary, the pharmacist should verify all dosing and assess coverage. Social workers or counselors should provide reassurance and ongoing emotional support. In each of these roles, the individual contributor must report back to the team and document progress within their specialty. Only through this type of collaboration can the interprofessional team drive outcomes in prune belly syndrome to successful outcomes, regardless of the severity of the particular case. [Level V]