Mullerian anomalies can be either clinically asymptomatic and missed in routine gynecological examinations or manifest with infertility and amenorrhea. These pathologies represent unique challenges for establishing reproductive health. The American fertility association has classified this anomaly in seven categories

- Class I: Hypoplasia/uterine hypoplasia. (Mayer Rokitansky Kuster Hauser syndrome)

- Class II: Unicornuate uterus

- Class III: Uterus didelphys.

- Class IV: Bicornuate uterus

- Class V: Septate uterus

- Class VI: Arcuate uterus

- Class VII: T-shaped uterus resulting from the exposure to Diethylstilbestrol in fetal life

Mayer Rokitansky Kuster Hauser syndrome has a prevalence of 1 in 4000 to 5000 births and is one of the most frequent Mullerian abnormalities. It characteristically presents with uterine and vaginal agenesis or hypoplasia and can be accompanied by renal and bone abnormalities. Patients usually arrive at care due to primary amenorrhea with normal secondary sexual characteristics. Treatment of vaginal aplasia consists of the creation of a neovagina surgically or by dilation. Depression, anxiety, and female identity issues often occur in these patients, thus seeking counseling and peer support groups are recommended activities before and during treatment. Alternatives for having children include adoption and gestational surrogacy; this merits discussion during the consult.

Also of clinical relevance after fetal life rudimentary structures derived from paramesonephric ducts can persist and be encountered in clinical practice

- Testicular appendage: From the cranial end of the fussed paramesonephric ducts in males.

- Prostatic utricle: A small sac found in the prostatic urethra in males.

- Morgagni hydatid in females from the cranial end of the paramesonephric duct that does not contribute to the fallopian tube