The tibia is the weight-bearing bone of the leg, located medially to the fibula. The proximal part of the bone compromises the distal part of the knee joint. The tibial plateau has two articular surfaces, the medial and lateral tibial condyles, also called the medial and lateral plateaus. The medial tibial condyle bears 60% of the knee’s weight and is a thicker structure. It is concave in shape and located slightly more distally compared to the lateral tibial condyle. The lateral tibial condyle is convex in shape, thinner, weaker, and more proximal than the medial tibial condyle. The intercondylar eminence is a bony structure between the two condyles that serves as an attachment point for the anterior cruciate ligament. Deep fascia separates the lower leg into four compartments containing muscles and neurovascular structures. The anterior, lateral, superficial, and deep posterior compartments border the tibia and are at risk for compartment syndrome with tibial fractures. The ligaments and menisci of the knee joint are also at risk for injury in association with tibial plateau fractures. Lateral meniscal tears are more common in association with Schatzker type II fractures and where there is more than 10 mm of articular surface depression, while medial meniscus tears are most common in Schatzker type IV plateau fractures. Anterior cruciate ligament injuries have been reported in a quarter of Shatzaker type IV and VI fracture patterns. Vascular injuries are commonly seen in Schatzker type IV fracture-dislocations

The three-column theory of tibial plateau fractures states that zero-column fracture is a purely articular fracture. Whilst one column fracture is an isolated articular depression with a fracture in the column and two-column fractures are either anteromedial with posteromedial fractures or anterolateral with separate posterolateral depression fractures.