A patient-centered approach to care is necessary to manage and treat a patient with a positive Trendelenburg sign. A team of health care workers, including the patient’s primary care physician, specialists like orthopaedics and neurologists, nursing, physical therapists, and/or chiropractors, all working in an interdisciplinary manner with the patient can help find the root cause and treat the patient. Often patients will need to follow up with their physical therapists and other doctors managing their condition on a long term basis as it takes time to make a full recovery depending on the diagnosis**.**

**Management**

Medical management of a positive Trendelenburg sign depends on the underlying cause. If the positive Trendelenburg sign is the result of pain, providers might suggest pain control through the use of over the counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). In severe cases, doctors might prescribe steroids such as cortisone injections to help reduce pain. If the patient has short leg syndrome, patients might benefit from a shoe lift to minimize the waddling gait. Other times the clinician might suggest a harness for developmental dysplasia of the hip or cast for Legg Calve Perthes disease. Physical therapists will often recommend various exercises to strengthen the hip abductors so that the patient can maintain a midline center of gravity preventing the side-to-side motion during their gait cycle. Osteopathic manipulative treatment could result in improved gait and range of motion for individuals with somatic dysfunctions, short-leg syndrome, and lower back pain contributing to positive Trendelenburg sign.