The management of acute compartment syndrome requires a well-integrated interprofessional team of healthcare professionals including nurses, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and multiple physicians in different specialties. Without proper management, acute compartment syndrome can lead to high morbidity and poor outcomes.

- The nurses are usually the first health professional to see the patient, often in triage in the emergency department. The nurse must quickly recognize the signs and symptoms consistent with compartment syndrome and immediately involve the clinical team to further evaluate the patient. The nurses will need to assist in monitoring the patient's vital signs, pain, and assist in getting the patient to the operating room where definitive treatment usually takes place. After the procedure, they will need ongoing evaluation as often a patient with compartment syndrome will have multiple other injuries that require attention as well as complications as a direct result of the compartment damage.

- Pharmacists in the emergency department can assist in medication reconciliation as well as provide recommendations regarding pain management.

- The nurse practitioner, physician assistant, and physicians often provide a role in coordinating the care, performing procedures, as well as educating the patient and family regarding the nature of the injuries.

After surgery, an interprofessional team that provides a holistic approach can help achieve the best possible outcomes for patients. This may include the surgery or orthopedics team, nurses, physical therapists, occupational therapists, pharmacists, and social workers. Due to the complexity of care required, the best outcomes will be achieved by the use of an interprofessional team.