Although hypermagnesaemia is a rare disorder, some medical history (e.g., use of lithium) and clinical data (e.g., chronic kidney failure) may suggest the occurrence of the disorder. An interprofessional team approach involving the nurse, the general practitioner, and the pharmacist is essential to prevent this disease. Hypermagnesemia, in a vast number of cases, is preventable. An integrated approach between the practitioner prescribing the medications associated with the disease and the pharmacist dispensing the drugs is essential for avoiding iatrogenic causes. Intensive patient education by specialized pharmacists and regular follow up with specialized nurses to discuss potential signs of toxicity can prevent this condition in a fair number of patients.

An integrated interprofessional team approach to medication reconciliation at each pharmacy refill and each clinic visit is equally important. Multiple other drugs can indirectly increase the patient's risk for the disease. For example, opiate-induced constipation can lead to increased intestinal absorption of magnesium. The use of opiates with magnesium-based laxatives may further worsen the picture. These are examples of where both nursing and pharmacists can assist in monitoring the patient, and alerting the clinician at the earliest sign that something is amiss. With an interprofessional team managing the situation, patient outcomes are more likely to have a positive outcome. [Level V]

Clinical research is necessary to show that in specific clinical settings, the serum magnesium evaluation must take place periodically. Further controlled investigations, including randomized controlled trials, are needed for testing the suggestive hypothesis that hypermagnesemia could be a stronger predictor for poor outcomes in hospitalized patients or a risk factor for various diseases in healthy people.