Galactokinase should be a consideration in a newborn with cataracts or with abnormal newborn screens or galactosuria. The newborn screen includes the combination of fluorometric or bacterial inhibition assay for total galactose and Beutler fluorescent spot screening test. Since galactokinase deficiency is very rare and is part of the differential diagnosis of congenital galactosemia, it has been designated as a secondary target. Therefore, in order to screen for galactokinase deficiency, an additional test is required.

GALT enzyme analysis is performed if there is clinical suspicion for galactosemia, positive newborn screen for galactosemia, or investigation of a possible carrier state.

Approximately 30 percent of programs measure total galactose (galactose plus Gal-1-P) either as a primary screening method or combined with GALT testing. Therefore, a negative newborn screen for galactosemia must be interpreted based on the nature of the test. If dietary monitoring is required, GAL1P/Gal-1-Phos erythrocytes levels are typically measured. Recent studies developed to measure early morning urine galactitol relative to galactose intake can be useful for measuring dietary compliance in galactokinase deficiency patients.

Urine and serum levels of galactose and galactitol also become elevated in galactokinase deficiency patients. Galactose concentration in the blood is decreased or normalized completely with dietary restriction of galactose.

Patients with suspected pseudotumor cerebri in GALK deficiency should have a detailed ophthalmological examination followed by neuroimaging. Following neuroimaging, a lumbar puncture is critical to measure the CSF opening pressure.

Molecular testing for galactokinase deficiency includes full gene sequencing followed by a targeted gene deletion/duplication analysis rather than targeted mutation testing.

Clinicians need to offer genetic counseling to the families of newborns affected with any type of galactosemia irrespective of the severity. Since it is an autosomal recessive condition, both parents must be affected, and the recurrence rate is at least 25 percent. Identifying specific mutations in the affected infant and the carrier screening options should be discussed with the families. Prenatal testing by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling or preimplantation genetic testing can be offered to those who are at risk of having a child with galactosemia.