**Limitations/ Factors Affecting BIS Monitoring**

- Anesthetic Agents: The anesthetic agents used affect BIS values. The patient anesthetized with one anesthetic drug may be more sedated than another patient with the same score anesthetized with a different combination of drugs. BIS monitor is unreliable with certain anesthetics, such as ketamine and nitrous oxide (N2O). In 2017, Mishra et al. studied the effect of nitrous oxide on the bispectral index and found out that the BIS value increases with the addition of nitrous oxide. This effect could be due to the decrease in the suppressant effect of the inhalational anesthetic agents on EEG with the use of NO and the neuro-stimulant properties of NO. NO increases cerebral blood flow velocities along with an increase in cerebral consumption of oxygen (CMRO).

- Age: It is difficult to titrate anesthetic agents in infants younger than 6 months of age with BIS; this could be due to a difference in EEG in this population than older children as brain maturation and synapse formation occur during that period. In 2001, Bannister et al. found that there were no significant differences between the standard practice and BIS groups in anesthetic use or recovery measures in the children 6 months to 3 years of age.

- Hypothermia: Doi et al.

- Neurological impairment: Neurological impairment alters the ability of the BIS to monitor the depth of consciousness; it is not a reliable tool to assess the level of consciousness in this patient population. Generally, BIS values are lower in patients with neurological impairment. BIS values reflect the activity of the cortical structure of the brain but do not reflect the activity of subcortical structures such as a spinal cord.

- Interference with medical devices: Interference from the medical devices causes artifacts and impairs the ability of the BIS monitor to assess the changes in the depth of anesthesia accurately. Chan et al. found that SQI decreases during the use of electrosurgical cautery.