**Ocular Prognosis**

The ocular prognosis in anterior and posterior lenticonus cases is usually good if managed on time. If there is a spontaneous rupture of lenticonus, it can result in secondary glaucoma. The prognosis can be guarded in such neglected cases. In cases with the posterior capsular breach, if the case is managed well, the IOL can be implanted in the sulcus, or an optic capture can be performed. The prognosis is usually good in such cases. Lowe syndrome visual prognosis depends on glaucoma, strabismus, and amblyopia development.

**Systemic Prognosis**

In patients with XL Alport syndrome in males, end-stage renal disease can be seen in 90% of the cases and 12% of females by the age of 40. Renal transplantation in Alport patients, if performed on time, has good graft and patient survival in comparison to those caused by other causes. Cases with autosomal recessive Alport syndrome have an early incidence of renal failure compared to autosomal dominant Alport syndrome. Lowe syndrome's prognosis is variable, and early and prompt diagnosis is essential to prevent life-threatening complications such as hypotony, infection, and renal pathology. The quality of life is governed by the extent of kidney and nervous compromise.

Cheng et al. treated 41 eyes with posterior lenticonus by surgical aspiration of the lens, IOL implantation, and amblyopia management. The visual acuity improved by two or more Snellen's visual acuity in 43% of the patients tested at six months. A total of 19 eyes improved visual acuity postoperatively by 20/20 to 20/40. Long-term follows up reveals that amblyopia remains a significant cause of loss of visual acuity for which occlusion therapy is required.

Bradford et al. reported excellent results of occlusion therapy in patients with partial cataracts and very poor outcomes in patients with posterior lenticonus. Prompt diagnosis and meticulous management improve diagnosis and prevent early-onset renal failure. Lee et al. reported that a pre-existing PC defect has a significantly better visual outcome than patients with posterior polar opacity. They proposed that there is a faster progression of cataracts in patients with posterior capsular dehiscence leading to early diagnosis and prompt intervention leading to an excellent visual outcome.