The most important treatment is to terminate the patient's exposure by removing them from the contaminated environment and performing decontamination. Decontamination of the patient should always be performed before further medical treatment if possible. Some nerve agents may remain in the skin and continue to cause symptoms via a depot effect. Patients can be decontaminated by washing the affected areas with a 0.5% hypochlorite solution or with soap and clean water. However, the most effective method of decontamination of patients exposed to nerve agents is Reactive Skin Decontamination Lotion (RSDL), which should be used if available. The ingredients of Reactive Skin Decontamination Lotion sequester, retain, and neutralize organophosphate chemical warfare agents. Patients with large areas of dermal exposure will require numerous Reactive Skin Decontamination Lotion sponges to be effectively decontaminated.

Patients known to have been exposed to nerve agents or those exhibiting symptoms of nerve agent exposure should be given the antidote medications atropine and pralidoxime. Atropine works by binding and blocking muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, thus preventing the buildup of acetylcholine from continuing to affect the receptors. Because atropine does not act on nicotinic receptors, it will not improve skeletal muscle symptoms. Atropine should be administered until there is clinically evident reduction of airway secretions and airway resistance; doses of atropine can be given every three to five minutes. When administered soon after exposure to nerve agents, pralidoxime (also known as 2-pyridine aldoxime methyl chloride or 2-PAM Cl) removes the phosphyl moiety from acetylcholinesterase, thus reactivating the enzyme. Dual-chamber auto-injectors have been developed containing atropine sulfate and pralidoxime; examples of these include the Mark I Nerve Agent Antidote Kit (NAAK) or the newer Antidote Treatment Nerve Agent Autoinjector (ATNAA). Each Antidote Treatment Nerve Agent Autoinjector contains 2.1 mg of atropine and 600mg of pralidoxime.

Patients are also given diazepam or midazolam to prevent seizures and convulsions. When given intramuscularly, midazolam is absorbed faster than diazepam. The United States military uses a specialized diazepam auto-injector called the Convulsive Antidote Nerve Agent (CANA). Patients may be given up to three Antidote Treatment Nerve Agent Autoinjector autoinjectors. After three Antidote Treatment Nerve Agent Autoinjectors have been given, patients may receive additional doses of atropine every three to five minutes as clinically indicated, however additional doses of pralidoxime should not be given for 60 to 90 minutes. Patients who receive three Antidote Treatment Nerve Agent Autoinjector autoinjectors should also receive a Convulsive Antidote Nerve Agent (or a dose of benzodiazepine) even if there is no visible evidence of seizures. Medication administration by autoinjector has been shown to cause plasma concentrations of these medications to each therapeutic levels faster than intramuscular administration using a needle and syringe. Scopolamine is effective at blocking the muscarinic effects of acetylcholine in the central nervous system, and low doses of scopolamine can significantly reduce the amount of atropine needed for a patient. Opiates, phenothiazines, antihistamines, and succinylcholine should be avoided in patients that have been exposed to V-series nerve agents.