On a weight basis, it is recommended not to exceed 1.5 to 3 mg/kg of actual patient weight for dosing. The toxicity of the drug is affected by the site of administration. Tetracaine undergoes absorption (from fastest to slowest) in the following order: IV > intercostal > caudal > epidural > brachial plexus > subcutaneous. Absorption speed may be mitigated by avoiding areas with high vascular supply nearby and/or by adding local vasoconstrictors to the solution (epinephrine or phenylephrine).

One of the primary concerns with tetracaine, as with other local anesthetics, is CNS toxicity. Toxicity may manifest initially as circumoral numbness, tinnitus, blurry vision, and dizziness. It may then present with hyperexcitability of the patient due to the blockade of CNS inhibitory pathways before progressing to depressive phenomena, seizures, and a comatose state before hemodynamic collapse. Tetracaine does exhibit vasodilatory properties when given in toxic doses and exerts dose-dependent decreases in cardiac contractility. In addition to this, it may increase the duration of PR and QRS intervals, progressing to sinus bradycardia then to asystole. Ventricular arrhythmia is a possibility but is more common with bupivacaine.

Direct neural toxicity has been noted with chloroprocaine and lidocaine, although rare with tetracaine. These may manifest after neuraxial administration as cauda equina syndrome (lumbosacral radiculopathy, saddle anesthesia, loss of bowel/bladder tone). It may also manifest after a neuraxial technique as transient neurologic symptoms (painful lumbosacral radiculopathy lasting up to 10 days); this may be particularly more common in patients undergoing surgery in the lithotomy position are or will be non-ambulatory for prolonged periods, and those who are obese. Some degree of risk may be mitigated by using lower doses of local anesthetic for neuraxial technique and avoiding preservatives including sulfites and/or EDTA (which have been implicated for CES and TNS when used).

Allergic reactions to tetracaine can occur. While allergy to local anesthetic is rare, it is more common with aminoesters than aminoamides. This reaction appears primarily to be due to para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). In addition to this, care is necessary to review the drug label for any addition of preservatives, especially methylparaben, which metabolizes to PABA.