In human embryos, the default sexual differentiation is female. However, having the Y chromosome defines differentiation into the male phenotype and the male reproductive system. The Y chromosome contains the sex-determining region (SRY) gene, which encodes for development of the testes. The testes descend from the posterior abdominal wall during development to lie in the scrotum at maturity. The testes develop Sertoli cells, which produce MIS to induce regression of the Mullerian ducts, which form the female reproductive tract. The testes also develop Leydig cells that produce testosterone, the major driver of male reproductive development.

Testosterone plays an important role in stimulating the development of the Wolffian ducts in the male fetus, which become the testes, epididymis, vas deferens and seminal vesicles. Testosterone is also responsible for erythropoiesis, pubertal growth spurt, bone density, closure of epiphyseal plates, deepening of the voice, increase in muscle mass, male physique development and libido. Additionally, testosterone can be converted to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) via 5-alpha-reductase, an enzyme produced by the prostate peripherally. Both DHT and testosterone bind to the same androgen receptors intracellularly, but DHT has a higher affinity. DHT stimulates the development of the prostate, scrotum, and penis. DHT is also responsible for male hair pattern (facial, axial, and pubic hair), including the pathology of male pattern balding, increased sebaceous gland secretion and acne. Together, these hormones promote puberty and subsequent maintenance of the male reproductive system.

Typically, the growth of the testes marks the beginning of puberty in males, which occur between 11 to 13 years of age. This is stimulated by a sudden rise in GnRH from the hypothalamus, which stimulates FSH and LH release from the anterior pituitary. LH stimulates Leydig cells to increase testosterone, which causes growth and pigmentation of the scrotum and penis. Secondary sexual characteristics such as facial, axillary, chest and pubic hair growth, deepening of the voice and growth spurt occur next. At this stage, first fertile ejaculations appear, marking mature reproductive function. Eventually, the epiphyseal growth plates close, marking the end of pubertal development. Pubertal development can continue into a male's 20s.