Ranolazine is metabolized in the liver mainly by CYP3A4  and CYP2D6 enzymes. It is also a substrate of P-glycoprotein. Potent CYP3A4 inhibitors like ketoconazole, clarithromycin, and ritonavir increase ranolazine levels, and concomitant use is contraindicated. Moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors such as diltiazem, fluconazole, erythromycin, and verapamil increase ranolazine levels. When used together, the ranolazine dose should not exceed 500 mg twice a day, and close monitoring is needed. CY3A4 inducers such as rifampin, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and St. John’s Wort decrease ranolazine plasma levels, and concomitant use is not recommended. There are no recommended dose adjustments for patients with hepatic impairment, but usage is contraindicated in patients with cirrhosis of the liver.

Ranolazine inhibits the tubular secretion of creatinine, although this does not affect the glomerular filtration rate. However, acute renal failure in patients with marked severe impairment (creatinine clearance [CrCl] less than 30 ml per minute) has been reported. Discontinue therapy if renal failure occurs and do not initiate therapy in patients with a CrCl less than 30 ml per minute. Use in dialysis patients is contraindicated.

Ranolazine may prolong QT via inhibition of potassium current (IKr). Torsades de pointes was not reported as a side effect in clinical trials, but the risk may increase in patients also taking other QT-prolonging medications. Hepatic impairment may also lead to increased plasma concentrations, and hence, prolonged QTc interval. Caution is advised in patients with a family history of long QT syndrome and patients with known prolonged QT intervals.

Co-administration of ranolazine and metformin, each at a dose of 1000 mg twice a day, resulted in increased plasma concentrations of metformin. Patients on ranolazine 1000 mg twice a day should not exceed a total daily dose of 1700 mg metformin, and their blood glucose should be followed closely.

There is a lack of data on the use of ranolazine in pregnant women, during lactation, and in the pediatric population. Close monitoring is required in patients 75 years of age or older as they are more likely to experience adverse effects with ranolazine.