Cardiac surgery is the specialty of medicine concerning the surgical treatment of pathologies related to the heart and thoracic aorta. The spectrum of modern cardiac surgery can be understood by its history beginning at the end of the 19th century.

In 1882, Billroth performed the first pericardiectomy. The first successful treatment of cardiac trauma was done by Ludwig Rehn when he operated on a cardiac stab wound in 1896 against the wide held belief that the heart is not an organ on which surgeons should operate.

Surgical revascularization is one option to relieve ischemic heart disease with complicated atherosclerosis.

Surgical treatment of valvulopathies started closed mitral commissurotomy by passing a finger or instrument through the narrow orifice of the mitral stenosis to dilate or cut it as did Cutler in 1923 for the first time. The Hufnagel cage and ball valve was the first artificial valve introduced in 1952. It was placed in the descending thoracic aorta to prohibit blood flow reversal in aortic regurgitation. In 1967 a similarly structured valve, the Edwards cage and ball valve, had been implanted 1000 times for mitral valve disease.

In 1944, cardiac surgeons Blalock, Taussig, and Thomas first forayed into the field of congenital heart lesions, when they operated on the tetralogy of Fallot, one of the cyanotic heart lesions.

Regarding cardiac arrhythmias, the Cox-Maze procedure offers surgical treatment of atrial fibrillation. The evolution of cardiac pacemakers started by applying external electrodes to stimulate the heart. Lillehei placed electrodes directly to the heart during open heart surgery. The first implanted pacemaker lasted only 8 hours. Modern aggregates offer long-lasting solutions to diverse rhythm abnormalities.

In 1967, several surgical teams around the world performed the first heart transplantations: Barnard in South Africa, Shumway in Stanford (offering increased post-transplant survival by adding immunosuppressive treatment), and Kantrowitz with pediatric transplantation in New York.

Some devices can supply mechanical circulatory support. Since 1963, the intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) enhanced left ventricular function through the mechanism of counterpulsation. Open heart surgery requires a cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) to temporarily replace the human heart and lung by an external circuit consisting of pumps and an oxygenation membrane. Artificial hearts were first applied extracorporal in 1982. Later devices allowed for implantation.

Cardiac surgery represents high operative and perioperative risk requiring professional staff and advanced equipment. Besides the diseases that require cardiac surgery, the perioperative period shows a variety of characteristic pathologies: systemic inflammatory response following CBP, myocardial stunning and low cardiac output syndrome, arrhythmias, massive transfusion requirements and multiorgan involvement with kidney injury, stroke, and respiratory distress.

With the surge of interventional and minimally invasive methods to treat cardiac pathologies, the medical fields of cardiology and cardiac surgery recently need to adapt to these changes.