Computed tomogram (CT) imaging is often enough to make a diagnosis of an arachnoid cyst when the lesion is in an expected location with the appearance of a fluid-filled thin-walled cyst. When additional information is needed, an MRI is the imaging modality of choice for evaluating the anatomical location, size, and structures involved by an arachnoid cyst. MRI also can help refine the differential diagnosis when needed. The arachnoid cyst follows cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) on all pulse sequences unless it has experienced traumatic injury and blood products are present. Hemorrhage within an arachnoid cyst is rare.

The wall of the cyst is thin, and special pulse sequences can be employed to visualize the wall. The differential diagnosis for an arachnoid cyst includes epidermoid cyst, dermoid cyst, abscess, and other cysts such as cystic neurocysticercosis. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the arachnoid cyst follows the signal intensity of CSF on T1 (dark signal), T2 fast spin-echo (FSE), or T2 spin-echo (SE) (high signal), T2-FLAIR (dark signal), and diffusion (dark signal). The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps created from the diffusion data will demonstrate the cyst with similar high ADC values as the CSF. Due to CSF pulsations, there can be mild signal differences between the fluid in the arachnoid cyst and the normal CSF on MRI sequences. Arachnoid cysts do not enhance.

Epidermoid cysts will be similar to CSF on T2 FSE and T2 SE, but on other sequences, will have variations in the signal, will not enhance, and have markedly elevated signal on diffusion-weighted imaging. This is a useful characteristic. Also, epidermoid cysts tend to be located anteriorly and laterally from the brainstem. A dermoid/lipoma can be differentiated on CT or MRI with signal intensities that follow fat. A T1 sequence with and without fat saturation to demonstrate the presence of fat on MRI is very useful to confirm a dermoid cyst/lipoma.

An abscess can be cystic in appearance, but due to inflammatory and cellular debris, the internal signal will not be similar to CSF. Very likely, the central fluid of an abscess will have a markedly elevated diffusion-weighted image (DWI) signal, similar to an epidermoid, and rim enhancement that is most often thin. Although thick rim enhancement is seen with some bacterial and fungal infections.

Neurocysticercosis cysts in the CSF (racemose neurocysticercosis) can have individual cysts that are very similar in appearance to an arachnoid cyst, but these cysts are very likely multiloculated. In cases of neurocysticercosis, there are very likely other findings indicating neurocysticercosis on brain imaging, in history, and by immunology workup. Usually, with neurocysticercosis, there are brain lesions with calcifications.

CT cisternography and MRI cisternography can be performed to confirm a diagnosis and to further evaluate an arachnoid cyst. In CT cisternography, a neuro safe non-ionic iodinated contrast is injected intrathecally, and then dynamic CT images of the arachnoid cyst are obtained. The amount of filling and the time it takes to fill the cyst can be utilized to guide management. Cysts that fill completely and early are considered freely communicating and may not need to be treated.

MRI cisternography can be performed without contrast or with contrast. Intrathecal contrast-enhanced MRI cisternography has classically been thought to offer the advantage of demonstrating the connection of the arachnoid cyst with the surrounding CSF space. The MRI non-contrast techniques - constructive interference in steady-state (CISS), fast imaging employing steady-state acquisition (FIESTA), and 3D T2-weighted sampling perfection with application-optimized contrast with different flip-angle evolutions (3D SPACE) - demonstrate the arachnoid cyst wall and demonstrate surrounding structures including cranial nerves and vessels. Clear demonstration of the surrounding structures can help decrease surgical morbidities. The 3D SPACE technique is useful for demonstrating a connection to the CSF space. The 3D SPACE demonstrates signal loss in areas of CSF flow, and these areas of signal loss from flow highlight the connection of the cyst and the CSF space.

In a similar fashion, phase-contrast MRI can be utilized to evaluate for a CSF connection to an arachnoid cyst. The flowing CSF is specifically demonstrated as a signal change on phase contrast. However, secondary to false positives, a connection needs to be confirmed with contrast MR cisternography.

The radiologist needs to evaluate the brain structures for mass effect secondary to the arachnoid cyst. This might be for a subtle mass effect on a cranial nerve or a prominent mass effect resulting in brain herniation. The final analysis of the arachnoid cyst should only be made after obtaining an accurate history from the clinician. An accurate history will assure that the radiology report properly reflects information about pertinent cranial nerve or vascular structures that are being clinically affected by the arachnoid cyst. The radiologist also needs to be proactive when there is a cyst in a critical location that is causing hydrocephalus or if a large cyst is present that is resulting in mass effect and brain herniation. In these situations, the ordering clinician needs to be called, or a neurosurgeon needs to be called directly.