Treatment of PIH is typically stepwise and includes multiple modalities in addition to daily protection against ultraviolet (UV) radiation. The first step is the treatment of the causative inflammatory disorder if it is still active. Topical lightening therapy, often in combination, is next, followed by chemical peels and/or laser therapy for severe or refractory cases. Treatment lasting months to years is often required; patient education should set the expectation that improvement of hypermelanosis is slow and recurrences are common.

**Topical Therapy**- tyrosinase inhibitors (prevent melanin production)

The mainstay of treatment is a topical lightening agent such as hydroquinone (mequinol if a less irritating agent is needed). It is often combined with a topical retinoid with or without a topical steroid to enhance and speed effectiveness. A commonly used triple combination includes hydroquinone 4%, tretinoin 0.05%, and fluocinolone acetonide 0.01%. The topical steroid can lessen the irritant effects of the skin lightener and/or the retinoid but should only be used for up to 8 weeks to minimize the likelihood of steroid-induced skin changes. Topical retinoids include tretinoin, adapalene, and tazarotene. They are effective at treating underlying acne as well as PIH and may be used long term. Azelaic acid can also treat both acne and PIH.

**Chemical Peels**

Chemical peels work by removing the epidermal cells containing excess melanin. They must be used with caution by experienced clinicians as they can cause skin irritation and additional hyperpigmentation. Glycolic, salicylic, and trichloroacetic acid peels are common.

**Laser Therapy**

Multiple laser types, including Q-switched ruby lasers, Q-switched Nd:YAG lasers, and picosecond (short, intense pulse) lasers have been used to treat PIH as has fractional photothermolysis. However, they also should be used with caution by experienced clinicians as they can cause skin irritation and additional hyperpigmentation.