**Radial Nerve Injury**

Radial nerve palsy is among the most common peripheral nerve injuries following a humeral fracture.

**Conditions of the Shoulder**

Conditions such as calcific tendinitis of the rotator cuff and adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder (i.e., frozen shoulder syndrome) are relatively common conditions with controversial and/or multifactorial etiologies.

**Metastatic Disease**

Metastatic bone disease causes destructive bone lesions and significant localized pain, most often in the humerus. Lesions can increase the risk of a fracture within the humerus.

**Supracondylar Fractures of the Distal Humerus**

This fracture is the most common elbow fracture in the pediatric population. The fracture location is superior to the medial and lateral condyles and epicondyles. Supracondylar fractures of the distal humerus by the elbow joint can compromise nerve and vasculature depending on its displacement. Anterior displacement puts the median nerve and brachial artery at risk. Posterior displacement puts the radial artery at risk. Palpation of distal pulses and capillary refill should be part of the initial workup to survey for preserved blood supply. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs are necessary for accurate diagnosis and treatment. Nondisplaced fractures are treated initially with a posterior splint and eventual casting. Displaced fractures are reduced, and pinned percutaneously. Malunion, compartment syndrome, and neurovascular complications are morbidities related to this fracture.

**Other/Miscellaneous Conditions**

Hematologic, infectious, genetic, and neurologic disorders may cause humerus varus.

Disappearing bone disease is a rare musculoskeletal condition marked by bone resorption, lack of bone formation, and lack of vascular proliferation. This disorder has severe quality of life implications.

Charcot arthropathy is a rare disorder characterized by debilitating joint destruction. The disease can lead to bone and soft tissue loss around the humerus and can alter muscular control. Treatment involves shoulder arthroplasty.

Osteochondrosis of the humerus is associated with Panner disease and osteochondritis dissecans. The two diseases present similarly.