Sumatriptan can be administered orally, intranasally, via subcutaneous injection, and rectally.

- Sumatriptan is available as 5 mg per actuation, 10 mg per actuation, 20 mg per actuation nasal solution, and 11 mg nasal powder per actuation. The sumatriptan nasal powder system has faster improvement in migraine-related disability and migraine pain intensity at early time points than the oral sumatriptan.

- Sumatriptan succinate (25 mg) administered rectally is an effective treatment for acute migraine attacks and significantly reduces symptoms within two hours.

- Sumatriptan succinate oral tablets are available in  25 mg, 50 mg, or 100 mg. Doses of 50 mg and 100 mg may provide better relief of migraines than the 25 mg dose.

- It is available in 3 mg / 0.5 ml, 4 mg / 0.5 ml, and 6 mg /0.5 ml subcutaneous injections. Subcutaneous administration has also been considered the most efficacious treatment in the acute phase, both on pain and associated autonomic symptoms. If migraine returns after an initial treatment with sumatriptan injection, sumatriptan succinate tablets (up to 100 mg/day) may be used 2 hours after the injection.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Oral sumatriptan has demonstrated effectiveness in treating a single acute migraine attack. The absorption of sumatriptan is rapid after oral and subcutaneous administration. However, the bioavailability of oral sumatriptan is just 14% compared to subcutaneous administration, which is nearly 100%. The plasma half-life for sumatriptan is approximately 2 hours. The elimination of sumatriptan is primarily by metabolism to a nonactive indoleacetic acid analog. The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic variables of sumatriptan are not altered by the presence of alcohol, food, prophylactic migraine treatments, or dihydroergotamine.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

- Sumatriptan dose should not exceed 50 mg/day orally in patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. Sumatriptan is contraindicated in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

- There is no information available on sumatriptan use in patients with renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Consideration**

- In clinical trials, the effectiveness and safety in pregnant or pediatric patients have not been performed.

**Pediatric Patients**

- Sumatriptan is not recommended for use in patients younger than 18 years of age.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

- Sumatriptan gets excreted in human milk, so lactating women should avoid breastfeeding for 12 hours after treatment to minimize infant exposure.