Imaging of a pediatric patient or those with suspected malrotation with volvulus depends on stability. A thermodynamically stable patient should undergo a radiologic evaluation to confirm the diagnosis.

**Imaging Studies**

**Abdominal Radiography**

It has limited use for diagnosing intestinal obstruction. The double-bubble sign may be produced by an air-filled stomach and proximal duodenum with no or little gas in the rest of the GI tract. The GI tract might be distended with/without radiological signs of pneumatosis intestinalis. A left lateral decubitus x-ray can be obtained to visualize better if pneumoperitoneum is suspected. The sensitivity of plain film radiography for revealing small-bowel obstruction was 69%, and its specificity was 57%.

**Upper GI Series**

The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of the present study were 93%, 77%, and 86%, respectively. However, upper GI series should only be obtained in hemodynamically stable patients.

Using barium contrast enema (lower GI series) is possible in patients who are stable or have chronic symptoms but may not be possible in actively vomiting patients. The utility of a contrast enema is low as the bowel may not be fixed in infants, and a normally placed or displaced cecum does not rule out intestinal malrotation.

**Ultrasonography**

An ultrasound is not utilized to exclude malrotation.

**Computed Tomography (CT) Scan**

Absence of a retro-mesenteric/retroperitoneal segment of the duodenum (the third part of the duodenum). May again show abnormal SMA /SMV relationship (SMA is smaller and more circular). Large intestine predominantly on the left side and small bowel on the right side of the spine shadow.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI is not utilized in the acute setting (where volvulus is suspected). It is helpful from times where ionizing radiation is contraindicated (pregnancy).

**Screening**

Heterotaxy syndrome infants/children in the asymptomatic setting are screened for intestinal malrotation.

**Laboratory Studies**

**CBC Count**

Elevated or reduced numbers of WBCs may reflect systemic inflammation or sepsis. Thrombocytopenia may imply a consumptive process such as enterocolitis necrotizing or thrombocytosis in the process of systemic inflammation as its an acute phase reactant. A decreased hemoglobin and hematocrit may represent blood loss through mucosal sloughing. An elevated hemoglobin/hematocrit may be due to intravascular fluid depletion (hemoconcentration).

**Blood Gas and Lactate:**

Metabolic acidosis with high lactate can be the result of bowel ischemia. Metabolic acidosis can also occur mostly with non-acute presentation predominated by vomiting due to the loss of gastric acid.

**Complete Metabolic Panel**

Patients with volvulus and subsequent bowel ischemia can develop severe metabolic dysregulation, which should be corrected, if possible, before operative intervention. Sodium, chloride, and bicarbonate losses may result from suctioning GI secretions. Hyperkalemia can occur as a result of metabolic acidosis, hemolysis, and cell lysis.