Domestic violence under Florida law is defined as "any assault, aggravated assault, battery, aggravated battery, sexual assault, sexual battery, stalking, aggravated stalking, kidnapping, false imprisonment, or any criminal offense resulting in physical injury or death of one family or household member by another family or household member." Family members must "reside in the same single dwelling unit, with the exception of persons who have a child in common." A state task force has been developed to enhance education and increase public awareness. This task force has made several changes geared toward improvements in the detection and prevention of domestic violence. Florida now has legislation requiring all physicians, osteopaths, nurses, dentists, dental hygienists, midwives, psychologists, and psychotherapists to obtain two hours of domestic violence education every third renewal period.
Domestic Violence Data Resource Center (DVDRC) and Domestic Violence Fatality Review Teams have been established to examine cases of domestic violence that result in a fatality and to identify potential changes in policy that might prevent future deaths. The "Family Protection Act" requires a five-day jail term for any domestic battery crime in which the perpetrator deliberately injures the victim. The law makes a second battery crime a felony offense. A statute to the Family Protection Act includes dating relationships of six months or more, and another statute requires judges to inform victims of their rights, such as the right to appear, be notified, seek restitution, and make a victim-impact statement. The Domestic Violence Leave Act requires employers with 50 or more employees to provide guaranteed leave for domestic violence issues. This activity describes evaluation and management strategies for Florida victims of domestic abuse and stresses the role of team-based interprofessional care for these victims.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the cycle of abuse.
- Describe the types of domestic and family violence.
- Describe signs and symptoms of domestic violence.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to identify and assist victims of domestic violence.