**Electrocardiogram (ECG)**

Electrocardiogram (ECG) of ATTR-CM is described to have low voltage ECG patterns along with poor R wave progression across the precordial leads.

However, these ECG findings are not acceptably sensitive.

**Echocardiogram**

Myocardial infiltration of ATTR causes concentric bi-ventricular hypertrophy. A septal wall thickness of >12 mm should heighten clinical suspicion but is not diagnostic.

Strain echocardiography has emerged as a practical tool in the early detection of cardiac amyloidosis. "Apical sparing" with progressive worsening of longitudinal strain when moving to midventricular and basal segment is characteristic of cardiac amyloidosis. It gives an appearance of a "bulls-eye pattern," or sometimes referred to as "cherry on top" in the strain imaging. The apical to basal strain ratio and apical to mid-ventricular plus basal strain have shown good diagnostic accuracy.

Echocardiographic parameters can help identify patients with cardiac amyloidosis but cannot be used to differentiate between hATTR, wATTR, or AL type.

**Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (CMR)**

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) has considerable utility as both a screening tool and a tool to track treatment response.

It is seen that T1 signals are amplified in cardiac amyloidosis, similar to post-contrast extracellular volume fraction (ECV). CMR with parametric imaging can identify native (non-contrast) myocardial T1 signal and ECV. Parametric imaging is believed to be a more sensitive and reliable measure of amyloid burden, and therefore can be used for treatment tracking.

CMR cannot reliably differentiate between hATTR, wATTR, or AL type.

**Nuclear Imaging**

Nuclear imaging using avid bone radiotracers is the sole imaging modality available that can accurately diagnose ATTR-CM without the need for biopsy. There are majorly three types of bone avid radiotracers that are available. Most commonly used is technetium pyrophosphate (TC-PYP) (available in the USA). Other available radiotracers are Tc-DPD and Tc-HMDP (available in Europe).

During the scan, TC-PYP is injected intravenously. Once in circulation, it selectively binds to osseous tissue and ATTR fibrils.

TC-PYP scan offers few advantages over other imaging modalities. TC-PYP scan can detect ATTR deposition in the myocardium much earlier than the development of structural and conduction system changes. TC-PYP scan can diagnose ATTR-CM with 100% specificity without the need for biopsy when grade 2 or 3 update is present, and there are no monoclonal proteins on urine and serum testing.

The specificity of the TC-PYP scan to differentiate ATTR from AL does reduce when monoclonal proteins are present. 40 to 50% of patients with ATTR were found to have coexisting unrelated monoclonal gammopathy.

**Genetic Testing**

Genetic testing may be obtained once the diagnosis of ATTR-CM is confirmed (either with nuclear imaging or with cardiac biopsy). Genetic testing will help to differentiate hATTR-CM from wATTR-CM. In addition, differentiating between hATTR-CM from Wt-ATTR-CM might be needed to accommodate disease-specific treatment.