The epidermis begins developing from the surface ectoderm at the end of the fourth week of life as the neural tube separates from the overlying ectoderm to mark the completion of neurulation. Although after the first few weeks of embryogenesis, the epidermis is composed of five strata or layers. During the first few weeks, it is composed solely of a basal layer of cuboidal cells lying atop mesenchyme or future dermis. By the fifth week, a secondary layer of squamous, non-keratinizing, cuboidal cells, known as periderm or epitrichium, develops atop the basal layer. By cycling through phases of keratinization and desquamation, the periderm generates a white, waxy substance called vernix caseosa (cheesy varnish), which serves to protect the fetus from amniotic fluid and, as it later exits the birth canal, from bacterial and environmental insults.

The basal layer develops into the stratum germinativum, proliferating to form a multilayered intermediate zone by the 11th week. By the 20th week, the stratum germinativum begins proliferation and differentiation to form four more superficial strata of the epidermis: spinosum (spinous), granulosum, lucidum (clear, extra fifth layer seen only in the skin of palms and soles), and corneum (horny). Proliferation between weeks 12 to 14 forms epidermal ridges that protrude as troughs into the developing dermis beneath. Deep in the epidermis, lateral plate-derived mesenchymal cells proliferate to form dermis, filling the space between the epidermal ridges with dermal papillae. Neurovascular supply within the papillae is complete by the end of the first trimester. Between the ninth and 12th weeks, some of the stratum germinativum also differentiates into the first appearance of hair follicles. By the twelfth week, lanugo (fine, soft, unpigmented hair) is visible on the eyebrows, upper lip, and chin. By the seventeenth week, lanugo is substantial and aids in the adherence of the vernix caseosa to the skin. As melanocytes migrate in greater numbers within the epidermis, they also provide pigment to hair bulbs. Ultraviolet light first encountered at birth results in increased amounts of melanin production.

Adnexal structures also develop from the epidermis:

- Sebaceous glands, which develop from buds of epidermal root sheaths of the hair follicles

- Eccrine sweat glands and ducts; these develop from buds of stratum germinativum that migrate into the dermis. A lumen allowing for the egress of sweat contents then forms as the overlying epidermal layers degenerate linearly.

- Apocrine sweat glands, which develop from outgrowths of the hair bulbs

- Arrector muscles of the hair develop from mesenchyme surrounding the hair follicles and attach to their respective dermal root sheaths

Nails begin development in the ten weeks, when the epidermis at the tips of the digits first thickens, migrates dorsally, and finally keratinizes while growing toward the distal end of the nail plate. This process is complete by the 32nd weeks in the fingers and by the 36th week in the toes.