Selegiline is administered via two different routes and in three different forms.

**Oral Route:**Selegiline is given as either capsule or oral disintegrating tablet (ODT) form, producing low plasma concentration levels, which provide the selective inhibition of MAO-B that is desirable for the treatment of Parkinson disease. Capsules and tablets are available in 5 mg strength. Dosing for Parkinson disease in these capsules and tablets forms is 5 mg twice daily.

Orally disintegrating tablets are available in 1.25 mg strength. Dosing for Parkinson disease in ODT forms is 1.25 mg once daily in the morning with breakfast and without any liquid. Patients should avoid eating food or drinking liquids for 5 minutes before and after taking ODT selegiline. ODT tablets are sealed in foil backing tamper-resistant packaging. Peel back the foil backing of one blister as prescribed with dry hands and gently remove the tablet. Place it on top of the tongue, where it gets disintegrated in a few seconds.

- **Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**In patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score 5 to 9), the daily maintenance dose of selegiline ODT should be decreased from 2.5 mg to 1.25 mg daily, depending on the patient's clinical response. Selegiline ODT is not recommended in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score greater than 9).

- **Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment is required in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment (CrCL 30-89 mL/min). The patient's clinical response should determine the daily maintenance dose. Selegiline ODT is not recommended in patients with severe renal impairment and patients with end-stage renal disease  (CrCl <30 mL/min).

**Transdermal Route:**The other route of administration of selegiline, in which a patch is applied to the patient's skin to facilitate absorption of the medication directly into the blood, bypassing the first-pass metabolism. The transdermal route achieves greater plasma concentration levels than the oral route; the elevated levels of selegiline produce the anti-depressive effect, nonselective MAO inhibition, desired to treat the major depressive disorder.

- It is available in 6 mg/24 hr, 9 mg/24 hr, and 12 mg/24 hr strengths, each box containing 30 patches. Clinicians should not use selegiline in patients with creatinine clearance below 30 ml/min or those in Child-Pugh Class C.

- The patch should be applied to intact and dry skin on the outer surface of the upper arm, the upper torso (below the neck and above the waist), or upper thighs once every 24 hours. The patch's usual starting and target dose is 6 mg/24 hours. However, based on the patient's clinical improvement, if dose increases are recommended, it should occur in dose increments of 3 mg every 24 hours ( maximum daily dose of 12 mg) at every two weeks or longer intervals.

**Specific Population**

**Pregnancy Implication:**Selegiline is FDA pregnancy category C medicine. There is a lack of data on the fetal harm associated with the maternal use of selegiline. Animal studies show selegiline use during pregnancy is associated with developmental toxicity at doses greater than those used clinically.

**Breastfeeding Implication:**Insufficient data exist on the excretion of selegiline or its metabolites in breast milk and its effect on breastfed babies. Because of the serious potential for adverse effects in breastfed infants (including the potential for hypertensive reactions), advise the lactating women that breastfeeding is not advised during treatment with selegiline and for a week after the last dose.

**Pediatric Patients:**Effectiveness and safety in pediatric patients are not established.

**Geriatric Patients:**Geriatric patients experienced higher incidences (hypertension, orthostatic/postural hypotension) of adverse reactions than non-geriatric patient groups.