The treatment of Holt-Oram syndrome is individualized and based on specific symptoms. In some cases, many providers are involved, including pediatricians, cardiologists, cardiovascular surgeons, and orthopedists.

Medications to consider depending on the specific cardiac defects. For example, if congestive heart failure is present, diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, beta-adrenergic antagonists, and cardiac glycosides may be warranted. Surveillance is critical and should include an annual electrocardiogram. If a patient has a conduction abnormality, an annual Holter monitor should be considered. Finally, those patients with septal defects should have an echocardiogram every one to 5 years.Upper limb abnormalities may require corrective or reconstructive surgery in addition to physical and occupational therapy. Those with cardiac malformations may require medications, an artificial pacemaker, or surgical correction. Finally, psychosocial aspects should be addressed to allow the individual to reach his or her full potential and enjoy a satisfying quality of life.

During surgical procedures, prophylaxis must be considered to avoid complications of bacterial infective endocarditis and pericarditis. This includes simple procedures, such as tooth extractions, or more complex procedures, such as surgical repair of septal defects. Finally, individuals with Holt-Oram syndrome are more susceptible to respiratory infections and therefore, should be monitored closely; there should be a low threshold for the initiation of antibiotics.