**Fitness for Duty**

Due to the rigors of aviation and the high cost of the potential loss of human life, there are medical directives in military, civil, and international regulations. Careful screening is completed on pilot candidates to include cardiac disease, substance dependence, mental health conditions, otolaryngologic issues, gastrointestinal problems, and many others to evaluate for any conditions that may be affected by the physiologic changes that can occur during flight. Initial exams are conducted by an Aviation Medical Examiner (AME) or a flight surgeon in the military with recertification every 12 months for commercial and military aircrew to maintain the most update and accurate health evaluation. The FAA has set expiration dates for these medical certificates based on age; for air transport pilots under age 40, recertification occurs every 12 months and for those over 40, every six months. For private pilots, the FAA has mandated them to be recertified every 24 months for those over 40 years old and every 60 months for those under 40 years old. Prescribed medications are monitored to mitigate any undesirable side effects that may physically and mentally blunt pilot’s flying ability and decision-making capacity, particularly those with sedative or hypnotic profiles.

**Human Factors**

A human factor that significantly increases the risk of error is fatigue, which is exacerbated in aviation by circadian disruption, insufficient crew rest with unpredictable shifts, and prolonged duty hours. A study found that as high as 7% of civilian aviation incidents were secondary to aircrew fatigue.

Regulations to combat fatigue in pilots mainly consist of limits to flight duty time and mandated crew rest time of at least 10 hours between shifts. Members of the ICAO all annotate some format of shift hour limitation. However, implementation varies and does not account for disruption to circadian rhythm and overall sleep debt accumulation. Helpful medical guidance for managing jet lag and improving overall sleep hygiene includes moving back both sleep and wake times 30 minutes per day starting three days prior to departure for eastward travel or 30 minutes forward for westward travel. Additionally, for eastward travel, exposure to bright light within the first 2 to 3 hours of waking and avoidance of bright light (i.e., TV, computer, or cellphone screens close to bedtime and use of sufficient sunlight blocking window treatments) are paramount to aid in shifting the circadian rhythm.  Whereas, for westward travel, it is recommended to increase light exposure in the evening and avoid bright light in the early hours after waking. Avoidance of alcohol, caffeine, exercise, or heavy meals just prior to bed is encouraged. Shorts naps with duration less than 45 minutes may be helpful for fatigue.  For pharmacologic management, caffeine may be useful for alertness. In the military, the use of “Go” pills such as dextroamphetamine and modafinil and “No-Go” pills such as zolpidem, temazepam, and zaleplon have been used to manage circadian rhythm mismatch; however, use is closely regulated and limited for operational use. There is also required ground testing prior to use to ensure medication tolerance and absence of side effects.  Overall, non-pharmacologic management of fatigue is considered the first-line approach.

Other significant trends in regards to human factor related errors include insufficient communication and decreased situational awareness, which could be mitigated by increased crew cross-checking. The FAA currently employs the Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) to encourage voluntary reporting of safety issues. Similar military requirements exist during mission debrief. Additional post-accident analysis or mishap investigations in the military are performed to prevent similar incidents in the future.

**Checklists**

Checklists originated in the military out of necessity due to the high rates of aviator and plane accidents in wars predating and including the Korean War. Checklists were part of the standardization of the overall flight process which now includes a pre-briefing, a flight operation, debriefing, and a non-punitive error analysis system.

**Crew Resource Management**

Aviation mishap research has shown that the majority of aircraft accidents are due to miscommunication. CRM was developed to improve crew member performance under stressful conditions with the development of problem-solving and decision making.

Additional regulations later implemented include the Line Operation Safety Audit (LOSA), which involves a standard clandestine audit by the inspector to evaluate team functioning and the Operational risk management (ORM) which focusing on anticipating scenarios for risk reduction.