The parotid gland is the largest major salivary gland. It is bounded by the masseter muscle anteriorly, zygomatic arch superiorly, anteromedial aspect of the sternocleidomastoid muscle inferiorly, and the external auditory canal posteriorly. The gland is divided virtually into superficial and deep lobes by the facial nerve. The superficial lobe is lateral; the facial nerve and the deep lobe extend medially into the parapharyngeal space. However, this division is not anatomical since no true embryologic or fascial plane exists between the pars superficialis and pars profunda. The parotid gland is encased by a prolongation of the deep cervical fascia, which divides into a deep and superficial layer to surround the gland. The superficial fascia extends from the masseter and SCM to the zygomatic arch. The superficial musculoaponeurotic system (SMAS) extends from the platysma to the superficial temporal fascia superiorly. It lies superficial to the parotid fascia and should not be confused with it.

The duct of the parotid (Stenson's duct) exits the gland anteriorly and follows a course approximately 1 cm inferior to, and parallel to, the zygomatic arch. After crossing the masseter, it pierces the buccinator muscle and enters the oral cavity facing the second maxillary molar. Salivary secretions of the parotid gland are more serous in contrast with the submandibular gland, which secretes a more mixed serous/mucous saliva. This is thought to explain the higher incidence of sialolithiasis within the submandibular gland.

Relevant facial nerve anatomy is limited to its extemporal portion. After leaving the stylomastoid foramen, the main trunk of the facial nerve divides at the pes anserinus (figure 1) into two divisions: the temporofacial branching into frontal, zygomatic, and buccal branches, and the cervicofacial giving rise to the marginal mandibular and cervical branches. The course of the temporal branch can be predicted using surface landmarks as described by Pitanguy et al.: a line starting from a point 0.5 cm below the tragus in the direction of the eyebrow, passing 1.5 cm above the lateral extremity of the eyebrow (figure 2). The middle branch of the facial nerve (zygomatic/buccal) can be identified at Zuker's point, which lies midway on a line drawn from the root of the helix and the lateral commissure of the mouth with a 6 mm accuracy (figure 3). Note the buccal branch accompanies Stenson's duct over the masseter muscle. The marginal mandibular branch is located immediately in a plane deep to the platysma in close proximity to the inferior border of the mandible (figure 4). Along its course, it runs superficial to the facial vessels. The retromandibular vein travels through the parotid gland just deep to the facial nerve (figure 4). Since the facial nerve cannot be detected on a CT scan or MRI, the retromandibular vein serves as a useful radiologic landmark for the superficial and deep lobs of the gland. With the advent of 3 Tesla MRI, imaging of the intra-parotid facial nerve is occasionallypossible; however, there are concerns regarding accuracy and reproducibility, particularly in the setting of parotid neoplasms.

Another structure worthy of mentioning is the greater auricular nerve (GAN), which travels parallel to the external jugular vein and splits into an anterior and posterior branch at the level of the tail of the parotid gland. Injury to this nerve leads to loss of sensation in the skin at the angle of the mandible, the side of the upper neck, and the inferior half of the external ear. Of note, preservation of the anterior branch is often impossible as it frequently overlies the tail of the parotid and physically hampers exposure of the tail of the gland while raising the skin flap. The GAN can also be used as a nerve graft in the event of a facial nerve injury.

The parotid gland contains lymph nodes in the superficial and deep lobes with a 90% to 10% distribution, respectively. The superficial group drains the pinna, scalp, eyelids, and lacrimal glands. The deep group drains the gland, middle ear, nasopharynx, and soft palate. The external auditory canal drains into both groups. This is important in the setting of sentinel lymph node biopsy, which may necessitate superficial or total parotidectomy for melanoma or other epithelial tumors of these regions.