Treatment depends on the disease stage.

- Primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis is treated with a single dose of intramuscular (IM) benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units.

- Neurosyphilis is treated with IV penicillin G aqueous 18-24 million units daily for 14 days. An alternative regimen would be procaine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM once daily AND Probenecid 500 mg orally 4 times/day for 10–14 days.

- Tertiary and latent syphilis and HIV-infected patients should be treated with weekly benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM for three weeks.

Alternative therapies include doxycycline 100 mg orally (PO) twice daily for 14 days or ceftriaxone 1 to 2 gm IM or intravenously (IV) daily for 10 to 14 days or tetracycline 100 mg PO 4 times for 14 days. Azithromycin is no longer recommended due to reports of resistance.

Patients must be followed post-treatment 6, 12, and 24  months after treatment with a clinical evaluation and serial nontreponemal (VDRL and RPR) testing. In addition, re-examinations at 3 and 9 months are suggested for high-risk individuals. A 4-fold decline in nontreponemal test titers indicates successful treatment, while a fourfold increase from the initial level suggests reinfection or therapy failure.

**Pregnancy and Syphilis**

All pregnant patients should be tested for syphilis at their initial prenatal visit or at their first obstetrical visit, whichever comes first. Pregnant patients who test positive for syphilis should have nontreponemal testing to track their titers. Serological testing is recommended during the third trimester: At 28 weeks, and at delivery for patients who live in geographic areas with a high incidence of syphilis or who are otherwise at high risk (no prenatal care at the time of delivery, history of drug abuse, other STIs, multiple or new sexual partners). Mothers should be tested for syphilis after 20 weeks of gestation in any fetal death. All mothers who test positive for syphilis should also be tested for HIV.

Ultrasonography of the fetus for signs of congenital syphilis is recommended when the disease has been diagnosed during the second half of the mother's pregnancy. Sonographic signs of congenital syphilis include ascites, hepatomegaly, hydrops, and a thickened placenta.

Treating syphilis during pregnancy is the same as for non-pregnant patients based on their stage of infection. A second dose of 2.4 million units of IM benzathine penicillin G administered one week after the initial injection is beneficial in helping prevent congenital syphilis.

A fourfold decrease in nontreponemal titers is optimal but may not be achieved prior to delivery, even in properly treated patients. This does not necessarily indicate a treatment failure.

There are no known acceptable alternatives to penicillin for the treatment of syphilis during pregnancy. Therefore, pregnant women who are penicillin allergic should be skin tested to identify their actual risk and undergo desensitization so they can be treated with penicillin.

Patients with a high titer of primary or secondary syphilis can develop a Jarisch Herxheimer reaction, which is a self-limited immune-mediated response that occurs within 2 to 24 hours of antibiotic treatment and is characterized by high fever, headache, myalgias, and rash.

**Congenital Syphilis**

Congenital syphilis can be a diagnostic challenge as maternal antibodies are transferable to the fetus. Such antibodies can persist for 15 months. Clinical signs and symptoms of congenital syphilis include fetal hydrops,  hepatosplenomegaly,  pseudoparalysis of an extremity, hyperbilirubinemia, jaundice, rhinitis, or a skin rash. Darkfield microscopy and/or PCR testing of any suspicious lesions should be done. Further workup for suspected cases includes x-rays of the long bones, a CBC, and an analysis of CSF fluid for cell count, protein, and a VDRL titer.

Treatment of congenital syphilis is aqueous crystalline penicillin G at 100,000–150,000 units/kg body weight/day. This is given as 50,000 units/kg body weight/dose IV every 12 hours during the first seven days after birth, then every 8 hours for ten days. An alternative regimen is procaine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg body weight/dose IM in a single daily dose for ten days. Ten-day treatment protocols are recommended for neonates with proven syphilis or with moderate to high risk. Lower-risk newborns may be treated with a single dose of benzathine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg body weight/dose IM is an alternative therapy for congenital syphilis if their recommended testing is negative.

Neonates with a positive nontreponemal test (VDRL or RPR) should be retested at least every three months until they become non-reactive. If a baby was not treated as his risk was considered low, his nontreponemal test titers should drop by three months and become non-reactive by six months. If so, no further treatment or evaluation is needed. If the testing still shows positive titers, the infant should be treated as a congenital syphilis neonate and given a 10-day course of penicillin as above.

If CSF titers remain positive after 18 months, retreatment for neurosyphilis is indicated.

**Pediatric Syphilis**

Older children who test positive serologically for syphilis should have a CBC with differential and a CSF examination for cell count, protein, and a VDRL titer. Other optional tests would include x-rays of the long bones, chest x-ray, liver function studies, abdominal ultrasound, neurological imaging, auditory brain-stem response, and an ophthalmologic evaluation as clinically indicated.

The standard treatment for pediatric syphilis in children is aqueous crystalline penicillin G at 200,000 to 300,000 units/kg body weight/day IV. The medication is administered as 50,000 units/kg body weight every 4–6 hours for ten days. This is followed by a single dose of benzathine penicillin G at 50,000 units/kg body weight (up to a maximum of 2.4 million units).

If there are no clinical manifestations of syphilis and the evaluation is otherwise normal (VDRL of the CSF, CBC, etc.), consideration can be given to treating the child with three weekly doses of IM benzathine penicillin G 50,000 units/kg body weight (up to a maximum of 2.4 million units/IM injection).

**Patients with a Penicillin Allergy May Still be Treatable with Penicillin**

When specifically tested, most patients (<9%) who report a penicillin allergy actually have it confirmed.

Ceftriaxone may be a reasonable alternative to penicillin in selected syphilis cases. Neurosyphilis and at least one case of syphilis in pregnancy have been treated successfully with ceftriaxone.T. pallidum at low serum concentrations.T. pallidum.

- Many patients with a presumed penicillin allergy may not be allergic.

- Skin testing to confirm the penicillin allergy should be considered, as penicillin is still the preferred antimicrobial for syphilis, especially neurosyphilis and pregnancy.

- Skin testing should NOT be performed in patients with a history of severe allergic reactions to penicillin, such as anaphylaxis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, interstitial nephritis, or hemolytic anemia.

- If the skin testing is negative, this is usually followed by an oral penicillin challenge with amoxicillin.

- For those who test positive, desensitization by an allergist can be considered, especially during pregnancy and in patients with neurosyphilis, where alternative medications are not recommended.

- Anecdotally, ceftriaxone has been used successfully without incident for the treatment of syphilis and the prevention of congenital syphilis in a pregnant patient with a severe allergic reaction to penicillin.

For further details on treatment, see our companion reference StatPearls articles on "Sexually Transmitted Infections," "Neurosyphilis," and "Congenital Syphilis."

**The Jarisch Herxheimer Reaction**

Following initiation of treatment for syphilis with penicillin, especially in the early stages, the dying organisms release toxins that can lead to the Jarisch Herxheimer reaction through cytokine induction. The symptoms include headache, muscle pain, fever, tachycardia, rash, and malaise. The most common symptom is fever, followed by an exacerbation of cutaneous lesions. The reaction usually appears within a few hours of starting treatment and spontaneously resolves within 24 hours without treatment. Patients should be warned about this possible reaction prior to starting therapy and that it is not an allergic response to penicillin.

Patients at highest risk are those with the highest bacterial loads, typically those with primary and secondary syphilis, where over 50% of patients will develop the reaction. Patients with latent syphilis are the least likely to develop a reaction.

Treatment of the Jarisch Herxheimer reaction is mainly supportive. NSAIDs and acetaminophen can help mitigate symptoms but will not prevent the reaction. Anti-tumor necrosis factor-alpha antibodies and steroids may be of some additional help in minimizing symptoms, but their use has not been adequately studied.

**Preventing Syphilis**

Benzathine penicillin should be administered if a person has sex with a known infected individual.

**WHO Guidelines**

- Benzathine penicillin administered intramuscularly is the treatment of choice.

- Procaine penicillin is the 2nd choice and is administered intramuscularly for 10 to 14 days.

- If penicillin cannot be used, doxycycline, azithromycin, or ceftriaxone are other options.

- Doxycycline is preferred as it is cheap and easy to administer. But it is not recommended for children or pregnant women.

- Azithromycin does not cross the placenta, so the infant must be treated after delivery.