Induction of labor is a commonplace obstetric practice. Currently, more than 20% of pregnant women in the United States deliver as a result of labor. Predictors for success in induction include many of the similar criteria Bishop set forth in the 1960s. While, originally, the Bishop score was designed for multiparous patients, it applies to nulliparous patients undergoing induction as well. Increasing maternal parity is a strong indicator of the likelihood of successful vaginal delivery and a predictor of shorter length of labor. Fetal size, gestational age, maternal age, provider patience, and decision to induce versus expectantly manage can be correlated to differing success rates. Maternal body mass index can play a role as well, with the increased length of labor and cesarean delivery rates. The Bishop score is still widely in use to determine whether or not a cervix is “favorable” and to assess whether or not cervical ripening is needed. While Bishop score has been found to be useful for predicting vaginal delivery with sensitivity around 75% (similar between the full and modified scores) as well as a positive predictive value 83% to 84%, it has poor specificity and negative predictive value.

If a cervix is favorable, induction of labor is likely to result in vaginal delivery, and any method of induction tends to work well.  In the scenario of a favorable cervix, labor induction is normally undertaken with oxytocin and/or amniotomy.

If a cervix is considered to be unfavorable, no method is highly effective for induction so that patient is a candidate for cervical ripening. Cervical ripening is a process that helps prepare the cervix for labor and can result in a more favorable cervix. There are two main types of cervical ripening, prostaglandin use and mechanical methods.  Prostaglandins are a medication that can be given vaginally, buccally, or orally to a patient with an unscarred uterus that can help the cervix progress to a more favorable Bishop score in 12 to 24 hours. Mechanical methods such as a balloon catheter and hygroscopic dilators can be used as well. Mechanical methods, such as a balloon catheter, have shown to have similar outcomes to prostaglandins. Mechanical methods can be used in conjunction with prostaglandins in certain clinical scenarios.