Treatment for hypercalcemia is required if the patient is symptomatic or if the calcium level is more than 15 mg/dL, even in asymptomatic patients. The goals of treating hypercalcemia include increased elimination from the extracellular fluid, reducing gastrointestinal (GI) absorption and decreasing bone resorption. Immediate therapy is directed at restoring intravascular volume and promoting calcium excretion in the urine with an infusion of 0.9% saline at twice the maintenance rate until any fluid deficit is replaced and diuresis occurs (urine output ≥ 200 mL/h to 300 mL/h). Hemodialysis is the treatment of choice to rapidly decrease serum calcium in patients with heart failure or renal insufficiency. Loop diuretics should be used with caution as even though they may enhance renal excretion, paradoxical hypercalcemia can occur due to bone resorption.

Patients with hyperparathyroidism require surgical exploration and removal of the source of increased PTH secretion. Postoperatively, patients need to be monitored closely for the development of hypocalcemia and tetany. Bisphosphonates such as etidronate, pamidronate, and alendronate are the drugs of choice for hypercalcemia of malignancy as they inhibit osteoclastic activity.

Calcitonin can be administered subcutaneously but in most cases, the effects are mild and limited to a few days. Mithramycin can block the function of osteoclasts and is often administered to patients with malignancy-associated hypercalcemia. but the drug has significant renal, liver, and bone marrow toxicity.

Hypercalcemia associated with excess vitamin D can be treated with steroids as they inhibit one alpha-hydroxylase activity. Ketoconazole, an antifungal agent, has also been used in hypervitaminosis D as it inhibits 1-alpha-hydroxylase activity. Hypercalcemia of immobilization can be prevented by encouraging activity as tolerated and adequate hydration. The specific cause of hypercalcemia needs to be identified, and treatment directed accordingly.