A normal audiogram does not satisfy any of the above rules and does not require masking. Figure 1 shows an example of a normal audiogram, with the red circles correlating to non-masked air conduction in the right ear and the blue crosses correlating to non-masked air conduction in the left ear. This does not require masking because there is no significant difference in non-masked air conduction between each ear. Equally, because the hearing thresholds are normal, bone conduction does not need to be performed as there is no concern about conductive hearing loss.

In figure 2, the blue circumflex accents represent non-masked bone conduction. There is a difference between the non-masked bone conduction thresholds and the non-masked air conduction thresholds on the left. This satisfies rule 2 and therefore requires masking; this is because without masking, it is not possible to establish whether this is a conductive or sensorineural hearing loss, as clinically, it is impossible to ascertain whether the non-masked bone conduction pertains to the left or right cochlea. Masking of the right (non-test) ear is required with re-testing of the bone conduction in the left (test) ear to determine whether the hearing loss is sensorineural or conductive.

If the hearing loss is sensorineural, the masked bone thresholds will lie at the same thresholds as the non-masked air on that side, whereas if the hearing loss is conductive, the masked bone conduction thresholds will mirror the non-masked bone conduction, as seen in figure 3. Here the masked bone conduction has replaced the non-masked bone conduction on the image and is demonstrated with square brackets. Following masking, the audiogram demonstrates that there is left-sided conductive hearing loss.

Figure 4 shows a right-sided hearing loss, with a difference greater than 40 dB between the right and left ear in non-masked air conduction. This, therefore, satisfies rule 1 and requires masking. This is because without masking, it is impossible to identify whether the tones presented to the right ear are being heard by the right cochlea or being cross-heard by the left cochlea, as with a greater than 40 dB difference between each ear, the interaural attenuation may be exceeded when testing the right ear.

Figure 5 shows an audiogram of a patient with reduced hearing bilaterally and worse on the right. Initially, rule 1 was not applied, as the difference between non-masked bone does not exceed 40 dB. However, rule 2 was applied as there was a greater than 10dB difference between the air conduction and non-masked bone conduction. Therefore the bone conduction was masked on both sides, revealing a bilateral conductive hearing loss. However, once masking of the bone conduction has been applied, it is evident that there is now a difference of at least 40 dB between the air conduction thresholds in the right ear and bone conduction thresholds in the left ear. Therefore rule 3 applies, and masking should be performed for air conduction.