Fabry disease is a rare X-linked lysosomal disorder that results in excessive deposition of lipids in the tissues. Young patients usually present with stroke, skin lesions, heart attack, or renal failure. Once the diagnosis is made, an interprofessional approach is vital. The earlier the diagnosis, the better the prognosis. If the disorder is identified during pregnancy, the family will need prenatal counseling.

The role of the nurse in education is indispensable. The patient and the family need to know about the course of the disease, lifestyle modifications, and the need to follow up.

Since these patients are prone to strokes, the pharmacist must be fully aware of the types of antiplatelet agents that can be used as prophylaxis. If the stroke is embolic, then warfarin has to be used, and the patient must be told to get regular INR checks. Since the patients are also prone to painful neuropathies, the pharmacist should be familiar with anticonvulsants that are effective in such disorders. Finally, the pharmacist must be fully aware of the enzyme replacement therapies available. The earlier the enzymes are started, the better the outcomes.

Patients with Fabry disease also develop renal and liver failure, and hence the transplant team should be notified to determine if the patient is eligible.

Finally, the physical and occupational therapist should be consulted to assist with ambulation, use of an ambulatory device, and how to perform daily living activities.

**Outcome**

Fabry disease is heterogeneous in its presentation, but most of its complications are life-threatening. Because the disease is rare, there are no long-term randomized trials, and most of the evidence is short-term and based on anecdotal case reports and small retrospective case series. End-stage heart and liver disease are often the cause of premature death. Various studies show that the ten-year survival is very low despite enzyme replacement. While kidney transplant has been shown to prolong survival, it is not curative and also subjects the patient to additional morbidity from the side effects of the immunosuppressant drugs. Given this, an interprofessional approach that includes nurses and therapists should try to offer the patient a decent quality of life.