The lens is an avascular, transparent, biconvex structure held in place by the zonular fibers in the posterior chamber. It is located anteriorly to the vitreous and posteriorly to the iris. The crystalline lens is an elliptical structure with a steeper posterior surface than the anterior.

Embryologically, the development of the crystalline lens begins at the 4 mm stage, or two weeks of gestation, when the optic vesicle induces the differentiation of the surrounding surface ectoderm to form the lens placode. The lens placode is made up of single-layered columnar cells but may appear stratified due to variability in the location of the individual cell nuclei. As the embryonic lens further develops, a small depression appears in the developing lens placode, and at about four weeks, the lens placode begins to invaginate to form the lens vesicle.

The differentiating lens cells are oriented in such a way that the basal aspect of the cell is oriented externally while the apical aspect is directed to the lumen of the lens vesicle. This phenomenon provides for the formation of the lens capsule via the continuous deposition of the basal membrane. As the lens develops, the posterior vesicle cells grow forward into the lumen in such a way that between the 12 mm and 25 mm stages (5 to 7 weeks), the lumen is obliterated, and the previously posterior vesicle cells, which have now moved more anteriorly become the primary lens fibers.

While the posterior vesicle fibers elongate, the anterior vesicle fibers remain unchanged morphologically and eventually end up as the future lens epithelium. Continuous developmental changes include the loss of the primary lens fiber nuclei, the transition of the lens epithelium from columnar to cuboidal shape, and a burst in the lens epithelial proliferative activity ushers in the secondary lens fibers during the 7th week. After that, the continuous proliferative activity of the lens epithelium leads to crystalline lens maturation, which remains continuous after birth.

The crystalline lens is divided into a capsule, cortex, and nucleus.

The lens epithelial cells undergo continuous elongation to reach the anterior and posterior suture, where the apical aspect joins the anterior suture and the basal aspect of the cells joins the posterior suture. Lens fibers are matured epithelial cells which have lost their organelles. Lens fibers are continuously deposited at the center and push older fibers outwards. As measured nasal to temporally, the diameter ranges from 9 mm to 10 mm in adults with an average annual growth of 0.023 mm. The anteroposterior thickness of the adult lens is between 3 mm to 5 mm.

The transparency of the crystalline lens is maintained by its avascularity, protein content, nature of the crystalline, and lens fiber arrangement. The crystalline lens obtains its oxygen and glucose supply from the surrounding ocular fluids. Aerobic glycolysis is mostly achieved in the superficial layers of the crystalline lens because the deeper layers contain lens fibers that have lost their cell organelles. Adequate communication between the deeper lens fibers (lens nucleus) and superficial lens cells (capsule, epithelium, and lens cortex) is necessary to ease the flow of nutrients to the deeper lens layers. This communication is mediated via gap junctions formed by the interdigitation of the lens fibers.

The sodium-potassium ATPase system maintains ionic transport in and out of the crystalline lens. This system, along with water channels known as aquaporins, maintains water homeostasis in the crystalline lens. The systems are influenced by factors such as long-standing hyperglycemia and age. Poor hyperglycemic control puts significant metabolic stress on the lens via intra-lenticular sorbitol build-up, leading to the formation of lens vacuoles with subsequent lenticular opacification.