Common adverse effects of cardio-selective beta-blockers include bradycardia, decreased exercise capacity, hypotension, atrioventricular nodal block, and heart failure. Other common adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, dizziness, weakness, headache, fatigue, and dry mouth and eyes. Less common adverse effects are sexual dysfunction, memory loss, and confusion. An additional risk of beta-1 blockers is the masking of hypoglycemia-induced tachycardia in the diabetic patient, which is a warning sign of the patient's blood glucose levels being too low. Hypoglycemia, or low blood glucose, most commonly occurs in diabetic patients due to insulin or other drugs. The onset of hypoglycemic symptoms can occur at different blood glucose levels but most commonly occurs when blood glucose falls below 70 mg/dL.

The catecholamine-triggered neurogenic hypoglycemic symptoms masked by this class of medications include tremors and palpitations. Hunger, tremor, irritability, and confusion can be hidden as well. Sweating, however, remains unmasked and might be the only consistent sign of hypoglycemia in individuals treated with β-blockers.

Some medications that may result in adverse effects when paired with beta-1 blockers include nitrates, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, ACE inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, and other blood pressure-lowering or anti-arrhythmic medications. Adverse effects also occur in overdose. In excessive doses, cardio-selective beta-blockers lose their selective binding and begin to interact with beta-2 and beta-3 adrenergic receptors.