Definitive management of cleft palate is achieved through surgical intervention. Repair is often staged, with the lip managed first, followed by the palate. The timing of the first surgical intervention is based on the often-quoted rule of tens, “10 pounds, hemoglobin of 10, and age > 10 weeks”. There are several techniques for surgical repair of the cleft lip and palate. The most commonly utilized repairs of the lip are the Millard rotation-advancement technique for unilateral cleft lip and the Mulliken technique for bilateral. Palatoplasty for cleft palate associated with cleft lip and for cleft palate alone is performed later, at 9-15 months of age. Techniques for repair include straight line repair, the Furlow double Z-plasty, and Veau-Wardill-Kilner V-Y pushback.

Preoperatively, for cleft palate associated with cleft lip, the lip is usually taped from about one week of life until surgery. This helps to reduce the size of the cleft and improve symmetry. An alternative and more aggressive measure to lip taping is nasoalveolar molding (NAM), which can lead to an improved cosmetic and functional outcome after surgery. NAM involves the placement of a prosthesis that is fitted from a maxillary impression and is worn 24 hours a day and adjusted on a weekly or biweekly basis. NAM can result in far improved nasal symmetry and alveolar alignment. However, it is a significant time and effort commitment for families, and poor compliance can significantly impact outcomes.

For very wide clefts, lip adhesion is a surgical alternative to achieve a narrower cleft at the time of repair. It is uncommonly used as it requires an additional surgical procedure. It is usually performed as early as 4-6 weeks old. Lip adhesion involves elevation of rectangular mucoperiosteal lip flaps, which are brought together medially with absorbable suture.

**Palatoplasty Techniques**

The most critical step in any of the palatoplasty techniques is the reconstruction of the levator veli palatini muscle, which functions to elevate the palate during a swallow. Inappropriate or failure to reattach the muscle can lead to velopharyngeal insufficiency or failure of velopharyngeal closure. This results in nasal reflux during swallow and hypernasal speech.

**Two-flap Palatoplasty or Straight-line Repair with Intravelar Veloplasty**

This technique involves the elevation of mucoperiosteal flaps off the vomer on either side of the cleft. Nasal mucosal and oral mucosal flaps are elevated anteriorly from the maxillary alveolus toward the soft palate. The medial mucosal attachments of the flap are left intact over the soft palate only. The flaps are then rotated medially and closed in a layered fashion. To recreate the levator muscle sling, the muscular attachments are elevated off the hard palate and repositioned in the midline more posteriorly at the soft palate. This technique does not lengthen a short palate.

**Furlow Double Z-plasty**

The Furlow palatoplasty involves Z-plasty or transposition of soft palatal muscle flaps in one layer to re-create the levator sling and transposition of mucosal flaps in a second layer to recreate the uvula. The Z-plasty technique allows for lengthening of the palate. Straight-line mucoperiosteal flaps are elevated for the closure of the hard palate cleft.

**Veau-Wardill-Kilner V-Y Pushback**

This technique involves elevation of bilateral mucoperiosteal flaps involving oral mucosa in an anterior to posterior direction. The posterior attachments of the flaps remain intact. The mucoperiosteal flaps are then retroposed, or pushed back, and reapproximated at the midline. This allows for palatal lengthening. The nasal mucosal layer is closed primarily in its position and is thereby exposed on its inferior or oral aspect, to close by secondary intent.