Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are a class of drugs indicated for the treatment of inflammatory arthritides, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis (PsA), and ankylosing spondylitis (AS). They can also be used in the treatment of other disorders, including connective tissue diseases such as systemic sclerosis (SSc), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and Sjogren syndrome (SS), as well as in the treatment of inflammatory myositis, vasculitis, uveitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and some types of cancers.

DMARDs are immunosuppressive and immunomodulatory agents and are classified as either conventional DMARDs or biologic DMARDs. Commonly used conventional DMARDs include methotrexate, leflunomide, hydroxychloroquine, and sulfasalazine. Biologic DMARDs were introduced in the early 1990s and are usually prescribed after the failure of conventional DMARD therapy (ongoing disease activity or clinical or radiographic disease progression). Some biologic agents include infliximab, adalimumab, etanercept, rituximab, abatacept, rituximab, tocilizumab, tofacitinib, among others. Biologic DMARDs are highly specific and target a specific pathway of the immune system. Some of these drugs are monoclonal, chimeric humanized fusions antibodies, while others are receptors that have been fused to a part of the human immunoglobulin or small molecules such as Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors.

**DMARDs in Rheumatoid Arthritis**

Although many medications can be used in the treatment of RA, methotrexate is the most commonly used agent as an initial treatment. RA treatment is complicated, with several factors playing a role in decision making, including disease activity and severity, comorbidities, and patient preference (including cost, route of administration, and frequency of monitoring). RA treatment can be either monotherapy or combination therapy, although several randomized controlled trials have shown the superiority of combination therapy of a biologic DMARD with a conventional DMARD such as methotrexate over either agent alone. Treatment goals shall include achieving remission or low disease activity and preventing radiographic progression of the disease. The initiation of therapy early in the disease has been shown to prevent radiographic progression, most of which occurs within the first few months of the disease.