# Introduction

Peptides play an essential role in fundamental physiological processes and are necessary for many biochemical processes. A peptide is a short string of 2 to 50 amino acids, formed by a condensation reaction, joining together through a covalent bond.

Peptides are named based on the number of amino acid residues in the sequence. As peptide chains form between joining of the primary structure of amino acids, they may enlarge to become an oligopeptide when there are between 10 to 20 amino acids in the chain. In vivo, each amino acid is added to the amino-terminal of one amino acid to form a peptide chain.

Each amino acid comprising a peptide is called a “residue” since that is the portion remaining after the loss of water in the dehydration reaction. Amino acids are the organic starting molecule composed of a carboxyl-terminal and an amino group that makes up the foundation of a protein. Peptide synthesis depends on three main reactions: 1. an amino acid goes through a deprotection step, a preparatory reaction that adds the next amino acid to the chain, and lastly, a coupling reaction that forms the final peptide with functionality.

Peptide bonds are resistant to conditions that denature proteins, such as elevated temperatures and high concentration of urea. Amino acids all have the same general structure, with a positive charge on nitrogen and negative on the carbonyl group.

# Fundamentals

**Peptide bonds**

The peptide bond formed in the active site of the ribosome has a partial double-bond character.

**Bioactive Peptides**

As amino acids combine to form a peptide, specific bioactive peptides can be designed with implications to the pharmaceutical industry and biologics design usage for therapeutic biomedical research.

# Cellular Level

The process of biochemical synthesis of a peptide from its primary amino acid primary structure to a final protein structure is a fundamental biological process. This section will provide an overview of the mechanisms involved in synthesizing a peptide sequence and highlight key cellular locations and specific enzymes.

Biologically active peptides, including neurotransmitters and hormones and, are created from and RNA template, transcribed from DNA.

The steps of translation subdivide into initiation, elongation, and termination.

With expansion and addition of additional amino acids, a polypeptide is then created and destined to become the major macromolecule constituent of cells, protein. Post-translationally modification of peptides such as methylation, phosphorylation, acetylation can also alter the rates of peptide synthesis.

As a growing peptide forms, it is then cleaved from its signal sequence, forming a large preprohormone, which is then cleaved further into a prohormone. As a prohormone, it is packaged into vesicles and sent to the Golgi apparatus for further processing and to be proteolytically cleaved into their final form. The final peptide is packaged into secretory vesicles and sent into the cytoplasm and then leave the cell via exocytosis when they receive a stimulus.

The established method in a laboratory setting for the production of the synthetic peptide is known as solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS).

# Molecular Level

**Peptide Hormones**

Peptide hormones are water-soluble molecules that can range from 3 to 200 amino acids in lengths and shape and are linked by peptide bonds.  Peptide hormones are synthesized locally and can travel to remote tissues with an implication for physiological growth and differentiation. The paracrine and perhaps autocrine actions of these peptide hormones contribute to the growth, survival, and functionality of the tissues on which they act.

**Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene family**is originally a 241 amino acid residue that is cleaved at different lysine residues through proteolysis to create unique, active peptides. The peptides created include melanocyte-stimulating factor (MSH), adrenocorticotropic releasing hormone (ACTH), B-lipotropin, and B-endorphin, and are expressed in peripheral tissues and the brain.

**Oxytocin and ADH**The posterior pituitary produces two peptide hormones that differ by only two AAs: oxytocin and anti-diuretic hormone (ADH). Both oxytocin and ADH are nonapeptides with a disulfide bridge.

**Insulin**is a 51 amino acid peptide hormone that consists of two disulfide-linked peptide chains.

**Glucagon**is created when proglucagon is cleaved by prohormone convertase 2, to form a fully processed bioactive peptide.

**Secretin**is another example of a peptide hormone, with an N-terminal and C-terminal end, composed of a 27 chain amino acid sequence.

**Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)**is a 37-amino acid neuropeptide, which is most commonly localized to C and Aδ sensory fibers but affects both the central and peripheral nervous systems and metabolism through a multitude of receptor types.

**Natriuretic Peptides**are small peptide hormones secreted by cardiac myocytes in response to tension or wall stress.

# Pathophysiology

Pathophysiological processes related to peptides are very broad due to the ubiquitous nature of peptides in the body. This section will describe how peptides are involved in the pathophysiology of various metabolic processes.

**Peptide-Receptor Complex and Signaling Cascade**

Biologically active peptides are produced from genes that target specific proteins or protein-coupled receptors, such as G-protein-coupled-receptors (GPCRs).

In some cases, when a peptide binding to a receptor causing a pathologic "on" state, unregulated transcription and proliferation may ensue, leading to an oncologic state. These cellular processes may be left unchecked and result in tumor growth. The design of synthetic peptides, created to act as endogenous peptides do and bind to a target receptor, can identify the location of tumor growth for identification and even for therapeutic purposes.

**Infection**

Peptides play a large endogenous role in humans and other species as a first-line barrier to fight infection. One of the components of the body's innate immune system includes the production of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) in the epithelium.

Dermcidin is a known gene that encodes antimicrobial resistance peptides in the sweat glands that can survive at a high salt concentration and over a wide range of pH values.

# Clinical Significance

As previously mentioned, peptides play an essential role in many physiological processes present throughout the body. The clinical significance peptides will be summarized below including some dermatologic disease states as well as therapeutic uses of peptides as imaging probes related to oncology for imaging and tumor targeting. Note that the information provided is concise and is not intended to represent all physiological processes that involve peptides.

**Wound repair**

Endogenous peptides also play a role in wound healing, and induction of mesenchymal cells to differentiate and promote bacteriolysis within the wound and facilitate healing. Antimicrobial peptides from within wound fluid induced by known as syndecan, a cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan.

**Chronic Inflammatory Skin Conditions**

As mentioned previously, healthy skin can secrete AMPs to defend against surface attack, especially by gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, viruses, and fungi.

Where atopic dermatitis patients have suppression of AMPs leading to a further inflammatory, infectious state, patients with rosacea overexpress an anti-microbial peptide known as cathelicidin anti-microbial peptide (CAMP).

**Molecular Imaging and Tumor Targeting**

The mechanism of endogenous peptide and specific receptor binding is principally the design for peptides acting as imaging probes and receptor-binding peptides for overexpressed receptors such as in cancer proliferation.

As biochemical sciences and therapeutic design continue to progress, peptide synthesis and design are heavily studied with implications for oncologic therapy as the pharmaceutical industry continues to shift more toward biologicals for new drug candidates.