Findings on imaging that require immediate operative intervention include pulsatile hematoma, extravasation of contrast or early pseudoaneurysm, occlusion or AV fistula of a major named artery.  If there is extravasation, AV fistula, or occlusion is noted in an artery that is not considered to be one of the major named ones (profunda femoris, anterior tibial, posterior tibial or peroneal artery), then observation (occlusion) or therapeutic embolization (AV fistula or extravasation) can be done. The recommendation is that in 3 to 5 days a repeat arteriogram or duplex ultrasound be done to rule out pseudoaneurysm or pulsatile hematoma which can develop secondary to distal backflow.

If an intimal defect is present on imaging, no invasive intervention is necessary as 87% to 95% will heal without vascular operative intervention. The patient can be placed on heparin or aspirin for prophylaxis as long as there is no contraindication. Urgent imaging is necessary if there is an abrupt change in the flow to an extremity or signs of AV fistula or pseudoaneurysm.

The peripheral artery can spasm (common in younger patients), and this is visible on imaging. Rewarming of the extremity is advisable as long as there are signs of good distal flow.  Other pathologies must merit consideration and monitoring including compartment syndrome, in situ thrombosis or distal embolism.  If the spasm is severe and threating the limb, there are numerous intra-arterial treatments that can be attempted which include: papaverine bolus of 60 mg followed by infusion of 30 to 60 mg/h, nitroglycerin of 50 to 100mg or infusion of 1000 mL of normal saline plus 1000 units of heparin 500 mg tolazoline at a rate of 30 to 60 mL/h.

Preparation and draping for operative intervention should be done in a fashion that allows for proximal and distal control, as well as any area where a fasciotomy would be performed.  In the upper extremity, skin prep is done from the chin to umbilicus, from the contralateral nipple to ipsilateral fingernails and includes one of the lower extremities to the toenails. For lower extremity intervention, the preparation is from the nipples to bilateral toenails.

If the injured vessel is <100% transected with minimal tissue loss, an interrupted or continuous repair of the vessel can be done with 6-0 or 7-0 polypropylene.  If complete transection has occurred, the artery should be debrided back to healthy intima. Evaluate for the tension that will be present when an end-to-end anastomosis is under consideration. If tension is too great, then the proximal and distal branches can be ligated to gain up to 3 cm of total advancement from both ends.  Care is necessary when attempting ligation of the geniculate collaterals from the popliteal artery.  For transactions in arteries that are distal to the axillary artery or common femoral artery that are less than 1 cm in diameter, a spatulated end-to-end anastomoses with 6-0 or 7-0 polypropylene can be done.  If the diameter is more than 1 cm than a non-spatulated, end-to-end anastomosis with 6-0 or 7-0 polypropylene is a choice for repair.  If a segmental loss is present, then an interposition graft autogenous (greater saphenous vein) or ringed polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE or Teflon) can be placed.  Due to its high long-term patency rate, the greater saphenous vein is the conduit of choice.  If the greater saphenous vein is not usable, then the lesser saphenous vein is another option. In the upper extremity, the basilic or cephalic veins are options.  If no autogenous grafts are available, then PTFE graft can be placed.

The repair of a vascular injury should never be left exposed as this increases the risk for infection. If there is inadequate healthy tissue to cover the repair, then the surgeon needs to consider (possible consultation to a plastic surgeon) if a transposition or rotational muscle flap will be necessary.  If a muscle flap cannot be done, then a vacuum-assisted device or open packing can be placed.

After repair of a peripheral artery a completion arteriogram should be done in a stable patient if there was a delay in diagnosis and/or treatment, complex repair done (segmental resection and an end-to-end anastomosis or insertion of an interposition graft), if palpable pulses are not present distally after repair or there is concern for narrowing at anastomosis. Metal clips can be placed at the distal and proximal end of the repair to aid with the arteriogram.  If the anastomosis appears narrowed and the patient is stable, cut out the polypropylene suture, debride any questionable tissue (especially adventitia) and if the artery appears to be in vasospasm, a dilator (Garrett coronary artery or Bakes biliary) can be inserted. It is recommended to use an interrupted suture technique if a continuous technique was used the first time.

A patient that is hemodynamically unstable may not be suitable for placement of an autogenous graft. Therefore, lateral arteriography should be covered with a porcine xenograft under mesh gauze soaked in saline-antibiotics.  A temporary intraluminal shunt is inserted with a porcine xenograft under mesh gauze soaked in a saline-antibiotic solution to cover it. Upon achieving patient stability, he or she can return to the operating room for a more definitive intervention.

If limb salvage is the treatment choice, the first step of the procedure is to establish arterial inflow via insertion of a temporary intraluminal shunt. Several shunts are options, including intravenous tubing or carotid artery-type shunts.  For large peripheral veins (popliteal or femoral), 16-24 Fr thoracostomy tubes are a viable option.  Palpable pulses or doppler flow at the wrist or ankle establish that the shunts are functional.  The exact time frame that a shunt can remain in place is unknown but the longer that one is left in places the patient at increased risk for complications such as thrombosis.  After removal of the shunt, an autogenous graft or extra-anatomic bypass should be performed.

If the patient is at increased risk for compartment syndrome (delay in treatment, significant swelling of extremity, neuromuscular findings or need for simultaneous arterial and venous clamping along with venous ligation) a fasciotomy can be done.  Compartment pressure can be measured if there is an abnormal completion arteriogram.  If the pressure is >30 mmHg, then a fasciotomy is done.  Historically, there was a 20% return to the operating room to perform a delayed fasciotomy, the goal of the aforementioned is to avoid this.

No antibiotic guidelines exist for GSW associated fracture.  For low-velocity GSW related fractures, some recommend antibiotics (either short IV course or short outpatient course) if the case is being managed non-operatively, while others feel that antibiotics are not necessary as multiple studies have suggested that there is no difference in the infection rate.  In the studies, the most common antibiotic class used was cephalosporins.  There is also debate on the need for debridement on these non-operative fractures; no definitive evidence is present to settle this debate.  For high-velocity GSW related fracture, once again, no high-quality studies exist.  The consensus is that debridement and antibiotic therapy is necessary.