Selective IgA deficiency is the most prevalent immunodeficiency in humans and affects 1 in 700 individuals, most of the White race. It characteristically demonstrates an isolated decrease in IgA levels below 7 mg/dl with generally normal levels of IgG and Ig M in patients over four years of age.

Pulmonary infections most commonly result from extracellular encapsulated bacteria and can result in recurrent infections as well as long-term respiratory epithelial damage. While there is an increase in IgM in an attempt to compensate for the missing IgA, it cannot functionally replace IgA completely, especially in the respiratory tract. However, IgM can compensate for IgA more holistically in the gastrointestinal tract leading to fewer gastrointestinal disorders and infections. Despite this, there remains a correlation between IgA deficiency and other disorders such as celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease, and pernicious anemia. There also remains a high chance of contracting giardiasis due to a deficiency of IgA, which has a strong role in preventing this infection. Celiac disease remains the most common disorder concurrently found with IgA deficiency, with an almost 10 to 15% increased chance of being IgA deficient. As Celiac disease is due to an autoimmune reaction of IgA and IgG antibodies directed towards proteins, testing for anti-IgA antibodies can result in a false negative. Thus IgG antibody levels and other tests are required to confirm the diagnosis.

IgA plays an active anti-inflammatory role in the body, leading to allergic diseases and autoimmune conditions when deficient. A decrease in secretory IgA results in a weakened mucosal barrier and allows more allergens to enter into the bloodstream. IgA deficiency can result in the production of IgG anti-IgA antibodies, which can cause a significant risk for anaphylaxis when transfused with blood products that contain IgA. Also, there is a higher incidence of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, celiac disease, and thyroiditis in IgA deficient individuals due to unknown mechanisms.

IgA nephropathy, also known as Berger disease, is a type of glomerulonephritis of the kidney. It is the most frequent cause of glomerulonephritis worldwide and has a multitude of clinical manifestations.

IgA Vasculitis (IgAV), also referred to as Henoch-Schonlein purpura, is the most common childhood vasculitis that affects small vessels and is more common in Asian populations. Researchers have advanced impaired IgA1 glycosylation as the possible mechanism of pathogenesis. It results from the deposition of IgA and complement protein C3 in the vessel walls that cause inflammation and leukocytoclastic vasculitis, resulting in erythrocytes extravasating the blood vessels resulting in purpura in the dermis. The peak age of presentation is 4 to 6 years.

IgA myeloma is the second most commonly encountered subtype of multiple myeloma, characterized by a plasma cell malignancy that produces IgA. It typically presents with a tetrad of features, including hypercalcemia, renal impairment, and back pain due to osteolytic bone lesions and anemia. Bone marrow biopsy reveals greater than 10 percent plasma cells. Bone destruction is a hallmark of this condition and results in lytic bone lesions primarily in the skull and spine, as well as other regions of the body. The lesions can increase the likelihood of fractures and manifest as severe bone pain. This condition is diagnosable via serum protein electrophoresis, which reveals an M-protein that is then confirmed by immunofixation electrophoresis to be IgA with either kappa or lambda light chains.

Linear immunoglobulin A bullous dermatosis (LABD) is a rare, autoimmune disease that affects the subepidermis. It appears to be caused by IgA antibodies to collagen XVII with concomitant neutrophil accumulation. In this condition, there is a linear deposition of IgA against antigens in the basal membrane zone, which ultimately leads to subepidermal cleavage. LABD results in blisters on a reddish base in the perineum and perioral areas. The skin symptoms can be painful and can lead to more chronic gingivitis, ulcers, and conjunctivitis. It typically presents around six months of age and may spontaneously undergo remission within two years or remain until puberty.