The majority of the adductor muscles originate from the pubic bone and insert at various portions of the femur. The most medial muscle of the medial thigh muscles is the gracilis muscle. Although the sartorius muscle does not originate with the adductors proximally, as it travels distally, it crosses medially across the knee extenders and inserts medially on the proximal tibia. The junction where the gracilis, sartorius, and semitendinosus insert on the anteromedial proximal tibia is known as the pes anserinus. The name of this region derives from its resemblance to a goosefoot.

These muscles are arranged from deep to superficial: semitendinosus, sartorius, and gracilis. Interestingly, it has been determined that 40% of the adductor longus muscle originates anteriorly near the pubic tubercle via tendon fibers, and 60% originates from the posterior pubic symphysis via muscular fibers.

- Sartorius origin: Anterior superior iliac spine

- Sartorius insertion: Medial proximal tibia at the pes anserinus

- Gracilis origin: Anterior body of the pubis and inferior ramus of the pubis

- Gracilis insertion: Medial proximal tibia at the pes anserinus

- Pectineus origin: Pectineal line

- Pectineus insertion: Posterior femur from lesser trochanter to linea aspera

- Adductor brevis origin: Body of the pubic bone and anteroinferior pubic ramus

- Adductor brevis insertion: Upper third of the femur on the linea aspera and posterior proximal femur

- Adductor longus origin: Body of the pubis and anteroinferior pubic ramus

- Adductor longus insertion: Middle third of the shaft of the femur on the linea aspera

- Adductor magnus origin: Inferior pubic ramus, external obturator membrane, and ischial tuberosity.

- Adductor magnus insertion: Posterior proximal femur and linea aspera