Rituximab is an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody that was first approved by the FDA in 1997. Currently, it has approval for use by the FDA in the following conditions.

**CD20 positive B-cell Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (NHL)**

- Approved for use as a single agent in relapsed/refractory, low-grade, or follicular B cell NHL

- Single-agent maintenance therapy for patients with previously untreated follicular B cell NHL who are achieving a complete or some degree of response to combination chemotherapy with rituximab

- As a single agent in low-grade non-progressive/stable B cell NHL after CVP chemotherapy.

- In combination with anthracycline-based chemotherapy in previously untreated diffuse large B cell NHL

**Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)**

- Approved for use in combination with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide to treat newly diagnosed or previously treated CLL.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

- It is considered a biologic DMARD for the treatment of RA. It is approved for use with methotrexate in adult patients who have an inadequate response to one or more anti-TNF therapies.

**Microscopic Polyangiitis (MP) and Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (GPA)**

- Approved for use in combination with glucocorticoids.

**Pemphigus Vulgaris (PV)**

- Approved in 2018 for use in combination with glucocorticoids for adult patients with moderate to severe disease.

In addition to these, rituximab has orphan designations for immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and Rasmussen encephalitis.

The FDA has recently approved two biosimilars of rituximab for use in adult patients. Biosimilars are drugs that have no clinically significant difference from the reference drug. These have a similar structure, safety profile, and function. The aim of developing biosimilars is to make drugs more accessible by lowering the cost of the drug.

There are numerous off-label uses of rituximab. According to a retrospective cross-sectional study done in the US, the use of rituximab for off-label indications increased from 1.2% in 2009 to 55.6% in 2017.

Rituximab, in combination with hyaluronidase (rituximab-hyaluronidase human), was approved by FDA in 2017. This formulation is available for use in the subcutaneous form, giving the advantage of a faster administration over five to seven minutes as opposed to the prolonged infusion times with IV formulations. It is approved for use in chronic lymphocytic leukemia, follicular lymphoma, and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. One limitation of use is that it can only be given after receiving at least one full dose of a rituximab product by IV infusion.