While moderate, conscious sedation may be used for the procedure, general anesthesia is preferred. Pre-procedure antibiotics are necessary. A right internal jugular approach is preferred to cannulate the central venous system. An angled catheter is used to cannulate the right hepatic vein. A balloon occlusion hepatic venogram with CO2 is performed to opacify the portal venous system and provide a fluoroscopic target for portal vein entry with the needle. Several commercial transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt kits are available, and the included needle is used under fluoroscopic/ultrasound guidance to regularly access the right portal vein from the right hepatic vein. Middle and left hepatic veins, as well as the left portal vein, may be used. Real-time ultrasound guidance can help visualize the passage of the needle and portal vein entry. Aspiration of blood, followed by contrast injection, is used to confirm appropriate portal venous access. The ideal entry point in the portal vein is 1 to 2 centimeters from the main bifurcation to avoid an extra-hepatic puncture and possible hemoperitoneum. If the portal vein cannot be accessed in this manner, a percutaneous transhepatic guidewire can be placed into the portal vein and be used as a fluoroscopic target for portal vein entry. An angiographic catheter is advanced into the portal vein for venogram to confirm portal vein access and to confirm suitable location. Pressure measurements in the portal vein and right atrium are obtained to calculate the initial portal to systemic gradient. The initial pressures may be low in patients with a competing spleno-renal shunt, and they may need to be embolized. The tract is then dilated to 8 to 10 millimeters. A partially covered stent is the preferred stent, with the uncovered portion being placed in the portal venous end and the covered end extending to the junction of the hepatic vein and inferior vena cava (IVC). Care should be taken to avoid extending the stent significantly into the IVC or far down into the portal vein as this may impact future liver transplantation. If there is persistent filling of varices after TIPS placement, they should be embolized with coils or plug. They also can be sclerosed at this time to prevent ongoing variceal bleeding. Final TIPS gradients should be recorded to help in future interventions.

The patient should recover in a closely monitored setting, depending on the clinical status. Liver enzymes should be closely followed to monitor for any hepatic dysfunction post-TIPS placement. A TIPS Doppler ultrasound study should be obtained within 48 to 72 hours of TIPS placement. Earlier studies may be inaccurate as residual air bubbles within the wall of the polytetrafluoroethylene material may prevent adequate ultrasound penetration and may simulate decreased or absent flow within the newly created shunt. This study can serve as a baseline for follow-up surveillance scans to assess for shunt dysfunction and the need for follow-up intervention.

Doppler ultrasound velocities of greater than 190 centimeters per second or lower than 90 centimeters per second are associated with shunt dysfunction. Other concerning findings are a change (increase or decrease) in velocity of greater than 50 centimeters per second from baseline. Depending on the clinical scenario and the ultrasound findings a TIPS venogram with direct pressure measurements should be pursued in the angiography suite. Intimal hyperplasia within the stent can be treated with balloon dilation and or re-stenting to improve TIPS flow.