Priapism is not a fatal disorder, but it can lead to permanent erectile dysfunction in the future. The key to prevention is education, with all interprofessional healthcare team members contributing. At the time of discharge, the nurse should educate the patient on seeking medical help as soon the condition develops. Older adults should be cautioned against using oral or injectable agents used to treat erectile failure except as prescribed by their physician. They should be cautioned against combining these agents as the result is quite unpredictable. All patients with the first episode of priapism should be seen by a mental health counselor as the condition is associated with severe anguish and anxiety. Patients need to be told that the condition can be associated with a poor outcome, despite adequate treatment. The patient's condition and treatment must be well documented by all clinicians and healthcare professionals as this disorder often leads to litigation. Follow-up by a urologist is mandatory, or one risks a malpractice suit. The interprofessional team members must exercise open communication to ensure that the patient receives the current standard of care. Pharmacists should discuss the risk of priapism with patients receiving drugs that have this possible side effect.

**Outcomes**

The prognosis of patients with priapism depends on age, duration of symptoms, and the underlying cause. If the priapism is present for less than 24 hours, then the chances of remaining potent are high, but if the duration is more than 72 hours, the risk of remaining potent is greatly diminished. Erectile dysfunction is a long-term complication in many patients, and recurrent episodes of priapism and longer durations are associated with a worse prognosis. The risk for recurrence is also high if one episode has already occurred. If the cause is associated with trauma, there is an increased risk of infection and fibrosis.