During any cardiac procedure, the need for advanced surgical techniques in patients with concomitant porcelain aorta (PA) is mandatory to avoid manipulating the heavily calcified aorta, thus preventing unfavorable consequences from the calcified aorta leading to stroke and systemic embolism.

**Porcelain Aorta During Coronary Bypass Surgery**

Patients with porcelain aorta demonstrate an increased morbidity and mortality rate during CABG operation because of the elevated risk of embolic stroke from the atheromatous heavily calcified aorta. Such complication usually takes place during manipulation of the diseased aorta in three different maneuvers in CABG:

- Cannulation of the aorta

- Cross-clamping

- Partial clamping for the construction of the proximal anastomosis

Several amendments have been described to avoid cannulation and clamping of the porcelain aorta, including:

- A no-touch technique or aortic off-pump CABG

- CABG performed during deep hypothermic circulatory arrest

- Femoral or axillary artery cannulation for cardiopulmonary bypass

- Placement of proximal saphenous vein grafts onto the internal mammary artery, onto the innominate artery, onto the axillary artery, or the carotid artery

- Single clamp technique

- Intraluminal balloon catheter as a replacement for external clamps

- Ascending aorta endarterectomy

- Patch aortoplasty

- Graft replacement of the ascending aorta

The most common and effective recent modality is "no-touch technique" or aortic off-pump CABG in which cannulation and clamping of the ascending aorta are averted. This technique is performed on the beating heart without using the heart-lung machine and, so-called, off-pump, or beating heart CABG. It is achieved by an arterial grafting using bilateral internal mammary grafts in addition to a radial artery or reverse saphenous venous grafts, forming a T, or Y shaped graft that will be connected to the innominate artery or common carotid artery that will act as the inflow source, thereby bypassing the blockage area without touching the diseased aorta.

If there is a small non-calcified area confirmed by epiaortic ultrasound, a safe proximal anastomosis construction can be done using a proximal seal system

The other beneficial method is performing CABG during deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. In this practice, myocardial revascularization is performed using moderate hypothermia with a core temperature of 28-32°C for up to 40 minutes without harming the patient. In this case, sufficient time is given for the surgeon to perform safe proximal anastomoses without placing clamps on the aorta, minimizing the rate of cerebral complications. Salenger et al.

Ascending aorta is the usual cannulation site in cardiac surgery.

- It carries a lower risk of cerebral embolization.

- The rate of atherosclerosis is less than that of the ascending aorta or the femoral artery.

- The risk of severe distal ischemic-reperfusion injury or embolization after cannulation is reduced due to the presence of abundant collaterals.

However, axillary artery cannulation can be accompanied by several local complications, including axillary artery dissection, thrombosis, and brachial plexus injury.

Svensson et al.

Cannulation via the brachiocephalic artery could also be a feasible option in patients with porcelain aorta. Banbury et al. endorsed that brachiocephalic arterial cannulation is a good alternative in cases whose aorta cannot be manipulated. This option can avoid making a second incision in axillary artery cannulation or retrograde perfusion issues in femoral artery cannulation.

**Porcelain Aorta During Mitral Valve Surgery**

Hypothermia and a fibrillating heart can avoid aortic cross-clamping in mitral valve surgeries.

**Porcelain Aorta and Aortic Stenosis**

Strategies like deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, the apico-aortic conduit technique have been proposed in the scholarly literature to avoid a cross-clamping of the aorta during surgical aortic valve surgery in patients with aortic stenosis and porcelain aorta.

Another new promising alternative is transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR). It is the least invasive procedure to replace the aortic valve in high surgical risk patients with severe aortic stenosis. Patients having porcelain aorta will benefit from this approach by replacing the aortic valve without an aortic cross-clamping. In a study of around 60 patients with severe AS and PA, TAVR was successful in 98.4% of the patients with PA. The stroke and thirty-day mortality rates were 1.6% (1/61 patients) and 11.5% (7/61 patients), respectively, showing no differences from patients without PA. Pascual et al. stated that 449 patients underwent TAVR, of which 36 patients (8%) had a porcelain ascending aorta. The procedure was successful in 94.4%. The stroke and thirty-day mortality rates were 2.8% (1/36 patients) and 5.6% (2/36 patients), respectively, similar to patients without PA.