# Introduction

The mammillary bodies are brainstem nuclei on the posteroinferior aspect of the hypothalamus. There are 2 mammillary bodies on either side of the midline. Early anatomists named the structures after mammary tissue because they resembled small breasts (Figure 1A).

# Structure and Function

The mammillary bodies are one of the primary nuclei within the Papez Circuit (Figure 1B). The circuit assists with spatial and episodic memory consolidation and storage.

The primary function associated with the mammillary bodies is recollective memory. Memory information begins within the hippocampus. Theta waves activate CA3 neurons in the hippocampus. Information about memory transmits through the fornix to the mammillary bodies (orange line, Figure 1C). Mammillary bodies project to the anterior thalamic nuclei through the mammillothalamic tract. The anterior thalamic nuclei projects to the cingulate cortex, and the cingulate cortex to the entorhinal cortex. There is then a bi-directional projection between the hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex that completes the circuit; the Papez circuit (Figure 1B).

Beyond the transmission of memory information, the mammillary bodies help facilitate the creation of appropriate behavioral reactions through reciprocal connections with the tegmentum (blue line, Figure 1C). The medial mammillary nucleus has bi-directional projections to the ventral tegmental area. The lateral mammillary nucleus has bi-directional connections to the dorsal tegmental nucleus. The ventral tegmentum is rich with dopamine neurons, and thus functions as a reward (pleasure) center of the brain. Memory information from the hippocampus combines with information about reward or aversive attributes about a specific stimulus or set of stimuli in the environment, which allows the processing of the salience of environmental stimuli.

The dorsal tegmental connections to the lateral mammillary nucleus function to process goal-directed movement. The location of the dorsal tegmental nucleus is between the trochlear nuclei within the midbrain.

The mammillary bodies do not have interneurons. The processing of information within the mammillary bodies occurs from projection neurons of other regions of the brain. It receives both dopaminergic and acetylcholine reciprocal projections from the tegmentum (blue line, Figure 1C) that help to regulate what information the mammillary bodies send forward to the anterior thalamic nucleus (Papez circuit) and the cerebellum. Because tegmental connections are reciprocal (bi-directional), the mammillary activity also influences the tegmentum and other connections of the tegmentum (e.g., amygdala, prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and nucleus accumbens). Activation of the acetylcholine and dopamine circuits activate norepinephrine and serotonin systems downstream.

# Embryology

In development, the mammillary bodies form from the ectoderm layer. The ectoderm layer forms the neural tube that closes at six weeks of gestation. The neural tube differentiates into the forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord. The forebrain section develops into the telencephalon and diencephalon. The hypothalamus, mammillary bodies, and posterior pituitary form from the diencephalon.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Mammillary bodies receive blood supply from the circle of Willis, which runs on the inferior surface of the hypothalamus. Branches off the posteromedial artery directly supply the mammillary bodies. These arteries originate from the posterior cerebral artery but can originate off of the posterior communicating artery. The posteromedial artery has three branches: rostral, deep penetrating, and caudal. The caudal branches supply the mammillary bodies.

Capillary plexus around the region carry blood away from the mammillary bodies through the hypothalamo-neurohypophysial portal system.

Lymphatics within the brain differ from other regions of the body. Within the brain, the blood-brain barrier regulates the movement/transport of nutrients, small molecules, metabolites, and/or cells and toxins in and out of the brain.  The blood-brain barrier is a functional and structural boundary between vasculature and the brain that forms from brain vasculature endothelial cells, adjacent astrocytic end-feet, and pericytes. Tight junctions connect brain endothelial cells and create a physical barrier. This barrier forces most molecules to travel through selective transcellular routes – forming a transport barrier. In addition, there is also a synergistic relationship between brain endothelial cells and astrocytes. Perivascular astrocytic end-feet surround brain endothelial cells, but a basal lamina separates them. The barrier formed from these astrocytic end-feet and endothelial cells protect the brain from toxins and assist with transport of nutrients, wastes, glucose, lipids, and neurotransmitters between capillaries and neurons in the brain.

# Nerves

Mammillary bodies have three large direct connection: hippocampus, thalamus, and tegmental nuclei (Figure 1C). The hippocampus projects to the mammillary bodies through afferent fibers in the fornix (orange line, Figure 1C). The mammillary bodies then process information about memory and then relay it up to the thalamus for additional processing through the mammillothalamic tract. This tract terminates within the anterior thalamic nuclei. (red line, Figure 1C). Both the hippocampal projections to the mammillary bodies as well as the projections from the mammillary bodies to the thalamus are uni-directional. These circuits are a part of the Papez circuit (Figure 1B).

Mammillary bodies also have bi-directional connections with the tegmental nuclei through the mammillotegmental tract (blue line, Figure 1C). Because the tegmentum has numerous connections to several limbic structures, mammillary body input to this region can influence a variety of limbic functions (see above).

# Muscles

Although the mammillary bodies do not directly contact muscle, they have projections to the cerebellum, a secondary motor brain region. Mammillary inputs from the tegmentum carry information about movement velocity, turning behaviors, and learned goal-directed behaviors.

# Physiologic Variants

The mammillary bodies are a part of the hypothalamus. Physiology of this region of the brain is necessary for survival. Therefore, few developmental/physiological variations allow for the survival of a fetus.

Throughout life, the mammillary bodies adapt to environmental and physiological changes of an individual; this enables the individual to alter behavior based on learned salience of a stimulus or set of stimuli. Although it is ideal for the mammillary bodies to change with variations in environmental stimuli, the neurons, and connections with the mammillary bodies are susceptible to damage based on environmental factors (e.g., alcohol, thiamine deficiency).

# Surgical Considerations

The location of the mammillary bodies is one factor that surgeons use as a guide in patients with craniopharyngiomas that involve the hypothalamus. In these patients, the location of the mammillary bodies move. Surgeons can measure the angle between the base of the mammillary bodies and the plane of the floor of the fourth ventricle in a midsagittal MRI as an indicator of the location of these types of tumors. Angles less than 60 degrees indicate a tuberal-interventricular tumor. Angles greater than 90 degrees show tumor invagination of the third ventricle. Thus mammillary body position is a quick reference for the location of these types of tumors. By understanding the location of the tumors, surgeons have more information on how to treat and manage these tumors.

# Clinical Significance

Damage to the mammillary bodies can occur through trauma, stroke, tumors, or environmental factors (e.g., thiamine deficiency or chronic alcoholism). Thiamine deficiency commonly causes Korsakoff's syndrome. This syndrome can occur with Wernicke encephalopathy, caused by chronic alcoholism because alcoholism can induce a thiamine deficiency.

# Other Issues

The mammillary bodies and circuits associated with the mammillary bodies (e.g., limbic structures) influence many higher-order functions. Researchers have hypothesized that stimulation of the Papez circuit may have beneficial effects on memory and attention as well as decreasing the incidence of depression in individuals with dementia. In animal models, deep brain stimulation of the hippocampus shows increased memory function with no signs of anxiety. Researchers attributed these results to increased activation of the cingulate gyrus through the hippocampus-mammillary tract, mammillothalamic tract, and thalamic projections to the cingulate gyrus (the brain location where emotion is perceived).

Deep brain stimulation has been a treatment for Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and dementia.