The first step in setting a patient up for success with an IUD is to provide counseling about the various forms of contraception available. Patients should be counseled that all forms of long-acting reversible contraception (LARC), including IUDs and subdermal implants, are the most efficacious in preventing pregnancy and are similar to the efficacy of tubal ligation and vasectomy.

After a patient decides that the IUD is the most appropriate contraception option, there are several different ways to get the patient ready for insertion. Prior to beginning the procedure, it is crucial to confirm a negative pregnancy test. First, there is the quick start method, which allows for same-day counseling and insertion, improves the rate of patient follow-through, and decreases the rate of unintended pregnancies.

- Less than seven days after the start of regular menses

- No sexual intercourse since the start of last menses

- Consistently using another form of contraception reliably

- Less than 7 days after spontaneous or induced abortion

- 4 weeks postpartum

- Fully or nearly fully breastfeeding and amenorrheic, and less than six months postpartum

If these criteria are not met, it is an acceptable practice to bridge the patient with a non-implantable form of contraception, including oral contraceptives, vaginal rings, transdermal patches, condoms, or medroxyprogesterone acetate injections.

Additionally, if needed, based on the patient's sexual history, a screen for sexually transmitted infections should also be done. Women, who have not been screened for sexually transmitted infection, should be screened at the time of insertion if indicated by guidelines; however, this should not delay the insertion of the device.

Once counseling and a negative pregnancy test are confirmed, the next step is to obtain informed consent. The risks, benefits, and side effects of the procedure must be explained to the patient. Risks to the patient include pain at the time of insertion, uterine perforation, which may necessitate surgery or cause unintended pregnancy, infection, bleeding at the site of insertion, and possible expulsion, which may go unnoticed, leading to unintended pregnancy, and alterations in a patient's monthly bleeding pattern. Additionally, if pregnancy does occur with IUD in place, there is a higher risk of ectopic pregnancy or septic abortion.

There is also some discussion and disagreement regarding the using medications prior to the procedure and during the procedure for pain control. Starting with oral pain medications, researchers have looked at various non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, including ibuprofen and naproxen, as well as tramadol, and found some benefits to prescribing naproxen or tramadol prior to insertion.