Presentation of patients with hyperpituitarism will depend on the hormone or hormones that are produced in excess, the presence of a mass pituitary lesion, and associated features of hypopituitarism. Local effects of a pituitary tumor such as visual field disturbances and headache may be present in the presence of a mass lesion. Pituitary tumors can be microadenomas less than 10 mm or macroadenomas greater than 10 mm. Macroadenomas usually cause hypopituitarism.

**Excessive Production of Prolactin**

May occur in isolation or can occur with increased production of other hormones such as GH. Clinical features include infertility and galactorrhea and secondary amenorrhea in females, loss of libido, and impotence in males. In males, the tumors are usually macroadenomas presenting with features of extension beyond the pituitary.

**Excessive Production of Growth Hormone**

**Adults**

Excessive production of GH in adults results in the condition known as acromegaly. Features include:

- Skeletal overgrowth of flat bones like the mandible called prognathism as well as the growth of bones in the feet with a resultant increase in shoe size

- Overgrowth of skin and subcutaneous tissue

- Increased presence of skin tags,  macroglossia, cardiomyopathy, and peripheral neuropathy

- Carpal tunnel syndrome caused by compression of the median nerve due to increased soft-tissue growth

- Metabolic disturbances that include glucose intolerance or frank diabetes mellitus as well as hypertension

- Osteoarthritis

- Excessive sweating

**Children**

In children, before the fusion of epiphyseal plates in long bones (for example femur and tibia), excessive GH production results in gigantism.

**Excessive Production of TSH**

Causes secondary hyperthyroidism. Clinical features are those of thyroid hormone excess and include weight loss, heat intolerance, anxiety, menstrual disturbances, and palpitations. Diffuse goiter may also be present. Hyperthyroid symptoms with TSHomas are often mild to moderate.

**Excessive Production of ACTH**

Increased levels of ACTH produced by the pituitary gland results in Cushing's disease. Clinical features include central obesity, skeletal muscle wasting, the presence of buffalo hump, striae, excessive bruising, menstrual abnormalities, increased blood pressure, glucose intolerance, as well as depression, and psychosis.