As with any initial evaluation, a thorough history and physical is paramount. In patients with high-output cardiac failure, history regarding chronic medical conditions can facilitate in determining the underlying etiology of high output cardiac failure.

Further physical signs are related to the underlying etiologies. At times, the cardiac symptoms of high-output cardiac failure are secondary and somewhat incidental, as patients come with presenting symptoms of the underlying disease.

Hyperthyroidism presents with a wide range of symptoms. Relative to the heart, patients can present with tachycardia, palpitations, and dyspnea from hyperthyroidism alone, even in the absence of high output cardiac failure. Physical exam findings can include fever, eyelid retraction and lid lag, tremor, hyperreflexia, hyperactivity, enlarged thyroid gland with possible tenderness, and exophthalmos with periorbital edema in addition to cardiac findings.

Myeloproliferative disorders can show a wide range of findings in addition to cardiac findings. Fever, fatigue, dyspnea, increased bleeding episodes (e.g., epistaxis, bruising), with signs of splenomegaly and peripheral blood smear abnormality specific to the myeloproliferative disorder.

Sepsis presents on a wide spectrum, from fever, chills, fatigue, loss of appetite, palpitations to altered mentation, and even coma secondary to acute systemic vasodilation. A physical exam can show fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, and warm extremities in the first presenting stages of sepsis with further symptoms, depending on the source of infection. Further stages of sepsis can cause a worsening myocardial dysfunction, eventually leading to a left ventricular failure and causing systolic heart failure.

Berberi usually presents with a history of a malnourished, alcoholic, dieting, or bariatric patient. Patient presentation depends on the form of beriberi, characterized by either dry or wet beriberi. Relative to the heart, dry beriberi is separated from wet beriberi by symptoms of heart failure. Patients often present with complaints of dyspnea, orthopnea, palpitations, and peripheral swelling, with respective physical exam findings of clinical heart failure. Additional signs of beriberi are burning pain in the extremities, muscle weakness, and possible fall secondary to peripheral neuropathy with both sensory and motor involvement.

Chronic lung disease usually involves a patient with a smoking history, who has already been diagnosed with progressive lung disease; however, chronic lung disease can be diagnosed on initial presentation of worsening dyspnea, cough, and wheezing. Relative to the heart, when patients have chronic lung disease it often results in right-sided heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension. Isolated right-sided heart failure can lead to clinical symptoms and signs of peripheral swelling with pitting edema, positive jugular venous distention, parasternal heave, fixed split S2, and possible S3 or S4 heart sound.

Arteriovenous fistulas (AVF) can either be congenital or acquired. Usually, congenital AVF presents with diffuse hemangiomas from childhood (e.g., hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia or Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome) with associated bleeding episodes from mucocutaneous or gastrointestinal sources. Acquired AVFs can be iatrogenic or traumatic with the respective history. Often, acquired iatrogenic AVFs are formed intentionally for hemodialysis access or secondary to a complication. All of these, if causing high-output cardiac failure, cause symptoms of progressive dyspnea, orthopnea, and swelling, with respective physical exam findings of heart failure. Patients with AVFs, especially for heart disease access, also have findings of palpable thrills and audible bruits over the AVF itself.

Patients with liver cirrhosis present with a wide spectrum of symptoms. History is notable for causes of liver cirrhosis if already diagnosed, such as alcohol abuse, viral hepatitis, obesity, autoimmune disease to name a few. Initial symptoms of the presentation can be very nonspecific to symptoms of decompensated liver disease. Fatigue, weakness, generalized unwellness, increased swelling, dyspnea, abdominal distention, yellowing of skin and eyes, confusion, and even gastrointestinal bleeding can be presenting symptoms. Physical exam findings are just as variable in liver cirrhosis and highly dependent on the severity of liver disease and if in a decompensated state. Relative to the heart, patients have physical exam findings of clinical heart failure in addition to decompensated liver cirrhosis.

Patients with obesity have a high body mass index (BMI), defined as a BMI greater than or equal to 30 kg/m2, with severe obesity indicated by a BMI of greater than or equal to 40 kg/m2. A physical exam is largely specific to, as well as limited by, an obese habitus. Relative to the heart, physical exam findings of clinical heart failure with tachycardia may be evident.