Management of androgen insensitivity syndrome involves a holistic approach toward the psychological, physiological, and social well-being of the individual suffering from this disorder. It is imperative to address the challenges foreseen to the family of the infant who is born with AIS to optimize well being of the infant into adulthood. Given the irreversibility of the development during embryogenesis in AIS, management involves counseling families, appropriate gender assignment, and improving functional status with time and timing of gonadectomy to prevent tumorigenesis.

**Complete Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (CAIS)**

CAIS presents as an incidental finding of gonad at the time of inguinal hernia repair or as primary amenorrhea in females. It is advisable to obtain a biopsy of the gonad at the time of hernia repair and replace it back either subcutaneously or within the abdomen while further discussion with the parents about the diagnosis and plans for future management are pending.

Parents can choose early gonadectomy to prevent tumorigenesis when complete androgen insensitivity presents in infancy, and the child is unaware of the issues around the diagnosis of CAIS. In this scenario, puberty induction can be done later via estrogen replacement. Also, since women with CAIS do not have a uterus, the risk of estrogen-induced cancer is absent. Alternatively, gonadectomy can be delayed until early adulthood, in which scenario there is a low risk of gonadal tumor in childhood.

Surgical management in CAIS includes vaginal dilation and rarely vaginoplasty for normal sexual functioning and well-being.

**Partial Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (PAIS)**

Unlike CAIS, infants with PAIS are usually born with ambiguous genitalia, which presents the necessity for an accurate diagnosis primarily and a decision on sex assignment after a holistic discussion with family and caregivers. After that, the clinician can address early management issues.

In infants assigned as males, medical management includes androgen supplementation at the time of puberty. Surgical management includes the correction of hypospadias and undescended testes. These procedures are preferable during the 2nd to 3rd year of life. At the time of puberty, gynecomastia may develop, which should be corrected with reduction mammoplasty to prevent tumorigenesis. However, the incidence of breast cancer in men with PAIS is low.

Management of PAIS in infants assigned as females includes estrogen supplementation at the time of puberty, along with genitoplasty with gonadectomy before the onset of puberty.