Prognosis of plasma cell neoplasms depends on the disease entity. PCM prognosis depends on multiple factors including disease stage, genetics, host factors (age, performance status, co-morbidities), response to therapy, disease biology, and others. The Durie and Salmon (OS) staging system applies clinical parameters to predict myeloma cell tumor burden and prognosis and is generally classified as low, intermediate and high. The International staging system (ISS) for PCM is based on the serum beta-2 microglobulin and albumin levels and has shown to predict survival. Genetics is used to classify PCM prognosis as standard, intermediate, and high risk. The high-risk group includes t (14; 16), t (14; 20), and deletion 17p13 and gene expression profiling (high risk). The intermediate risk group includes deletion 13, t (4; 14), and hypodiploidy. The favorable risk group includes hyperdiploidy, t (11; 14) and t (6; 14). Hyperdiploidy is generally defined as chromosomes greater than 48 and less than 75

Non-Ig M MGUS in generally not considered a neoplastic process with a risk of progression of approximately 1%. Progression of non-Ig M MGUS to PCM, solitary plasmacytoma or amyloidosis has been reported. Factors influencing the progression of MGUS include the size and type of M proteins. Immunoglobulins less than 5 g/L and greater than 25 g/L being markers of low and high risk of progression. Non-Ig M MGUS rarely presents with abnormal karyotype. EMP has a better prognosis than PCM and SBP. Early PCM, may be misdiagnosed as EMP. Thorough and complete assessment of the patients as well as longtime follow-up is recommended. SBP shows progression to PCM in up to 60% of patients. EMP has an indolent course with recurrences occurring in up to 25% of patients, distant metastasis is relatively uncommon, and progression to PCM is infrequent and occurs in 20% of cases

Monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disorders have a poor prognosis, with cardiac, hepatic failure and infection being the major causes of death. The median survival for patients with primary amyloidosis is approximately two years; while patients with both amyloidosis and PCM have even a shorter survival expectancy. Recently the survival of these diseases have improved especially when no cardiac involvement is present.

On the other hand, POEMS syndrome has a favorable overall prognosis compared to other plasma cell neoplasm with an expected median overall survival of 14.7 years. Reports of cure have been reported with localized radiation therapy.