# Introduction

The learning that takes place in medical simulation settings is largely experiential in nature. Participants experience a novel situation in a simulated scenario, and subsequently reflect on it, deepening their understanding of the relevant aspects of healthcare and (it is to be hoped) modifying their future behavior in the real world . One important factor which affects this post-experience reflection is the quality of the associated debriefing and analysis. Debriefing is the act of reviewing critical actions that unfolded during the course of a simulation scenario.

# Function

There are multiple forms of debriefing when it comes to content.  Promoting Excellence and Reflective Learning in Simulation (PEARLS); Team-Guided team self-correction, Advocacy-Inquiry, and Systemic-constructivist (TeamGAINS); Defusing, discovering, and deepening (3D); Gather, Analyze, and Summarize (GAS) are just some of the forms that debriefing can take and are described elsewhere.

Regardless of the content, debriefing is rooted in providing learners with a psychologically safe environment.  Learners and faculty should have a shared mental model with and an underlying assumption that everyone wants to learn and improve upon their current foundation of knowledge.

# Issues of Concern

Debriefers should be trained to recognize and intervene in difficult situations so that the benefits of simulation are not compromised. Common issues that surface include quiet learners, disengagement, conversation domination with or without proper knowledge and insight, and emotional reactions.

# Clinical Significance

**Why should you debrief?**

The process of debriefing is one of the most important aspects of simulation design. This component allows learners to reflect on tasks that they performed well, tasks that need improvement, and the opportunity to clarify knowledge gaps.  The process of debriefing facilitates adult learning, enhancing self-efficacy, and responsibility in the learning process.  In doing so, learners can add to their working body of knowledge, promoting the transfer of learning, and faculty and learners can share a similar mental model of benchmarks.

**Rapid cycle deliberate practice**

Stop-and-go debriefing has been utilized in simulation scenarios focused on mastery learning. This process has been gaining momentum as the theory behind its use contributes to more opportunity to hone skills, especially for high stakes clinical scenarios, such as resuscitation. This process is also known as rapid cycle deliberate practice (RCDP).

**Debriefing on demand**

Debriefing on demand can help in scenarios that have the potential to generate stress and anxiety. One study examined the benefits of this model with novice postgraduate residents. Guided facilitation through complex problems could occur when a learner identified a point in time during the scenario when he/she became overwhelmed or perplexed. The scenario can pause in place and resume during a quick period of reflection. Learners identified that this process allows for clarification, decrease in stress, and thus contributes to knowledge retention and transfer of skills more effectively.

**Video-assisted debriefing**

The theory of video-assisted debriefing (VAD) allows learners to review the actual performance of the scenario as opposed to recalling and relying on other individuals to correctly relay information. Conversely, learners often exhibit reluctance to have themselves video recorded, becoming self-conscious.

**Instructor vs. peer-led debriefing**

Properly trained faculty requires a significant investment and time. Programs that have a large volume of students have been leaning towards the use of peer-led debriefing. While some studies point to virtually no or minimal differences in knowledge and self-confidence, the quality of debriefing does differ with learners noting that instructors provide more feedback and solutions.

**Written tools for the debriefer**

The art of debriefing requires training and expertise.  Written tools have been designed to facilitate debriefing to ensure that the process maintains a learner-centered focus and remains nonjudgmental. These tools can be particularly beneficial to novice debriefers.  Debriefing sessions performed by faculty that lack adequate training can disrupt the tenets of simulation, threatening knowledge retention, and creating an unsafe environment.

**Written debriefing for the learner**

There has been some investigation into the potential to incorporate written debriefs in the post-simulation period.  The theory is that written debriefs can lend themselves to higher insight into the individual learning process.

**Co-debriefing**

The process of co-debriefing can be challenging; both individuals need to have a shared understanding of the process, along with mutual respect.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Debriefing is a critical component of simulation exercises. Without debriefing, incorrect mental models are often reinforced rather than corrected.

A preconceived debriefing plan is essential to ensure the addressing of critical actions.

Effective debriefing requires training and practice.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Debriefing in interprofessional groups allows learners the opportunity to discover how teams can function together, communicate more effectively, and better understand each other’s roles.