The withdrawal reflex is polysynaptic, meaning that, in addition to the sensory and motor neurons, this response utilizes interneurons which pass signals between the sensory and motor neurons, ultimately creating multiple synaptic connections.

- Nociceptors, receptors specialized to detect noxious stimuli, detect a painful stimulus.

- Activation of nociceptors allows an action potential to occur in a sensory neuron.

- This sensory neuron sends an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) to a somatic motor neuron within the ventral horn of the spinal cord, activating multiple reflex pathways.

- One pathway involves the somatic motor neuron exiting from the ventral horn to stimulate the flexor muscle of the ipsilateral limb, causing it to withdraw from the painful stimulus.

- Another pathway involves the sensory neuron activating an inhibitory interneuron, which sends an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) to a somatic motor neuron that results in the inhibition of the extensors of the ipsilateral limb.

- Additionally, a sensory neuron activates an interneuron that decussates and crosses the spinal cord's midline, inhibiting the motor neuron that usually activates the opposing extensor muscle in the limb. This keeps the extensor muscle from counteracting the attempt of the flexor muscle to pull the limb away. This interneuron synapses and excites a somatic motor neuron that stimulates the contralateral extensor muscles. This is sometimes called the crossed-extension reflex, and it is enacted for postural support. If, for example, you are withdrawing your foot from a painful stimulus, the other leg needs to be prepared to hold your weight.