**Surgery**

Primary treatment decisions have as their basis a preoperative risk assessment that includes clinical, imaging, and cytological data.

A lobectomy is an option for unifocal tumors smaller than 4 cm with no evidence of extrathyroidal extension or lymph node metastasis. For patients with PTC >4 cm, or with gross extra-thyroidal extension (clinical T4), or clinically apparent metastatic disease to nodes (clinical N1) or distant sites (clinical M1), the initial surgical procedure should include a near-total or total thyroidectomy and gross removal of all primary tumor unless there are contraindications to this procedure. If surgery is chosen for patients with thyroid cancer <1 cm without extra-thyroidal extension and cN0, the initial surgical procedure should be a thyroid lobectomy unless there are clear indications to remove the contralateral lobe. Thyroid lobectomy alone is sufficient treatment for small, unifocal, intrathyroidal carcinomas in the absence of prior head and neck radiation, familial thyroid carcinoma, or clinically detectable cervical nodal metastases.

Prophylactic central-compartment neck dissection (ipsilateral or bilateral) should be a consideration in patients with PTC with clinically uninvolved central neck lymph nodes (cN0) who have advanced primary tumors (T3 or T4) or clinically involved lateral neck nodes (cN1b), or if the information will be used to plan further steps in therapy.

**Adjuvant Radioiodine Therapy**

After thyroidectomy, radioiodine is the therapy of choice in patients with PTC to ablate residual normal thyroid tissue.

Radioiodine therapy is indicated in several cases.

- Patients with a tumor >2 cm and one of the following risk factors: gross extra-thyroidal extension, age > 45 years, lymph node and distant metastases

- Patients with a tumor <2 cm and distant metastasis

Radioactive iodine therapy is given 4 to 6 weeks after surgery. Prior to treatment, a hypothyroid state is induced by stopping thyroid hormone replacement treatment. The therapy is continued until no more radioactive iodine uptake is seen. Potential adverse effects of radioactive iodine include:

- Sialoadenitis

- Transient thyrotoxicosis

- Pulmonary fibrosis

- Emesis

- Brain edema (can be prevented with the use of corticosteroids)

- Infertility

- Small risk of leukemia, breast or bladder cancer

Thyroid Hormone Treatment

After thyroidectomy, patients require lifelong thyroid hormone therapy, usually as monotherapy with levothyroxine (LT4). Since TSH can promote the growth of remaining PTC cells, the dosage of LT4 should initially be high enough to achieve suppression of thyrotropin. The thyroid function should be checked after 6 to 8 weeks. Depending on the result, the dosage should be adjusted; the use of TSH suppressive therapy should merit careful consideration since it carries an increased risk of complications.

**NCCN Guidelines for Total Thyroidectomy**

- Known distant metastases

- History of radiation

- Extrathyroidal extension

- Bilateral nodules

- The tumor measures more than 4 cm

- Poorly differentiate lesion

- Positive cervical lymph nodes

Routine cervical node dissection continues to be debated. Some literature notes fewer recurrences but other studies note a higher incidence of recurrent nerve injury.

**New Developments**

New techniques have been tried for initially treating smaller-size papillary thyroid cancer with good results, like thermal ablation and ultrasound radiofrequency ablation for treating recurrent disease.

**Chemotherapy**

This is reserved for patients with recurrent or excessive remnant disease after the initial surgical treatment and radioactive iodine ablation. The most common agents used are the kinase inhibitors that target different pathways, like the anti-angiogenic multi-targeted kinase inhibitors (aaMKI- lenvatinib, sorafenib), BRAF kinase inhibitors (vemurafenib, dabrafenib), MEK inhibitors (trametinib, cobimetinib), NTR kinase inhibitors (larotrectinib), and RET inhibitors (selpercatinib).