There are several proposed mechanisms for the cause of orthostatic proteinuria:

- Normal variant

- Subtle glomerular abnormality

- Exaggerated hemodynamic response

- Left renal vein entrapment

Mahurkar et al. supported the normal variant mechanism. A study with 120 healthy male volunteers showed the difference in proteinuria with laying down versus standing up. The participants were from 11 to 36 years of age. Urine was collected after lying supine for one hour and then again after standing for one hour with only gentle walking allowed. Proteinuria was measured in both urine samples and was higher in 20% of the patients after standing for an hour, compared to the other 80%, who had a decrease in protein excretion with a corresponding reduction in creatinine clearance. The authors concluded that there might be a broader distribution curve for standing protein excretion.

Subtle glomerular abnormalities in the setting of abnormal glomerular hemodynamics may contribute to protein loss in patients with orthostatic proteinuria. A study by Sinniah et al. compared 55 young, healthy men in Singapore via renal biopsy. The subjects had either persistent proteinuria or orthostatic proteinuria. Men with orthostatic proteinuria showed subtle glomerular abnormalities that the researchers thought to be contributing to the proteinuria.

An exaggerated hemodynamic response could cause orthostatic proteinuria by increased efferent arteriolar resistance, likely from the action of angiotensin 2. An article by Vehaskari critiqued this mechanism, suggesting that orthostatic proteinuria is multifactorial and that the exaggerated hemodynamic response mechanism is probably only a contributing factor.

Left renal vein entrapment showed to be common in patients with orthostatic proteinuria.