**Conservative Management**

Conservative management is usually the initially preferred modality of treatment for stable patients. Studies have demonstrated angiographic healing in more than 90% of the patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection, usually within a month.

These patients should be hospitalized and monitored for 3 to 5 days and followed closely after discharge. Follow-up invasive coronary angiogram is reserved only for high-risk patients with recurrent symptoms, abnormal stress tests, or high-risk anatomies like the involvement of the left main, proximal LAD, or multivessel disease in the initial coronary angiography. Otherwise, stable patients can be followed with CCTA.

**Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI)**

Studies have shown that PCI for spontaneous coronary artery dissection can lead to suboptimal outcomes and increased risk of complications.

**Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG)**

CABG is reserved for spontaneous coronary artery dissection patients after attempted PCI has failed, with left main or proximal dissections, or refractory ischemia, despite conservative management. Follow-up studies have shown a high rate of graft failure from graft occlusion resulting from the competitive flow in the healed native vessels.

**Medical Management**

Medical management of ACS due to SCAD is different from atherosclerotic ACS.

**Anticoagulant and Antiplatelets**

Patients are started on anticoagulation and dual antiplatelets as per the guidelines for ACS management. However, expert consensus recommends stopping anticoagulation after SCAD has been diagnosed on angiography as it may worsen intramural hematoma. Thrombolytic therapy in acute SCAD is not recommended as it can lead to coronary artery rupture and cardiac tamponade.

Research to date does not support using dual-antiplatelets in patients receiving medical management for spontaneous coronary artery dissection. The expert consensus recommends long-term aspirin use, but there is no data to support the benefit of long-term antiplatelets in SCAD. Patients undergoing PCI should receive dual antiplatelets for at least a year as per current guidelines.

**Beta-Blockers and Antianginals**

Beta-blocker therapy has been shown to lower the incidence of recurrent spontaneous coronary artery dissection and should always be prescribed.

**Prevention of Recurrence**

Recurrence of SCAD is defined as a new dissection event, usually at a different location. Beta-blockers have been shown to prevent a recurrence after an index event. These patients should be cautioned to avoid isometric exercise, high-intensity exercise, and prolonged Valsalva maneuvers.