The antidepressants all work slightly differently and target certain neurotransmitters to modulate mood and behavior. All currently licensed antidepressants are believed to increase serotonin, norepinephrine, or both in the synapse. The mechanisms to increase these neurotransmitters vary, though antidepressant drugs target reuptake by the nerve terminals.

**SSRI**

- The reuptake of 5HT(5-hydroxytryptamine/serotonin) into presynaptic terminals is mediated by SERT; neuronal uptake is the primary process by which neurotransmission via 5HT is terminated. SSRIs block reuptake and enhance and prolong serotonergic neurotransmission. With continuous administration of SSRI, there are sustained increases in cyclic AMP signaling and phosphorylation of the nuclear transcription factors and increases in the expression of trophic factors such as BDNF and increased neurogenesis.

- SSRIs are currently the first-line agents for the treatment of depression.

**SNRI**

- Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) block serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake in the synapse, increasing postsynaptic receptors' stimulation. SNRIs differ in their affinity for the serotonin and norepinephrine transporter.

- In contrast with other selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors like duloxetine, venlafaxine, and desvenlafaxine; milnacipran and levomilnacipran has higher selectivity for inhibiting norepinephrine reuptake than serotonin reuptake

**Atypical Antidepressants**

- Atypical antidepressants****have****various mechanisms of action.

- Bupropion, for example, works by inhibiting the reuptake of dopamine and norepinephrine at the presynaptic cleft.

- Agomelatine works as an agonist at melatonin receptors MT1 and MT2. It also antagonizes serotonergic 5-HT2C receptors, promoting dopamine and norepinephrine release.

- Mirtazapine works by blocking alpha-2 adrenergic receptors on the cell bodies and nerve terminals, promoting the release of norepinephrine into the synapse. Furthermore, mirtazapine antagonizes the 5-HT receptor, which has been shown to increase norepinephrine and dopamine in the brain's cortical regions.

**Serotonin Modulators**

- Serotonin modulators such as vilazodone inhibit the presynaptic reuptake of serotonin. It is also a partial agonist at the postsynaptic serotonin 5-HT1A receptor.

- Trazodone acts upon postsynaptic serotonin 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors and weakly inhibits presynaptic serotonin reuptake. In addition, Trazodone has additional postsynaptic alpha-adrenergic receptors and histamine receptors blocking activity.

- Nefazodone antagonizes postsynaptic serotonin 5-HT2A receptors and inhibits presynaptic serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake; these actions increase serotonergic transmission at 5-HT1A receptors.

**Tricyclic Antidepressants**

- TCA,****like amitriptyline, inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin at the presynaptic neuronal membrane. Amitriptyline also has an affinity for muscarinic M1 receptors and histamine H1 receptors. TCA thus can cause sedation and anticholinergic side effects.

**Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors**

-  MAOIs inhibit the monoamine oxidase enzyme responsible for catabolizing serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors were the first antidepressants discovered. MAOIs are not recognized as the first-line treatment for depression because of the adverse effects and drug-drug interactions.

**NMDA Antagonists**

- Dysregulation in glutamatergic neurotransmission is implied in the pathophysiology of depression. In clinical research of depression, alteration of glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) activity have been recognized. Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter that binds to NMDA(N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors). Consequently, NMDA antagonists are useful in the treatment of depression.

- Esketamine- Esketamine, the S-enantiomer of racemic ketamine, is a non-selective, non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist. It is indicated in treatment-resistant depression.

- Dextromethorphan is an uncompetitive NMDA receptor antagonist and opioid σ receptor agonist. Bupropion, as discussed above, works by inhibiting the uptake of dopamine and norepinephrine. The fixed drug combination of dextromethorphan-bupropion has a rapid onset of action(approximately one week) in patients with major depressive disorder.

**BDNF Hypothesis**

- The initial increase in synaptic serotonin eventually leads to increased neuroprotective proteins such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). BDNF concentrations in depression normalize in response to pharmacological treatment. An increase in BDNF level and enhanced neuroplasticity leads to the remission of depression.