The abdominal aorta bifurcates into common iliac arteries, which, in turn, are divided into external and internal iliac arteries at the L5-S1 vertebral level. The internal iliac arteries are the major blood supply to the pelvis. They are coursing inferiorly into the lesser pelvis, medial to the external iliac veins, and obturator nerves. At the greater sciatic foramen, the internal iliac artery divides into anterior and posterior trunks. The anterior trunk consists of the following 8 branches in females: inferior gluteal, internal pudendal, middle rectal, uterine, vaginal, inferior vesicle, umbilical, and obturator. The posterior trunk had 3 branches: superior gluteal, lateral sacral, and iliolumbar. The uterus receives the majority of its blood supply from the uterine arteries.

Uterine arteries branch into arcuate arteries, which penetrate and supply the myometrium. However, the ovarian arteries also provide blood supply to the uterus, the fallopian tubes, and the ovaries. The paired ovarian arteries are aortic branches arising below the renal arteries. Ovaries receive their blood supply mainly from the paired ovarian arteries. However, a branch for the ovarian artery creates a direct anastomosis with the uterine artery; thus, ovaries receive a dual blood supply. Vaginal arteries supply the lower part of the female reproductive tract. Venous supply follows the arterial supply of the pelvic organs.

In the ovaries, this network of veins is known as the pampiniform plexus of veins that drain into the ovarian veins. The ovarian vein drains into the left renal vein on the left side, but the inferior vena cava on the right. The fallopian tube is partly drained by the uterine venous plexus and partly by the pampiniform plexus.

Lymphatic drainage of the pelvis is accomplished through a chain of lymph nodes named after the associated arteries: sacral, internal iliac, external iliac, and common iliac nodes. The vagina, cervix, and uterus drain into external and internal iliac nodes. Fallopian tubes and ovaries drain into the paraaortic lymph nodes.