Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn is a life-threatening condition in the immediate neonatal period. It may be due to lung parenchymal disease such as respiratory distress syndrome or due to underdeveloped lung vasculature in conditions such as congenital diaphragmatic hernia and small for gestational age infants. Quick diagnosis and appropriate management are extremely important in the management of these infants. While the neonatologist plays an important role in the management of Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn, an interdisciplinary team approach is vital to early identification and providing timely treatment.

The nurses in the delivery room and newborn services are crucial in identifying newborns with cyanosis. Respiratory therapists provide valuable input regarding the ventilatory support required by the infant. Respiratory therapists also initiate iNO and thus monitor for response with iNO. NICU nurses monitor the infant's vitals and assist with parent education. Pharmacists provide recommendations on medications used for persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. Cardiologists and echocardiogram technicians play a vital role in diagnosing and recommending appropriate therapy for persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn.

The surgeons, along with the ECMO team, play a major role in initiating ECMO. Radiologists also play a vital role in identifying the underlying causes of persistent pulmonary hypertension of newborn.

The interprofessional healthcare team, including nurses and respiratory therapists in the newborn nursery, should receive education to identify the signs and symptoms of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. Pharmacists will play a role when medication is part of the management plan, including medication reconciliation, verifying doses, and coordinating their activities with the ordering clinician. Speech, occupational and physical therapists are very important in improving neurologic outcomes of babies with persistent pulmonary hypertension, especially after ECMO.