Uric acid (2,6,8 trioxypurine-C5H4N4O3) is the result of purine breakdown. At the normal physiological pH of 7.4, uric acid circulates in the ionized form of urate. Purine metabolism mainly occurs in the liver, but it can also be produced in any other tissue that contains xanthine oxidase (intestines). About two-thirds of uric acid is excreted in the kidneys, and a third is excreted into the intestine. In the kidneys, it is filtered and secreted, and 90% is reabsorbed. Other mammals have lower uric acid levels due to the activity of uricase. This enzyme converts urate to the more water-soluble form of allantoin.

Urate production is accelerated by purine-rich diets, endogenous purine production, and high cell breakdown, and it is responsible for a minority of cases of hyperuricemia. Foods rich in purine include all meats but specifically organ meats (kidneys, liver, “sweet bread”), game meats, and some seafood (anchovies, herring, scallops). Beer, which is purine-rich, also increases uric acid levels by decreasing kidney excretion. Endogenous production of the purine production can be accelerated by phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) synthetase activity as well as a defect in the regulatory enzyme hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT). Conditions of accelerated cell breakdown or turnover such as rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis, and tumor lysis, can also be a purine source and, thus, increase urate production.

Urate excretion occurs primarily in the kidneys and is responsible for hyperuricemia in 90% of individuals. Underexcretion appears to be a combination of decreased glomerular filtration, decreased tubular secretion, and enhanced tubular reabsorption. The acute or chronic decrease in glomerular filtration can result in hyperuricemia. Proximal tubular reabsorption of uric acid is controlled by URAT1 (uric acid transporter 1). This transport can be stimulated by organic acids (lactate and acetoacetate, and beta-hydroxybutyrate), medications (niacin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol, cyclosporin, and chemotherapy) and reduced extracellular fluid volume resulting in hyperuricemia.