Clinicians employ various options to manage oral mucositis in the setting of cancer therapy.

**Basic Oral Care**

Basic oral care (BOC) is suggested by the 2020 Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer and the International Society of Oral Oncology (MASCC/ISOO) clinical guidelines for managing oral mucositis secondary to cancer therapy.

Oral hygiene protocols prevent oral mucositis and decrease its duration and severity once it occurs by reducing the microbial burden, hence, avoiding secondary infections.

Prophylactic dental interventions, such as extracting compromised teeth and restoring carious lesions before initiating cancer therapy, can decrease mucositis risk by >25% and are particularly beneficial in high-risk patients.

**Mechanical Cleaning**

Patients should be encouraged to enhance their regular mechanical cleaning practices, including increasing the frequency of tooth brushing, using a soft toothbrush, replacing the toothbrush regularly, and cleaning interproximally.

**Oral Rinses**

Rinsing the oral cavity with non-medicated oral rinses - saline water rinse, sodium bicarbonate rinse, or a combination of sodium bicarbonate and saline water- is recommended every four hours.

Chlorhexidine is not recommended to prevent radiotherapy-induced oral mucositis as no available data supports its benefit.

**Antiinflamatory Agents**

The MASCC/ISOO guidelines recommend benzydamine mouthwash for preventing oral mucositis in head and neck cancer patients receiving less than 50 Gy radiation dose (moderate dose) and in those receiving radiotherapy-chemotherapy (RT-CT).

**Hydration And Lubrication Of The Oral Mucosa**

Patients should be advised to maintain adequate hydration and avoid irritants like tobacco and alcohol (as a beverage and alcohol-containing mouth rinses).

**Diet**

The diet should be limited to food that does not aggravate the mucosa or risk injury during chewing. Food that may induce unintended trauma to the oral mucosa, such as spicy, sharp, and hard food, should be avoided.

**Pain Management**

Topical morphine 0.2% mouth rinse is recommended by the MASCC/ISOO guidelines for managing pain in head and neck cancer patients receiving radiotherapy and chemotherapy.

Other oral rinses have been formulated to manage pain, including the so-called “magic mouthwash.” This oral rinse usually contains an anesthetic, antacid, and diphenhydramine and may have steroids and anti-micotics.

**Low-Level Laser Therapy**

The local use of low-level light and laser therapy to induce a biological response is known as photobiomodulation (PBM).

The MASCC/ISOO guidelines recommend intraoral low-level laser therapy for the prevention of oral mucositis in the following clinical settings:

- Adult patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation conditioned with high-dose chemotherapy, with or without total body irradiation.

- Adult patients undergoing radiation therapy to the head and neck without chemotherapy - clinicians must take into account the safety considerations relevant to patients with oral cancer.

- Adult patients undergoing radiotherapy-chemotherapy for head and neck cancer - clinicians must take into account the safety considerations relevant to patients with oral cancer.

It is worth noting that although clinical evidence supports the use of LLLT in head and neck cancer patients, in vitro studies showed that LLLT can induce pro-tumorigenic signaling pathways in cancerous cells.

**Cryotherapy**

Cryotherapy refers to placing a source of cold in the oral cavity, usually ice or cold water, during the delivery of a cytotoxic agent (chemotherapy).

The cooling of the oral mucosa is only temporary; therefore, this measure is indicated in conjunction with short chemotherapy protocols or when short half-life cytotoxic agents are used.

**Chemoprotective Agent**

Palifermin is a keratinocyte growth factor and works as a chemoprotective agent, recommended for severe oral mucositis (mucositis greater than or equal to grade 3) associated with autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplant regimens.

**Zinc Supplementation**

Zinc enhances tissue repair and provides antioxidant effects. The 2014 MASCC/ISOO guidelines recommended systemic zinc supplements to prevent OM in oral cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy or chemoradiation.