**Lateral Epicondylitis**

Lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow) ranks as one of the most prevalent pathologies affecting the wrist extensor muscles, affecting approximately 1 to 5% of the population.

Affected patients will typically report tenderness to palpation in the region of the lateral epicondyle as well as pain with activities that require wrist extension. This condition is generally diagnosed clinically but may warrant imaging in some cases. Radiographs help to rule out bone disease, arthropathy, and the presence of loose or foreign bodies. Ultrasound is a useful imaging modality that can identify the tendon changes, such as thinning, thickening, or tearing. MRI can provide more information about the nature of the pathology, but this modality is expensive and generally does not correlate accurately with the severity of clinical symptoms.

Treatment in the acute stage of lateral epicondylitis aims to reduce inflammation mainly by rest, ice, and compression of the affected arm. The subacute phase is managed by exercise, stretching, bracing, coordinated rehabilitation, and corticosteroid injection to the affected area.

**DeQuervain Tenosynovitis (extensor compartment 1)**

DeQuervain tenosynovitis classically affects women more often than men. Amongst women, those who are recently postpartum are commonly affected. Recently there has been a greater occurrence of individuals who frequently send text messages. It is seen as a stenosing synovitis that occurs in the first wrist extensor compartment affecting APL and EPB. Repetitive injury to the APL and EPB tendons impedes the smooth gliding of tendons in the extensor compartment. The flexor retinaculum overlying the compartment becomes thickened, and the tendon sheaths become inflamed.

Pain can be elicited by performing Finkelstein's test. This patient is instructed to adduct their thumb. They then flex all four digits over the thumb and deviate their wrist towards the ulna. A positive test is when this maneuver causes pain. Treatment measures should be conservative. Thumb spica splinting can be used to immobilize the thumb. Corticosteroid injection into the first extensor compartment has a 75 to 80% chance of alleviating symptoms.

**Intersection Syndrome****(extensor compartment 2)**

Distal intersection syndrome is classically experienced by skiers and kickboxers, who present with dorsal wrist pain complaints. This condition is considered rare and can be missed if there is no clinical suspicion of the syndrome.

Proximal intersection syndrome is similar to distal intersection syndrome but occurs at the junction where the APL and EPB cross over the ECRB and ECRL. This form of intersection syndrome is more common than distal intersection syndrome. It often affects rowers, weightlifters, individuals performing secretarial work, and carpenters. This condition is typically managed by conservative treatment, including thumb spica splinting, activity modification, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, and steroid injection in the second extensor compartment.

**EPL Tenosynovitis/Drummer's Wrist/EPL Rupture (extensor compartment 3)**

EPL tenosynovitis (drummer's wrist) is commonly experienced by patients with rheumatoid arthritis and also in drummers, hence the eponym drummer's wrist. Individuals who experience a distal radius fracture are also at increased risk of this condition.

**PIN Compressive Neuropathy**

Compression of the PIN can occur in the posterior forearm compartment causing radial tunnel syndrome (RTS). As the PIN enters the posterior compartment of the forearm, it passes deep to the supinator muscle (between its two heads). Compression can occur at five sites, but the Arcade of Frohse is the most common location of the compression. Patients are typically 30 to 50 years old and frequently have a history of prior surgical intervention to the affected arm. RTS is typically unilateral, with the dominant arm more likely affected. Bilateral RTS is rare. Conservative management is typically first-line treatment, including immobilization, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, activity modifications, and anesthetic injection directly to the compression site. If conservative management fails, then surgical intervention is indicated.