# Introduction

The skeletal muscles of the hand are responsible for the movement of the hand and fingers.

# Structure and Function

Four muscle groups comprise the intrinsic hand. These are the thenar, hypothenar, interossei and the lumbrical muscles.

# Embryology

Understanding the genetics of limb development is an important aspect of both medicine and surgery as signaling errors in embryological development may lead to congenital deformities. Although the genetics are still not fully understood, recent advancements in the study of invertebrates and vertebrates have determined the key steps involved in the complex interactions of limb development.

**Macroscopic embryological development of the upper extremity and hand**

The limb bud consists of undifferentiated mesodermal cells covered by overlying ectoderm. Two important mesodermal tissues are the lateral plate mesoderm, that yields cartilage and bone, and the somites, which yield skeletal muscle.

**Microscopic embryological development of the upper extremity and hand**

In the limb, not only is it important for the development of the macroscopic structures (muscle, bone, and connective tissue) but it is critical for limb identity and limb outgrowth to occur in a stepwise order.

When the limb bud first appears on week 4 (approximately day 26), activation of mesenchymal cells of lateral plate mesoderm cause PD growth due to the development the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), a thickened area of ectoderm overlying the mesoderm. The process by which this occurs takes place when Hox gene expression initiates the T-box family, Tbx5 and Tbx4, proteins that program limb identity and stimulate ligands called fibroblast growth factors (FGF). T-box proteins initiate FGF10 expression in the proliferating mesoderm to produce the AER, and the AER produces its own FGFs to maintain the growth of the underlying mesoderm. In regards to limb identity, Tbx5 is responsible for the programming upper extremity structures, while Tbx4 is responsible for the lower extremity structures. The importance of the AER and FGFs in the developing limb is shown in experiments that result in severely shortened limbs with the removal of AER or FGFs are absent.

The second axis, AP, is controlled the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), a collection of cells at the posterior border of the limb bud.

The third axis, DV, is controlled by Wnt7a, a protein expressed in the overlying ectoderm of the limb bud. Wnt7a is involved in interactions between two other factors that help the limb develop its correct dorsal structures.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Blood supply to the intrinsic hand muscles comes from the ulnar and radial arteries and their anastomotic branches and collateral circulation. The ulnar and radial arteries cross the wrist to enter the hand and send vessels deep and superficially, forming two anastomoses called the superficial and deep palmar arches. The ulnar artery contributes to the majority blood supply of the superficial palmar arch, while the radial artery contributes to the majority of the deep palmar arch. Arising from the superficial palmar arch, are distal branches called the common and proper palmar digital arteries.

The thenar muscle is supplied primarily by the superficial palmar arch. The hypothenar muscle is supplied primarily by the ulnar artery.

Lymphatic drainage of the upper limb and hand drain into the superficial and deep lymphatic systems. The superficial system drains the skin of the palm and dorsal hand via the lymphatic plexuses along the cephalic and basilic veins towards the axillary and cubital lymph nodes. The deep system drains the skeletal muscle of the hand via the lymphatic plexuses along the deep veins and terminates in the humeral lymph nodes.

# Nerves

Nerves of the intrinsic hand arise from the brachial plexus, a network of nerves from ventral rami between the C5 to T1 nerve roots. The nerves of the brachial plexus that supply muscles of the intrinsic hand include the median and ulnar nerve. The median nerve is composed of C5 to C8 nerve roots and enters the hand through the carpal tunnel, where it divides into a recurrent motor branch and cutaneous branch. The ulnar nerve is composed of the C8 to T1 nerve roots and enters the hand through the Guyon canal, where it divides into a superficial and deep branch.

The thenar muscle group receives innervation from the recurrent motor branch of the median nerve, a branch of the median nerve.

# Muscles

**Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand**

**Thenar Muscles:**

**Abductor pollicis brevis (APB)**

- Function: Abduction of the first digit (thumb)

- Origin: Flexor retinaculum and the tubercle of the scaphoid

- Insertion: Lateral aspect of the proximal phalanx of the thumb

- Nerve: Recurrent motor branch of the median nerve

**Flexor pollicis brevis (FBB)**

- Function: Flexion of the thumb

- Origin: Flexor retinaculum and the tubercle of the trapezium

- Insertion: Lateral aspect of the proximal phalanx of the thumb

- Nerve: Recurrent motor branch of the median nerve

**Opponens pollicis (OPP)**

- Function: Opposition of the thumb

- Origin: Flexor retinaculum and the tubercle of the trapezium

- Insertion: Lateral aspect of the thumb

- Nerve: Recurrent motor branch of the median nerve

**Intrinsic Thumb Adduction Component:**

**Adductor pollicis**

- Function: Adduction of the thumb

- Origin: 2nd and 3rd metacarpal, and the capitate

- Insertion: Proximal phalanx and extensor expansion of the thumb

- Nerve: Deep branch of the ulnar nerve

**Hypothenar Muscles:**

**Abductor digiti minimi (ADM)**

- Function: Abduction of the 5th digit (pinky)

- Origin: The pisiform

- Insertion: Medial aspect of the proximal phalanx of the 5th digit

- Nerve: Deep branch of the ulnar nerve

**Flexor digiti minimi brevis (FDMB)**

- Function: Flexion of the pinky

- Origin: Flexor retinaculum and the hamate

- Insertion: Medial aspect of the proximal phalanx of the pinky

- Nerve: Deep branch of the ulnar nerve

**Opponens digiti minimi (ODM)**

- Function: Opposition of the pinky

- Origin: Flexor retinaculum of the hamate

- Insertion: Medial aspect of the 5th metacarpal

- Nerve: Deep branch of the ulnar nerve

**Interossei Muscles:**

**Dorsal Interossei (DI)**

- Function: Abduction of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th digits

- Origin: Metacarpals

- Insertion: Extensor hood and proximal phalanges of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th digits

- Nerve: Deep branch of the ulnar nerve

**Palmar Interossei (PI)**

- Function: Adduction of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th digits

- Origin: Palmar aspect of the 2nd, 4th, and 5th metacarpals

- Insertion: Extensor hood and proximal phalanges of the 2nd, 4th, and 5th digits

- Nerve: Deep branch of the ulnar nerve

**Lumbricals**

- Function: Flexion of the MCP joints with the extension of the PIP and DIP joints

- Origin: Tendons of the flexor digitorum profundus

- Insertion: Extensor hood of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th digits

- Nerve: Median nerve for the 1st and 2nd lumbricals, whereas, the 3rd and 4th lumbricals receive innervation by the deep branch of the ulnar nerve

# Physiologic Variants

Physiologic variants of the upper extremity may manifest within and around the intrinsic hand muscles. Anomalous muscles and neurovasculature may create compressive neuropathies of the hand or distorted anatomical landmarks. Although they exist as a minority, it is important to distinguish normal anatomy from clinically relevant and asymptomatic variants to avoid misdiagnoses or overdiagnoses.

Variants of the lumbrical muscles have been the subject of much study.

Studies have also shown variants of neurovasculature within the hand.

# Surgical Considerations

Surgical considerations should consider physiologic variants. Because of the variety of anatomic changes that may distort landmarks during hand imaging and surgery, it is important to consider anomalous muscles and nerves.

The creation of muscle flaps, utilizing the intrinsic hand muscles, have been described in the literature to treat carpal tunnel syndrome and other nerve palsies.

Tendon transfers for the treatment of median and ulnar nerve palsies leading to deficits in muscles of the intrinsic hand are a well-covered topic in the literature.

# Clinical Significance

When the hand is at rest, there is an equilibrium in the forces between the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the hand, especially from lumbricals and the interossei.

Ulnar clawing and Pope’s hand of benediction present similar but arise from different nerve lesions. Ulnar clawing results from a distal ulnar nerve lesion, at the level of the wrist, yielding paralysis of the interossei in the presence of functioning extrinsic muscles. Recalling that the ulnar nerve innervates all the interossei and the third and fourth lumbricals, if the equilibrium is lost, the opposing forces exaggerate MCP flexion and PIP and DIP extension, which impacts a patient’s ability to cup their hand around objects.

Klumpke palsy, or total hand claw, is a neuropathy involving the lower trunk of the brachial plexus (C8 to T1). Deficits to the lower brachial plexus lead to loss of all intrinsic hand muscles. Loss of lumbricals and interossei result in an extension of MCP joints and flexion of DIP and PIP joints. Loss of thenar and hypothenar muscles result in palmar atrophy and weakness in thumb and pinky finger abduction, flexion and opposition. The most common mechanism of injury is hyper-abduction of the upper extremities. Two populations in which this occurs is: in the neonate with upward traction of the arms during delivery, and in adults with traumatic upward traction of the arms.

# Other Issues

A comprehensive analysis of hand function will include overall visual inspection, assessment of the strength, coordination, and speed of hand movements. By combining a thorough physical exam with knowledge of the intrinsic hand muscles, an astute physician should be able to comfortably recognize and workup patients presenting with distortions of normal hand anatomy.