Sex-hormone related disorders present with more than just the physiological findings to treat. For instance, precocious puberty not only shows as physical changes but also has mental effects on a child and how they are perceived in the world. Therefore, an interprofessional team of healthcare providers is necessary to treat these patients. These interprofessional teams should include physicians, nurses, pharmacists, psychologists, and others. The same applies to an interprofessional team that will treat patients with advanced prostate cancer. When the clinician or specialist initiates leuprolide therapy, a pharmacist should perform drug interaction checking and verify the dosage. Nursing can counsel the patient regarding dosing and administration, as well as potential adverse events that will require them to contact the prescriber's office. Pharmacists and nurses need to notify the clinicians if they have any concerns about the patient's therapy, as this type of interprofessional interaction will improve patient outcomes. [Level 5]

There will be many different specialties that need to communicate effectively and bring about better results for the patient. With the many different uses of leuprolide, physicians, nurses, and pharmacists must have a good understanding of the clinical applications and side effects of the drug. Also, a team of interprofessional researchers found that leuprolide is helpful in IVF treatments. The study gave one group leuprolide and gonadotropins and compared it to a control group that only received gonadotropins. It found that pregnancy rates increased in the experimental group.