Macrolides are naturally occurring compounds comprised of a lactone ring with deoxy sugars attached. Certain macrolides have antibiotic or antifungal properties and are used in pharmaceutical antimicrobial therapy. The first macrolide used in this manner was erythromycin in 1952; it was often used for infections in patients who were allergic to penicillin or whose infections were penicillin-resistant.

The FDA has approved the use of macrolide antibiotic agents for a wide variety of bacterial infections. In particular, azithromycin, clarithromycin, and erythromycin are commonly used to treat infections like pneumonia, sinusitis, pharyngitis, and tonsillitis. Also, the FDA has approved its use in uncomplicated skin infections and otitis media in pediatric patients. Moreover, clarithromycin is used to treat Helicobacter pylori infections in standard triple therapy protocol regardless of clarithromycin resistance status. Macrolides are also commonly used to treat sexually transmitted infections such as gonococcal and chlamydial infections. The majority of macrolide use, like other antibiotics, is dictated by the susceptibility and resistance status of the targetted organism.Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Legionella, and Chlamydia pneumoniae.

In recent studies, macrolide maintenance therapy has been shown to improve quality of life and spirometry findings in adults and children with non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. Further, these agents have been shown to reduce the number of bronchiectasis exacerbations. However, these studies revealed no reduction in hospital admissions pertaining to exacerbations.

Macrolides remain an integral part of treatment regimens for COPD exacerbations. The use of these drugs in COPD is because of their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulating characteristics.