**Diabetic macular edema (DME):**The vascular dysfunction is initially caused by the breakdown of the inner BRB, while the outer BRB is compromised in the later stages. The damage occurs secondary to hyperglycemia (vascular endothelial cells are damaged due to their inability to regulate intracellular glucose levels), ischemia, enhanced reactive oxygen intermediates production, extracellular matrix degradation, and modulation caused (matrix metalloproteinases are activated), and abnormal autoregulation (capillary basement membrane thickening).

**Retinal vein occlusions:**The outer BRB is disrupted due to ischemia, raised hydrostatic pressure in the perifoveal capillaries, and a turbulent blood flow.

**Coat disease:**The inner BRB is disrupted due to damage to the endothelium of the retinal vasculature and abnormal pericytes. These abnormalities lead to multiple telangiectasias (sausage-like vessels) and retinal ischemia.

**Retinal artery macroaneurysms (RAM):**Chronic hypertension, arteriosclerosis, and focal ischemia of blood vessel walls cause weakening of the blood vessel wall and subsequent aneurysmal dilatation.

**Radiation retinopathy (RR):**Macular edema is the earliest feature of RR. The free radicals cause vascular damage (initially capillaries), leading to capillary nonperfusion. The pathogenies and clinical features are similar to diabetic retinopathy. Tissue tolerance doses (TD and TD) are defined as the total radiation doses which lead to complication rates of 5% and 50%, respectively, at five years. The values of TD and TD for the retina are 45 and 65 Gy, respectively.

**Hypertensive retinopathy (stage IV):**The outer BRB is disrupted due to ischemic hypoperfusion of the choroid, resulting in RPE damage.

**Irvine-Gass syndrome:**The surgical trauma during intraocular surgeries causes the breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier via prostaglandin release. The inflammatory mediators subsequently diffuse into the vitreous cavity and also disrupt the BRB; this increases the permeability of the perifoveal capillaries.

**Inflammatory disorders:**BRB breakdown is mediated by the release of prostaglandins.

**Non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION):**It is assumed that fluid can percolate into the subretinal and/or intraretinal spaces from the peripapillary choroid.

**Edema after panretinal photocoagulation (PRP):**This occurs secondary to the inflammation-induced during the procedure and increases in macular blood flow secondary to the laser.

**Drug-induced macular edema:**Topical epinephrine (antiglaucoma medication) causes the breakdown of the BRB. Prolonged use of systemic tamoxifen can cause reversible macular edema.

**Choroidal tumors:**Cystoid macular edema and subretinal fluid may be seen in tumors like choroidal melanoma secondary to infiltration of chronic inflammatory cells within the choroid adjacent to the tumor; and choroidal hemangioma due to the abnormal leaking vessels, respectively.

**Retinitis pigmentosa (RP)**: The possible mechanisms responsible include the breakdown of the BRB due to the ‘toxic products’ released from the degenerating retinal cells, especially the RPE cells; failure of the RPE pumping mechanism, and muller cell dysfunction.