The Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) oversees and manages all medication disbursement in the United States. The Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA) of 1906 was the first federal law to establish the FDA as the main regulatory body for all medications in the United States. This role became more complex with the Durham-Humphrey Amendment of 1951 and the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA).

These acts defined the two classes of federally regulated medications: OTC and prescription medications. Ultimately, these acts established the criteria for labeling a medication as a prescription drug, with the following requirements:

- The use of such a drug is safe only under the supervision of a licensed practitioner due to its toxicity or method of use.

- All drugs categorized as prescription medications are subject to the new drug application (NDA) approval process under the FDAMA.

The FDA is responsible for ensuring that all medications on the market, both over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription, are distributed safely [21 C.F.R.§ 205]. The FDA has the power to impose any restrictions on medications that are deemed unsafe for public consumption. This role is defined in Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as well as the Controlled Substances Act of 1971 (CSA) [21 C.F.R.§ 1306 2022; 21 U.S.C.§ 801 2018]. Title 21 defines prescription and OTC drug labeling and distribution.

The CSA is responsible for categorizing all medications into schedules. This CSA also sets the requirements to prescribe, dispense, store, and dispose of medications. Furthermore, this Act was expanded with the Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005 (CMEA).

Finally, the FDA instituted the Poison Prevention and Packaging Act of 1970 (PPPA) to protect the public and particularly children. This law established the required safety precautions that must be taken when dispensing medications to protect children under the age of 5 years from accidental poisoning [16 CFR § 1700].

This federal law is monitored and enforced by the Consumer Products Safety Commission (CPSC) under the guidance of the FDA. This article describes the federal regulations regarding medication disbursement and describes the provider’s role in properly prescribing, filling, and monitoring medications.