Pulmonary function testing is essential for diagnosis. Spirometry demonstrates airflow obstruction that does not reverse with inhaled bronchodilator challenge. Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) will be reduced, and the ratio of FEV1 to forced vital capacity (FEV1/FVC) is also reduced. Hyperinflation may occur, and hence total lung capacity (TLC) may be increased with air trapping. Diffusion capacity (DLCO) is usually reduced.

Chest radiographs may be normal in early disease or show signs of hyperinflation. Chest CT imaging may show bronchial wall thickening, mosaic pattern with patchy areas of hypo attenuation. If there are dynamic images with inspiratory and expiratory films, a mosaic pattern persists due to air trapping from small airway disease.

Bronchoscopy can be performed if other causes of airflow obstruction are suspected like endobronchial tumors or sarcoid but might be unrevealing in bronchiolitis obliterans. A lung biopsy is usually not necessary for diagnosis in the setting of classic symptoms, air trapping on imaging, airflow obstruction on spirometry in the setting of organ transplantation, or toxic inhalational injury. If required for diagnosis, surgical lung biopsy is preferred over transbronchial biopsy since it involves distal bronchioles and not parenchyma. Also, the sensitivity by transbronchial biopsy for the diagnosis of BO is low (range 15 to 87%). In cases following lung transplantation, a biopsy is not required to diagnose bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome but may be required to exclude other causes of deterioration lung function like infection or acute rejection. Spirometry showing obstructive pattern is necessary for diagnosis.