# Continuing Education Activity

Sacroiliac joint injury is a common type of low back pain. Differentiating SI joint pain from mechanical low back pain is essential. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of sacroiliac joint injury and highlights the role of the interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of sacroiliac joint injury medical conditions and emergencies.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of sacroiliac joint injury.
- Outline the management options available for sacroiliac joint injury.
- Describe the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance sacroiliac joint injury and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Sacroiliac (SI) joint injury is a common cause of low back pain. Posterior pelvic joint pain a common name for SI joint dysfunction. The spine and pelvis are connected by the sacroiliac joint. The SI joint lies between the iliac's articular surface and the sacral auricular surface. When an injury occurs to the SI joint, patients often experience significant pain in their low back and buttock region. The SI joint experiences forces of shearing, torsion, rotation, and tension. Ambulation is heavily influenced by the SI joint, as this is the only orthopedic joint connecting our upper body to our lower body. The joint is a relatively stiff synovial joint filled with synovial fluid. The bones of the sacrum and ilium are coated in hyaline cartilage at their articular surfaces with dense fibrous tissue connecting the ilium and the sacrum. SI joints typically only have a few degrees of motion.

Diagnosing sacroiliac (SI) joint pathology can be challenging. One of the difficulties providers can run into in the evaluation of SI joint injury is in distinguishing between lower lumbar pain (lumbago) from SI joint pain. Specialized tests can be instrumental in making this distinction. It is vital to keep SI joint pain as part of the differential diagnosis of low back pain, with up to 30% of low back pain secondary to the SI joint.

However, there are multiple etiologies and a variety of factors that can contribute to SI joint injury.

Extra joint mobility of the joint can result in pain in SI joint injury. However, hypomobility is a hallmark of ankylosing spondylitis, a common cause of inflammatory sacroiliac injury. SI joint dysfunction often occurs in unison with mechanical back pain. The sacroiliac joint may also be the site of pain referred from the lumbar vertebra rather than the origin of the patient's pain. For example, degenerative disc disease at the L5-S1 vertebrae may become interpreted at the SI joint, but the source is much higher in the lumbar spine. There are multiple patterns of referral of pain for patients with SI joint injury. Including, the posterior thigh, knee, or foot. The most common site of pain referral is the posterior thigh, seen in 50% of patients.

The sacroiliac joint is a commonly targeted area of treatment of chronic low back pain as well.

# Etiology

Injuries to the sacroiliac joint can occur from various etiologies. 88% of cases of SI joint injury are due to either repetitive microtrauma or acute trauma. There is a high prevalence of SI joint injury in athletes. Separately, 20% of cases are pregnancy-related, while 4% are idiopathic.

There are also three types of fractures associated with SI joint injury. A type one fracture is a minor fracture of the anterior aspect of the S2 foramen. This fracture creates a large crescent-shaped fragment that is stable. Less than one-third of the SI joint is involved, and the fracture encompasses the least amount of ligament injury of the three types of fractures. Separately, a type two fractures occur between the anterior aspect of the S1 and S2 foramen. The fracture creates a smaller crescent-shaped fragment compared to the type one injury. Type two fractures occur when one-third to two-thirds of the SI joint is involved. Lastly, a type three fracture encompasses the superior and posterior aspects of the SI joint up to the S1 nerve root. Greater than two-thirds of the sacroiliac joint are involved and include a higher degree of ligament disruption. However, the fracture is typically smaller than a type one or type two fracture. A posterior fracture-dislocation of the SI joint involves variable disruption of the SI ligament complex.

The L5 nerve root crosses the sacral ala 2 cm medial to the SI joint. In the case of injury, the nerve root can be involved causing radicular pain. SI joint innervation occurs via the ventral rami of the L4 and L5 vertebra, as well as the dorsal rami of L5-S2, and the superior gluteal nerve. Injury to these nerves can cause neuropathic SI joint pain. Generalized gluteal pain can be secondary to an injury of the SI joint or local nerves surrounding the SI joint, causing radiculopathy. When the S1 nerve root is directly injured during SI joint injury, it can also create radiculopathy.

Separately, during pregnancy, laxity occurs within many of the joints in the pelvis. The hormone relaxin causes joint mobility during pregnancy. As the pelvis widens during pregnancy, the SI joint becomes more mobile. The expecting mother can experience SI joint pain as the hips rotate, putting stress on the SI joint. Pain can be both unilateral or bilateral during pregnancy.

Anatomical variations can lead to SI joint injury as well. An increase in lumbar lordosis, as well as an anterior tilt to the pelvis, can lead to SI joint dysfunction.

Osteoarthritis also plays a role in the development of SI joint pain. Typical of all osteoarthritic joints, joint space narrowing, osteophyte formation, and sclerosis of the SI joint can be seen on x-ray.

Furthermore, inflammatory arthritis can cause SI joint injury. Ankylosing spondylitis is the most common type of inflammatory arthritis of the SI joint. Erosion of the joint can occur over time, leading to disabling pain. Subchondral edema is the earliest sign of sacroiliitis on imaging. Ankylosing spondylitis causes bony erosions of the SI joint. As decay occurs, the joint space widens and becomes sclerotic. Over time the joint fuses as erosion occur across the entire joint.

# Epidemiology

13% of patients with chronic low back pain have SI joint dysfunction.

Lateral compression of the SI joint comprises up to 80% of pelvic rim injuries. Crescent fracture-dislocations of SIJ accounts for 12% of pelvis ring injuries.

The prevalence of abnormal SI joint movement is 20% in college students and between eight to 16% in asymptomatic individuals.

Over 80% of patients report clinically significant pain improvement following surgical fusion of the SI joint compared to 25% in the nonoperative group. 3% of patients who undergo fusion surgery require surgical revision. Operative therapy typically requires a 75% improvement following an SI joint diagnostic injection before surgery.

# History and Physical

The history provided for SI joint pain may look very similar to mechanical back pain, with a few exceptions. Pain is usually localized to the buttock region and may occur with the sensations of numbness, tingling, weakness, pelvic pain, leg instability, and groin pain. The patient often points to the area between their gluteal folds and posterior iliac crests.

Radiation is pervasive in SI joint injury seen in up to 50% of cases, the majority into the lower extremity.

The history of SI joint injury may suggest S1 radiculopathy classically seen in sciatica. Symptoms are reproducible in an SI joint neuropathy of the S1 nerve root. In cases of neuropathic pain, the patient may endorse numbness, tingling burning pain of the posterior leg extending below the knee into the plantar aspect of the foot. The patient may support sensation changes or muscle weakness, depending on the nerve root involved.

A physical exam includes a full musculoskeletal and neurologic exam of the lumbar spine, and bilateral lower extremities are a part of the SI joint injury evaluation. A complete neurological and musculoskeletal exam of the lower extremity should be mostly normal, with muscle strength, sensation, and deep tendon reflexes intact. However, Pelvic asymmetry may be appreciated on the exam. The range of motion testing of the lower extremity is a must for the assessment of SI joint dysfunction. A rectal exam may also be indicated in specific cases. On physical exam, there can be tenderness to the pelvic floor muscles.

Sacroiliac joint mobility has been studied, along with the symmetry of the pelvis. Both tests are unreliable in the diagnosis of SI joint dysfunction. The compression of the iliac crest on the side of the patient's pain may reproduce symptoms.

Special tests are often utilized in cases of suspected SI joint injury. The Gaenslen test is a special test that can be used to isolate the sacroiliac joint. The patient should be placed in the supine position; their hip flexed to their chest. The provider applies a force to the knee of the flexed hip anteriorly on the ipsilateral side of pain. Simultaneously, the contralateral knee is pushed downward; their opposite leg is allowed to fall off the table. Both SI joints are tested simultaneously. Gaenslen is considered a provocative test, reproducing the patient's symptoms.

# Evaluation

X-ray is often the first test utilized in SI joint injury. Weight-bearing anteroposterior views are usually all that is needed for the initial radiographic assessment of SI joint pain.

CT is utilized when MRI is contraindicated or unavailable. Separately, CT of the pelvis with contrast evaluates for vascular and urogenital injures. CT is more sensitive than radiograph but inferior to MRI in detecting SI joint injury.

Local anesthetic blocks are a more invasive way to test SI joint pathology when the diagnosis is in question. An ultrasound or fluoroscopy-guided diagnostic injection assesses patient pain before the injection and directly following the injection allowing the physician to see if the pain was alleviated momentarily with short-acting anesthetics. A 75% reduction in pain is suggestive of SI joint pain. Patients who could benefit from an ultrasound-guided diagnostic injection include patients experiencing isolated SI joint pain or pain that is reproducible on three provocative tests.

Labs are a part of the assessment for possible inflammatory SI joint injury. When sacroiliitis is seen on pelvic x-ray, a CBC, CRP, and ESR are often part of the workup.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment can vary significantly between cases. For example, pregnancy-related SI joint pain often resolved in the months following delivery, while traumatic SI joint injury may require prompt surgical repair.

In acute injury ice, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory should be a part of management unless they are otherwise contraindicated. Muscle relaxers can also be used for SI joint injury such as cyclobenzaprine if the suspected injury is secondary to muscle spasm. Inflammatory sacroiliitis can be treated with TNF inhibitors as well, such as infliximab or etanercept. Weak core muscles, such as oblique muscles can contribute to injury as well. Strengthening of the transverses abdominis, as well as the obliques either through a home exercise program or physical therapy, can help improve SI joint pain. Girdles and braces also help support the core in SI joint dysfunction. Braces have been shown to reduce SI joint pain. Separately, belts can limit the motion of the SI joint. However, limited studies support its clinical significance in SI joint injury.

The effectiveness of corticosteroid injections into the periarticular surface of the SI joint is controversial at best.

Radiofrequency denervation is a possible treatment option for refractory, chronic SI joint pain. Rhizotomy (radiofrequency denervation) is often complete after failed corticosteroid injections.

Interestingly at both three to six months, follow-up radiofrequency ablation was shown to have a clinically significant reduction in pain and improvement of function in patients with SI joint injury in one study.

# Differential Diagnosis

Common causes of SI joint injury include pregnancy, traumas such as hip fractures, hypermobility, hypomobility, leg length discrepancies, obesity, and surgeries such as lumbar fusion. The differential diagnosis of sacroiliac joint injury includes synovitis, capsulitis, and enthesitis, infection, piriformis syndrome. Osteitis condensins ilii, and malignancies such as multiple myeloma are also a part of the differential. Functional causes can occur with scoliosis or short legs. Posterior sacral ligaments tears can cause pain in SI joint injury.

Furthermore, hip osteoarthritis should be considered in addition to SI joint osteoarthritis for low back pain and pelvic pain.

# Prognosis

Similar to mechanical back pain, the vast majority of cases of SI joint injury improve with conservative management. Over 75% of cases respond to conservative management and physical therapy.

# Complications

The recurrence rate of SI joint injury in over 30% of chronic cases.

# Consultations

Physicians who specialize in diagnosing and managing pain through a comprehensive understanding of the body's mechanics and musculoskeletal system are the following: Physical medicine and rehabilitation, sports medicine, pain management, and interventional spine physicians.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Part of the initial workup for acute back pain includes an assessment of the SI joint. SI joint pain is a common type of low back pain, and it is separate from the lumbar spine or paraspinal muscles often associated with low back pain. The spine and pelvis are connected posteriorly by the sacroiliac joint. The SI joint lies between the iliac bone and the sacrum. A common cause of SI joint injury includes trauma. Trauma can be repetitive, causing a series of small injuries that accumulate over time, such as in the case of an athlete, or can be significant trauma such as a pelvic fracture from a motor vehicle accident. Separately, SI joint injury is prevalent in pregnancy.

Furthermore, SI joint pain often occurs due to arthritis. Both degenerative osteoarthritis and inflammatory arthritis can lead to SI joint injury. Inflammatory arthritis of the SI joint is commonly known as sacroiliitis. When inflammatory changes are seen on imaging may be the sign of systemic disease. Imaging for SI joint dysfunction often includes an X-ray or MRI. Most cases of SI joint injury respond to conservative management, including physical therapy. However, some cases can require corticosteroid injections or even surgical repair.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing sacroiliac joint injury can be challenging. Low back pain secondary to SI joint dysfunction requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a primary care provider, physical therapist, primary care sports medicine specialist, pain medicine physician, radiologist, orthopedic surgeon, nurse specialist, and in cases of sacroiliitis, a rheumatologist. Without proper management, the morbidity associated with SI joint injury can become a chronic and debilitating injury. There are multiple steps involved in the injury assessment of the sacroiliac joint, the evaluation of the underlying injury, and treatment of sacroiliac injury:

- History and physical should be complete by the primary care provider, including special physical exam tests as well as initial x-ray imaging.

- Imaging to be interpreted by the radiologist. Standard imaging includes a weight-bearing AP view of the SI joint, MRI of the pelvis and sacrum, or CT of the pelvis.

- Initial therapy often provided by the primary care provider or orthopedist includes home exercise programs, over-the-counter pain medications, bracing, belts, manipulative therapy, and physical therapy.

- The physical therapist is crucial in the strengthening of the core muscles as well as the gluteus muscles, which are needed to help support the SI joint.

- Corticosteroid injection or anesthetic injections can be done either via ultrasound or fluoroscopy injections. A primary care sports medicine physician or pain medicine specialist is often utilized for this procedure.

- Refractory treatment such as radiofrequency ablation or rhizotomy can be complete with a pain medicine specialist as well.

- Suspected inflammatory SI Joint injury usually requires further assessment, including labs and management by a rheumatologist.

- Surgery can be necessary in refractory cases. Either an orthopedic surgeon specializing in spinal surgery or a neurosurgeon often performs the procedure.

- Many cases of SI joint injury occur in athletes. A sports medicine specialist best manages long-term treatment and management of SI joint injuries.

The management of a sacroiliac joint injury can be both acute and chronic. Treatments range from conservative management to surgery. Diagnosis requires a high index of suspension in suspected cases. However, most cases improve conservatively. Many cases require the time and effort of multiple healthcare providers. [Level 5]