**Electrochemical Gradient and Resting Membrane Potential**

One of the essential functions of the cell membrane is to establish an electrochemical gradient via the transportation of ions.  The biggest factors in the electrochemical gradient generation are:

- Potassium leak channels

- Sodium/potassium (Na/K) electrogenic pumps

The Na/K pump uses ATP to transport three Na ions extracellularly and two K ions intracellularly. This process causes the pooling of K intracellularly and Na extracellularly.

**Action Potential Generation**

All cells create a resting membrane potential, but neurons and muscle cells are termed "excitable" cells and can create electrical impulses called action potentials. This cellular excitability is based on specific voltage-gated channels present in the excitable cell membrane. Neurons generate action potentials mainly through the use of Na voltage-gated channels and K voltage-gated channels, while muscle cells, specifically cardiac myocytes, incorporate the use of Na, K, and Calcium (Ca) voltage-gated channels.

The resting membrane potential in neurons is close to a negative 70 millivolts. In neurons, when excitatory neurotransmitters are released, the resting membrane potential can be summatively depolarized, and when the depolarization reaches a threshold level of approximately negative 55 millivolts, the Na-voltage gated channels open, allowing a huge influx of positive Na ions to flow into the cell which creates an electrical current (the action potential), which propagates down the neural cell membrane by continually opening more and more Na-voltage gated channels. The membrane potential moves from negative seventy millivolts to positive thirty millivolts, which in turn opens K voltage-gated channels, having the opposite (repolarizing) effect on the cell membrane returning the membrane to its natural resting membrane potential.