Current approaches to screening guidelines for Lynch syndrome are published by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommends immunohistochemical staining of the mismatch repair proteins in all colorectal cancer tumors in all patients with colorectal cancer younger than age 70 and those older than age 70 meeting Bethesda criteria and endometrial tumors diagnosed in patients younger than the age of 50.

The two methods used to screen for Lynch syndrome are immunohistochemical staining and/or microsatellite instability testing. Concordance is high between these tests, and both have been found to be highly sensitive and specific; both have a false negative rate of about 5% to 10%.

Immunohistochemical staining is performed on a tumor sample to look for expression of proteins encoded by mismatch repair genes. If staining for expression of all mismatch repair proteins is present, a mismatch repair gene mutation is unlikely to be present. This is a normal result and referred to as mismatch repair-proficient. If staining is negative for expression of at least one mismatch repair protein, this is referred to as mismatch repair-deficient, and germline genetic testing should be offered. Of note, if immunohistochemical staining for MLH1 (either alone or with PMS2) is abnormal (not expressed) in colorectal tumor tissue, this should be followed by testing for BRAF V600E mutation or hypomethylation of the MLH1 promoter (in blood or normal tissue). If this testing is positive, it suggests a sporadic colorectal cancer rather than Lynch syndrome, and if negative germline mutation testing for Lynch syndrome should follow. For more information, please refer to National Comprehensive Cancer Network Screening Guidelines for Colorectal Cancer.

Microsatellite instability is another screening test for Lynch syndrome and is characterized by variations in length of repetitive DNA sequences known as microsatellites in the human genome which occur as a result of the loss of mismatch repair activity. Identification of microsatellite instability technique involves testing for nucleotide markers. If a tumor is found to have a certain proportion of abnormal microsatellite repeat markers, it is considered to be microsatellite instability-high. mismatch repair-proficient is generally equivalent to microsatellite instability-low. The great majority of Lynch syndrome tumors are microsatellite instability-high; however, this pattern can be observed sporadic colorectal cancers thus germline testing is recommended for microsatellite instability-high tumors.

Among sporadic colorectal cancers, 10% to 15% exhibit deficiency of at least one mismatch repair protein and/or are microsatellite instability-high most often as a result of abnormal methylation of the MLH1 gene promoter and not due to Lynch syndrome. Therefore, screening with microsatellite instability and/or immunohistochemical staining alone is not adequate to diagnosed Lynch syndrome and must be followed by germline mutation testing. This is accomplished by DNA sequencing and large rearrangement analysis. Genetic testing should be preceded by genetic counseling due to the complexities of test selection.

Patients identified to have abnormal immunohistochemical staining and/or abnormal microsatellite instability testing, but in whom germline testing does not reveal a mutation may be a result of a double somatic mismatch repair gene mutations in the tumor DNA or may still have undetected Lynch syndrome and management should be based on the personal/family history.

Clinical Testing Criteria (based on personal and family history)

Assessment for Lynch syndrome begins with taking a thorough family cancer history, which includes both maternal and paternal relatives and at least three generations made up of first, second, and third-degree relatives. All cancers should be noted, including the age of diagnosis, if available. Genetic testing for Lynch syndrome should be considered for patients who meet:

- Amsterdan II criteria (Table 1A)

- Revised Bethesda guidelines (Table 1B)

- Endometrial cancer diagnosed before age 50

- Known Lynch syndrome in the family

- Testing should also be considered in patients with at least 5% risk of Lynch syndrome on MMRpro, PREMM, or MMRpredict prediction models

Table 1. Amsterdam II Criteria and Revised Bethesda Guidelines

A. Amsterdam II Criteria

- More than three relatives with a Lynch syndrome-related cancer (colorectal, endometrial, small bowel, ureter or renal pelvis), with one being a first that meet the following criteria:

- More than two successive generations affected

- One is a first-degree relative of the other two

- More than one relative is diagnosed younger than age 50

- No evidence of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP)

B. Revised Bethesda Guidelines

- Colorectal cancer diagnosed in a patient younger than age 50

- Presence of synchronous or metachronous, colorectal, or other Lynch syndrome-related tumors*, regardless of age

- Colorectal cancer with microsatellite instability-high histology (tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, Crohn like lymphocytic reaction, mucinous or signet-ring differentiation, or medullary growth pattern)

- Colorectal cancer diagnosed in a patient with one or more first-degree relatives with a Lynch syndrome-related cancer*, with one of the cancers diagnosed before age 50

- Colorectal cancer diagnosed in a patient with two or more first- or second-degree relatives with Lynch syndrome-related cancers* regardless of age

* Lynch syndrome-related cancers include colorectal, endometrial, gastric, ovarian, pancreas, ureter and renal pelvis, biliary tract, brain (usually glioblastoma as seen in Turcot syndrome), and small intestinal cancers, as well as sebaceous gland adenomas and keratoacanthoma (as seen in Muir-Torre syndrome).

Use of Amsterdan and Bethesda criteria to identify patients with Lynch syndrome misses approximately 50%, whereas about 50% of patients meeting criteria do not have Lynch syndrome.

Individuals identified by tumor testing with immunohistochemical staining and/or microsatellite instability or meeting testing criteria are recommended to consider Lynch syndrome-specific gene testing or multi-gene testing of affected family members is encouraged; however, when no affected member is available, testing of unaffected individuals should be considered.