Possible complications include ventricular arrhythmias, right bundle branch block that are usually transient and resolve once the catheter is removed or the catheter tip position is adjusted. Very rarely complete heart block in the setting of prior left bundle branch block can occur that may require temporary pacemaker placement.

Air embolism can occur if there was air in the catheters or the fluid-filled pressure transducers. The patient can manifest with sudden onset of chest pain, dyspnea, hypotension, tachycardia. If this is suspected, the patient should be placed in the Trendelenburg position, and high flow oxygen must be administered. This helps in the reduction of the nitrogen in blood and promotes reabsorption of the injected air. In some situations, hyperbaric oxygen therapy is required.

The rate of pulmonary artery perforation is 0.03%, which can occur in the setting of prolonged balloon inflation and distal placement of the catheter into the pulmonary arteries for wedge pressure measurement, particularly in the setting of prior pulmonary hypertension and systemic anticoagulation. This can manifest as sudden dyspnea and cardiogenic shock. Fluoroscopy can help identify if the tip of the catheter is very distal in the pulmonary artery branches. If this occurs, the catheter should be left in place with the balloon inflated so as to minimize pulmonary hemorrhage. The patient should be emergently intubated with a double-lumen endotracheal tube and placed in the lateral decubitus position with the affected side down so as to protect the unaffected side from the ongoing hemorrhage. Emergent surgery or embolization should be considered.

For indwelling pulmonary artery catheters, the potential complications include access site infection, pulmonary infarction, right-sided chamber or pulmonary artery perforation, arrhythmias, thrombosis of the accessed vein.