**Fractures**

Most children with simple, non-displaced fractures can be treated with appropriate splinting, followed by casting for several weeks. Surgical treatment for fractures depends on the degree of injury and the age of the child. Open fractures are often managed in the operating room with vigorous irrigation, cleaning, and exploration, followed by reduction if indicated and casting. Consultation with pediatric orthopedics is recommended, especially if there is doubt regarding the appropriate treatment and disposition of the child.

**SCFE/LCP Disease**

Emergency pediatric orthopedic consultation is indicated in these children. Children with SCFE require operative repair, albeit not necessarily in cases of mild slippage; these children should be made non-weight bearing and have very close follow-up; prophylactic pinning is usually done to prevent worsening slippage. Management for children with LCP disease ranges from immobilization to operative intervention. This will depend on the degree of symptoms and radiographic findings.

**Osteomyelitis/Myositis/Discitis**

Children with these conditions are admitted for appropriate intravenous antibiotics. Consultation with pediatric infectious disease and/or pediatric orthopedics is recommended before antibiotic initiation. If there is an associated abscess, operative management is required.

**Oncologic Etiologies**

Oncologic etiologies warrant admission for further evaluation and management after consultation with pediatric oncology and staging of the lesion.

**Rheumatologic**

The disposition of the child depends on the degree of pain and the child’s response to analgesia. Consultation with pediatric rheumatology is recommended.