At a length varying from 3 to 5 cm and a caliber of 1 cm, the coronary sinus is the largest coronary vein. It arises along the posterior aspect of the heart between the left atrium and the left ventricle. From there, it continues along the left posterior atrioventricular groove before emptying into the posteroinferior aspect of the right atrium, just medial to the entrance of the inferior vena cava and superior to the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve.

The coronary sinus is a product of many venous tributaries. The origin of the coronary sinus is marked by the coalescence of the great cardiac vein and oblique vein of the left atrium (oblique vein of Marshall). Immediately downstream, the posterior vein of the left ventricle, middle cardiac vein, and small cardiac vein drain into the coronary sinus, respectively, just before it terminates at the right atrium.

In summary, the following tributaries drain into the coronary sinus:

- Great cardiac vein

- Oblique vein of the left atrium

- Posterior vein of the left ventricle

- Middle cardiac vein

- Small cardiac vein

All tributaries, except for the oblique vein of the left atrium, contain valves at their junction with the coronary sinus. Located at the endpoint of the Great Cardiac Vein, the Vieussens Valve marks the origin of the coronary sinus. The coronary sinus continues along the left atrioventricular groove until it reaches the Thebesian valve, which is located at the orifice of the coronary sinus as it drains into the right atrium. The Thebesian valve prevents regurgitant blood flow from the right atrium from entering the coronary sinus during diastole.

As the major tributary of the greater cardiac venous system, the coronary sinus returns approximately 55% of the coronary blood supply into the right atrium. The anterior cardiac veins, which range in numbers between 2 and 5, drain approximately 35% of the coronary blood supply into the right atrium. The remaining 10% is returned by the smallest cardiac veins (Thebesian veins), which drain into any of the four cardiac chambers.