The management of myocardial infarction should focus on hemodynamic stability, pain relief, increasing oxygen supply to the heart, and decreasing myocardium oxygen demand.

1. Oxygen: Supplemental oxygen should be administered to patients with arterial oxygen saturation of less than 90%.

2. Nitrates: Patients with ongoing chest pain should receive sublingual nitroglycerin 0.4 mg every 5 minutes for a total of 3 doses, and after that, an assessment should take place regarding the need for IV nitroglycerin. Intravenous nitroglycerin is indicated for the relief of ongoing ischemic discomfort, control of BP, or maintenance with nitroglycerin. Avoid nitrates in patients with systolic BP less than 90 mm Hg, severe bradycardia, suspected RV infarction and those who have received a phosphodiesterase inhibitor with in the last 24 hours

3. Analgesia: Administer morphine sulfate for pain relief.

4. Aspirin: Give an initial dose of 162 mg to 325 mg.

5. Beta-blockers: Administer oral beta-blockers in patients without contraindications and in the presence of tachyarrhythmia or hypertension.

6. Reperfusion: Reperfusion is the mainstay of treatment in acute MI. Patients with acute anterior STEMI should undergo percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) within 90 minutes of first medical contact. If the patient is at a non- PCI capable hospital, the door-in door-out time should be less than 30 minutes with the transfer of the patient to a PCI capable hospital. The expectation is that the first medical contact to intervention time will be as soon as possible, ideally less than 120 minutes. If the door-in door-out time is greater than 30 minutes, and the first medical contact to intervention time is greater than 120 minutes, a fibrinolytic agent should be administered within 30 minutes of arrival. Evidence of failed reperfusion or restenosis will require urgent transfer to a PCI capable hospital. Patients with STEMI having ischemic symptoms for less than 12 hours, patients with absolute contraindication to fibrinolytic therapy irrespective of time delay from first medical contact, cardiogenic shock, or acute severe heart failure irrespective of time delay from the first medical contact should undergo emergent PCI. Early reperfusion leads to decreased complications and better prognosis. PCI has demonstrated superiority to thrombolytic therapy in reducing the short term and long term adverse cardiac events in patients with anterior acute MI.

7. Anticoagulation: Anticoagulation with heparin or low molecular weight heparin after thrombolysis and during PCI is required to prevent thrombosis.

8. Adjunctive therapy should include P2Y12 inhibitors, a statin, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor/ angiotensin receptor blocker (ACEi/ ARB), and spironolactone within 24 hours in a stable patient.

9. Patients undergoing PCI should receive the following:

- Aspirin: 162 to 325 mg loading and 81 mg daily maintenance indefinitely

- Clopidogrel: 600 mg as early as possible or at the time of PCI and 75 mg daily maintenance dose OR

- Prasugrel: 60 mg at the time of PCI and 10 mg daily maintenance dose OR

- Ticagrelor: 180 mg as early as possible or at the time of PCI and 90 mg twice daily maintenance dose.

10. Patients undergoing fibrinolytic therapy:

- Adjunctive antithrombotic therapy

- Aspirin: 162 to 325 mg loading dose, 81 to 325 mg maintenance dose

- Clopidogrel: Age < 75 years 300 mg loading dose, 75 mg maintenance. Age >75 years, no loading dose and 75 mg daily for 14 days and up to 1 year

11**.**Secondary prevention for STEMI

- Complete smoking cessation

- Blood pressure control

- Lipid management

- Weight management goal BMI: 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m^2.

- Diabetes management: Goal HBA1c <7%

- Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers - In anterior MI patients start an ACEi or start ARB if intolerant to ACEi

- Aldosterone antagonists: For patients with STEMI who are receiving an ACE inhibitor and a beta-blocker, and who have a left ventricular ejection fraction less than or equal to 40 percent and either heart failure or diabetes

- Beta-blockers: Start in all patients unless contraindicated

12**.**Cardiac rehabilitation - This includes exercise training and counseling, education on heart-healthy living, and counseling to reduce stress.