Transthoracic Echocardiography (TTE): When a patient presents clinically with dyspnea or chest pain, and there is a high pre-test probability that the shortness of breath is of cardiac origin, TTE is recommended. It is useful in identifying the cause, location, and severity of myocardial ischemia, atrial sizes, ejections fraction (EF), left ventricular hypertrophy, and presence of valvular disease.

Bedside Echocardiography: The use of bedside echocardiography is widespread and allows a physician to obtain immediate information in the acute setting. A common use is an assessment of cardiovascular response while hydrating a hypovolemic patient, however, as mentioned above, this gives you information about pre-load, and further clinical assessment must be taken into account.

Transesophageal Echocardiography (TEE): When a patient has a high index of suspicion for infective endocarditis, it is important to have a much clearer image of the valvular structure to identify valvular prolapse, rupture, or infective vegetation on the valves

Stress Echocardiography: When appropriate, stress echocardiography is a great initial modality to assess for cardiac ischemia. First, the patient's heart function is assessed at rest to determine a baseline, next the heart is stressed using either running on a treadmill or pharmacological stressors, including dobutamine, adenosine, or dipyridamole.

Intracardiac Echocardiography (ICE): The use of ICE is less frequent given its invasive technique, cost, steep learning curve, and due to the advancements in TTE and TEE.

Intravascular Ultrasound (IVUS): The mainstay of treatment for coronary artery disease is cardiac catheterization when appropriate, and most commonly, it is performed under the guidance of angiography. Contrast is introduced into the cardiac vasculature while radiography is performed, allowing the visualization of coronary anatomy. This is also the technique interventional cardiologists utilize to guide their wire and assess stenosis. When stenosis is <40%, no intervention is generally required, but with a greater than 70% stenosis, a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is performed.

Strain rate (STR) Echocardiography: TTE is able to detect wall motion abnormalities in those with ischemic or non-ischemic cardiomyopathy; however, when these abnormalities are sub-clinical, STR echocardiography is a more sensitive utility. Early detection in asymptomatic patients is an important use of STR echocardiography, especially in those with diabetes, amyloidosis, and muscular dystrophies.

3-dimensional (3D) Echocardiography: The use of traditional 2D echocardiography is limited due to foreshortened views of the ventricles and atria, and this can underestimate volumes.

Contrast Echocardiography: When a patient has an embolic cerebrovascular accident, the most common origin is cardioembolic. Contrast-enhanced echocardiography is performed to assess for the presence of a patent foramen ovale, which may require surgical closure.