As previously stated, dysfunction of the BBB can be seen in many chronic neurological disorders, such as multiple sclerosis (MS), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Alzheimer disease (AD), and Parkinson disease (PD). BBB dysfunction may also be observed in acute neurological disorders such as traumatic brain injury (TBI) or stroke. It is currently known that cerebrovascular dysfunction (CVD) and vascular pathology play a significant role in the majority of these neurological disorders.

**Alzheimer Disease**

A widely accepted hypothesis regarding the pathogenesis of AD is the two-hit vascular hypothesis, which states that while either oxidative stress or mitotic signaling abnormalities may independently serve as initiators of the disease, they are both needed to generate the disease pathology.

The first hit in the two-hit hypothesis is damage to blood vessels. Damage may occur through vascular risk factors, such as diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia; environmental risk factors, such as pollution; or genetic risk factors, such as being a carrier of the APOE-ε4 gene. Blood vessel damage causes BBB dysfunction and decreased brain perfusion, which leads to the second hit in the two-hit hypothesis - Aβ accumulation in the brain. Aβ accumulation leads to neuronal injury and degeneration, synaptic dysfunction, and, ultimately, dementia.

**Parkinson Disease**

Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common degenerative neurological disorder globally, second only to Alzheimer disease. Pathologically, PD is characterized by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta and the accumulation of α-synuclein inclusion bodies termed Lewy bodies. Risk factors for the development of PD include known genetic alterations and environmental risk factors, which may ultimately lead to neuronal death in PD.

Past studies related to the pathological process of PD stated that the BBB was not truly compromised in PD. The main reason the BBB was thought to be intact in PD patients was due to the use of peripheral aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AAAD) inhibitors, such as carbidopa. The fact that carbidopa does not compromise levodopa therapy further contributed to this belief. Carbidopa was developed based on its inability to cross the BBB while effectively inhibiting the peripheral decarboxylase enzyme, thereby increasing the availability of levodopa, which can cross the BBB to the brain.

However, as of 2020, further studies have shown that the BBB is disrupted in animal models of PD, yet clinical studies in humans are currently lacking. It is the current idea that PD involves the vascular model of neurodegeneration. The two concepts of this model are hypoperfusion and BBB disruption, both of which contribute to neuronal dysfunction and death. In humans, a small positron emission tomography (PET) study in PD patients showed dysfunction of the BBB transporter system. Furthermore, a histological examination revealed significantly increased permeability of the BBB in the post-commissural putamen of PD patients. Thus, the areas implicated in PD pathology have demonstrated BBB disruption, yet, as previously stated, studies remain few and predominantly in animal models.

**Traumatic Brain Injury**

BBB disruption associated with TBI is considered a significant risk factor for high morbidity and mortality. The disruption of the BBB may occur within hours following injury and can persist from days to years. Two markers of BBB disruption, extravasation of the serum protein fibrinogen and immunoglobulin G (IgG), were observed in the brains of human patients that died in the acute phase following TBI, as well as in those that survived at least one year.

A significant consequence of BBB disruption associated with TBI is cerebral edema due to excess water accumulation in the brain. Two types of edema, cytotoxic and vasogenic, can occur following a brain injury. Vasogenic edema results from fluid accumulation in the perivascular space, leading to changes in cerebral blood flow (CBF) and increased intracranial pressure (ICP). Alternatively, cytotoxic edema is caused by the activation of ion channels that drive the influx of water into the intracellular space of various cell types resulting in further disruption to the BBB. Without immediate intervention, elevated ICP and changes in CBF can result in irreversible tissue damage and cell death, contributing to high mortality in severe cases of TBI.