Treating anemia in patients using erythropoietin stimulating agents (ESA) requires an interprofessional team of medical providers. This team should include a nephrologist in patients with chronic kidney disease, a hematologist/oncologist in patients undergoing chemotherapy, appropriate nursing staff, a pharmacist for ESA dosing, a phlebotomy lab/ technician for blood draws to monitor for improvement.

The healthcare team should arrange appropriate follow-up appointments to reassess the patient’s health status and any adverse effects of the ESA; this is where specialty-trained nurses and pharmacists can play a significant role. Nursing will have the most frequent and ongoing contact with the patient, so they can provide education and monitor for adverse effects and administer the medication. Pharmacists with specialty oncology certification should monitor dosing, interactions, and lab values that may alter or stop the dosing of the ESA. Both nurses and pharmacists must chart and inform the treating physician of any findings, changes, or concerns.

Patients should receive counseling on the potential adverse effects and when to seek immediate medical care. Emergency medical providers should be aware of the adverse effects of ESAs to risk-stratify patients for venous thromboembolism, acute coronary syndrome, ischemic stroke, and other emergent conditions related to ESA.

Only through the coordinated effort of an interprofessional healthcare team can ESA therapy be administered safely and effectively, with minimal adverse events and optimal patient results. [Level 5]

Monitoring the hemoglobin level to optimize patient outcomes and minimize adverse effects is very important. A debate exists regarding the appropriate target hemoglobin in individuals treated with ESA. A pooled analysis of nine randomized control trials on patients with chronic kidney disease indicates that patients have higher mortality and morbidity from cardiovascular-related events when the hemoglobin falls below 10 g/dL.