Therapeutic goals in patients with pulmonary edema include alleviation of symptoms and treatment of the underlying pathologic condition.

Diuretics remain the mainstay of treatment, and furosemide being the most commonly used medication. Higher doses are associated with more improvement in dyspnea; however, also associated with transient worsening of renal function.

Vasodilators can be added as an adjuvant therapy to the diuretics in the management of pulmonary edema.

Nifedipine has been utilized in the prophylaxis and treatment of high altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE). This calcium channel blocker counteracts the hypoxia-mediated vasoconstriction of the pulmonary vasculature. This leads to the lowering of the pulmonary arterial pressure with subsequent improvements in gas exchange, exercise capability, and chest radiography.

Inotropes, such as dobutamine and dopamine, are used in the management of pulmonary congestion when associated with low SBP and signs of tissue hypoperfusion. Significant adverse events include tachyarrhythmias, ischemia, and hypotension. Milrinone is an IV inotrope with vasodilatory properties but is associated with an increase in post-discharge mortality.

Morphine reduces systemic vascular resistance and acts as an analgesic and anxiolytic. It has been used in the management of pulmonary edema secondary to acute coronary syndrome. However, it may cause respiratory depression needing intubation, and generally not recommended.

Ventilatory support, both noninvasive and invasive, is used to improve oxygenation, direct alveolar and interstitial fluids back into the capillaries, improve hypercarbia and hence reverse respiratory acidosis, and lastly, tissue oxygenation. It also aims at reducing the work of breathing. The decision to provide ventilatory support is based on clinical improvement with a trial of the above-mentioned drugs, patient's mental status, overall energy, or lack of such. In patients on invasive mechanical ventilation, continuous monitoring of hemodynamics is essential as a reduction in preload can lead to reduced cardiac output and thus a fall in SBP. Noninvasive mechanical ventilation, when initiated early in the management of pulmonary edema, has been associated with lower occurrences of respiratory muscle fatigue and, thus, reduction in invasive ventilation.