Malignancy-associated hypercalcemia is ideally treated by an interprofessional team that consists of an oncologist, internist, endocrinologist, and surgeon. It is also important to involve a pain specialist because many patients may present with varying degrees of pain. More than 90% of the cases of hypercalcemia are due to primary hyperparathyroidism and malignancy-induced hypercalcemia. Nurses, lab personnel, and pharmacists round out the interprofessional team.

The various clinicians will guide treatment, and nursing will play a big part in case management by assisting with patient assessment, counseling, and serving as a liaison between the various specialties. Pharmacists will ensure the proper drugs at the correct dose are given, reporting any potential drug interactions and counseling patients regarding potential adverse effects they should monitor. Lab techs will ensure blood collection takes place and serum values are processed and reported to the clinicians in a timely manner. All interprofessional team members must maintain accurate records, so everyone involved in care has the same patient data. This interprofessional approach will optimize patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Malignancy remains the most common cause of hypercalcemia in hospitalized patients. While most cases are managed as an outpatient, severe hypercalcemia requires in-patient treatment. The outcome depends on the stage of the primary malignancy and the severity of hypercalcemia. Patients with uncontrolled malignancy and severe hypercalcemia usually have a poor prognosis.