The common adverse effects of pioglitazone are edema, weight gain, macular edema, osteoporosis, and congestive heart failure (CHF). It may cause hypoglycemia when combined with other antidiabetic drugs and decrease hematocrit and hemoglobin levels.

- Weight gain, fluid retention is considered to contribute to weight gain

- A decrease in hemoglobin and hematocrit most likely due to hemodilution

- It is associated with increased bone fracture risk, especially in women, and might be a potential cause of osteoporosis.

- It correlates with an increase in serum low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels.

- Myocardial infarction, although it is more common in rosiglitazone users than in users of pioglitazone as per a retrospective cohort study conducted to study cardiac adverse effects of both these drugs.

- It has been proven in four real-life registries that the relative risk of CHF with TZDs was between 1.06 and 1.76 (between 1.10 and 1.44 if combined with insulin) in comparison to treatment without TZDs. Such a relatively high CHF risk merits acknowledgment along with the potential benefits of TZDs in the management of type 2 diabetes. The odds ratio of intraclass correlation was 1.43 (pioglitazone vs. placebo) in diabetic patients with high cardiovascular risk in the PROactive trial.

- In December 2016, the FDA conclusion was that using pioglitazone may be associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer.

- Pioglitazone should be discontinued in patients with developed macular edema.

There is a known drug interaction with oral contraceptives (OCPs), as co-administration of a TZD with OCPs containing ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone reduced the plasma concentrations of both hormones by approximately 30%, which could result in loss of contraception. Therefore, ensure extra caution regarding contraception in patients receiving pioglitazone and OCPs.

Pioglitazone and insulin combination increases the risks of edema and heart failure.

Pioglitazone was associated with bladder tumors in male rats. Although some studies showed an increase of bladder cancer in pioglitazone users in the past, a meta-analysis published in 2017 failed to show an increased risk ratio or hazard ratio between pioglitazone use and the risk of bladder malignancy, allowing Filipova et al. to state that there is no link between long-term use of pioglitazone and bladder cancer.