Gastrulation is a process in embryonic development in which the two-layered blastula becomes a three-layered gastrula consisting of the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. The development of the vertebrae begins at this time with the development of the notochord. The mesoderm surrounding the notochord separates into three areas: the paraxial, lateral, and intermediate areas.  The intermediate mesoderm contributes to the urogenital system, while the lateral mesoderm contributes to other organ systems, including the cardiac and pulmonary systems. The paraxial mesoderm then develops into 42 pairs of somites that develop in a craniocaudal direction. Each somite then differentiates into a dermomyotome and a sclerotome. The dermomyotome eventually forms the muscle and dermis of the skin, while the sclerotome becomes the skeleton of the vertebral column.

After separate sclerotome form from each somite, the cells migrate and begin to surround the notochord. Each sclerotome starts to separate into two different clusters of cells: one located cranially and the other caudally. Between each cluster, an intervertebral disc develops. The intervertebral disc consists of a central core known as the nucleus pulposus and an outer ring known as the annulus fibrosis. The nucleus pulposus originates from the notochord, while the annulus fibrosis originates from the sclerotome.

Ossification of the vertebrae occurs in three primary centers and five secondary centers. One primary center of ossification is in the centrum, and the remaining two are on each side on the neural processes. There are five secondary ossification centers; the tip of the spinous process, the tip of both transverse processes, and the superior and inferior surfaces of the vertebral body.