**First degree.**In first-degree AV block, the P waves always precede the QRS complexes, but there is a prolongation of the PR interval. The PR interval will be greater than 200 milliseconds in duration without any dropped beats. There is a delay, without interruption, in conduction from the atrium to the ventricle. All atrial activation is eventually transmitted to the ventricles. The delay is typically due to a minor AV conduction defect occurring at or below the AV node.

- **Causes.**There are multiple causes of first-degree AV block, including simply being a normal variant. Other causes include inferior myocardial infarction (MI), increased vagal tone (e.g., athletes), status post-cardiac surgery, myocarditis, hyperkalemia, or even medication-induced (e.g., beta-blockers, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocks, adenosine, digitalis, and amiodarone).

- **Clinical significance.**This is benign and does not result in any hemodynamic instability. No specific treatment is required.

**Second degree, Mobitz type 1 (Wenckebach).**In second-degree Mobitz type 1 AV block, there is a progressive prolongation of the PR interval, which eventually culminates in a non-conducting P wave. The PR interval continues to prolong with each beat of the cycle,  and the subsequent PR lengthening is progressively shorter. The PR interval before the dropped beat is the longest of the cycle, and the PR interval after the dropped beat is the shortest as the cycle starts over.

- **Mechanism.**This is usually a result of a reversible conduction block at the level of the AV node. There is typically a functional suppression of AV conduction. The AV nodal cells seem to progressively fatigue until they fail to conduct an impulse to the ventricles and a dropped beat occurs.

- **Causes.**There are multiple causes of second-degree Mobitz type 1 (Wenckebach) AV block, including reversible ischemia, myocarditis, increased vagal tone, status post-cardiac surgery, or even medications that slow AV nodal conduction (e.g., beta-blockers, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocks, adenosine, digitalis, and amiodarone).

- **Clinical significance.**Differentiating between second-degree Mobitz type 1 (Wenckebach) and Mobitz type 2 AV blocks is important as the management and treatment are different. Mobitz type 1 is often a benign rhythm. Most patients are asymptomatic, and there tends to be a minimal hemodynamic disturbance. Patients that are asymptomatic do not require treatment and can be monitored on an outpatient basis. Patients that are symptomatic typically respond to atropine and rarely require permanent cardiac pacing. Medication-induced impairment of AV conduction is often reversible after stopping the offending agent.

**Second degree, Mobitz type 2.**In second-degree Mobitz type 2 AV block, there are intermittent non-conducted P waves without warning. Unlike Mobitz type 1 (Wenckebach), there is no progressive prolongation of the PR interval; instead, the PR interval remains constant, and the P waves occur at a constant rate with unchanged P-P intervals. Because the P waves continue to occur at normal intervals, the R-R interval surrounding the dropped beat is simply a multiple of the preceding R-R interval and remains unchanged.

- **Mechanism.**In Mobitz type 2, the block occurs farther along the electrical conduction system below the AV node.

- In this case, the cells abruptly and unpredictably fail to conduct an impulse from the atria to the ventricles. This is often the result of structural damage to the conduction system.

- Because the defect occurs below the AV node and often times distal to the His Bundle, it produces wide, bizarre-appearing QRS complexes. In the remaining cases, the defect is located within the Bundle of His, resulting in the normal, narrow QRS complexes. There can be a fixed P:QRS relationship (e.g., 2:1, 3:1) or no pattern at all.

- **Causes.**Common causes of second-degree Mobitz type 2 AV block include anterior MI, causing septal infarction of the bundle branches. Other causes include idiopathic fibrosis of the conducting system, autoimmune (e.g., systemic sclerosis or systemic lupus erythematosus) or inflammatory (e.g., myocarditis, Lyme disease, or rheumatic fever) conditions, infiltrative myocardial disease (hemochromatosis, sarcoidosis, or amyloidosis), electrolyte imbalance (e.g., hyperkalemia), medication-induced (e.g., beta-blockers, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, digitalis, adenosine, or amiodarone), or status post-cardiac surgery (e.g., mitral valve repair).

- **Clinical significance.**Mobitz type 2 AV block can be associated with severe bradycardia and hemodynamic instability. It has a greater risk of progressing to third-degree (complete) heart block or asystole. Because the onset of dropped beats can occur abruptly and unexpectedly, hemodynamic instability and the consequential syncope and potentially sudden cardiac death can occur at any moment. Thus, patients require a permanent pacemaker. While Mobitz type 1 can improve with atropine, giving atropine in the setting of Mobitz type 2 can worsen the block and increase the risk of complete heart block or asystole.

**Third-degree (complete).**In third-degree, or complete, heart block there is an absence of AV nodal conduction, and the P waves are never related to the QRS complexes. If ventricular conduction occurs, it is maintained by a junctional or ventricular escape rhythm. There is a complete dissociation between the atria and ventricles and they conduct independently of each other. The P waves (atrial activity) are said to “march through” the QRS complexes at their regular, faster rate. The QRS complexes (ventricular activity) also occur at a regular, but slower rate. There are two independent rhythms occurring simultaneously.

- **Mechanism.**Third-degree heart block is the end result of progressively worsening second-degree AV block. Because a third-degree heart block can occur above or below the AV node, two different rhythms can take over. If it occurs above or at the crest of the AV node, a junctional rhythm will take over and drive the ventricles. The resulting QRS complexes will be narrow and occur at the intrinsic rate of the AV node (40 to 55 beats/minute). Whereas if the block occurs below the AV node, a ventricular pacemaker must take over. In such cases, the QRS complexes will be wide and at the intrinsic rate of the ventricular pacemaker (20 to 40 beats/minute).

- **Causes.**Complete heart block is often the result of the same causes as Mobitz type 1 and Mobitz type 2. Other causes include inferior MI, degeneration of the conduction system, and AV-nodal blocking agents such as beta-blockers, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, adenosine, digitalis, and amiodarone.

- **Clinical significance.**Patients with complete heart block are at great risk of developing asystole, ventricular tachycardia, and sudden cardiac death. Insertion of a permanent pacemaker is required.