Management of patients with neglect is via a combination of different rehabilitation therapies and medications.

1) Rehabilitation includes a combination of visual exploration, intensive motor therapy of motor-sensory defects, and continuous reinforced neck muscle vibration or allocation of attention to the neglected side.

For motor-sensory defects, the following therapies by occupational therapists are recommendations from the American Heart Association (AHA) and the American Occupational Therapy Association (AOTA).

1) Prism Adaptation Treatment: An economically feasible and highly effective restorative therapy in which patients ideally have ten sessions in 14 days according to standardized criteria.

2) Other strategies include limb activation and optokinetic stimulation. In limb activation therapy, which consists of 1 or 2 sessions per week for three months, the patient moves his affected limb towards the neglected side after receiving sensory or verbal stimuli.  This strategy will analyze spatial motor systems directly and, perception-attention function indirectly.

3) Such patients do not normally respond to commands or surrounding stimuli. A neuropsychological evaluation must be done at an early stage to define the main reason behind this altered behavior in addition to speech therapy, occupational and physical therapy.

4) Medical treatment in spatial neglect is typically secondary to stroke. Cholinesterase inhibitors such as rivastigmine or donepezil are used as the primary treatment strategy in post-stroke class IIb patients (according to AHA recommendations) for cognitive impairments in doses recommended by VA/DOD guidelines.

5) The use of stimulants e.g., methylphenidate, has proven to be useful in neglect patients according to a randomized clinical trial.

6) Contraindicated medications are benzodiazepines, anticholinergic, antidopaminergic, and sedatives/hypnotics because of the reappearance of resolved symptoms in neglect patients or the development of delirium.