There are several signs of glomerular dysfunction that can be used in the diagnosis and are also used to separate diseases into nephrotic or nephritic syndromes.

- **Protein in the urine (proteinuria****):**This is a hallmark measure of renal disease, and the primary measure used to differentiate between nephrotic and nephritic syndromes. Protein in the urine can be due to glomerular disease-causing proteins to leak into the urine, or a defect in protein reabsorption in the kidney tubules. Proteinuria may cause foamy urine.  Generally, very high protein concentration in the urine or "nephrotic range" > 200 mg/l is associated with podocyte disruption, which results in non-selective protein loss.

- **Blood in the urine (hematuria****):**The presence of hemoglobin from leaked red blood cells gives the urine a pink or light brown (cola-colored). This presentation is a typical symptom of nephritic syndrome, along with lower proteinuria, and is proteinuria is associated with nephritic attributable to a defect in the glomerular basement membrane.

- **Edema:**Protein losses from the blood results in a reduction of colloid oncotic pressure and increased filtration from the capillaries resulting in the excess, non-resorbed fluid accumulation within the intercellular spaces to cause swelling. This swelling due to edema is usually more noticeable in the hands, ankles, or periorbitally.

- **Uremia:**reduced glomerular filtration rate: Disruption of the barrier can also result in reduced filtration and thus the accumulation of waste products such as. Creatinine and urea nitrogen in the blood.

**Acidosis:**This is beyond a discussion of the glomerulus, but still bears mentioning. Kidney tubules are involved in the metabolic acid-base homeostatic regulation of blood pH.

**Tables 1-3 and Legends**

**Table 1: Diseases with Nephritic syndromes.**This syndrome is a set of symptoms generally attributed to inflammatory processes, and not a disease in itself.  It involves disruption of the glomerular basement membrane, and common features include hypertension (salt retention), increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatine, oliguria, hematuria, and red blood cell casts. Proteinuria of less than approximately 3.5 g/day.**References for diseases in table 1:******Le et al. 2019 First Aid for the USMLE McGraw Hill pp 583-5,**Key:**GBM = glomerular basement membrane, LM= light microscopy, IF =  immunofluorescence, EM = electron microscopy, IgG = immunoglobulin G, C3 = complement C3.

**Table 2: Diseases with Nephrotic syndromes**. This syndrome is also a set of symptoms and not a disease in itself. It can occur with many diseases; thus, the basis of prevention is controlling the underlying causal diseases. This syndrome is generally due to podocyte disruption, resulting in impairment of the charge barrier. This syndrome is characterized by massive proteinuria > 3.5g/day with hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, and edema.**References for diseases in table 2:**Le et al. 2019 First Aid for the USMLE McGraw Hill pp 583-585,**Key:**GBM = glomerular basement membrane, LM= light microscopy, IF =  immunofluorescence, EM = electron microscopy, IgG = immunoglobulin G, C3 = complement C3.

**Table 3: Diseases with both Nephritic-nephrotic syndrome**s. Severe nephritic syndrome with profound glomerular basement membrane damage, resulting in a change of the charge barrier. Nephrotic range proteinuria (>3.5 g/day), and features of nephrotic syndrome.**Reference for diseases in table 3:**Le et al. 2019 First Aid for the USMLE McGraw Hill pp 583-5,**Key:**GBM = glomerular basement membrane,  LM= light microscopy, IF = immunofluorescence, EM = electron microscopy, IgG = immunoglobulin G, C3 = complement C3.