Testing rarely leads to a diagnosis as the most common cause is vasovagal and benign. A thorough physical examination is the most important diagnostic tool as it helps in diagnosing the cause and excluding potential life-threatening causes. Choice of diagnostic studies depends on history and physical examination.

In patients presenting to the Emergency department, routine blood work to include hemoglobin, electrolytes, and glucose is indicated. At the minimum ECG is needed in all patients presenting with syncope.

If cardiovascular etiology suspected, further workup includes cardiac enzymes, continuous cardiac monitoring, and echocardiogram. Holter monitor recommended for outpatients suspected of conduction abnormalities.

If cerebrovascular etiology suspected, further workup includes CT head, carotid Doppler ultrasound, MRI brain, and MRA.

Electroencephalography (EEG) indicated if seizures suspected.

A tilt table test is indicated in:

- Patients with recurrent episodes of syncope of unknown etiology in the absence of cardiac disease.

- Suspected vasovagal syncope but not sure

- Differentiate between suspected reflex syncope and orthostatic hypotension syncope.

The ECG is the most useful diagnostic study, yielding an etiology of syncope in approximately 5% of patients, while routine blood work leads to a diagnosis in only about 2% of cases. Despite widespread and often indiscriminate testing, approximately 45% of patients will leave the emergency department without a diagnosis following their syncopal event. Recent data suggests that a focused management plan may help diagnose an etiology of the syncopal event and reduce the number of patients discharged without a diagnosis. For example, echocardiography before discharge may be useful in uncovering valvular disease in a patient presenting with a murmur and syncope. Similarly, overnight telemetry or discharge with an event monitor may help expose a dysrhythmia in a patient with evidence of conduction disease on their presenting ECG.