In the emergency department, a positive pregnancy test should spark further evaluation, especially if the patient is reporting abdominal or pelvic pain and or vaginal bleeding.

A single beta-HCG level does not provide any information on whether a pregnancy is intrauterine. An emergent ultrasound should be performed for any pregnant female in whom ectopic pregnancy is suspected. Ultrasound may demonstrate an intrauterine pregnancy, an ectopic pregnancy, findings suggestive of an extrauterine pregnancy (solid or complex adnexal mass), or might be indeterminate.

If the ultrasound results are indeterminate, the "discriminatory zone" can be used to help clinically correlate the ultrasound findings with the beta-HCG level. The discriminatory zone is the approximate beta-HCG threshold where an intrauterine pregnancy can typically be identified by ultrasound. Transvaginal ultrasound has high sensitivity when beta-HCG levels are above 1,500 mIU/mL, while the threshold is much higher using the transabdominal approach (approximately 6,000 mIU/mL).

If the patient has an indeterminate ultrasound and the beta-HCG is less than the discriminatory zone, and the patient is hemodynamically stable without significant pain or vaginal bleeding, she should be directed to have a quantitative serum beta-HCG level repeated in 48 hours. If this repeat level is rising, ideally doubling every 48 hours, this is highly suggestive of a normal pregnancy. In contrast, if the beta-HCG level is declining or not doubling in 48 hours, miscarriage or failed pregnancy should be suspected.