Vertebrobasilar insufficiency is managed by an interprofessional team that includes the emergency department physician, neurologist, radiologist, internist, and a stroke specialist. Most patients become disabled and recovery for the survivors can take years.

While the definitive treatment is under the care of a neurologist, the primary care provider and nurse practitioner should educate the patients on preventing further episodes. Following a vertebral artery stroke, most patients have significant disability and recovery is prolonged. These patients require extensive rehabilitation to improve speech, swallowing, and gait. In addition, many nursing issues have to be addressed including bowel and bladder training, nutrition, patient safety, prevention of pressure ulcers and performing daily living activities.

In addition, patients often become depressed and a consult from a mental health nurse is highly recommended.

The patient should be discouraged from smoking, remain compliant with medications, maintain a healthy weight, ensure that the cholesterol levels are under control and participate in regular exercise. Because of the risk of a recurrent stroke, follow up is vital. Those who are maintained on warfarin need to have their INR checked regularly.

Speech, occupational, and physical therapy are an integral part of treatment and most patients need extensive rehabilitation for many months. A home care nurse is often needed to check on patient recovery and progress. The entire team must communicate to ensure that the patient is receiving the optimal standard of care.

The outcomes for patients with vertebrobasilar insufficiency depends on the severity of the stroke, age, comorbidity, and degree of neurological deficit.