When prescribing quinolones, many factors must merit consideration to avoid the many potential severe adverse events that can result from quinolone use. Of major note is tendon rupture associated with quinolone use. Risk factors identified for tendon rupture include advanced age (>60 years old), concurrent steroid therapy, and certain conditions such as hypercholesterolemia, gout, rheumatoid arthritis, end-stage renal disease, and history of previous renal transplantation. Athletes are also among the higher-risk individuals for tendon rupture and, as such, must have careful monitoring for tendonitis when taking quinolones or otherwise opt for another antibiotic, if available.

Multiple studies have observed an increase in the elimination half-life of various quinolones with decreasing creatinine clearance.

QTc interval prolongation is an adverse event that usually occurs with newer quinolones. Though certain quinolones display more cardiotoxicity than others, it is important to consider the possibility of QTc prolongation due to the potentially severe nature of this event, regardless of which quinolone the patient is using. As such, quinolones are not recommended for patients on other medications that can also cause QTc interval prolongation as they risk developing Torsades de pointes, a severe life-threatening arrhythmia. These medications may include antiarrhythmics, antifungals, antipsychotics, antidepressants, and certain anti-tuberculosis drugs. Clinicians should avoid quinolone use in patients with known QTc prolongation as well as those with hypokalemia. If a patient must take these medications concurrently, they need careful monitoring with an electrocardiogram.