A full biomechanical evaluation is crucial to optimal success. The ankle joint must be evaluated to see if an adequate range of motion exists to support an arthrodesis of the midfoot. The entire lower extremity must also be assessed to plan for proper intra-op and post-op positioning of the foot. This process involves a gait analysis with both the knee, ankle, and foot position evaluated.

Typically, the foot upon weight-bearing and in the progression of gait abducts approximately 10 to 15 degrees. If the knee is rectus with the foot abducted 15 degrees, it may be advisable to abduct the foot in its final position to 30 degrees; this would be 15 degrees abduction from the line of gait. However, if the knee is laterally positioned 15 degrees during the base of gait, it may be advised to position the foot in a rectus position.

Pre-operative radiographs include a weight-bearing dorsoplantar, medial oblique, and lateral view. These views can help assess overall joint quality, joint positioning needing to be corrected to obtain a rectus foot, and potential wedging or required grafting during the procedure.  A calcaneal axial view may also be obtained to assess the degree of correction in regards to calcaneal valgus or varus. If questioning the integrity of the subtalar joint, one can get a CT scan to evaluate.

Adequate patient counseling must take place before the procedure. With the fusion of the joints of the rearfoot, the patient will have difficulty walking on uneven surfaces, possible difficulty going downstairs, and a change in gait pattern. Patients must know that the post-procedure recovery may take six months to a year until fully recovered.