In light of the present opioid epidemic in the United States, seeking alternative pain reduction methods that either reduce or obviate the need for administering opioids is essential. Higher-risk populations for opioid abuse include young males, individuals with a history of misuse, and individuals with significant mental health histories.

Ketorolac has demonstrated effectiveness equal to that of morphine when used postoperatively. It has significant potential to be useful in emergency room settings for moderate to severe pain, for which opioids are often regularly prescribed. When considering opioids for acute pain, a multimodal approach can be beneficial to decrease opioid administration to the extent possible. An interprofessional team can also be helpful in correctly identifying individuals who might benefit from alternative pain management medications or interventions and coordinating or assisting in implementing these alternate strategies. Given the relatively high toxicity profile of ketorolac and the oral form is recommended for administration only after IV or IM dosage, highly fluid inter-professional collaboration is ideally maintained to reduce adverse outcomes and ensure the right individuals receive this medication.

Health care providers are first and foremost responsible for identifying individuals who could benefit from non-opioid pain medications, both in the emergency department and in the postoperative setting. Recommendations include pharmacists in this process, as their expertise in medication pharmacokinetics and proper dosing. Pharmacists can also ensure that adverse drug-to-drug interactions are detected and addressed and help decide which patients are ideal for ketorolac. Nurses play a vital role, given that they spend the most time with patients and are the individuals responsible for administrating ketorolac in its oral, IV, and IM forms. They assist in monitoring for toxicity, as well. Nurses can also liaise between the ordering provider and the patient, informing clinicians of any adverse effects and advocating for patients who might be appropriate candidates for ketorolac. Both nurses and pharmacists are responsible for reporting any concerns or issues to the rest of the health care team.

Coordination of communication between all the above individuals on the interprofessional team is essential to ensure that the patient receives the proper care regarding this medication, thereby optimizing outcomes with its use. [Level 5]