# Continuing Education Activity

Papuloerythroderma of Ofuji (PEO) is a rare skin disorder most commonly found in Japan. It is characterized by polygonal, flat-topped erythematous-brown papules that coalesce into sheets that often cover the entire skin surface but spare the skin folds. PEO is commonly accompanied by pruritus, peripheral eosinophilia, and elevated IgE. This activity outlines the evaluation of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the epidemiology of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji. 
- Describe the evaluation for papuloerythroderma of Ofuji. 
- Outline the treatment and management options available for papuloerythroderma of Ofuji. 
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for optimizing care coordination and communication to advance the management of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Papuloerythroderma of Ofuji (PEO) is a rare skin disorder most commonly found in Japan, which is characterized by polygonal, flat-topped erythematous-brown papules coalescing into sheets which often cover the entire skin surface but spare the skin folds. PEO was first discovered in Japan in 1984 by Ofuji, Furukawa, Miyachi, and Ohno.

# Etiology

While the underlying etiology of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji has not been elucidated, a clear connection between underlying malignancy, infectious processes, and pharmacological agents preceding the presentation of PEO has been a consistent theme. The range of oncotic disorders found in association with PEO includes gastric carcinomas, hepatocellular carcinoma, adenocarcinoma of the colon, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, prostate cancer, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

# Epidemiology

The most common subset of the population affected by papuloerythroderma of Ofuji consists of the following demographic; 55 years of age or older, Asian or Caucasian descent, and a predilection for males to females with a ratio of 4 to 1. Epidemiologic factors including age and gender comprise two of the five minor criteria used in diagnosing PEO.

# Histopathology

Histopathological examination of the tissue reveals focal hyperkeratosis and an acanthotic epidermis with minimal spongiotic change. Inflammatory infiltration is present in a perivascular distribution with a non-specific collection of plasma cells, eosinophils, Langerhans cells, lymphocytes, and Th2 cells. These findings are not pathognomonic; however, they do aid in the diagnosis and evaluation of PEO.

# History and Physical

Included in the history and physical in a patient with suspected papuloerythroderma of Ofuji, the provider should elucidate the presence of pruritus, establish the status of atopy, and exclude all external triggering factors including infectious processes, malignancy, and drug-induced lesions. Minor criteria for the diagnosis of PEO include age over 55, male gender, eosinophilia, elevated IgE, and reduced lymphocyte count.

# Evaluation

Laboratory, histopathological, and clinical features are the hallmark of evaluation of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji. Laboratory tests including complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, serum IgE, viral titers for Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and HIV, RPR, VDRL should be performed. Presence of lymphopenia elevated serum IgE, and peripheral eosinophilia are all consistent with the diagnosis of PEO. Histological evaluation of a punch biopsy should be performed in patients and reveals a perivascular infiltration of inflammatory cells including histiocytes, lymphocytes, and granulocytes. As a result of the similarity in clinical presentation of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) and that of PEO, patients should undergo flow cytometry and T-cell receptor clonality studies to rule out the possibility of misdiagnosis and to prevent further delay of treatment in patients with CTCL.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji consists of initially finding the underlying etiology and treating the secondary disease; this may include the treatment of infectious processes or removal of pharmacological agents. Those with idiopathic disease currently have no gold standard of therapy; however previous cases have received treatment with photochemotherapy (PUVA - psoralen and ultraviolet A), oral steroid courses, and cyclosporine. A 9-month course of cyclosporine at 3mg/kg was noted to lead to complete resolution of skin-lesions with some residual post-inflammatory change.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji should include the following: cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, secondary syphilis, and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS). Differentiation of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and PEO is by flow cytometry and evaluation of clonal t-cell samples, secondary syphilis may be ruled out via VDRL and RPR testing, and DRESS can be differentiated via its acute presentation versus the more gradual, chronic course of PEO.

# Prognosis

The course of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji is generally indolent with remission occurring many years after the initial onset in idiopathic cases.

# Complications

A significant complication of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji is secondary bacterial super-infection of the polygonal papular lesions likely due to excoriation. These secondary infections may lead to erysipelas or cellulitis and significantly impact patients overall well-being. These complications are manageable with brief oral courses of clindamycin or cefuroxime.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients suffering from papuloerythroderma of Ofuji should receive proper education on the correlations that exist between PEO and multiple internal malignancies, as well as its similarity and possible association with CTCL. Proper screening and evaluation to rule out these internal malignancies is a crucial component in the management of PEO and informing patients regarding the types of screening they should undergo will aid in adequate the evaluation of possible underlying disease processes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Management of papuloerythroderma of Ofuji requires the participation of an interprofessional healthcare team approach. Besides the primary care provider, nurse practitioner and internist, the involvement of specialists in multiple fields to aid in the diagnosis of underlying malignancy should have participation at an early stage in the disease process. Pharmacists can be integral in helping determine when the condition is drug-induced as well as recommendations for pharmaceutical therapy, and nursing is often the primary point of contact for patients and families, providing education. [Level V] Patients with PEO should undergo evaluation via a gastroenterologist to perform upper endoscopy and colonoscopy to rule out gastric carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the colon. In addition to proper gastroenterological work-up patients should be evaluated for any hematological abnormalities and referred to hematology/oncology specialists if any cell line abnormalities, flow-cytometry abnormalities, or clinical features of malignancy are present.