Sesamoid bones are common in humans, with some bones like the patella being present in everyone and vital to lower extremity function. The patella is an anomaly among sesamoid bones due to its consistent presence, size, and significance in humans. While the patella is present in all humans, it has been shown that it fails to develop entirely in paralyzed embryos due to a lack of mechanical stress, indicating the role that both genetics and concurrent biomechanical stress play in developing a sesamoid bone.

There are also lesser-known sesamoid bones that exist as variants and can develop spontaneously due to extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Mechanical forces, biomechanics, and skeletal geometry all contribute to the development of sesamoid bones. Intrinsic genetic factors also play a crucial role. One study noted the frequency of the appearance of the fabella sesamoid bone and the os peroneum sesamoid bone together in individuals. These sesamoid bones are smaller and variable in occurrence. Inconclusive evidence also remains on various factors affecting sesamoid bone variant development. Genetics and mechanical factors play equally important roles in developing mainstay sesamoid bones like the patella and variants such as the fabella and the os peroneum.

Even within the hand, there is variety in sesamoid bone development between individuals. Two sesamoid bones were seen at the thumb metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints, but variations in the shape and fusion lines of the sesamoid bones were seen in 30% of the individuals studied. The thumb MCP joints consistently showed two sesamoid bones compared to the joints of the other fingers. Similarly, 60% of individuals had an index finger MCP sesamoid bone, and 59% had the 5th finger MCP sesamoid bone present.