As previously stated, most cases of bronchial atresia are an incidental finding on chest radiograph. It will appear as a silhouette close to the hilum in a tubular, round, ovoid or branching structure. If the distal lung becomes infected, it can have the appearance of pneumonia.

Computed tomography is the modality of choice when diagnosing bronchial atresia. The classic finding on computed tomography is branching tubular or nodular opacities radiating from the hilum with a “finger-in-glove” appearance from the formation of mucoid impaction of the distal bronchus, that is a mucocele. However, there have been reported cases, although rare, where there is no mucoid impaction, and instead, an air-filled bronchus is present. The distal lung supplied by the atretic segment can be hyperlucent and hyperinflated secondary to oligemia and air-trapping. Collateral ventilation from intra-alveolar pores of Kohn, bronchoalveolar canals of Lambert, and inter-bronchiolar channels of Martin function as a one-way check valve allowing air to enter but not escape.

Bronchoscopy was once the modality of choice before the mainstream use of computed tomography. A blinding-ending bronchus with classic radiographic features was considered diagnostic for bronchial atresia. However, the absence of typical radiologic features and a blind-ending segmental or sub-segmental bronchus on bronchoscopy can be regarded as a normal anatomic variant, rather than raising suspicion for the alternative diagnosis of bronchial atresia.