# Continuing Education Activity

A cardiac contusion is a misnomer used to indicate injury to the heart after blunt chest trauma. Because of the term's ambiguity in describing a spectrum of myocardial injuries secondary to blunt trauma, "cardiac contusion" is now termed "blunt cardiac injury." Blunt cardiac Injuries can range from clinically silent, transient arrhythmias to fatal cardiac rupture. This activity describes the etiology, epidemiology, and management of blunt cardiac injury. It explains the role of an interprofessional team in the evaluation and management of such patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the risk factors for blunt cardiac injury.
- Outline the diagnostic techniques for blunt cardiac injury.
- Explain the conservative and invasive treatment options and their indications in the treatment of patients with blunt cardiac injury.
- Describe the interplay among the interprofessional team in rapidly diagnosing, treating, and rehabilitation of patients with blunt cardiac injury.

# Introduction

In the absence of severe arrhythmia and hemodynamic instability, the significance of BCI is sometimes called into question.

# Etiology

Blunt cardiac injury (BCI) from blunt chest trauma is most commonly due to motor vehicle collisions (50%), with 20% of all motor vehicle collision deaths involving blunt chest trauma.

# Epidemiology

In the United States, trauma is the 4th leading cause of death. The incidence of blunt cardiac injury (BCI) has a broad range due to a lack of widely accepted diagnostic criteria, inconsistencies in reporting, and a lack of consensus on its definition. Diagnosis can be mistaken when symptoms are misattributed and not related to BCI. For example, an arrhythmia may simply be a pre-existing condition. Furthermore, diagnostics, including elevated troponins, can be due to trauma unrelated to the chest.

# Pathophysiology

Six potential mechanisms have been suggested for BCI: direct, indirect, bidirectional, deceleration, blast, crush, concussive, or combined.

The cardiac chamber injury distribution reflects the position of the heart in the chest, where the right ventricle and right atrium are more anterior compared to the left ventricle and left atrium.

Most patients who survive BCI have less severe injuries that range from structural injuries to electrical and conduction disturbances.

# History and Physical

It is important to first identify the trauma patient with blunt chest injury by the mechanism of force. For instance, patients involved in an MVC should be queried on whether there was a steering wheel impact. In one study, 54% of patients with a history of a fall greater than 20 feet had BCI.

The most common complaint is chest pain or shortness of breath

The physical exam should be thorough. Patients can present with cardiac tamponade, and suspicion should be high in the presence of jugular venous distention and hypotension. The focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST exam) will help in the assessment for pericardial fluid and cardiac tamponade. Tachypnea, irregular lung sounds, chest wall tenderness, chest abrasion or ecchymosis, rib or sternal fractures, and seatbelt sign across the chest are some of the physical findings that should raise suspicion for BCI

# Evaluation

No consensus has been established to diagnose blunt cardiac injuries. However, in 2012, the Eastern Association of Trauma (EAST) published BCI practice guidelines that supported obtaining an ECG in all patients with suspected BCI.

# Treatment / Management

Patients with abnormal ECG and/or cTnI levels should be admitted for cardiac monitoring for 24 to 48 hours because life-threatening arrhythmias or cardiac failure will most likely present during this time.

Management of dysrhythmias should be approached and treated as in the non-BCI patient. Replete electrolytes accordingly, avoid hypoxia and acidosis, and when clinically indicated, utilize antidysrhythmics and advanced life support algorithms. Although rare with isolated BCI, complete heart block may necessitate a pacemaker. ST segment elevations can be due to either a contused heart or a traumatic myocardial infarction, necessitating coronary angiography.

Patients with severe clinically diagnosed or imaged structural cardiac injury require emergent cardiology evaluation for further management. Temporizing measures such as fluid resuscitation, inotropes, or vasopressors may be indicated in the interim based on the specific clinical findings and associated injuries. Patients presenting with cardiac tamponade, most frequently seen in cardiac rupture, require emergent surgical intervention.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Arrhythmia

- Cardiac tamponade

- Cardiac wall motion abnormality

- Cardiogenic pulmonary edema

- Cardiogenic shock

- Hemorrhagic shock

- Myocardial infarction

- Valvular regurgitation

# Prognosis

Prognosis in blunt cardiac injury (BCI) is highly dependent on the specified injury, its association with concomitant injuries, and any history of previous cardiac disease or injury.

# Complications

Overall, complications from blunt cardiac trauma are rare.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis of blunt cardiac injury (BCI) remains challenging due to its variable presentation and range of injury. Furthermore, there is a lack of consensus on the definition and diagnostic criteria. However, the crucial factor in caring for these patients is to have a high suspicion in trauma patients. ECG and cTnI levels can be used as screening tools, followed by admission and echocardiography for any resultant abnormalities, with the understanding that BCI can take up to 48 hours to manifest. An interprofessional consensus should be employed to identify BCI based on the specific injury.

While the majority of cases diagnosed as BCI may be inconsequential, the true significance of the diagnosis remains controversial due to inadequate assessment of long-term outcomes. Those suspected of having BCI who are hemodynamically stable without dysrhythmia should at least have a short period of observation. Further consensus and research among providers are warranted to better define the management and long-term significance of BCI.