Buprenorphine administration is possible via many means. For chronic pain relief, a transdermal patch is an option. Oral forms include a buccal film and sublingual tablets. Parenteral routes include a subdermal or subcutaneous implant and intravenous (IV) or intramuscular (IM) injections.

Buprenorphine is also available combined with naloxone in a sublingual tablet. Naloxone is not absorbed orally, so the effect is predominantly from buprenorphine when taking the combination drug. Naloxone is added to buprenorphine to reduce its abuse potential when injected. When taking the combination in an IV form, the naloxone is also absorbed and works to prevent the high of buprenorphine and may even precipitate a withdrawal; this is why buprenorphine alone has a higher potential for misuse than buprenorphine/naloxone.

**Federal Regulations for Prescribing Buprenorphine**

Sublingual buprenorphine preparations are helpful in the management of opioid dependence (such as heroin, oxycodone, hydrocodone, and morphine). The use of buprenorphine replacement therapy in the management of opioid dependence is regulated and highly monitored.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD.  Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.

**Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2000**

Unlike methadone, which requires dispensing from a specialized clinic, buprenorphine/naloxone can be prescribed in an outpatient setting, as permitted by the Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2000. However, healthcare workers who wish to prescribe buprenorphine to treat their opioid-dependent patients must undertake some training or extra education to know more about this agent. Further, most insurers also recommend that healthcare workers who prescribe this drug must have completed an approved course of buprenorphine treatment for opioid dependence.

Just like the prescription of other opioids like morphine, the healthcare worker should maintain good medical records when prescribing buprenorphine. Each time a clinician prescribes the drug, the medical notes should contain the following:

- Reason for prescribing

- Start and end date

- Which pharmacy will dispense the drug?

- Who will supervise the administration?

- Will the drug be taken at home or at the pharmacy?

- What type of follow-up and who will be in charge of follow up

- How will compliance be monitored?

Further, the prescriber must comply with all the DEA requirements and actively monitor the patient.

**Buprenorphine Dose Routes**

The parenteral formula is not FDA-approved for the management of opioid dependence, and hence intravenous use is not permitted, except under extraordinary circumstances and with permission; otherwise, such use can be illegal, and the prescriber can lose his or her DEA number and ability to write any future prescriptions for controlled substances.

Buprenorphine has multiple routes of administration. For chronic pain relief, a transdermal patch can be used (this formula is only available in Europe). Oral forms include a buccal film and sublingual tablets. Parenteral routes include a subdermal or subcutaneous implant and IV or IM injections but are not routinely used. The sublingual formula has extensive use in the treatment of opioid addiction; it contains buprenorphine and naloxone in a 4 to 1 ratio. Buprenorphine is available in 2 mg and 8 mg sublingual formulas combined with naloxone 0.5 mg and 2 mg, respectively, to deter drug abuse by injection.

Once placed underneath the tongue, the drug formula dissolves in 2 to 10 minutes.

Naloxone is an opioid antagonist, and its use in the formula is to prevent injection of the liquid obtained by dissolving the pills; this may help decrease the misuse of buprenorphine and limit diversion. Because naloxone is poorly absorbed sublingually, its systemic effects when patients take buprenorphine properly are minimal. However, if the tablet is dissolved and injected, the naloxone blocks mu receptors and prevents receptor activation or precipitates withdrawal in opioid-dependent patients.

**Initial Dosing**

The initial treatment dose of buprenorphine/naloxone should be at the lowest dose and gradually titrated every week until noting a response. The minimum duration of treatment is eight weeks. In the majority of cases, the drug is administered under supervision by a pharmacist, except when the pharmacy is not open on the weekends, then the patient can receive a take-home dose. Take-home doses are only suitable for compliant patients who are clinically motivated to treat their opioid dependence. However, before agreeing on take-home dosing, the patient must receive education on the consequences of the following:

- Potential for overdose

- Unintended dosing by others

- Diversion

- Consequences of careless storage

If take-home dosing is agreed upon, initially, it should be limited to weekend doses only and then gradually increased as the patient shows more reliability. At all times, the patient requires monitoring for compliance.

**Induction Therapy**

Induction with buprenorphine initiates when the patient is experiencing mild to moderate symptoms of opioid withdrawal. The treatment is usually started 6 to 12 hours after the use of short-acting opioids (e.g., heroin, oxycodone) or at least 24 hours or longer after using a long-acting opioid (e.g., morphine or oxycodone controlled-release formulations. For those methadone maintenance patients who prefer a switch to buprenorphine, the recommendation is that one waits at least 72 hours or more after the dose of methadone before initiating treatment. The dose of methadone should be tapered down to less than 30 mg before buprenorphine treatment to decrease the risk of precipitating intense withdrawal symptoms.

For patients on the fentanyl patch, at least 48 to 72 hours is necessary after discontinuation before starting treatment.

In most patients with opioid dependence, the initial dose is 2 to 4 mg. For those on high doses of opioids or potent agents like oxycodone, an additional dose of 2 to 4 mg may be necessary on the same day. After the supervised dosing, the healthcare provider in the clinic will monitor the patient.

During this time, the patient undergoes monitoring for withdrawal symptoms. Tools like the Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale can help to determine the presence and intensity of withdrawal symptoms. Additional doses of buprenorphine may be necessary for the symptomatic management of the withdrawal symptoms. Once the symptoms have subsided and the patient is discharged, the induction can be rescheduled for the following day. The patient should be encouraged to abstain from opioids while at home.

**Maintenance Phase**

During this phase, the dose of buprenorphine is gradually increased according to the patient’s physical and psychological needs but should not exceed a maximum of 24 mg in one day. Most patients respond to doses between 8 to 12 mg per day. In most patients, the maintenance dose is attainable within 2 to 4 days. Once stabilized, the dosing frequency may be reduced, especially in reliable patients or those who need to travel. Some patients may benefit from alternate dosing by doubling the dose at each visit.