Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) concentration must be obtained from the patient before the zileuton treatment, as hepatotoxicity can occur. The pattern of liver injury is hepatocellular, and ALT is the most sensitive liver enzyme for liver injury with zileuton treatments.

After that, they require periodic monitoring when receiving long-term treatment. Discontinuation of the drug can cause a resolution of toxicity within 21 days. Patients with a history of liver disease or excessive alcohol consumption should use zileuton cautiously. Rechallenge of zileuton should be avoided as it leads to the recurrence of hepatotoxicity.

Patients taking zileuton may experience sleep disorders or changes in behavior. If neuropsychiatric events occur, patients should contact their healthcare provider.

Patients undergoing long-term therapy (e.g., taking zileuton for more than six months) may experience frequent headaches, upper respiratory tract infections, diarrhea, or myalgia. However, these symptoms are similar to placebo treatment in many cases, e.g., headache: 25% for zileuton and 24% for placebo. In one study, dyspepsia was the most statistically significant side effect compared to the placebo group.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

Concurrent use of loxapine should be avoided due to the risk of severe bronchospasm.

- Studies have shown a 15% decrease in warfarin clearance leading to a significant increase in prothrombin times. Therefore, the recommendation is to monitor prothrombin times if the patient takes warfarin with zileuton.

- Research has shown that patients taking zileuton immediate-release tablets and propranolol experienced an increase in serum propranolol concentration within five days, leading to bradycardia and the risk for hypotension. Therefore, patients taking propranolol or other beta-blocking agents must be monitored or have their beta-blocker dose reduced to prevent complications.

- In patients taking theophylline and zileuton concurrently, studies showed a decrease in theophylline clearance within five days. Therefore, if patients are using theophylline and zileuton, clinicians should reduce the theophylline dosage by half and have the plasma concentrations of theophylline monitored daily. Adjust the maintenance dose of theophylline if the patient is already on zileuton.