A detailed history and physical is vital in the diagnosis and assessment of DiGeorge syndrome. A broad spectrum of disease severity exists, and suspicion of DGS from history and physical can prompt further evaluation. Although most cases get diagnosed in the prenatal and pediatric periods, diagnosis can also occur in adulthood. Delay in motor development is a common presenting feature first recognized by parents who notice delays in rolling over, sitting up, or other infant milestones.

A detailed history may reveal the following:

- Family history of diagnosed or suspected DGS

- Abnormal genetic testing results of family members

- Delays in the achievement of developmental milestones

- Behavioral disturbance

- Cyanosis, exercise intolerance, or symptoms

- Recurrent infections secondary to T-cell deficiency

- Speech difficulty

- Difficulty feeding and/or failure to thrive

- Muscle spasms, twitching, tetany, seizure

An examination can reveal findings consistent with several features of DGS:

- A complete cardiopulmonary evaluation can reveal murmurs, cyanosis, clubbing, or edema consistent with aortic arch anomalies, conotruncal defects (e.g., tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus, pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect, transposition of the great vessels, interrupted aortic arch), or tricuspid atresia.

- A craniofacial examination may demonstrate abnormalities such as cleft palate, hypertelorism, ear anomalies, short down slanting palpebral fissures, short philtrum, and hypoplasia of the maxilla or mandible.

- Recurrent sinopulmonary infections due to T cell deficiency as a result of thymic hypoplasia

- Signs of hypocalcemia, including twitching and muscle spasm, may be evident as a result of parathyroid hypoplasia. Chvostek's and Trousseau's signs may be positive.

- Delayed development, unusual behavior, or signs of psychiatric disorders may be observable.