The mandible can be exposed through an intra-oral incision made in the gingivobuccal sulcus or through a cutaneous incision in the neck. With the trans-oral approach, care should be taken to preserve the mental nerve exiting at the mental foramen, unless it has already been resected. Trans-cutaneous approaches can include a pre-auricular approach that reflects the parotid gland anteriorly and allows access to the ramus and condyle.

The parotid gland's inferior aspect often needs to be retracted superiorly to allow access to the angle and ramus of the mandible. Still, the risk of main trunk facial nerve injury in this approach is less. Access to the body and symphysis of the mandible can be accomplished through a transverse incision made in a skin crease 2-4 cm inferior to the jaw's inferior edge. In this approach, care must be taken to preserve the facial nerve's marginal mandibular branch not to cause lower lip weakness. Classically, the marginal mandibular branch may be preserved by reflecting the facial vein superiorly; the vein will, in turn, retract the nerve and protect it. The mandible must be stabilized with a reconstruction bar; ideally, four screws should be placed on either side of the defect for maximal stabilization. Three screws are adequate when four are not achievable. Two screws are sufficient but not as robust as three. One screw will lead to rotation of the bone around the screw and insufficient bony stabilization. The reconstruction bar should be shaped and plated along the mandible's inferior edge so as not to disrupt any tooth roots.

Before plating, the jaw should be reduced to its native position; the wear facets of any teeth present should be appropriately opposing to make sure the jaw is set in its pre-traumatic or pre-operative configuration. Temporary maxillary-mandibular fixation can be achieved with screws and 24 gauge wires, arch bars, and other methods. If the area being reconstructed has comminuted fractures, then the bone fragments should be removed, and the wound irrigated before reconstruction. If a section of the mandible is missing, then the remaining bony edges should be freshened to improve healing; a reciprocating saw can be used to remove an additional 1-2 mm of bone until fresh, bleeding edges are seen.

Non-vascularized bone grafts may be harvested from many sites throughout the body and commonly include the iliac crest and anterior tibia.

For osteocutaneous free tissue transfer, an incision is made in the neck, and suitable vessels for microvascular anastomosis are isolated first. Commonly, the facial artery and vein provide a suitable caliber match. The jaw and the defect are exposed through the neck, if possible, to prevent the possibility of saliva leaking onto the graft site. However, if necessary, an additional transoral incision can be made for enhanced exposure of the area to be reconstructed. The harvested osteocutaneous graft is fitted into the defect and secured to the plate with monocortical screws. In this case, two screws per segment of the graft are often sufficient, placing too many screws risks devascularization and subsequent graft failure. To restore the mandible's natural arc, wedge-shaped closing osteotomies of the bony flap can be made to permit restoration of the arched mandibular contour. However, individual segments should not be less than 1.5 to 2 cm in length, or there is an increased risk of devascularization and graft failure. Osteocutaneous grafts are harvested with their periosteum intact, as the periosteum is an important source of perfusion for the bone. Care must be taken not to disrupt the periosteum, even if making osteotomies, to maximize flap survival chances.

Ideally, the osseous graft ends will have good bony contact with the native mandible after inset to enhance healing. If there is poor bone-to-bone contact between the graft and mandible, then the gap can be packed with autologous or allograft bone chips to improve healing. The peroneal artery and venae comitantes are sewn to vessels in the neck to restore perfusion, and all incisions are then closed in layers. While an oral surgeon has historically placed dental implants three to six months after vascularized bone transfer to allow sufficient healing time, some patients will tolerate a longer initial operative time – so long as malignancy is not involved – that permits placement of dental implants at the time of reconstruction. This procedure is beginning to gain traction at some academic centers and is known as "jaw in a day" surgery.

After mandibular reconstruction, all patients are maintained on a no-chew diet for at least six weeks to allow for bony healing. If patients attempt to chew or put pressure on the reconstruction plate before sufficient healing has occurred, then there is a risk of non-union, infection, and failure of the reconstruction. If there are intra-oral incisions, patients are often kept nil per os (NPO) and fed via a nasogastric or gastric tube for a few days to allow mucosal healing. If there are no intra-oral incisions, patients can resume a soft, no-chew diet immediately after surgery. Patients are observed in the intensive care unit and a hospital ward for several days after osteocutaneous free tissue transfer with regular evaluation of the reconstruction so that acute vascular insufficiency can be recognized and corrected before flap failure, should it occur.