Several surgical approaches can be attempted depending on the underlying physiology. Since aortic valvular atresia exists as part of a spectrum, including HLHS and ventricular septal defect (VSD), the surgical approach should be contingent upon the underlying structure of the infant's heart. If there is a hypoplastic left ventricle (LV), a univentricular repair can be attempted. This consists of a three-stage repair, involving a Norwood procedure initially, followed by a Bidirectional-Glenn procedure, and completed with the Fontan procedure.

An initial procedure called the Yasui procedure can be undertaken soon after birth if there is an option for biventricular repair with an existing VSD. In patients with a left ventricle that is not hypoplastic due to an existing VSD, a conduit is created from the left ventricle into the pulmonary artery through the VSD. The pulmonary artery is transected, and the proximal portion is anastomosed to the aorta. The distal portion of the pulmonary artery is attached via a valved conduit to the right ventricle. This procedure is high risk, but it allows for biventricular physiology and complete correction initially.

Another two-pronged approach can be attempted, as well. This involves the Norwood procedure initially, allowing for some time with univentricular physiology, and then a staged Rastelli operation at an average of 9 months from the first procedure. This was first done in 1981 by Norwood et al., and the approach consists of reconstructing the ascending aorta using the Damus-Kaye-Stansel method and then subsequently repairing the VSD and right ventricular conduit to the pulmonary artery.

The methodology for choosing one surgical approach versus another is complex and continues to be debated. Biventricular repair, either in single versus staged operations, continues to have improving outcomes and compares favorably to univentricular palliation.