The treatment options for Marcus Gunn jaw-winking syndrome (MGJWS) include the following:

**Medical Care**

The patient needs aggressive treatment with occlusion therapy and/or correction of anisometropia before any consideration of ptosis surgery if amblyopia is encountered. Close follow up is usually advised while the patient is undergoing therapy for amblyopia.

****Surgical Care****

Thoughts on surgery for MGJWS are currently controversial. Some surgeons believe that the child should not have surgery until the age of one to two years old as general anesthesia is safer at 1-2 years than infancy. Any surgical correction to repair only the ptosis without correcting the synkinetic jaw winking may result in an aggravation of the aberrant eyelid movement, which may be cosmetically disfiguring to the patient. Indications for surgery include the presence of amblyopia and vertical strabismus, severe ptosis with levator muscle dysfunction, and severe ptosis with normal levator function.

The jaw-winking phenomenon is considered cosmetically significant only if it is 2 mm or more. If the jaw-winking is cosmetically insignificant or if the ptosis is mild, it is advisable not to proceed with surgery. If a correction is desired in mild ptosis, then procedures of choice include Muller muscle and conjunctival resection, a Fasanella– Servat procedure, or a standard external levator resection.

If the ptosis is moderate to severe, then resection of LPS with bilateral frontalis suspension may be indicated.

Relative contraindications for surgical intervention of MGJWS are poor Bell phenomena, reduced corneal sensations. and dry eye. All these clinical conditions can ultimately result in vision-threatening exposure keratitis.