Pure-tone audiometry is the standard gold method of determining the type, degree, and configuration of hearing loss due to its widespread availability, inter-test reliability, and relative ease of execution. The results of pure-tone audiometry provide context for diagnosis, reassurance, monitoring, or further investigation of ear concerns. Repeated assessments track changes in hearing as an indicator of changes in ear health over time.

When a sudden change in hearing is reported, immediate pure-tone evaluation is warranted to determine whether a significant hearing loss has occurred and if it meets the criteria for sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL). Identification of SSNHL and rapid initiation of therapy is critical due to the limited time window for SSNHL treatment to be effective.

Outside of sudden hearing loss, a significant threshold shift, according to the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, is ≥10 dB increase in the PTA, or at 3000, 4000, and 6000 Hz, in either ear; the Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards for a shift for noise-related hearing loss are an average of ≥10 dB threshold increases for 2, 3, and 4 kHz.

The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association considers a threshold shift significant with respect to ototoxicity monitoring when there is a ≥20 dB threshold increase at a single frequency, ≥10 dB at two adjacent frequencies, or loss of response at three or more consecutive previously-obtained frequencies in the ultra-high frequency range where maximum volume outputs are limited.

Hearing asymmetry is a common symptom of retrocochlear pathologies, such as vestibular schwannoma.

Aside from hearing deficits, pure-tone audiometry is utilized in the test battery to assess loudness discomfort levels, which indicate the presence of hyperacusis when the discomfort threshold is ≤85 dB HL or softer.

It is important to remember that pure-tone audiometry does not provide a complete diagnostic picture for auditory neuropathy or central auditory processing concerns, such as difficulty understanding speech in noise, which requires speech audiometry or other objective tests to assess accurately.