Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) is a preferred imaging modality compared to fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) for PCV because indocyanine green dye absorbs and emits near-infrared light that penetrates RPE, leading to a better imaging of choroidal structures. Moreover, unlike fluorescein dye, ICG doesn't leak from choriocapillaris, so choroidal lesions are less obscured. ICGA is the gold standard for diagnosing PCV and differentiating it from retinal angiomatous proliferation and typical AMD.

The ICGA characteristics of PCV are abnormal vascular network (AVN) of inner choroidal vessels, nodular dilatations at the edge of AVN, and the presence of hyperfluorescent halo around polyps, arising within the first six minutes. Pulsation of polyps can be observed using video ICGA.

Typically, the early phase of ICGA reveals the filling of an abnormal choroidal branching vascular network. Hyperfluorescent polyps fill up soon after the delineation of AVN. The hyperfluorescent polyps leak and obscure the hyperfluorescent halo around the polyps.

OCT shows certain distinctive features that help a clinician suspect PCV. It is not diagnostic alone but should be used as an adjuvant to ICGA and must be used for disease monitoring and assessing response to treatment. Distinctive OCT features that are suggestive of PCV include: sharp-peaked PED, notched PED, hyporeflective lumen surrounded by hyperreflective ring under the surface of RPE, and Double-layer Sign (DLS). A Double-layer sign implies when RPE is seen distinct from Bruch's membrane in spectral-domain OCT and represents the presence of AVN. Sharp peaked PED denotes polyp. The presence of thickened choroid (pachychoroid) on enhanced depth imaging- OCT (EDI-OCT) supports the diagnosis of PCV and rules out typical AMD where the underlying choroid is usually thin.

FFA must be performed at the initial presentation to identify leakage from the abnormal vascular network. Leakage on FFA is a sign of disease activity. Fluorescein angiography has a limited role in diagnosing polyps. Moreover, it overestimates the lesion size, compared to ICGA, if a PED is present along the edge of the lesion because, in FFA, PED appears hyperfluorescent.