**Isolated Intestinal Transplantation (IITx)**

IITx is performed more in adults than in children (14) with the ability to also perform the operation with a living donor. The IITx can also be modified to include the pancreaticoduodenal complex. In a deceased donor, the mesenteric arterial supply and venous drainage are identified and dissected clearly. The aorta is cross-clamped and flushed with the University of Wisconsin (UW) solution. The SMA is freed, including a segment of the aorta, and the splenic vein is ligated at the junction of the SMV. Depending on the patient – a segment of the ascending colon, along with the right and middle colic artery, can also be freed. The donor small intestine is inserted in a side to side anastomosis onto the proximal host duodenum/jejunum. The distal end is created with either the native colon or with a segment of the ileocecal complex. Critical to the transplantation an end chimney, or Bishop-Koop, the ileostomy is created that allows frequent transtomal endoscopic access for routine postoperative graft surveillance. The arterial system is then restored with anastomosis to the intrarenal aorta and the venous system to either to the portal vein or infrarenal vena cava.

The operation is modified in a living donor to allow both individuals adequate bowel for vitamin and bile absorption. Typically, about 150 cm of an ileal segment of the donor is isolated, along with its vascular pedicle, and removed.  The remaining donor ileum is reconnected in an ileo-ileal anastomosis. The donor vascular pedicle is attached in the end to side onto the recipient ileocolic artery and vein. Depending on the recipient’s anatomy and intra-operative findings, the vascular anastomosis may also be created using the infrarenal aorta and inferior vena cava. The distal ileocecal intestinal complex on the donor remains to allow for adequate B12 absorption.

**Combined Liver-Intestine**

Patients with compromised liver function, typically secondary to prolonged PN – more commonly seen in children, undergo combined liver-intestine transplants. In the 1990s, the liver and bowel were transplanted in a “separate” fashion, and then a Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy reconstruction was performed, restoring the biliary system. This led to a high rate of biliary related complications leading to en bloc transplantation.

**Multivisceral**

There is no true consensus on what multi-visceral transplant organs are standard, and the concept of a multi-visceral transplant can be considered an umbrella term for all of the variations. The allograft is tailored to the individual patient’s need with exclusion or inclusion of multiple organs (ex. kidney and spleen).  The main difference between the combined liver-intestine is the addition of the stomach into the graft; but, this can be modified to exclude the liver.   Due to the denervation of the stomach graft, a pyloroplasty is performed, which allows for improved gastric emptying. The proximal host esophagus or sometimes a segment of the host stomach is anastomosed to the donor's stomach, and the vascular conduits are restored in a similar fashion as the other types of intestinal transplantation.