It is recommended to check the following in a patient suspected of having hypomagnesemia:

- Serum magnesium, phosphate, and calcium level

- Basic metabolic panel, including serum creatinine/kidney function, glucose levels

- Electrocardiogram to rule out arrhythmias

Please note that there is no clinically available "ionized" magnesium test.

If unsure, the distinction between gastrointestinal and renal losses can be made by measuring the 24-hour urinary magnesium excretion. In addition, one can calculate the fractional excretion of magnesium (on a random urine specimen) with the following formula, where U and P refer to the urine and plasma concentrations of magnesium (Mg) and creatinine (Cr).

- FEMg = [(UMg x PCr) / (PMg x UCr x 0.7)] x 100

Once hypomagnesemia is confirmed, the etiology can usually be obtained from the history. History may include the causes mentioned above.

On examination, vertical nystagmus and tetany may be observed. The following signs can be checked:

- Chvostek sign: Tapping on facial nerve leads to twitching of facial muscles

- Trousseau sign: Carpopedal spasm induced by inflated blood pressure cuff

If the fractional excretion of magnesium is above 2% in someone with normal renal function, the hypomagnesemia is likely secondary to renal magnesium wasting from drugs such as diuretics, aminoglycosides, or cisplatin.

Genetic testing may be considered if there is positive family history, unexplained hypomagnesemia, or if discovered early in infancy.

Gene mutation

SLC12A3

**Table 1. Some genetic disorders causing hypomagnesemia**