Never probe or manipulate a neck wound because it may cause the individual to choke, cough or gag, resulting in dislodgement of the blood clot resulting in severe hemorrhage and exsanguination. A carotid artery contusion is best evaluated with computed tomographic angiography (CTA). This imaging test can be performed rapidly and is associated with few complications. A screening CTA can be done in several minutes and can be included with other CT examinations during initial imaging of poly-trauma patients. CTA scan has the advantage of accurate visualization of various degrees and types of traumatic vascular lesions such as partial or complete occlusion, post-traumatic pseudoaneurysm formation, intimal flaps, dissection and traumatic arteriovenous fistulas. Additionally, CT scans can identify other traumatic lesions involving cervical soft tissues, the aerodigestive tract, and the spinal cord.

Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) has been conventionally considered the gold standard for imaging traumatic carotid injuries. Angiography can detect subtle intimal defects and recognize intraluminal thrombus or aneurysm formation. However, DSA has limitations regarding practicality (time-consuming in poly-trauma patients), invasiveness, expenses, and availability. Angiography is usually reserved for patients with an uncertain diagnosis or those with a clear indication for an endovascular intervention as this imaging modality is therapeutic as well as diagnostic.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and angiography (MRA) can be a useful adjunct for the detection of post-traumatic carotid ischemic sequelae but does not play a role in the acute workup of a recent carotid injury.