Each amino acid consists of a carboxyl group, an amino group, and a side chain. Amino acids are linked together by joining the amino group of one amino acid with the carboxyl group of the adjacent amino acid. Each amino acid side chain has differing properties. Some side chains can be either acidic or basic, while others can be polar uncharged or just non-polar. These characteristics provide insight into whether the protein generally functions better in acidic or basic environments, solubility in water or lipids, the temperature range for optimal protein function, and which parts of the protein are found on the protein interior being in contact with the external aqueous environment. Some amino acids contained within the polypeptide chain can even create ionic bonds and disulfide bridges. The location of certain amino acids in the primary structure dictates how the secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure will look.

**Nonpolar, Aliphatic Amino Acids -**backbone molecules of the amino acid are used to form hydrogen bonds.

- Glycine - can cause a bend when used in an alpha helix chain (secondary structure)

- Alanine

- Valine

- Leucine

- Isoleucine

- Methionine

**Nonpolar, Aromatic Amino Acids -**backbone molecules of the amino acid are used to form hydrogen bonds.

- Phenylalanine

- Tryptophan

- Tyrosine

**Polar, Uncharged Amino Acids -**backbone/ side chain molecules of the amino acid can be used to form hydrogen bonds (besides proline and cysteine)

- Serine

- Threonine

- Asparagine

- Glutamine

- Proline - causes a bend when used in an alpha helix chain (secondary structure)

- Cysteine - the sulfur atoms from two cysteine side chains covalently bond together to form a disulfide bridge

**Acidic Amino Acids -**can be used to form hydrogen bonds (backbone/ side chain molecules) and salt bridges (side chain molecules only)

- Aspartic Acid/Aspartate

- Glutamic Acid/Glutamate

**Basic Amino Acids -**can be used to form hydrogen bonds (backbone/ side chain molecules) and salt bridges (side chain molecules only)

- Lysine

- Arginine

- Histidine