Laryngotracheal stenosis can be evaluated by laryngoscopy or bronchoscopy. The clinician may obtain computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck in severe cases in which the obstruction does not allow for direct laryngoscopy or patients who have a traumatic injury to the trachea and in planning for surgical treatment. CT scan may demonstrate artificial extra-tracheal stenosis, such as in a massive goiter, owing to the dependent position of the trachea when obtaining such scans.

There are three classification systems based on anatomic characteristics that are derived from intraoperative findings. The Cotton-Myer classification is based on percent stenosis (I = < 50% obstruction;  II = 51% to 70% obstruction; III = 71% to 99% obstruction; IV = Complete obstruction). The Lano classification is based on subsite involvement (I = one subsite involvement; II = two subsite involvement; III = three subsite involvement, with the subsite meaning the glottis, subglottis, and trachea). The McCaffrey classification is based on the length of stenosis (I = subglottis or trachea < 1 cm; II = subglottis > 1cm; III = subglottis and trachea >1 cm;  IV = any lesion involving glottis). The percent stenosis is important in regards to prognosis, individualized treatment planning, and risk stratification of tracheostomy dependence. Patients with grade III and IV stenosis in the Cotton-Myer classification were found to be tracheostomy dependent compared to patients with grade I and II. Per the Lano classification, larger subsite involvement was associated with a higher risk of tracheostomy dependence, as well as higher stages in the McCaffrey classification. In adult LTS, the Lano and McCaffrey classifications are more precise than the Cotton-Myer scale.