**Urogenital diaphragm:**is the name given to deep transverse perineal and sphincter urethrae with inferior fascia is known as the urogenital diaphragm. The superior fascia of the urogenital diaphragm is a continuation of the inferior fascia of the levator ani (pelvic diaphragm), and inferior fascia is the perineal membrane.

**In males:**

**Deep transverse perineal muscle:******situated in the posterior part. It emerges from the inner aspect of the ischial tuberosities of the pelvic girdle and extends towards the midline to attach to the perineal body. The superior and inferior fasciae of the urogenital diaphragm are continuous behind the transverse perineal muscle.

**External urethral sphincter: **in males sphincter urethrae at the level of the membranous urethra is made of striated muscle and encircles the urethra. This circular sphincter composed of the smooth and striated muscle surrounding urethra forms a strong sphincter. The circular smooth muscle part of this sphincter is situated between the longitudinal smooth muscle coat of the ureter and striated muscle of the rhabdosphincter

**In females**

**External urethral sphincter:** in females, external sphincter of the urethra is more complex than in males. It is more proper to call this as the urogenital sphincter. It includes a circular sphincter around the urethra (the urethral sphincter). Another sphincter, the compressor urethrae, has fibers anterior to the urethra and passes laterally to attach to the connective tissue near the inner surface of the ischiopubic ramus.