When administered parenterally, epinephrine has a rapid onset but a short duration of action. When given intravenously, it has a half-life of fewer than 5 minutes. Metabolism is primarily in the liver, along with various other locations such as the kidneys, skeletal muscle, and mesenteric organs. It is degraded into an inactive metabolite named vanillylmandelic acid by MAO and COMT and excreted into the urine. However, a small amount of the drug is excreted unchanged as well.

Epinephrine is a hormone that produces widespread effects. Certain effects need monitoring. Tachycardia and hypertension are expected effects when giving epinephrine intravenously, so it is important to titrate the drug carefully while monitoring hemodynamics. Epinephrine is also used with anesthetic agents to provide analgesia. In locations where extravasation of epinephrine has occurred, prevention and treatment of ischemia-induced necrosis are necessary. The infiltrated area should receive treatment with a 10 mL to 15 mL saline solution containing 5 mL to 10 mg of phentolamine, an alpha-adrenergic blocking agent. A study showed how hospitalized patients in the ICU with finger ischemia were associated with the use of vasopressors, including epinephrine.

Renal impairment requires monitoring as epinephrine causes renal blood vessel constriction and can decrease urine impairment. In patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and various other renal pathologies, clinical judgment is necessary. Researchers discovered a new enzyme named renalase produced by the kidneys and responsible for metabolizing epinephrine. Some studies have shown how renalase is deficient in CKD, making epinephrine levels greater in CKD.