RP is a very rare disorder that typically causes inflammation in cartilage bearing tissues like the ear, nose, larynx and the airways. The inflammatory episodes are recurrent and unpredictable. A concomitant autoimmune disease also occurs in more than 30% of patients. The diagnosis is not always easy because there are no specific tests. Even when diagnosed, the treatment is not standardized. The drug treatment is tailored to each patient and the cornerstone of therapy is the use of glucocorticoids. For patients with severe disease, other immunosuppressive are used including methotrexate and cyclophosphamide.

Because these drugs have potent adverse effects, the role of the pharmacist and nurses are critical. Both these professionals play a role in educating the patient on the signs and symptoms of the adverse effects and also ensuring compliance with the medications. Recently newer biological agents have also been used to manage RP patients with varying results. However, prior to initiating treatment with these novel agents, the patient needs a thorough work up to ensure that he or she is fit to receive the therapy. Any patient with worsening of symptoms should be referred to the specialist.

**Outcomes**

Patients with RP have frequent relapses and the quality of life is poor. The mortality rate of RP patients is twice that of the general population. Until randomized controlled studies are available, the treatment of RP will remain empirical and based on personal experience. For healthcare workers who have never treated such a patient, referral to a tertiary care center is recommended.