After a careful history and physical exam, the workup may be started either with mammography or a biopsy of the lesion. Scrape cytology is a quick, easy, non-invasive method of screening eczema of the nipple in the out-patient clinic. Bilateral mammography should be done to look for underlying mass. Approximately 50% of cases of PDB have associated abnormal mammographic findings. In 20 percent of cases, a mammographic abnormality is present without a palpable mass. The mammographic findings may include simply a mass or suspicious microcalcifications, architectural distortion, and asymmetric thickening of the nipple-areolar complex. A negative mammogram does not rule out underlying malignancy. In one case series, mammography failed to find underlying Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) in 17 women, five of them had the extensive multicentric disease. Whole breast ultrasound can be done for further evaluation, but the addition of ultrasound to mammography has not been found to increase the overall sensitivity to detect underlying lesion as compared to mammography alone. However, ultrasound can be used to further categorize or to guide core biopsy from any palpable mass or mass-like abnormality found in mammography.

**Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)**is a sensitive imaging tool for invasive breast cancer. As the neoplasm may be multifocal and multicentric, MRI has been recommended to evaluate the true extent of disease.Approximately 12 to 15 percent of cases are not associated with any palpable mass or a mammographic abnormality.

Most important is to biopsy the underlying abnormalities, not only the nipple lesion but any underlying masses or mammographic abnormalities to assist further management plan, including the further need for evaluation of the axilla. A full-thickness punch biopsy is more widely used.  A wedge biopsy may contain lactiferous ducts, which may identify DCIS as the etiology of PDB. Nipple scrape cytology can also accurately diagnose PDB but does not involve the biopsy of the underlying mass. If nipple discharge is present, a sample may be taken and studied to detect the presence of Paget cells.

**Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining**for a nipple biopsy that does not involve tissue from the underlying mass is very helpful to differentiate from other similar lesions, especially if squamous cell carcinoma of epidermis and melanoma are the in the list of differential diagnosis. The usual diagnostic panel includes CK7 and CK20, which are low molecular weight cytokeratins, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), Estrogen receptor (ER), HER2, S-100, and either MART-1 or HMB-45 if melanoma is suspected. PDB is usually positive for CEA and negative for S-100 protein. However, in some cases, PDB may also express S-100.

MART-1 or HMB-45 may be more useful than S-100 in confirming malignant melanoma. Squamous cell carcinoma of the epidermis contains high molecular weight cytokeratins, while PDB contains low molecular weight cytokeratins. CK7, a low molecular weight cytokeratin, is probably the most useful marker, but the interpretation must also consider other typical features of PDB as CK7 may also be expressed by benign Toker cell hyperplasia. Additionally, Hormone receptor (estrogen/progesterone) positivity is also very helpful. Unfortunately, only 50% of the PDB is positive for these receptors. This finding is not surprising as PDB is a high-grade malignant lesion, and many high-grade breast malignancies do not express these hormone receptors. Instead, most of them are positive for HER2 receptors as PDB. Over 80% of PDB have HER2 overexpression or amplification, the finding consistent for the worse prognosis of such malignancies.