Treat macrocytic anemia by replacing folate or vitamin B12 and targeting the underlying cause. Give folic acid orally, 1 mg to 5 mg daily, and encourage diets with foods rich in folate (fortified cereals, leafy vegetables). Patients who are taking folate antimetabolites or pregnant women (especially those with a history of neural tube defects or taking antiepileptics) should take daily supplements to prevent deficiencies. It is important to not overlook vitamin B12 deficiency as a cause for macrocytic anemia, treatment of folate deficiency but not vitamin B12 deficiency will resolve the anemia but not the neurologic effects. Prescribe 1000 micrograms oral vitamin B12 daily for 1 month followed by 125 to 250 micrograms daily or administer 1000 micrograms intramuscular B12 every week for 4 weeks then monthly to replace vitamin B12 stores, the latter of which is preferred for patients with pernicious anemia or altered gastrointestinal anatomy. Clinicians may prescribe empiric folate supplementation (400 micrograms to 1 g/day) in patients receiving vitamin B12 replacement. Reticulocytosis will improve within 1 to 2 weeks, and anemia should resolve after 4 to 8 weeks. There is no need to monitor RBC indices or recheck folate or vitamin B12 levels and their metabolites during active treatment, though some physicians check yearly complete blood counts in patients taking long-term vitamin B12 therapy. Neurologic symptoms from vitamin B12 deficiency take longer. Macrocytosis related to alcohol use resolves with abstinence. Other non-megaloblastic anemias improve when the underlying conditions are treated.

In other instances, macrocytosis is indicative of medical compliance (ex. methotrexate or zidovudine) and does not need additional management beyond supplements to prevent anemia.