The clinical presentation of N. meningitidis can vary widely and may initially appear benign, making it difficult to diagnose, especially in areas with no reported epidemic. Typically, the initial presentation of N. meningitidis
caused by meningitis can include sudden onset fever, headache, nausea, vomiting headache, severe myalgias, nonspecific rash, sore throat, and other upper respiratory symptoms. These symptoms can be confused for a multitude of other illnesses, including influenza since many meningococcal infections occur concurrently with influenza in late winter. The potential for rapid disease progression, especially given the possibility of death within hours of symptom onset, makes identifying meningococcal disease early challenging due to its low incidence and nonspecific early symptoms. Later presentation of the meningococcal disease includes neck stiffness, photophobia, petechiae or hemorrhagic rash, altered mental status, shock, abnormal skin color, purpura fulminans, or even disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).

Vital signs may show hypotension and tachycardia, which indicate early signs of sepsis. The physical exam should always be detailed and include careful skin inspection for evidence of a rash. The rash, a distinguishing feature, may initially appear as small lesions that may appear urticarial, macular, or papular. The rash can develop into petechiae, purpura, or ecchymosis later on. These may be early signs of thrombocytopenia, purpura fulminans, and DIC. Although Kernig's and Brudzinski's signs are the classic signs of meningitis, the sensitivity of 55.5% and 53.3%, respectively, make them unreliable in excluding meningitis.N. meningitidis infection in patients with sudden onset fever who display early signs of sepsis, rapidly progressing disease and the presence of a rash.

Purpura fulminans, a complication of meningococcal disease due to vascular collapse initiated by LOS activating the release of inflammatory mediators, is characterized by cutaneous hemorrhage and skin necrosis due to vascular thrombosis. It can even lead to adrenal gland hemorrhaging and failure, termed Waterhouse-Freiderichsen syndrome and DIC.N. meningitidis
infection. Any evidence of bleeding from intravascular access, gingival bleeding, ecchymosis, or skin discoloration should be very concerning.

Although these infections are rarely due to N. meningitidis, meningococcal disease can also include pneumonia, septic arthritis, urethritis, and pericarditis.