Computed tomography (CT) is the primary imaging modality used for the evaluation of ocular trauma. It allows for three-dimensional viewing of the orbital bones, soft tissue, and ocular structures and is useful for assessing a wide variety of trauma-related pathology. Radiographic cuts through the orbits should be less than <3mm (typically 0.5mm-2mm). In cases of suspected traumatic optic neuropathy or the presence of a foreign body, 1-millimeter cuts should be performed.

**Orbital Fractures**

CT is the modality of choice for accurately detecting fractures of the orbit and their associated soft-tissue injuries. The medial and inferior orbital walls are the thinnest and most prone to fracture; however, all orbital bones are susceptible to fracture following blunt or penetrating injury.

Blow-out fractures are common and occur when blunt trauma causes increased pressure within the orbit, leading to herniation of orbital contents out of the orbit and into the adjacent sinus (Fig 1). CT can easily identify the bones involved, the projection of any bony fragments, and the degree of extraocular muscle displacement or injury. Hemorrhage may be visualized in the adjacent sinus, and emphysema of the orbit and eyelids can occur. Enophthalmos occurs when the globe retracts into orbit due to its increased volume.  Surgical repair may be indicated for fractures leading to enophthalmos of greater than 2mm, or those that involve greater than 50% of the orbital floor. Still, cases treated with observation alone have also shown good results.

Muscle entrapment is a surgical emergency if it leads to bradycardia due to the oculocardiac reflex. This typically occurs in pediatric patients with a “trap door” fracture, in which the flexible bone springs back into place after an injury resulting in impingement of muscle fibers. Signs of entrapment are best visualized on sagittal and coronal sections. They include rounding of the muscle shape and displacement of the muscle through a small fracture site into the adjacent sinus (Fig 2).

Orbital roof fractures are associated with pneumocephalus, intracranial hematoma, cerebrospinal fluid leaks, and violation of the dura. Neurosurgical evaluation is indicated in these cases.

**Retrobulbar Hemorrhage and Orbital Compartment Syndrome**

A retrobulbar hemorrhage or hematoma can occur following ocular trauma and refers to a collection of blood within the orbit. Typically, retrobulbar hematomas are small and not significant clinically; however, larger hemorrhages can result in an orbital compartment syndrome due to increased pressure within the confined space of the orbit. Clinically it is characterized by elevated intraocular pressure, the presence of an afferent pupillary defect, proptosis, resistance to retropulsion, and decreased visual acuity. Once diagnosed, urgent decompression by lateral canthotomy and cantholysis is indicated to prevent permanent vision loss. CT scan is used to identify hematomas in orbit, and collections of blood are often visualized adjacent to bony fractures (Fig 3). Signs of orbital compartment syndrome on CT include proptosis, stretching of the optic nerve, and tenting of the posterior globe contour (Fig 4), but these findings must always be correlated clinically.

**Foreign Bodies**

CT is the modality of choice for detecting intraocular or orbital foreign bodies (Fig 5). The most common inorganic foreign bodies associated with ocular injury are glass and metals. Organic materials such as wood are difficult to detect on CT, but some clues to their presence include an inflammatory reaction surrounding the foreign body, which may be seen on imaging.

**Open Globe Injury**

CT scans are routinely obtained for detecting open-globe injuries. CT findings that suggest open-globe injury include a change in the globe contour (Fig 6), intraocular air and blood presence, and intraocular foreign bodies. If the perforation is posterior, a deep anterior chamber may be seen, resulting from a decrease in volume of the vitreous cavity and the lens moving posteriorly. Vitreous hemorrhage and choroidal or retinal detachment may also be seen (Fig 7). It is important to note that air in the globe can also be caused by prior eye surgery, so findings must be correlated clinically.

Though CT is commonly ordered to detect a ruptured globe, the reported sensitivities are 56 to 68%. Positive predictive values ranged from 86-100%, but negative predictive values ranged from 42% to 50%.

**Anterior Segment Injuries**

Lens dislocation can be visualized on CT images (Fig 8). Trauma accounts for more than half of all cases of lens dislocation. The lens may be displaced forward into the anterior chamber, backward into the posterior segment, or its position may just be altered slightly if only some of the zonules are broken. Clinically, the examiner may observe phacodenesis, or tremulousness of the lens with eye movement, during a slit lamp exam. A bilateral dislocation should raise concern for a systemic condition such as Marfan syndrome or homocystinuria.

A hyphema, or blood in the anterior chamber, can be visualized on CT as increased attenuation within the anterior chamber.

**Detachments of the Retina/Choroid**

Retinal detachments can occur after blunt or penetrating injury and may be seen on CT imaging as a thin, V-shaped hyperattenuating within the globe. The apex of the “V” is usually attached to the optic disk and the extremities attached anteriorly to the ora serrata. CT may also show choroidal detachments, which result from fluid accumulating in the space between the choroid and sclera. This can look like two thin convexities curving into the vitreous cavity, which may or may not be touching one another (“kissing choroidals”). Choroidal detachments are often a result of ocular hypotony, which can arise after ocular surgery.