Change is inevitable in health care. A significant problem specific to health care is that almost two-thirds of all change projects fail for many reasons, such as poor planning, unmotivated staff, deficient communication, or excessively frequent changes

Suppose a health care provider works in a hospital department that has experienced a 3-month increase in unwitnessed patient falls during the hours surrounding shift change. Evidence-based changes in the current shift change process would likely decrease patient falls; however, departmental leadership has attempted unsuccessfully to fix this problem twice in the past 3 months. Staff continues to revert to previous shift change protocols to save time, which leaves patients unmonitored for extended periods. What can departmental leadership and staff do differently to create sustained, positive change to serve the department’s patients and employees?

The answer may lie within the work of several change leaders and theorists. Although theories may seem abstract and impractical for direct healthcare practice, they can be quite helpful for solving common healthcare problems. Lewin was an early change scholar who proposed a three-step process for ensuring successful change

Lewin’s Theory of Planned Change includes the following change stages

- Unfreezing (understanding change is needed)

- Moving (the process of initiating change)

- Refreezing (establishing a new status quo).

Lippitt, building on Lewin’s original theory, created the Phases of Change Theory that encompass the following change phases

- Becoming more aware of the need for change

- Develop a relationship between the system and change agent

- Define a change problem

- Set change goals and action plan for achievement

- Implement the change

- Staff accept the change; stabilization

- Redefine the relationship of the change agent with the system.

Kotter’s Eight-Step Change Model, created in 1995, include the following change management steps

- Create a sense of urgency for change

- Form a guiding change team

- Create a vision and plan for change

- Communicate the change vision and plan with stakeholders

- Remove change barriers

- Provide short-term wins

- Build on the change

- Make the change stick in the culture.

Finally, Rogers’ Diffusion of Innovation Theory introduced these five change phases

- Knowledge (education and communication to expose staff to the change)

- Persuasion (use of change champions to pique staff interest; peers persuading peers)

- Decision (staff decide whether to accept or reject the change)

- Implementation (putting new processes into practice)

- Confirmation (staff recognize the value and benefits of the change and continue to use changed processes).