When there are no complications, the treatment’s goal would be symptom relief only. The choice should be based on symptom severity and patient preference. If the symptoms are not troublesome, treatment should not be offered. However, if the patient presents with a complication like recurrent infections or acute retention, treatment would reduce the incidence of complications.

Generally speaking, urethral stricture treatment can be divided into transurethral (dilation, internal urethrotomy) and open surgical (stricture resection and anastomosis, urethroplasty, and perineal urethrostomy). It should also be noted that with any of the treatment options, recurrence tends to happen. Especially with long strictures and previously treated ones.

Urethral dilation using sounds and boogies has been the standard and initial treatment modality for a long time. Inserting urethral dilators and sequentially increasing the size leads to stretch and disruption of the stricture. When compared to direct vision internal urethrotomy, there was no demonstrable difference between them with regards to outcomes.

Direct vision internal urethrotomy (DVIU) is performed by incising a transurethral incision to release the stricture and leave it to heal by secondary intention, increasing the caliber size of the urethra. It is the first-line treatment of choice for short (<1.5 cm) bulbar strictures with no previous intervention as its highest success rates are with such strictures.

Both of the above-mentioned procedures should be followed by prophylactic antibiotics.

Anastomotic urethroplasty is a more commonly used name for stricture resection and end-to-end anastomosis. It is most appropriate when the stricture is short (<2 cm) and is in the bulbar urethra, which is usually the result of a traumatic straddle-type injury.

Substitution urethroplasty or graft urethroplasty is a procedure where the urethra is mobilized in the area of stricture, dissected from the corpora cavernosa, and opened along the urethra for the entire length of the stricture.

Substitution urethroplasty should be used for bulbar strictures that are too long for anastomotic urethroplasty or any penile urethra stricture.

Perineal urethrostomy (Boutonnière) is a procedure with palliative intent preserved for patients who have had multiple stricture operations and do not wish to undergo additional surgeries and patients with multiple comorbidities who cannot tolerate a urethroplasty. The bulbar urethra is sutured to the perineal skin with the preservation of sphincter function and continence. Most of the patients who undergo this procedure express high satisfaction with the results.