# Continuing Education Activity

Approximately 95 percent of congenital chest wall anomalies are attributed to pectus deformities, with pectus excavatum being the most common. Pectus excavatum is characterized by a depression of the anterior chest wall resulting in a "funnel chest". While the defect involves the third to seventh costocartilages or ribs, the most severe aspect of the deformity occurs in the area of the xiphisternum. Although the deformity may be symmetrical, it is more commonly asymmetrical and may involve other aspects of the thorax. A pectus defomity may be appreciated in an infant at birth or develop it later during childhood. This activity examines the differential of pectus excavatum and how to properly evaluate a patient with pectus excavatum, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- List the hypothesized etiologies for pectus excavatum.
- Describe a complete evaluation of pectus excavatum, including any appropriate diagnostic imaging.
- Discuss when surgery is necessary in pectus excavatum management, and review the various surgical options available.
- Describe how an optimally functioning interprofessional team would coordinate care to enhance outcomes for patients with pectus excavatum.

# Introduction

Approximately 95% of congential chest wall anomalies are attributed to pectus deformities, with pectus excavatum being the most common.  A depression of the anterior chest wall results in a "funnel chest".  While the defect involves the third to seventh costocartilages or ribs, the most severe aspect of the deformity occurs in the area of the xiphisternum. (Figure 1).  Although the deformity may be symmetrical, it is more commonly asymmetrical and may involve other aspects of the thorax. A pectus defomity may be appreciated in an infant at birth or develop it later during childhood.

# Etiology

Several hypotheses exists regarding the underlying etiology that results in pectus excavatum.  The funnel - formed chest has been attributed to a weakness and abnormal flexibility of the sternum, overgrowth of the ribs, and developmental failure of the bony thorax.

# Epidemiology

Reported prevalence has been 1/300 to 1/1000 live births; with a 5:1male to female ratio.

# History and Physical

The presenting patient is commonly a thin, tall male that appears to be slouching, and thoracic scoliosis may also be appreciated.  Sternal depression and rotation may depress the heart, causing a slew of cardiopulmonary signs and symptoms, including exercise intolerance. An audible murmur can be attributed to a defective mitral valve (i.e., prolapse, regurgitation).  Exercise intolerance, though its exact cause is unclear, is one of the most common presenting complaints. Additionally, the psychological impact on patients can be significant, especially during the adolescent period.

# Evaluation

The lateral view of the chest radiograph clearly demonstrates the sternal defect.  Additional imaging studies may reveal displaced vertebral bodies and varying degrees of scoliosis.  Patients with mild pectus excavatum may have minimal or no symptoms; however, cardiopulmonary evaluation to establish a baseline as well as assess for progression is warranted every one to two years.

The Haller index (HI) is the standard upon which to quantify the severity of a pectus excavatum deformity.  It is defined as the ratio of the transverse diameter and anteroposterior diameter.  The measurements are obtained from computed tomography (CT) scan; normal value is 2.5 or less.  Measurement above 3.2 are considered severe.

# Treatment / Management

Early surgical correction of pectus excavatum was based on the aggressive resection and chest wall reconstruction performed for asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (Jeune's syndrome). The current trend is to delay the repair until pubertal growth, and the technique is modified to perform limited cartilage resection. Impaired cardiopulmonary function, not cosmesis, is the most common indication for surgical correction.  It is pertinent that surgical repair occur after the child's pubertal growth spurt.

The first documented surgical repair of pectus excavatum was performed by Ravitch in 1949.  Based on the aggressive chest wall resection used to manage asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (Jeune's syndrome), Ravitch performed a subperichondrial resection of all deformed costal cartilages and the xiphoid process, along with a transverse sternotomy.

The minimally invasive technique described by Nuss and Kelly involves inserting a metal bar under the sternum at the most depressed zone and most everted costal line on both sides of the chest.in situ for 3 years.

Additional modifications to both the Ravitch and Nuss procedures have been described.  The Leonard modification to Ravitch's procedure entails excision of the lower costal cartilage, leaving the perichondirum in place, after mobilization of the pectoralis muscles.

The application of negative pressure to the thorax offers a non-surgical alternative to pectus excavatum.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Ehlers-Danlos syndrome

- Marfan syndrome

- Noonan syndrome

- Scoliosis

# Complications

Minor pectus excavatum defects are usually asymptomatic, thus without complications.  More severe defects can, however, negatively impact cardiopulmonary function, presenting with variety of symptoms:

- chest pain

- fatigue

- exertional dyspnea

- recurrent respiratory tract infections

- asthma

- palpitations

- heart murmur (mitral regurgitation)

- arrythmia

- syncope

Complications are more commonly appreciated in patients who undergo surgical correction of the defect:

- migration of the sternal bar

- infection

- pneumothorax

- bleeding

- cardiac laceration

- chronic pain

- recurrence

Overall morbidity and length of stay are comparable for Ravitch and Nuss procedures, according to a recent meta-analysis.et al included the Ravitch, Nuss, and Leonard procedures.  The analysis clearly demontrated increased LOS, costs, narcotic use, and complications with the Nuss cohort.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Overall, congential chest wall defects are rare.  As the most common defect, pectus excavatum can be appreciated on physical examination by health care providers at every level.  Pediatricians are well equipped to follow these patients, and determine the need for comprehensive cardiopulmonary assessment.  There is a misconception that pectus chest wall deformities are merely cosmetic defects, even in the absence of abnormal pulmonary function and cardiac testing. Asymptomatic patients or those with minor defects may not need any treatment, be offered physical therapy consultation, or can be considered for negative pressure therapy. Surgical (pediatric or cardiothoracic) consultation should be sought for all patients with a Haller Index of 2.5 or greater, as well as for patients with concomitant cardiac defects that need surgical repair or decreased pulmonary reserve.  Regardless of the Haller index measure, impaired cardiopulmonary function is an indication for surgical correction. Surgical correction of the funnel chest attributed to a pectus excavatum defect significant improves pulmonary function at rest and VO2 max in cases in which the Hallex index measures greater than 3.2.  Subjective improvements tracked my quality measurements have also been attributed to operative correction.