Managing HIV in pregnant women requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a nurse, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, social workers, and a number of physicians in different specialties. Without proper management, the rate of perinatal transmission of HIV from mother-to-child is high.

The moment an HIV positive woman expresses her desire to have a child, the clinic physician and nurse are required to assess her readiness as follows:

- The nurse orders her CD4 cell counts and viral load measurements and coordinates with the laboratory technologists.

- The physician assesses her adherence to the ART regimen and consults with the pharmacist about the need to switch regimens in case one of the drugs is contraindicated in pregnancy.

- The primary care physician or HIV specialist consults OB/GYN specialists, and together they coordinate to care for the special needs of an HIV positive pregnant patient.

- Mental health physician is consulted to evaluate the patient for any domestic violence, depression or anxiety as these could affect her ART adherence and jeopardize the health and ensure the wellbeing of both the mother and the child.

- OB/GYN specialist plans the mode and timing of delivery [Level V] and coordinates with the patient’s HIV specialist, mental health physician and HIV pediatric specialist to improve the patient’s ART adherence postpartum, screen for postpartum depression and provide ART prophylaxis and testing to the newborn.

The management of HIV positive pregnant patient does not end with the delivery of the baby. ART regimens for both the mother and the child have to be decided before hospital discharge. Future contraception options have to be discussed. Counseling about breastfeeding needs to be done. The patient’s family support and home environment need to be assessed by a social worker. Only by working as an interprofessional team can we minimize the perinatal transmission of HIV.