The specific reduction technique selected should depend on the patient's physical characteristics, attitude toward scars, the surgeon's judgment, and experience. The superior pedicle, inferior pedicle, and partial breast amputation with free nipple-areola grafting are three common techniques that effectively meet these goals. The inferior pedicle technique is currently the most widely used approach in the reduction mammoplasty. This technique can be used with virtually any size and shape of the breast with a high degree of patient and surgeon satisfaction. The nipple-areola complex can be transposed over a considerable distance without loss of the nipple-areola sensation or loss of ability to lactate. The technique is also helpful for the correction of breast asymmetries and ptosis.

A variety of superior pedicle techniques has been described. One specific variant is the vertical mammoplasty, which eliminates the need for a horizontal inframammary scar. This is based on the principles of wide skin undermining to promote skin retraction, overcorrection of the lift to produce better long-term results, and liposuction to facilitate breast shaping and tissue removal. This technique is best suited for small to moderate reductions. Not requiring the inframammary incision benefits the patients with a propensity toward hypertrophic scarring or those significantly concerned about the scars. The main disadvantage of this technique is that the final results are not obtained immediately and the patient has to deal with the deformed, wrinkled breasts for the first few postoperative months. This is important to understand before surgery.

Amputation with free nipple-areola graft is a rapid and effective reduction mammoplasty technique when patient safety or nipple-areola viability is of concern. This method is chosen when transposition on a pedicle would be too long to be safe. Another indication is in massive reductions where large volumes of glandular tissue are resected allowing no option for a vascular pedicle. Other indications include a high degree of anesthetic risk or previous breast surgery with potentially compromised pedicle vascularity. Major disadvantages are the loss of nipple-areola sensation, inability to breastfeed, and hypopigmentation of the nipple-areola complex. Hypopigmentation occurs because of the loss of some portion of the graft with subsequent secondary healing.

No matter which technique is selected, during the consultation, the patient and surgeon thoroughly discuss the risks and benefits of the procedure, the patient's wishes, and limitations based on her morphologic characteristics. Accurate pre-operative marking is important. However, final breast shape and symmetry are achieved intraoperatively. After the initial tissue resection, the breasts are inspected in the upright position, and adjustments are made with "tailor-tacking" sutures or staples. Proper determination of the new nipple-areola complex location is essential. Nipple-areola complex malposition is difficult to correct secondarily. Preserve nipple-areola viability by developing a well-perfused pedicle or dermal graft bed. Avoid the tendency to undermine the pedicle. If the pedicle nipple-areola complex viability is questionable at the end of treatment, it should be converted to a free graft.

The patient can be admitted to the hospital overnight if the pain is severe and can not be managed. No laboratory studies are required after surgery. Dressings can be removed on the first postoperative day and replaced with clean gauze or a surgical bra. A support bra should be worn day and night for two months after the procedure. If drains are used, the output is carefully recorded and the drains removed when output is less than 30 mL in 24 hours. The patient is permitted to shower on the first postoperative if there are no drains. Otherwise, the patient must wait until they have been removed. It is advised to avoid heavy lifting for at least four weeks following surgery. After six to 12 months, mammograms are obtained on all patients older than 40 years of age as new baseline films documenting the radiographic changes of the breast following the operation.