Carbuncles typically require medical and surgical interventions. Carbuncles are usually incised and drained (I&D), in-office, and under local anesthesia. The I&D is usually performed with a #11 scalpel blade, curette, and iodoform packing strips. The #11 blade is used to make an incision into the carbuncle cavity and pressure is manually applied to express the purulent material within. Bacterial culture and sensitivity are usually obtained from the purulent material at this step. Next, a curette or hemostat is used to break up any loculations that may be present, and another attempt to express material is made. Once the majority of purulent material has been expelled, the lesion is typically packed with iodoform strips or gauze to assist with further drainage. The packing is typically left in place for 24 to 48 hours and then removed.

After incision and drainage, oral antibiotics are typically initiated; this is of particular importance if the patient has any systemic symptoms or if there is any surrounding cellulitis. Common first-line oral antibiotics include dicloxacillin and cephalosporins. If MRSA is suspected or cultured, oral antibiotics such as clindamycin, tetracyclines, trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole, linezolid, or glycopeptide may be used. Oral antibiotics can be further adjusted once bacterial culture sensitivities are known.

Topical antibiotics such as clindamycin or mupirocin may be used as adjunctive therapy.

In patients with recurrent carbuncles, prophylactic measures may be taken. This includes having patients bath with a benzoyl peroxide wash or antibacterial soap and attempting to decolonize the patient’s nares.