Inherently difficult to measure, since the ultimate endpoint is improved patient care which is an endpoint beyond the scope of most simulation-based medical education programs, much research focusses on technical skills, non-technical skills, and organizational outcomes. Accordingly, the surrogates to improved outcomes are measured precursors to the clinical care of a given patient. The evidence to support simulation-based training has been a discussion topic throughout, but there is additional research that supports outcomes for interprofessional training through the use of simulation.

Whether identified as teamwork or better understanding others’ professional role, simulation has demonstrated improved outcomes.

In a traumatic situation, all practitioners need to be able to perform at their highest level of competency under heavy duress, make rapids assessments, and formulate decisions as well as execute maneuvers that can save patient lives. Simulation teaches these skills plus the most important skill of communication among the professions involved. This paradigm applies to clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), nursing staff, and pharmacists alike. All must learn the same level of execution and performance under stress within their particular sphere of clinical practice, so they can function effectively as an interprofessional team when the need arises, and achieve optimal patient outcomes through communicating changes in the patient as the need arises. This simulation activity assists the learner in improving interprofessional team communication skills. [Level V]