Diagnosis of Hepatitis B is based on proper history taking, physical examination, laboratory works, and imaging.

Initial symptoms are nonspecific and can include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dark urine, clay-colored stool, and jaundice. In cases of severe liver damage, advanced findings specific to liver damage are common and can include hepatic encephalopathy, confusion, coma, ascites, gastrointestinal bleeding, coagulopathy, or infections. In cases of chronic hepatitis B, patients can have a chronic inactive infection, or they can develop findings of acute hepatitis known as chronic active hepatitis.

The diagnosis of hepatitis B relies on the appropriate history/physical and evaluation of serum or viral biomarkers. Viral serology of hepatitis B is usually detectable 1-12 weeks after initial infection with the primary viral marker being hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). The presence of HBsAg rarely persists beyond 6 months after infection and typically precedes detectable quantities of the corresponding antibody to surface antigen (Anti-HBsAg). The period of time between the disappearance of HBsAg and the appearance of Anti-HBsAg is termed “the window period” or “serological gap.” During the window period, other viral serology could also be undetectable. HBsAg is the first virological marker to be detected thanks to its exposure on the viral surface and is indicative of an acute infection. Immune-mediated destruction of the nucleocapsid allows exposure of core antigen (HBcAg) or e antigen (HBeAg) with subsequent antibody development. Liver enzymes are typically elevated within the latter part of the replicative phase on infection thanks to active inflammatory processes, otherwise, liver transaminases could also be within their reference ranges. Hence, liver transaminases should not be a sole guide to diagnosing suspected hepatitis B infection.

The presence of antibodies to HBsAg indicates immunized status while the presence of antibodies to HBeAg refers to a possible chronic infection state. Seroconversion refers to the transition between an acute, immune-active phase to an inactive carrier state and is marked by the spontaneous development of antibodies to HBeAg. Earlier seroconversion has been related to more favorable outcomes while later seroconversion, in conjunction with recurrent bouts of reactivation and remission, is more liable to complications like liver cirrhosis, thus resulting in poorer outcomes.

- Persons born in high or intermediate endemic areas (HBsAg prevalence of greater than or equal to 2%). African countries, countries from North, Southeast, and East Asia. All countries from Australia and South Pacific (except for Australia and New Zealand). All countries from the Middle East (except for Israel and Cyprus). All countries from Eastern Europe (except for Hungary), Western Europe (Spain, Malta, and the indigenous population of Greenland), North America (Alaskan natives and indigenous populations of Northern Canada), Mexico, Guatemala, and Honduras. South America (Ecuador, Guyana, Suriname, Venezuela, and Amazonian areas). Caribbean (Antigua, Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, and Turks and Caicos Islands).

- The unvaccinated U.S. citizens whose parents were born in high prevalence areas.

- History of illicit intravenous drug use.

- Men who have sex with men.

- Persons on immunosuppressive therapy.

- Persons with elevated ALT or AST of unknown origin.

- Blood, plasma, organ, tissues, or semen donors.

- Persons with end-stage renal disease.

- All pregnant women and infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers.

- Persons with chronic liver disease and HIV.

- Close contacts of HBsAg-positive persons, such as household, sexual, or needle-sharing.

- Persons with more than one sexual partner in the last six months.

- Persons requesting evaluation or treatment for sexually transmitted infections.

- Health care workers or public safety workers who are at risk for occupational exposure to blood or blood-contaminated body fluids.

- Residents and staff at facilities for developmentally disabled persons.

- Travelers to countries with an intermediate or high prevalence of Hepatitis B virus infection.

- Correctional facilities inmates.

- 19-59-year-old persons with diabetes who have not been vaccinated for Hepatitis B.

- Persons who are the source of blood or body fluid exposures that might require post-exposure prophylaxis.

**Interpretation of Serologic Markers**

Following serologic markers are often tested: Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), antibody to Hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs), Hepatitis B core Ab (Anti-HBc) IgM, Hepatitis B core Ab (Anti-HBc) IgG, Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), and Hepatitis B e antibody (anti-HBe).

HBsAg: Acute infection (less than 6 months) or chronic infection (more than 6 months).

Anti-HBs: Recovery from acute infection or immunity from vaccination.

HBeAg: Mostly associated with high viral load.

Anti-HBe: Low replicative phase.

Anti-HBc IgM: Acute infection, an only marker present in the window period, can be present during exacerbation of chronic infection.

Anti-HBc IgG: Exposure to infection, chronic infection (if present along with HBsAg), recovery from acute infection (if present with anti-HBs), if isolated presence, may represent occult infection.

Other markers are: Hepatitis B viral DNA is for detection of viral load. Hepatitis B genotype provides input about disease progression and response to interferons.