**Typical Atrial Flutter**

Typical atrial flutter is the most common type of atrial flutter and is a macroreentrant atrial tachycardia that uses the CTI as an essential part of the circuit. The Todaro tendon, crista terminalis, the inferior vena cava, the tricuspid valve annulus, and the coronary sinus os delineate the circuit. These structures are essential to provide the pathway length for the flutter system.

The CTI provides the slow conduction pathway, and it presents in the lateral aspect of the younger patient and the medial aspect in the older patients.  The mechanism of slow conduction is not well understood but might be related to anisotropic fiber orientation. With aging and atrial dilation, occurs fibrosis of the atrial tissue and produce non-uniform anisotropic conduction through the CTI.

The crista terminalis is a functional barrier that induces a transverse conduction block, steep slope, and arborization that allows the circuit to exist.

The mechanism of arrhythmia is a macro-reentry activation of the right atrium from the interatrial septum and along the crista terminalis with passive activation of the left atrium via the coronary sinus muscular connection.

As this cycle occurs in the atrium, conduction is determined by the atrioventricular node mechanism to conduct the atrial impulse.  Commonly the atrioventricular conduction will be 2 to 1 with an atrial rate of 300 beats per minute with a ventricular rate of 150 beats per minute, but this can be variable depending on the underlying parasympathetic stimulus or refractoriness of the atrioventricular node.

The absence of an isoelectric line between P waves or QRS complexes is due to the constant cycling of the circuit or atrial activation.

The reason behind the existence of the circuit might relate to the nature of the anatomical structures that are circumscribing the circuit. The crista terminalis thickness might have the capacity to block conduction, as well as the low voltage of the CTI, can be signs of arrhythmogenesis and poor conduction in the right atrium.

**Atypical Atrial Flutter**

Atypical atrial flutter or other macroreentrant atrial tachycardia has a circuit configuration different from the typical right atrial flutter circuit. Electrophysiologic studies and intracardiac mapping are the only means to determine the exact mechanism or area generating the atrial flutter. Different from typical atrial flutter, the presence of atypical atrial flutter is related to structural heart diseases as prior cardiac surgery or ablation procedures.

When the atrial flutter is determined to come from the right atrium but not associated with the CTI system, the circuit can be in the superior vena cava and part of the terminal crest. When prior surgery or intervention occurred, the presence of scar can often become arrhythmogenic, and the center of the circuit and the onset of the arrhythmia mostly occur after several years of the procedure, likely secondary to remodeling.

In patients without prior cardiac intervention, the atrial flutter circuit can be low voltage areas like the lateral right atrium,

Left atrial flutter can be associated with surgical atriotomy scars or areas of prior ablations, combined with areas of low voltage.

Electrophysiologic studies and mapping of the right and left atrium are necessary to determine the specific location and mechanism of the arrhythmia to guide the ablation. In the presence of an intra-atrial septal macro-reentrant system, the success rate is low when compared with the free wall atrial tachycardias.