Before reducing the tooth surface and adapting the crown, the operator must follow the following steps:

****Selection of Crown****

The operator can select the crown using different methods:

- Measuring the mesiodistal dimension of the tooth before tooth preparation

- Trial and error method

- Crown selection after tooth preparation

Loss of mesiodistal dimension resulting from space loss distal to the mandibular primary first molar complicates selecting an appropriate size crown. In such cases, measuring the dimension of the contralateral tooth is advised.

****Occlusal Evaluation****

Before placing the rubber dam and preparing the tooth, observe the following:

- Whether the opposing tooth has extruded as a consequence of long-standing carious lesions

- Whether there is mesial drift as a result of carious lesions leading to proximal space loss

- Presence of spacing and crowding

- Examine occlusion directly in the mouth or indirectly with dental analysis casts for incisor, canine, and molar relationship on both sides

- Examine for dental midline and the cusp fossa relationship bilaterally

****Local Anesthesia****

The tooth and adjacent soft tissues should be sufficiently anesthetized to prevent the pain and discomfort caused by tooth reduction and potential damage to the soft tissues during the stainless steel crown trial fitting. Additional anesthesia of the palatal surfaces of upper teeth is advised for few patients. Local infiltration is considered to be a better choice than topical anesthesia.

When preparing a root-treated tooth, the reduction of the mesial and distal contact areas may cause trauma to the local gingival tissues; therefore, applying topical anesthesia is advisable and may be sufficient.

****Rubber Dam Isolation****

Using rubber dam isolation is advised for the following reasons:

- To protect adjacent tissue

- To increase visibility and efficiency

- To improve behavior management of child

- To avoid ingestion of the stainless steel crown

****Wedging****

Many scholars advocated for the use of wooden wedges before beginning tooth preparation. These are used to keep adjacent teeth apart and reduce the chance of iatrogenic damage to the enamel.

****Removal of Caries****

Caries removal and pulpotomy procedures can be performed before or after crown preparation, although most crown preparation can be done while excavating caries.