Cerebral palsy is a clinical diagnosis based mostly on information gathered from the patient’s history and physical exam. The clinical history should focus on identifying risk factors and likely etiologies of the patient’s cerebral palsy. The history should include a detailed prenatal, birth, and developmental history. Developmental history should pay particular attention to motor development. In cerebral palsy, there is a delay in motor development. A history of developmental regression is not consistent with cerebral palsy. Family history is important, as well. Multiple family members with similar delayed development or neurologic disorders as the patient should prompt consideration of a genetic etiology of cerebral palsy or a disorder that mimics CP.

The physical exam should focus on identifying clinical signs of cerebral palsy. Head circumference, mental status, muscle tone and strength, posture, reflexes (primitive, postural, and deep tendon reflexes), and gait should undergo evaluation. Clinical signs and symptoms of cerebral palsy can include micro- or macrocephaly, excessive irritability or diminished interaction, hyper- or hypotonia, spasticity, dystonia, muscle weakness, the persistence of primitive reflexes, abnormal or absent postural reflexes, incoordination, and hyperreflexia.

The physical exam can also identify the cerebral palsy type. Cerebral palsy characteristically demonstrates the kind of tone abnormality and distribution of motor abnormalities. The subtypes of cerebral palsy are

- Spastic diplegic: The patient has spasticity and motor difficulties affecting the legs more than the arms

- Spastic hemiplegic: The patient has spasticity and motor difficulties affecting one side of the body; the arms are often involved more than the legs

- Spastic quadriplegic: The patient has spasticity and motor difficulties affecting all four extremities; often, there is often greater involvement of the upper extremities than the legs

- Dyskinetic/hyperkinetic (choreoathetoid): The patient has excessive, involuntary movements characterized as a combination of rapid, dance-like contractions of muscles and slow writhing movements

- Dystonic: The patient has involuntary, sustained muscle contractions causing twisting and repetitive movements

- Ataxic: The patient has unsteadiness and incoordination, they are often hypotonic