The classic presentation of neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis is seen in acute myelogenous leukemia patients receiving chemotherapy, most commonly with cytarabine. Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis can present as quickly as two days or up to 2 years after chemotherapy initiation. Also, there have been documented cases of neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis in acute myelogenous leukemia and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) patients naïve to chemotherapeutic agents. Clinically patients present with erythematous papules and plaques most frequently in the face, back, trunk, and extremities.

Regardless of the patients’ past medical history, neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis patients frequently present with fever, in addition to the solitary or multiple lesions that are best described as dark red, violaceous macules, papules, nodules, or plaques.

Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis favors the trunk and limbs. Half the patients are asymptomatic, while lesional pain and tenderness are the most common complaints. Because of its variable presentations, it can be challenging to differentiate neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis from other neutrophilic dermatoses that are also commonly associated with malignancies.

Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis differential diagnoses include, but are not limited to, other neutrophilic dermatoses such as acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet syndrome), acute urticaria, graft versus host disease, erythema nodosum, erythema multiforme, cellulitis, and erysipelas.