Clinical observation and laboratory testing confirm a mumps infection. Not all mumps cases classically display orchitis and parotitis and individuals may present heterogeneously. During an outbreak, the diagnosis is clinical in cases of parotid swelling with a history of exposure. When the local incidence is low other causes of parotitis warrant investigation. Laboratory testing is not routinely necessary to confirm a mumps viral infection, but in equivocal cases testing for other viral infections such as HIV, influenza, and para-influenza is necessary. Staphylococcus aureus is not an uncommon cause of suppurative parotitis. Recurrent parotid swelling of unknown etiology warrants an investigation for ductal calculi and malignancy. A viral mumps infection in the absence of parotid swelling and/or salivary gland involvement may present with symptoms of visceral and CNS predominance. In these cases, diagnosis relies on positive antibody titers and virus culture from oral secretions, urine, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Laboratory confirmation techniques include reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and serum IgM antibodies. RT-PCR is for serum and oral secretions. RT-PCR specimens additionally are for viral cultures. At the initial presentation of an individual suspected of mumps infection collect 2 specimens: a buccal or oral swab for RT-PCR and also an acute phase serum specimen for IgM antibody, IgG antibody, and serum viral RT-PCR. Obtain oral specimens within three days of parotid gland swelling and no later than 8 days after the start of symptoms. The IgM response may not be detectable for up to five days after the onset of symptoms. Incorrect collection of acute-phase samples lead to false-negative IgM and RT-PCR tests. When this occurs collect repeat samples 5 to 10 days after symptom onset to yield positive results. Laboratory confirmation of an acute viral infection in individuals with prior vaccination is difficult. This occurs due to multiple reasons: IgM antibodies are negative in a large number of patients, and RT-PCR results may be falsely negative. The disease is a Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reportable illness with most states requiring reporting in 1 to 3 days.