Calcium homeostasis in the body is a complex interplay between several different hormones and other factors. The main factors that regulate calcium homeostasis in the body are parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D, fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), and calcitonin. Serum calcium concentration is maintained within a very narrow range. Approximately 45% of the body's calcium is bound to plasma proteins, notably albumin. Approximately 15% is bound to small anions such as phosphate and citrate. Approximately 40% is in the free or ionized state. Most laboratories report total serum calcium concentration, which usually ranges between 8.5 to 10.5 mg/dL (2.12 to 2.62 mmol/L). Ionized calcium can also be measured by some laboratories, and the normal range is 4.65 to 5.25 mg/dL (1.16 to 1.31 mmol/L). Any level below this range is considered hypocalcemia. Because the majority of body calcium is bound to albumin, total calcium should always be corrected for albumin level before the diagnosis of hypocalcemia is made. There is an approximately 0.8 mg/dL (0.25 mmol/L) drop in serum total calcium concentration for every 1 g/dL (10 g/L) reduction in the serum albumin concentration.

Disorders of calcium metabolism are encountered pretty frequently in routine clinical practice. Hypocalcemia is not as frequently seen as hypercalcemia is, but it can be potentially life-threatening if not appropriately recognized and promptly treated. Most hypocalcemia problems are acquired, but some are inherited. The clinical presentation can vary from asymptomatic to a life-threatening state. Hypocalcemia is commonly seen in hospitalized patients, and for the most part, it is mild that only requires supportive treatment.