The lateral pterygoid muscle contains two heads and occupies most of the area in the superior infratemporal fossa. This muscle is often used as a landmark for dissection depending on the surgical approach that will be discussed further in the following section. The upper head of the lateral pterygoid muscle originates from the greater wing of the sphenoid and infratemporal surface and inserts on the joint capsule of the temporomandibular joint. The lower head originates from the lateral pterygoid plate and inserts inferior to the condylar process of the mandible at the pterygoid fovea. The lateral pterygoid is the only muscle of mastication that functions to depress the mandible, allowing the jaw to open.

Located inferior to the lateral pterygoid muscle in the infratemporal fossa is the medial pterygoid muscle. The medial pterygoid also contains 2 origins from the maxillary tuberosity and lateral pterygoid plate, respectively. Both heads course posteriorly to form a common insertion tendon with the masseter muscle on the medial surface of the ramus of the mandible, allowing the muscles to function synergistically as powerful jaw elevators.

The tensor veli palatini and levator veli palatini are two muscles also seen in the infratemporal fossa that interact to facilitate elevation of the palate to prevent food from entering the nasopharynx when swallowing. Additionally, the contraction of both muscles allows the opening of the Eustachian tube to equalize the pressure between the middle ear and nasopharynx.