All healthcare team members performing botulinum toxin injection should be familiar with its indications, contraindications, techniques, complications, and psychosocial implications. Botulinum toxin injection may be performed by a broad range of specialties and disciplines, including dermatology, plastic surgery, facial plastic surgery, otolaryngology, ophthalmology, neurology, and oral maxillofacial surgery. Practitioners may work with a nurse or medical assistant who reconstitutes the botulinum toxin, but botulinum toxin injection must be performed by a licensed healthcare practitioner, such as a physician, physician assistant, dentist, or registered nurse.

Provider and patient communication and expectation setting are paramount in the management of patients seeking cosmetic procedures. Careful planning, discussion of cosmetic goals, and pre-procedure documentation are vital. The provider may desire pre- and post-procedure photography to accurately document desired and undesired outcomes, pre-existing facial features, as well for teaching trainees. The photography should be standardized and reproducible.

It may be wise for the provider to work closely with a nurse, physician assistant, medical assistant, or technician trained specifically in medical photography related to facial plastic surgery. This individual may also be responsible for obtaining patient consent to use "before and after" photos for training, patient recruitment, and/or technique publication purposes. In addition, the provider should screen for comorbid psychiatric conditions (such as body dysmorphic disorder) and may require the patient to be screened by a mental health professional before any interventions.