The exact pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia is still not known. But many study series promulgated that common mechanisms of SCA are genetic mutations causing abnormal protein products, transcriptional dysregulation, dysfunction of autophagy, channelopathies, mitochondrial dysfunction, toxic RNA gain of function.

Six forms of SCA involve CAG repeat amplification encode glutamine, which gets assembled into ataxins that alters the protein configuration into the beta-pleated structure and toxic gain of function with autosomal inheritance. Ataxins are misfolded proteins from the expansion of a polyglutamine (more than 40 glutamines), which is abnormally translocated and accumulated in nuclei that interact with other proteins and oligomerize forming intranuclear inclusions in Purkinje cells.

The principal cell involved in degeneration is Purkinje cells, and other cells, such as granule cells, astrocytes, Golgi cells, and oligodendrocytes are not involved.

Channelopathies involving a mutation of voltage-gated calcium channel cause the release of calcium from calcium stores such as endoplasmic reticulum in SCA15, 16, and 29 and mitochondrial calcium influx in SCA28 which lead to enzyme activation and apoptosis of Purkinje cells. Pre- and postsynaptic calcium signaling consists of the alpha1A subunit of calcium channel encoded by the CACNA1A gene, and mutation of the CACNA1A gene occurs in SCA6, which disrupts the normal transmission of impulse in the synaptic junction of Purkinje cells. Normal functioning of voltage-gated potassium channels required for electrophysiological firing during nerve conduction. In SCA13, mutation of voltage-gated potassium channel KCNC3 impairs the normal conduction of Purkinje cells.

Loss of autophagy, another built-in proteolysis mechanism, and accumulation of misfolded long polyglutamine peptide may be the cause of neurodegeneration.

Some studies say that codon repeats containing RNA also accumulated forming RNA-foci in SCA8, 31, and 36.  This RNA-foci sequester RNA binding proteins which alter transcriptional regulation, and RNA splicing ability leading to neurotoxicity. Transcriptional dysregulation directly causes neurodegeneration in SCA1, 3, 7, and 17.

Recent studies affirmed that DNA repair modifies CAG with expansions.