The cardiovascular system is the initial system to develop due to the growing embryo’s growing metabolic demands. Compared to the adult cardiovascular system, one notes several distinctions, particularly that of a well developed pulmonary system in the adult. In an amniotic fluid environment, the fetus would not need a developed pulmonary system (as the placenta serves as a means of oxygen exchange). Several cardiovascular structures (such as the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus) minimize blood flow to the fetal lungs by directing blood into the systemic circulation and away from the lungs. The minimal blood flow to the developing pulmonary system prevents the premature development of the lungs.

The ductus arteriosus is a small vessel connecting the pulmonary artery and the aorta. It allows for blood flow from the right ventricle into the systemic circulatory system, bypassing the nonfunctional fetal lungs. Prostaglandins maintain its patency, and it closes after birth. The vestigial remnant of this structure is the ligamentum arteriosum. Premature closure of the ductus arteriosus is usually due to pharmacological agents that block prostaglandin synthesis (i.e., NSAIDs).

Birth presents an interesting change in the cardiovascular dynamics of the fetus. The fetus is no longer in an amniotic environment and now requires functioning lungs to meet respiratory needs — the first breath of oxygen that a newborn takes increases the inspired oxygen tension, facilitating blood flow to the lungs. The increased blood flow to the lungs leads to increased blood flow to the left atrium, closing the foramen ovale.