**Sources of Vitamin A**

In animals, the body stores vitamin A as a molecule called retinol. Egg yolk, milk, liver, cheese, and butter are all rich in vitamin A. We derive vitamin A from plant sources in the form of plant carotenoids, which convert to retinol during digestion. Plants abundant in vitamin A include dark green leafy vegetables (spinach, amaranth, among others), carrots, squash, yellow maize, mangoes, and papayas.

**Sources of Vitamin D**

Vitamin D is found primarily in two forms, D2 and D3. Vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) is present in certain foods such as salmon, tuna, and mackerel. Smaller quantities are present in beef liver, cheese, and egg yolks. Many countries fortify natural milk with vitamin D. This is a practice implemented to decrease the prevalence of rickets and osteomalacia. Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is synthesized in the skin after exposure to sunlight, hence its nickname the "sunshine vitamin."

**Sources of Vitamin E**

The predominant form of vitamin E is a-tocopherol. However, other tocopherols and tocotrienols are also present in circulation, such as the alpha, gamma, beta, and delta forms. Naturally occurring sources of vitamin E include vegetable oils, seeds, nuts, and whole grains.

**Sources of Vitamin K**

Vitamin K has two primary forms, K1 and K2. Vitamin K1 (phylloquinone) is present in green leafy vegetables, cabbage, and cauliflower. Lesser quantities are in fish, meat, and some fruits. The gut microflora synthesizes vitamin K2 (menaquinone).