Patients with CLL are often asymptomatic at the initial presentation, when a routine CBC reveals abnormal lymphocytosis, leading to CLL diagnosis. Approximately 5 to 10% of patients with CLL are symptomatic with B symptoms such as Fever of > 100.5 degrees F for > 2 weeks with no evidence of infection; unintentional weight loss >/= 10% of body weight over the last 6 months; drenching night sweats with no evidence of infection; extreme fatigue; and early satiety.

Upon physical examination, 50 to 90% of the patients with CLL present with localized/generalized lymphadenopathy.  The most common sites include cervical, supraclavicular, and axillary lymph nodes. On palpation, the nodes are firm, non-tender, round, and freely mobile.  Splenomegaly is the second most commonly enlarged lymphoid organ, seen in 25 to 55% of cases. On palpation, it is painless on non-tender with a smooth, firm surface.  Hepatomegaly is seen in 15 to 25% cases.  The liver is mildly enlarged and palpated 2-6 cm below the right costal margin.  On palpation, the liver is firm and non-tender with a smooth surface.

Skin examination is an important part of physical examination because skin cancers are a relatively frequent CLL complication. Skin is the most common non-lymphoid tissue involved in patients with CLL. Leukemia cutis (skin lesions) mainly involve the face and manifest as papules, macules, plaques, ulcers, blisters, or nodules.  Skin biopsy can help confirm the diagnosis of CLL. Nonspecific secondary cutaneous lesions may occur due to bleeding, vasculitis, and infection.  Exaggerated reactions to insect bites have been reported in for patients as well.

Infiltration of the spleen and bone marrow with neoplastic B cells causes splenomegaly and hypercellular bone marrow. The splenomegaly leads to increased sequestration of RBCs and platelets, leading to anemia and thrombocytopenia by decreasing the RBCs and platelets. Patients with anemia are symptomatic with fatigue and shortness of breath; patients with thrombocytopenia easily bleed/bruises, and petechiae can be seen on physical examination. Lack of functional B cells decreases the body's ability to produce antibodies for immune responses leading to hypogammaglobinemia, which eventually leads to an increased risk of infection.