In the United States judicial system, the expert witness has an essential function in determining medical negligence. The role of the expert witness testimony in medical malpractice cases is three-fold. The expert witness is called on to establish the standard of care applicable to that specific case. The expert is then asked to provide an opinion regarding any deviation from the standard of care. Lastly, if it is determined that there was a deviation from the standard of care, the expert witness may be asked to offer an opinion as to whether that deviation from the standard of care could have resulted in the patient’s alleged injury.

**Processes of Expert Witness**

The involvement of the expert witness in medical malpractice cases can take many different forms. The expert witness may be asked to evaluate the merits of a claim before legal action is filed. The expert witness may be tasked to review the medical records, provide a written opinion regarding the standard of care and any deviation from the standard of care. If the case continues, the expert will most likely be deposed. During a deposition, the expert witness provides recorded testimony, under oath, to the questions of attorneys from both sides. If the case goes to court, the expert witness will be required to provide testimony, under oath, to the judge or jury.

The judge and jury rely on the expert witness to clarify the medical standards. Therefore the testimony should be clear, coherent, and consistent with the standard of care applicable at the time of the incident.