Patient safety is of the utmost importance. Trigger point injections can be a valuable adjunct to treating chronic pain conditions involving the musculoskeletal system. A detailed history and musculoskeletal physical exam are suffering in preventing adverse outcomes.

A team-based, interprofessional approach should be implemented to ensure patient safety and the appropriateness of the procedure. This team should include the physician or mid-level practitioner, as well as a nurse or healthcare technician to prepare the patient and assist during the procedure. If being performed as an inpatient procedure, the pharmacist may also be involved in preparing the injection and assure appropriate dosing and check for allergy risk. The designated staff member assisting should monitor the patient during the procedure, assist with patient education, and report changes in vital signs should they occur.

Communication with the patient throughout the procedure is essential to make sure the treatment is addressing an active trigger point. Healthcare professionals should always take caution when handling sharps as accidental needle sticks may occur. Universal precaution guidelines should be followed, and hazardous materials should be disposed of appropriately. Documentation post procedure should include the location of trigger points treated; muscles injected, amount of selected medications used (if any), patient position during treatment, and post-procedure plan.

An interprofessional approach involving the clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists will result in the best patient outcomes. [Level 5]