Although non-infectious bursitis can be managed with conservative measures aimed at reducing inflammation, treatment for septic bursitis is always antibiotic therapy. Injection of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can be offered to control pain and injection of corticosteroids can be offered to cases where pain can not be controlled by NSAIDs. Treatment can be done on an outpatient basis with or without needle aspiration Staphylococcus aureus coverage with oral clindamycin, doxycycline, or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is recommended for empiric therapy until culture results are finalized. If there is a severe local infection or in an immunocompromised patient, admission for intravenous vancomycin is most appropriate. For those patients with a penicillin allergy, the recommended treatment is ciprofloxacin and rifampin.

Duration and type of therapy are debated. Recommendations include a minimum of 10 days of treatment in mild cases, and repeat aspirations and continuation of antibiotics until bursal fluid is clear of infectious signs in severe cases. Treatment can usually be guided by clinical response and culture results

**Indications for Operative Intervention**

- Significant pointing swellings

- Severe cases that are unresponsive to medical treatment with antibiotics alone.

- Chronic cases.

- Recurrent cases.

**Operative Intervention**

- Needle aspiration together with systemic antibiotics.

- Incision and drainage if aspiration fails due to loculation

- Suction irrigation

- Open or arthroscopic bursectomy: it was reported that single-stage acute bursectomy has higher recurrence rates in comparison to two-stage bursectomy with delayed primary closure