The patella experiences complex, dynamic loading patterns.

Periprosthetic patellar fractures are classified on a temporal basis, intraoperative or postoperative. Postoperative periprosthetic patellar fractures are more prevalent that intraoperative fractures and have predisposing factors associated with their pathology.

Postoperative periprosthetic patellar fractures are classified as traumatic or atraumatic. Traumatic causes are similar to those described in native patellar fractures. Atraumatic mechanism of fractures is caused by surgical technique, patient factors, and implant choice. Reuben advised against the revision to a new patellar component if <10 mm of bone stock remains and advocates for the retention of a well-positioned and minimally worn prosthesis during revision total knee arthroplasty.

Contrary to intraoperative periprosthetic patellar fractures associated with aggressive reaming, postoperative stress failure of the patella is a complication associated with inadequate reaming. Overstuffing the patellofemoral joint with a patellar prosthesis larger than the bone resected or a femoral component that is too large, places abnormal stress on the patella and predispose to stress failure. Component malpositioning during the index arthroplasty has a significant role in patella tracking. Patellar maltracking places undue stress on the patella and can lead to a postoperative fracture.

Patient factors associated with periprosthetic patellar fractures are osteopenia/osteoporosis, inflammatory arthritides, inadequate bone stock, male sex, and increased activity level.

The original classification of patellar fractures characterizes them into seven common fracture patterns: nondisplaced, transverse with displacement, inferior pole, comminuted without displacement, comminuted with displacement, vertical, or osteochondral.

Classification of periprosthetic patellar fractures focuses on the stability of the patellar prosthesis, degree of fracture displacement, location and pattern, quality of bone stock, and competence of the extensor mechanism. While no universally accepted classification exists for periprosthetic patellar fractures, Ortiguera and Berry developed a classification system that can be used to dictate treatment. Type I fractures are most commonly treated non-operatively while Type II and III fractures often require operative intervention, repair/reconstruction of the extensor mechanism, and revision of patellar prosthesis.

Ortiguera and Berry Classification of Periprosthetic Patellar Fractures

- Type I: Stable implant, intact extensor mechanism

- Type II: Disrupted extensor mechanism

- Type IIIa: Loose patellar component, reasonable bone stock

- Type IIIb: Loose patellar component, inadequate bone stock