# Continuing Education Activity

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a condition that develops when there is a retrograde flow of stomach contents back into the esophagus. It can present as non-erosive reflux disease or erosive esophagitis. This activity illustrates the evaluation and treatment of GERD and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the pathophysiology of gastroesophageal reflux disease.
- Describe the signs and symptoms of a patient with gastroesophageal reflux disease.
- Describe the tests used to diagnose gastroesophageal reflux disease.
- Describe the importance of improving coordination among interprofessional team members to enhance the delivery of care for patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease.

# Introduction

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a chronic gastrointestinal disorder characterized by the regurgitation of gastric contents into the esophagus. It is one of the most commonly diagnosed digestive disorders in the US with a prevalence of 20%, resulting in a significant economic burden in direct and indirect costs and adversely affects the quality of life

# Etiology

Currently, there is no known cause to explain the development of GERD. Over the years, several risk factors have been identified and implicated in the pathogenesis of GERD. Motor abnormalities such as esophageal dysmotility causing impaired esophageal acid clearance, impairment in the tone of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), transient LES relaxation, and delayed gastric emptying are included in the causation of GERD et al. concluded that obesity was associated with an increased risk of developing GERD symptoms, erosive esophagitis, and esophageal carcinoma et al. evaluated the predictive factors for erosive reflux disease in more than 6000 patients with GERD and noted that the odds ratio for the erosive disease increased with the body mass index (BMI)

# Epidemiology

GERD is one of the most common gastrointestinal disorders, with a prevalence of approximately 20% of adults in western culture. A systematic review by El-Serag et al. estimated the prevalence of GERD in the US between 18.1% to 27.8%. However, the true prevalence of this disorder could be higher because more individuals have access to over-the-counter acid, reducing medicationset al. estimated the pooled prevalence of GERD symptoms to be marginally higher in women compared with men (16.7% (95% CI 14.9% to 18.6%) vs. 15.4% (95% CI 13.5% to 17.4%)

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of GERD is multifactorial and is best explained by various mechanisms involved, including the influence of the tone of the lower esophageal sphincter, the presence of a hiatal hernia, esophageal mucosal defense against the refluxate and esophageal motility.

**Impaired Lower Esophageal Sphincter (LES) Function and Transient Lower Esophageal Sphincter Relaxations (TLESRs)**

The LES is a 3-4 cm tonically contracted smooth muscle segment located at the esophagogastric junction (EGJ) and, along with the crural diaphragm forms the physiological EGJ barrier, which prevents the retrograde migration of acidic gastric contents into the esophagus

**Hiatal hernia**

Hiatal hernia is frequently associated with GERD and can exist independently without causing any symptoms. Nonetheless, the presence of hiatal hernia plays a vital role in the pathogenesis of GERD as it hinders the LES functionet al. demonstrated the presence of hiatal hernia in 94% of patients with reflux esophagitis

**Impaired esophageal mucosal defense against the gastric refluxate**

The esophageal mucosa comprises various structural and functional constituents that function as a protective defense barrier against the luminal substances encountered with GERD

**Defective esophageal peristalsis**

Normally, the acidic gastric contents that reach the esophagus are cleared by frequent esophageal peristalsis and neutralized by salivary bicarbonateet al., 21% of patients with GERD were noted to have impaired esophageal peristalsis leading to decreased clearance of gastric reflux resulting in severe reflux symptoms and mucosal damage

# Histopathology

The esophageal squamous epithelium serves to function as a protective defense barrier against the retrograde migration of refluxate. Disruption of this epithelial defense is a common phenomenon in GERD and NERD

# History and Physical

The typical clinical presentation of GERD is heartburn and regurgitation. However, GERD can also present with various other symptoms that include dysphagia, odynophagia, belching, epigastric pain, and nausea

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of GERD is imprecise as there is no gold standard test available. The diagnosis of GERD is made solely based on presenting symptoms or in combination with other factors such as responsiveness to antisecretory therapy, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and ambulatory reflux monitoring.

**Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) trial**

GERD can be presumptively diagnosed in most patients presenting with typical symptoms of heartburn and regurgitation

**Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD)**

Patients presenting with typical GERD symptoms associated with any one of the alarm symptoms should be evaluated with an EGD to rule out complications of GERD. These include erosive esophagitis, Barrett's esophagus, esophageal stricture, and esophageal adenocarcinoma or rule out peptic ulcer disease. Distal esophageal biopsies are not routinely recommended to make a diagnosis of GERD as per the current American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) guidelines

**Radiographic studies**

Radiographic studies like barium radiographs can detect moderate to severe esophagitis, esophageal strictures, hiatal hernia, and tumors. However, their role in the evaluation of GERD is limited and should not be performed to diagnose GERD

**Ambulatory esophageal reflux monitoring**

Medically refractory GERD is increasingly common, and patients often have normal endoscopy evaluation as PPIs are incredibly effective in healing esophagitis caused by the refluxate. Ambulatory esophageal reflux monitoring can assess the correlation of symptoms with abnormal acid exposure. It is indicated in medically refractory GERD and in patients with extraesophageal symptoms suspicious for GERD. Ambulatory reflux (pH or in combination with impedance) monitoring employs the utility of a telemetry pH capsule or a transnasal catheter. It is the only available test that detects pathological acid exposure, frequency of reflux episodes, and correlation of symptoms with reflux episodes

# Treatment / Management

The goals of managing GERD are to address the resolution of symptoms and prevent complications such as esophagitis, BE, and esophageal adenocarcinoma. Treatment options include lifestyle modifications, medical management with antacids and antisecretory agents, surgical therapies, and endoluminal therapies.

**Lifestyle Modifications**

Lifestyle modifications are considered to be the cornerstone of any GERD therapy. Counseling should be provided about the importance of weight loss given that underlying obesity is a significant risk factor for the development of GERD, and studies have shown that weight gain in individuals with a normal BMI has been associated with the development of GERD symptoms

**Medical Therapy**

Medical therapy is indicated in patients who do not respond to lifestyle modifications. Medical therapy is comprised of antacids antisecretory agents like histamine (H2) receptor antagonists (H2RAs) or PPI therapy and prokinetic agents. Currently, there are two US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved H2RAs (famotidine and cimetidine) available in the US and are available over-the-counter. The other commonly used H2RA known as ranitidine has been recalled as a potential health hazard or safety risk due to an unexpected impurity in the active ingredient. The less commonly known prescription-only H2RA nizatidine has also been recalled as well due to similar concerns. In the US, there are six PPIs that are currently available, of which three (omeprazole, lansoprazole, and esomeprazole) are available over-the-counter, and the remaining three (pantoprazole, dexlansoprazole, and rabeprazole) are prescription-only medications. Of the available medical options, PPI therapy is considered to be the most effective for both erosive and non-erosive GERD based on multiple large-scale studies. These studies have also shown improved symptom control, healing of underlying esophagitis, and decreased relapse rates compared to H2RAs

**Surgical therapy**

Patients who present with either medically refractory GERD, noncompliance, or experience side effects with medical therapy, underlying large hiatal hernia, or individuals who desire to discontinue long-term medical treatment can be considered for surgical management

**Endoluminal Therapy**

In the era of minimally invasive surgery techniques, many different types of endoscopic therapies have been developed for GERD management. Most of them were discontinued after failing to demonstrate long-term efficacy. The current available endoluminal therapies include magnetic sphincter augmentation (MSA) and transoral incision-less fundoplication using the EsophyX (EndoGastric Solutions, Redmond, WA, United States)A recent meta-analysis by Gerson et al. that included data from 233 patients demonstrated that subjects who underwent TIF 2.0 procedure had improved esophageal pH, decreased need for PPIs, and significant improvement in the quality of life at three years after TIF 2.0 procedure

# Differential Diagnosis

- Coronary artery disease

- Achalasia

- Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE)

- Non-ulcer dyspepsia

- Rumination syndrome

- Esophageal diverticula

- Gastroparesis

- Esophageal and gastric neoplasm

- Peptic ulcer disease (PUD)

# Complications

**Erosive Esophagitis (EE)**

EE is characterized by erosions or ulcers of the esophageal mucosa

**Esophageal Strictures**

Chronic acid irritation of the distal esophagus can result in scarring of distal the esophagus leading to the formation of a peptic stricture. Patients can present with symptoms of esophageal dysphagia or food impaction. ACG guidelines recommend esophageal dilation and continue PPI therapy to prevent the need for repeated dilations

**Barrett Esophagus**

This complication occurs as a result of chronic pathological acid exposure to the distal esophageal mucosa. It leads to a histopathological change of the distal esophageal mucosa, which is normally lined by stratified squamous epithelium to metaplastic columnar epithelium. Barrett's esophagus is more commonly seen in Caucasian males above 50 years, obesity, and history of smoking and predisposes to the development of esophageal adenocarcinoma

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The majority of patients presenting with typical symptoms of GERD are usually recognized and managed by primary care providers. Patients with medically refractory GERD and alarm symptoms are generally referred to gastroenterologists.  The management of GERD requires an interprofessional approach involving primary care providers, gastroenterologists, otolaryngologists, pulmonologists, bariatric surgeons, and pharmacists.  Primary care physicians should obtain a good history to evaluate for any alarm symptoms or intrinsic cardiac causes and should promptly refer patients for further cardiac evaluation.  Considering lifestyle modifications are the cornerstone of GERD management, patients should be counseled about weight loss, tobacco and alcohol cessation, and avoidance of late meals.  Bariatric surgery should be discussed with morbidly obese patients presenting with GERD symptoms and should be promptly referred for bariatric surgery evaluation.  Otolaryngologists and pulmonologists should consider GERD in their differentials when evaluating patients presenting with atypical symptoms that include chronic cough, laryngitis, asthma, and hoarseness.  Cases of patients with medically refractory GERD should be discussed in a multidisciplinary approach with the surgeons, pharmacists, and endoscopy nurses. Complications of GERD should be promptly recognized, evaluated, and treated to prevent long-term morbidity. This interprofessional approach helps in the management of GERD, resulting in improved patients outcomes and increased quality of life.