There is no individual test that establishes the diagnosis of Budd-Chiari syndrome. The diagnosis is based on classic clinical manifestations and conditions predisposing to thrombosis, such as the presence of malignancy.

Doppler ultrasonography is the initial test of choice and usually helps confirm the diagnosis. If it is unavailable, equivocal, or cannot be performed, computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be helpful. If these tests fail to establish a diagnosis, but suspicion is still high, venography may be helpful.

**Diagnostic Paracentesis**

- Examination of ascitic fluid provides invaluable clues to diagnosis and form of presentation.

- Elevated protein levels >2g/d and a white blood cell count (WBC) < 500/microliter are mostly present in patients with the chronic form.

- The serum ascites-albumin gradient is usually <1.1 g/dl in the chronic form compared to patients with an acute form of the syndrome.

**Blood / Biochemical Abnormalities**

Non-specific except for mild elevation in serum aminotransferases (ALT/AST) and alkaline phosphatase level in 25% to 50% of patients

**Radiological Evaluation**

- Ultrasonography, preferably the color flow doppler, can visualize the thrombi with a sensitivity and specificity of 85% to 90%. Common findings in the sonographic evaluation of Budd Chiari syndrome include; 1. presence of inferior vena cava (IVC) webs and thrombi, 2. decreased IVC diameter, 3. presence of hepatic venous thrombosis, 4. increased caudate lobe size, 5. presence of ascites, 6. presence of intrahepatic or extrahepatic collaterals, 7. monophasic flow in the hepatic veins, and 8. remarkably high flow velocities in areas of stenosis that can be detected in the IVC or hepatic veins.

- CT scanning is helpful if a mechanical obstruction is suspected as an underlying cause.

- MRI is becoming the non-invasive modality of choice with a sensitivity and specificity of >90%.

- Venography can accurately show the site and severity of obstruction, but the invasive nature limits the test's usefulness.

Liver biopsy: while liver biopsy can be used to diagnose Budd-Chiari syndrome, there are more non-invasive methods available. Liver biopsy often shows necrosis, hemorrhage, and congestion in the central zone.