Pathogens causing neonatal meningitis vary depending on the neonate's gestational age at birth, age at presentation, and geographic location. The disease is categorized as early-onset or late-onset, defined as clinical signs of infection at ≤72 hours and >72 hours of life, respectively.

**Bacterial and Fungal Etiologies**

Well-known risk factors for bacterial meningitis in neonates are preterm birth, maternal group B Streptococcus (GBS) or S agalactiae colonization, premature or prolonged rupture of membranes, and very low birth weight (VLBW, less than 1500 grams).

The incidence of early-onset meningitis has been greatly reduced by using intrapartum antibiotics for GBS infection. However, GBS remains the most common cause of meningitis and neonatal sepsis, responsible for more than 40% of all early-onset infections.Escherichia coli, accounts for approximately 30% of all early-onset neonatal meningitis and is documented as the most common cause of early-onset sepsis and meningitis among VLBW and preterm newborns.Listeria monocytogenes, Enterococcus sp, and Streptococcus pneumoniae are the other major pathogens causing early-onset bacterial meningitis in neonates.

In the late-onset group, the incidence is directly related to gestational age, birth weight, and the setting where the patient presents for care. For community-acquired late-onset sepsis and meningitis, GBS and E coli remain predominant.Staphylococcus aureus, followed by E coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae.Pseudomonas aeruginosa and methicillin-resistant S aureus. Late-onset meningitis is a more frequent complication of neonatal sepsis than during other periods.

Some epidemiologic studies have noted a shift from GBS as the most common cause of neonatal meningitis in the last few decades. A recent study in China reported the most common pathogen identified in neonatal meningitis was E. coli (39%), followed by GBS (22.1%). Gram-negative bacteria were more common in preterm infants, whereas GBS was more common in term infants.Acinetobacter baumannii. This study also reported a correlation between lower Apgar scores and the risk of MDR meningitis.Candida sp.

A special mention of the bacteria Cronobacter (Enterobacter) sakazakii is warranted. It has been predominantly associated with outbreaks of sepsis and meningitis during early infancy (67% neonates) who have been fed powdered infant formulas. Meningitis in these patients is often complicated by brain abscesses, subdural empyemas, and hydrocephalus, leading to a high mortality rate.

Citrobacter
sp are noted to cause invasive disease in neonates and young infants, often with no risk factors. These pathogens are associated with a very high rate of brain abscesses (up to 75%) in patients with meningitis and subsequent central nervous system-related morbidity and mortality.

It is important to note that infants exposed to HIV, even uninfected, are at a higher risk of bacterial infections, including GBS-associated meningitis.

**Bacterial and Fungal Etiologies of Neonatal Meningitis**

(most common pathogens are in bold)

Late-Onset Meningitis

(community-acquired)

Late-Onset Meningitis

(nosocomial)

**Coagulase-negative**

**Staphylococcus**

****Escherichia coli****

**Viral Etiologies**

Neonates who do not test positive for bacterial etiologies but have abnormal CSF profiles are often presumed to have viral meningitis. Enterovirus infection is a common cause of neonatal meningitis, and human parechovirus type 3 has been identified as an emerging cause of meningoencephalitis.

Neonatal infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) is rare and, as such, a rare cause of neonatal meningitis. In a multicenter retrospective review of more than 26,000 infants undergoing evaluation for meningitis, HSV infection was identified in only 0.42% of reported cases, with the highest frequency of central nervous system (CNS) infection in the second week of life.

Arboviruses such as West Nile virus and Chikungunya have been reported as extremely rare causes of neonatal meningitis and meningoencephalitis.