**Blood Test**

It measures the C-terminal telopeptide (CTX) value, which depicts the level of octapeptide fragment released due to osteoclastic bone resorption from type I bone collagen.

**Radiographic Appearance**

Radiographically, BRONJ can range from no alterations to varying radiolucencies or radio-opacities. Osteolytic lesions may appear less or more radiodense, providing a similar radiographic appearance as metastatic bone. Altered bone morphology, periosteal bone formation, increased bone density, or sequestration may be radiographic findings of BRONJ. Early radiographic signs along alveolar bone may include widened periodontal ligament space and sclerosis of lamina dura.

**Imaging Modalities and Diagnostic Tests**

Due to the nonspecific radiographic features of the condition, imaging provides a good evaluation of the area involved and can assist in identifying the extent of bone and soft tissue disease but does not provide any definitive differentiation of osteonecrosis of the jaw from other conditions.

**Conventional radiographs**

Intraoral and panoramic radiographs are easy to acquire, inexpensive, deliver low radiation, and provide a good view. They are helpful to assess early features: thickening of lamina dura, increased trabecular density, incomplete healing of extraction socket, widening of periodontal ligament space, sinus floor cortication, periosteal bone, and sequestrum formation. Poor quality images do not clearly demarcate between necrotic and healthy bone. Disease at early stages can be frequently missed. Despite limitations, they form the first line of routine radiological investigation.

**Cone beam CT scan**

Cone beam CT scan provides tridimensional imaging of the involved cancellous and cortical bone and identifies osteosclerotic and osteolytic regions.

The early stage of osteonecrosis may not be detected, but cortical and trabecular bone changes at the symptomatic site can aid in diagnosis. CBCT has similar findings of the osteonecrotic areas as the CT scan but imparts lower radiation and has higher spatial resolution with better image quality, particularly for the cancellous bone in a small field of view.

**MRI**

MRI currently may be the method of choice to detect the early bone marrow and soft tissue changes surrounding the osteonecrotic area. Osseous change evaluation by MRI is similar to CT imaging. One consistent MRI findings are the decreased bone marrow signal intensity on T-1 weighted images resulting from progressive cell death and host response through repair, i.e., edema.

**Nuclear Imaging with Bone Scintigraphy**

Technetium-99 radioisotope scintigraphy has a high sensitivity for diagnosing early disease and ischemic osteonecrosis. Its sensitivity depends on the stage of osteonecrotic lesion and the change in vascularity.

The main drawbacks include significant radiation exposure, lengthy procedure, and low resolution, which sometimes make it challenging to differentiate between inflammatory and metastatic processes and heal osteolytic lesions and progressing osteoblastic lesions.

Combining CBCT with scintigraphy for diagnosing osteomyelitis