The term “distal radial fracture” is a catch-all for any fracture of the radius that occurs close to the wrist. This label is deceiving as there are many types of DR fractures. They can all present differently, have different mechanisms of injury, and different management. It is important to be familiar with basic the management and emergent referral indications for each type of DR fracture. This section of the review will discuss the most common distal radial fractures. Treatment options are the topic in another section.

**Colles’, Smith’s, Isolated Radial Shaft Fractures, Both Bone Fractures**- The Colles’ fracture is the most common fracture of the distal radius in adults. It gets its name from Irish Surgeon, Dr. Abraham Colles, who first described this injury pattern in 1814. The mechanism of injury is classically a FOOSH. It is a metaphyseal fracture that occurs around 1.5 inches proximal to the carpal articulation. Characteristically it presents with dorsal angulation and displacement of the distal fragment of the radius. On X-Ray, the wrist will present with what is known as the “dinner-fork” deformity. The Smith’s fracture is essentially the opposite of the Colles’ fracture. It is often referred to as a “reverse Colles’,” and occurs with a fall onto or a direct blow or force to the dorsum of the hand.

In contrast to Colle’s, the Smith’s fracture will have a volar angulation of the distal fragment. This injury produces what is known as a “garden-spade” deformity on X-Ray. Colles’ and Smith’s fractures often occur in isolation but can have other associated injuries. Isolated radial shaft fractures can occur at any location along the bone. The mechanism of injury for isolated distal third radial shaft fractures is similar to Smith’s and Colles’ fractures, and the management is often identical. Both Bone forearm fractures are also common, especially in the pediatric population. They usually result from a “fall from height.” Both bone fractures involve the radius and ulna. However, the distal radius is frequently involved. There is a high rate of open fractures with this injury pattern.

**Chauffeur’s/Radial Styloid Fracture**- The Chauffeur’s fracture is an intra-articular fracture of the radius that includes the radial styloid. The fracture fragment can be variable in size. The injury is often the result of a FOOSH injury with a blow to the back of the wrist causing dorsiflexion and abduction causing the scaphoid to compress against the radial styloid. Patients may have small avulsions of the radial styloid that are not clinically significant, but these injuries are often associated with disruption of the radioscaphocapitate and other collateral ligaments; this can lead to lunate dislocation and scapholunate disruption. These fractures were historically suffered by drivers who would need to start their cars using a hand crank. Occasionally these cranks would backfire and forcefully strike drivers on the back of the wrist.

**Die-Punch Fracture**- A die punch fracture is an intra-articular fracture involving the lunate facet of the radius. The lunate facet is one of the three articular surfaces of the distal radius. It lies between the ulnar articulation and the scaphoid facet. It connects the distal radius to the lunate bone in the wrist. A die-punch fracture occurs with axial loading of the lunate, which causes an impaction fracture to the lunate facet of the radius. This fracture often occurs in isolation but can have associated injuries.

**Galeazzi Fracture-Dislocation**- The Galeazzi fracture-dislocation is a fracture of the distal third of the radius with an associated distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) dislocation. These fractures are typically the result of FOOSH injuries. It is an uncommon injury pattern, and the DRUJ component is easi to miss for clinicians. They are labeled based on the direction of ulnar displacement. For example, if the DRUJ disruption causes volar deviation of the ulna, this is classified as a “Volar Galeazzi.”

**Barton’s Fracture**- A Barton’s fracture is an intra-articular rim fracture of the distal radius. It can be classified as either dorsal or volar. Dorsal rim fractures are more common and result from forced dorsiflexion and pronation. Volar rim fractures often occur with a fall onto a supinated hand/wrist. These forces disrupt the radiocarpal ligaments and subsequent avulsion fracture of the radial rim. In dorsal fractures, the avulsed fragment migrates dorsally. The opposite is true with volar fractures. These fractures are unstable and often present with a dislocation of the carpal bones.

**Greenstick and Buckle/Torus Fractures**- Both Torus and greenstick fractures are incomplete fractures. Pediatric bones are poorly mineralized relative to adults and can bend without frankly breaking. These fractures can occur in any long bone but frequently occur in the metaphysis of the distal radius. Torus fractures occur with axial loading whereas Greenstick fractures result from bending forces. Torus fractures are characterized by buckling of the bony cortex and periosteum without any true fracture lines. There is generally minimal deformity with Torus fractures, and the periosteum and cortex are intact. Greenstick fractures will show bony bending. There will be a fracture of the convex surface with an intact concave surface. These fractures are extremely common in children, and unfortunately frequently missed.

**Salter-Harris Type Fractures**- A Salter-Harris fracture is a pediatric fracture that involves the epiphyseal plate. These fractures can occur in any bone that has a growth plate but frequently occur in the distal radius. The Salter-Harris scheme was first developed by Doctors William Harris and Robert Salter in 1963 and remains the most common classification system for epiphyseal fractures. Salter-Harris fractures are graded I through IX, with I through V being the most frequently used in clinical practice. Type I is a fracture that runs transversely through the growth plate. Type II runs through the growth plate and the metaphysis. Type III involves the growth plate and epiphysis. Type IV is a fracture of metaphysis, epiphysis, and growth plate. Type V is a complete direct compression fracture of the growth plate. Each of these has different prognosis and management.