AKI does have significant morbidity and mortality. Today, the aim is to try and prevent the condition in the first place by employing a multidisciplinary team approach. All healthcare workers must be aware of the condition and its causes. The pharmacist should ensure that the patient is on no nephrotoxic medications at the first signs of creatinine elevation. The nurse should ensure that the patient is well hydrated prior to any contrast study and can produce adequate urine. For those who develop AKI, the nurse should educate the patient on agents to avoid worsening the renal injury. Plus, close follow-up with a nephrologist is highly recommended. Finally, the patient should have a dietary consult because salt and fluid restriction is vital when managing AKI. Similarly, the patient should avoid a high potassium diet when there is renal dysfunction. Because AKI induces a catabolic state, the patient should be encouraged to eat at least 1800 calories per day.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes for patients with AKI depend on the cause of the renal dysfunction, the presence of any underlying kidney disease, and the duration of the renal dysfunction. In the past, it was widely believed that AKI was fully reversible in all patients. Studies now show that in patients with a low eGFR, not only is there a higher risk of progressing to end-stage renal disease, but it also increases the mortality rate. In addition, AKI can also worsen the quality of life compared to the general population. Individuals who have a sudden increase in creatinine usually tend to have the worst prognosis. Today, in-hospital mortality for patients with AKI varies between 30-50%, especially when dialysis is required. Negative prognostic factors include:

- Advanced age

- Oliguria

- Use of vasopressors

- Multiorgan dysfunction

- Need for blood transfusions

- Hypotension

Over the long term, at least 12% to 15% of patients with AKI may require permanent dialysis. Mortality is increased in patients with high APACHE lll score, advanced age, and persistent creatinine elevation.