**Periductal mastitis****(PDM)**is the most difficult condition to differentiate from MDE. There is an overlap in clinical manifestations and imaging findings. Medical literature still has some controversies and overlaps between MDE and PDM. Absence of smoking history, presence of more severe inflammation, higher frequency of acute exacerbations, and fistulae are more common in PDM. The final diagnosis is often impossible without histopathology.

**Granulomatous lobular mastitis (GLM)**is a rare inflammatory condition of the breast, affects lobular and ductal components associated with the formation of noncaseating inflammatory granulomatous mass. The mass is usually a presenting symptom, located slightly away from the nipple and tender on palpation. Lumpectomy or segmental mastectomy is often required for histopathology to confirm the diagnosis.

**Fibrocystic disease**, usually more diffuse manifestations, cyclical discomfort, nipple discharge from multiple openings, bilaterality, and palpation of cysts away from the nipple-areola region are all pointing toward fibrocystic disease. Ultrasound is usually diagnostic.

**Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)**or intraductal carcinoma, when located close to the areola can be difficult to distinguish since calcifications are also seen with MDE. Imaging is helpful; needle biopsy is required for final diagnosis.

**Intraductal papilloma**must be excluded in cases of pathologic blood nipple discharge. In MDE, the discharge is multi-colored, but younger patients may have a bloody nipple over the course of MDE. The absence of palpable thickened tubal structure in the subareolar area with always bloody is in favor of intraductal papilloma. Diagnosis is confirmed by high-resolution ultrasound, discharge smear cytology, fiberoductoscopy, and finally histopathology of microdochectomy specimen.