Mucosal grafts can be harvested from the oral cavity, nose, vagina, or rectum. The oral mucosal grafts are most commonly performed due to the simple harvesting technique and easy accessibility. The oral mucosal grafts can be harvested from either the labial mucosa, the buccal mucosa, or the hard palate.

**Full-thickness Mucous Membrane Grafts from the Buccal Mucosa**

Mucosal harvesting may be performed under local anesthesia, sedation anesthesia, or general anesthesia with the tube secured to one side of the mouth. Exposure of the mucosa may be achieved using several different instruments, including Sewell retractors, Babcock clamps, Dingman retractors, or a Steinhauser mucosal stretcher. The use of one of these instruments allows the mucosa to be kept under tension which aids dissection. Additional pressure on the outside of the cheek or lower lip by an assistant further helps keep the mucosa taut.

Full-thickness mucous membrane grafts have less post-operative contracture and are commonly performed. The scar tissue is dissected, following which fornix-forming sutures are passed with the help of 4-0 silk sutures. The size of the defect is then measured with the help of blotting paper to get an approximate size of the graft. The donor site is cleaned with povidone-iodine, the size of the graft is marked with the help of the blotting paper. The donor site is infiltrated with bupivacaine 0.25% mixed with 1:200000 epinephrine which facilitates hemostasis and allows hydro-dissection of the mucosa. The incision is made along the marking with the help of a 15 Bard-Parker blade, and the dissection is performed with the help of conjunctival scissors.

When harvesting the mucous membrane graft, care should be taken to dissect it off the submucosal fat and minor salivary glands, which line the inner surface of the buccinator muscle. The buccinator muscle is a muscle of facial expression, and trauma to the muscle may lead to contracture of the wound with restriction of the opening of the mouth. Aggressive posterior dissection can injure the buccal nerve, which can lead to perioral numbness. Care is also necessary to avoid damage to the frenulum and the vermilion lid margin. The surgeon should be aware of the structures that lie within the buccal space lateral to the buccinator muscle: the buccal fat pad, Stensen's duct of the parotid gland, the facial artery and vein, the buccal artery posteriorly, lymphatic vessels, and buccal branches of the facial and trigeminal nerve. Stensen's duct is lateral to the masseter muscle. It continues forward and turns medially at the anterior masseter muscle border, and passes through the buccal fat pad to penetrate the buccinator muscle with its orifice on the mucosa opposite the upper second molar tooth. Trauma to Stensen's duct can result in a decrease in parotid salivary flow. Squeezing the parotid gland allows one to visually identify the opening of the duct through the mucosa. It is best to harvest the graft staying 1 cm inferior to the Stensen duct papilla and 1. 5 cm away from the lip vermillion, posterior to the labial commissure, and anterior to the pterygomandibular raphe. Skin grafts generally contract by 25% (although the degree of contracture may be more if the bed is on severely damaged skin), and mucosal grafts shrink by about 20%.

The graft should be harvested as thinly as possible. The donor site is then cauterized minimally to prevent thermal nerve injury. In the postoperative period, the patient is advised to use betadine gargles along with systemic antibiotics; the patient can also be asked to opt for a liquid diet until the wound heals.  After harvesting, the graft can be placed on the index finger to carefully dissect the sub-mucosal fat from the graft with the help of Westcott or Stevens scissors. The graft is placed on the bed and can be either sutured with a 6-0 polyglactin suture or fixed with the help of fibrin glue.

**Labial Mucosal grafts**

The mandibular labial alveolar mucosa has the following borders:

- The vermilion border of the lower lip superiorly

- Vestibular fold between the lower lip and anterior border of the mandible inferiorly

- Outer commissures of the lower lip laterally.

The mental and buccal branches of the maxillary artery and the inferior labial branch from the facial artery (all from the external carotid artery) supply this mucosa.

The mental nerve, a terminal branch of the inferior alveolar nerve arising from the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve, supplies sensation. The mental nerve traverses the mental foramen, which is located between the first and second premolar teeth. Injury to the mental nerve is avoided by placing the initial incision medial to the middle of the canines. Lip contracture and inversion can occur from scarring if the incision is closer than 1.5 cm from the lower lip vermillion. Injury to the orbicularis oris muscle should be avoided as mobility of the lips may be impaired with an abnormal smile. Finally, mucosa near the teeth should be protected to prevent periodontal defects.

**Mucosal Grafts with Minor Salivary Glands**

Minor salivary glands are 1 to 5 mm in size. They are found in the labial mucosa, the buccal mucosa, the base of the tongue, and the posterior hard palate. In the lips, these are found as a continuous tightly packed layer of lobules between the quadratus labii and the labial mucosa.

**Split Thickness Mucous Membrane Graft**

Split thickness mucosal grafts are less commonly performed. They are indicated when the graft has to be placed in the exposed areas, like after pterygium surgery, for better cosmesis. A microtome is used to harvest a mucosal strip of approximately 0.3mm thickness mucosa.

**Suture Versus No Suture of the Donor Site**

The donor site, as mentioned above, can either be sutured or can be allowed to heal by secondary intention. Suturing causes discomfort and may cause shortening and scaring of wound edges leading to poor cosmesis. The mucosal wound, when left open, has a tremendous self-healing property. The oral mucosa can undergo rapid healing due to the presence of a large number of growth factors in the saliva. Moreover, the presence of lymphoid tissue, macrophages, and plasma cells acts as a barrier for microbial invasion.

In the postoperative period, the patient is advised to avoid hot and spicy food, and it is advisable to apply lignocaine gel before meals. Chlorhexidine mouth wash and betadine gargles after meals for one week should also be added.