The treatment of HA presenting in infancy and childhood with a salt-wasting crisis in ALD synthase deficiency and PHA AD is aggressive rehydration with NaCl. Before a definitive diagnosis of HA is made, after drawing a 'critical sample' of blood, the infants are treated for presumed CAH with intravenous hydrocortisone (HC) in stress doses. This also has adequate mineralocorticoid activity and will tide over the crises. If 17 OHP levels are in range, the HC can be discontinued after the infant stabilizes, and the mineralocorticoid fludrocortisone (FC) can be substituted orally at doses starting at 150 micrograms / m2 body surface area in ALD synthase deficiency. The younger the child, the greater are the doses of fludrocortisone because of drug insensitivity in infants and young children. Fludrocortisone is ineffective in PHA and NaCl, sodium bicarbonate, cation exchange resins, and in very severe cases, peritoneal dialysis is needed to counter hyperkalemia; thiazide diuretics to reduce hyperkalemia and hypercalciuria and indomethacin to counter polyuria, Na loss and reduce hypercalciuria are useful in PHA AD.

PHA AR is a much more severe disease with multi-organ involvement and may need very high doses of salt replacement and often show resistance to therapy. Carbenoxolone, an 11 beta HSD 2 inhibitor, prevents cortisol degradation and allows it to stimulate the MR receptor and function as a mineralocorticoid that may be useful in PHA AR.

In Conn syndrome, preoperatively, spironolactone, if used to control hypertension, should be stopped at least 3 days before surgery and any volume expansion corrected. Post adrenalectomy hypoaldosteronism is managed with fludrocortisone. Some patients may need extended support until the suppressed adrenal recovers.

Renal transplant patients treated with calcineurin inhibitors present with hyperkalemia secondary to HA and respond to a low dose of fludrocortisone.

In type 4 RTA, fludrocortisone is useful in reducing hyperkalemia, but caution is required as Na retention, fluid overload, and precipitation of congestive heart failure are side-effects. The addition of a loop diuretic or even better thiazides that block the NCCT in the distal renal tubules may be necessary. Precipitating medications like NSAID and K+ sparing diuretics must be carefully reviewed and discontinued.