As with other electrolytes, magnesium's role in the body is diverse and complex. The mechanism of action of magnesium is dependent on which organ system is involved and the formulation used.**Physiology of Magnesium**

- Magnesium is the fourth most common cation in the body. The majority of magnesium is intracellular; it is the second most common intracellular cation following potassium. Magnesium plays a vital role in over 300 reactions involving metabolism. It is involved with hormone receptor binding, muscle contraction, neural activity, neurotransmitter release, vasomotor tone, and cardiac excitability. It is necessary for the active transport of potassium and calcium across the cell membrane. ATP is dependent on magnesium for proper functioning.

**Effects of Magnesium**

**Gastrointestinal**

- Oral magnesium promotes defecation via osmotic retention of fluids. It is also used in over-the-counter antacids.

**Cardiovascular**

- Magnesium acts as a natural calcium channel blocker, and it is a cofactor of the Na-K-ATP pump. Magnesium helps control atrioventricular node conduction. Therefore, hypomagnesemia can cause myocardial excitability resulting in arrhythmias such as ventricular tachycardia and torsades de pointes.

**Neurological System**

- Magnesium depresses the central nervous system (CNS) while producing anticonvulsant effects. At neuromuscular junctions, it inhibits the release of acetylcholine, thus blocking peripheral neuromuscular transmission.

**Reproductive System**

- Magnesium is used as a tocolytic during pre-term labor. Magnesium stimulates calcium reuptake by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which promotes relaxation of muscle and vasodilation. For pre-term labor, magnesium decreases the calcium within the uterine muscle.

**Musculoskeletal System**

- Magnesium is a cofactor of parathyroid hormone (PTH) synthesis. With hypomagnesemia, concurrent hypoparathyroidism will ensue. Hypoparathyroidism can lead to decreased calcium and eventually lead to osteopenia or osteoporosis.

**Respiratory System**

- Magnesium administration can cause bronchial smooth muscle relaxation. The cause of smooth muscle relaxation is unclear. It is thought to be either by inhibiting calcium, histamine, or acetylcholine release. There may also be a synergist effect with the concurrent use of beta-agonists.

**Hemostasis of Magnesium**

- Roughly 50% of magnesium is located within the bone, 25% is within the muscle, and the remainder is in soft tissue, serum, and red blood cells (RBC). Like other electrolytes, it can be classified as ionized, protein-bound, or bound to anions. Ionized magnesium is the most biological activity.

- The intestine, bone, and kidney maintain magnesium homeostasis. Similar to calcium, magnesium is absorbed via the intestine, stored in the bone, excreted via the kidneys. The absorption of magnesium is inversely proportional to the concentration within the body; if there are low magnesium levels within the body, more magnesium will be absorbed.