The liver receives 25% of the total cardiac output during each cardiac cycle. The portal vein receives drainage from the gallbladder, spleen, pancreas, stomach, and small and large intestines. The portal vein forms from the confluence of the superior and inferior mesenteric veins, the splenic vein, gastric vein, and cystic vein. The portal vein enters the liver within the hepatoduodenal ligament, traveling posterior to the proper hepatic artery and the common bile duct. When the portal vein reaches the hilum of the liver, it divides into right and left branches and feeds into the liver sinusoids. This vasculature comprises the majority of the blood flow to the liver, as well as draining back toxins and nutrients from the drained gastrointestinal tract. Blood then empties into the inferior vena cava (IVC). Figure 1 demonstrates normal portal venous anatomy and branching patterns, as shown by contrast-enhanced CT.

The remaining minority 25% of blood flow to the liver is supplied by the proper hepatic artery. Hepatic parenchymal cells are some of the most richly-perfused cells in the entire human body due to this blood flow. They receive well-oxygenated blood from the hepatic artery and nutrient-rich blood from the splanchnic vessels via the portal venous system. This blood mixes within the hepatic sinusoids. The intrahepatic and portal venous pressures are regulated by portal venous sphincters. The portal vein branches as it enters the liver into the right and left portal veins and then further divides. The progressively smaller branches that come from the venous divisions form the portal venules. After the blood mixes within the sinusoids, it is collected within the terminal hepatic venule or central vein. These central veins then coalesce to form the hepatic vein, which drains the liver back to the IVC, allowing blood to return to the heart and systemic circulation.

There is a large volume of blood contained within the portal venous system and a similarly-large amount of blood contained within the liver. The volume of blood contained within this system affects the body’s response to fluid loss or excess. The blood contained within the portal vein is crucial to the liver’s functional role, including lipoprotein metabolism, drug metabolism, and toxin clearance, as well as endocrine homeostasis.