**Vogt Koyanagi Harada Syndrome (VKH)**

- Patients with VKH may present with serous retinal detachments but differ in that their presentation includes bilateral uveitis, vitiligo, poliosis, orbital pain, and auditory symptoms.

**Postural and Volume-dependent Vision Changes**

- Patients can develop transient episodes of vision loss related to decreased intraarterial volume in states of dehydration.

**Posterior Ischemic Optic Neuropathy**

- Patients with severe volume losses, such as in cases of significant postpartum hemorrhage, can have vision loss due to decreased perfusion of the optic nerve posterior to the lamina cribrosa.

**Amniotic Fluid Embolus**

- After delivery, amniotic fluid emboli has been shown in case reports to lead to intraocular fundus changes consistent with Purtscher-like retinopathy.

**Increased Intracranial Pressure**

- Increased intracranial pressure often presents with papilledema, headaches, and visual changes. It can be primary (idiopathic intracranial hypertension, [IIH]) or secondary (mass lesion, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, eclampsia, meningitis). In pregnant patients, it can be challenging to discern if pregnancy and its associated weight gain and related hormonal changes cause IIH or are exacerbating a patient’s pre-existing disease. Furthermore, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, which occurs more commonly in pregnant than nonpregnant women, is an important diagnosis not to miss as it is thought to cause approximately 2% of pregnancy-related strokes.