Because of the drawbacks of the Ranson criteria, other factors are also used to assess the severity of acute pancreatitis. An elevated BUN on admission has been found to be associated with an increase in the severity of acute pancreatitis and/or risk fo death. It is believed that the elevated BUN is a reflection of intravascular volume depletion, which is mediated by inflammatory mediators in response to the acute inflammation. The APACHE score has one major advantage over Ranson criteria in that it can be used to evaluate the patient at any time point of admission. However, the one major drawback of the APACHE score is that it is labor-intensive.

The one laboratory parameter which is often used to stage acute pancreatitis is the hematocrit. Hematocrit greater than 47% on admission has been shown to be a good predictor of pancreatic necrosis. Other markers also used to stage acute pancreatitis include levels of CRP and interleukin-6. Many other biological markers have shown promise in predicting the severity of acute pancreatitis (e.g., trypsinogen activation peptide, phospholipase A2, and polymorphonuclear elastase), but not all are better than using CRP.

It is important to understand that imaging is not indicated to assess a patient with mild acute pancreatitis unless the patient is suspected of having a malignancy. However, a CT scan of the abdomen is always indicated in patients with severe acute pancreatitis and is the imaging modality of choice in patients with complications. The CT scan is rarely needed within the first three days of admission unless the diagnosis is in doubt because most inflammatory alterations are often not visible on the scan at this time.

Finally, in some patients with severe acute pancreatitis, image-guided aspiration may be required to differentiate sterile necrosis from a purulent infection.