**Controlled Ovarian Stimulation**

The cycle of IVF begins with ovarian stimulation. Multiple protocols have been utilized, including no stimulation to various levels of ovarian stimulation using clomiphene citrate, letrozole, and exogenous gonadotropins (FSH and luteinizing hormone (LH)). In IVF cycles, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogs are utilized to eliminate the woman’s LH surge allowing the physicians to time oocyte retrieval. Follicular growth is monitored by transvaginal ultrasonography, and blood levels of E2 help determine any indicated changes in the stimulation protocol.

In natural cycle IVF, the oocyte is retrieved before the mid-cycle LH surge occurs, or a GnRH antagonist (GnRHant) is used to prevent the release of LH. When the lead follicle reaches a mature size, hCG is given as a substitute for the LH surge. The pregnancy rate is about 8% per cycle with a 21% cumulative rate after three cycles, with rates as high as 44% in couples with male factor infertility. Natural cycle IVF is not commonly performed because of the lower clinical pregnancy rate.

Ovarian stimulation is done in the vast majority of IVF cycles so that approximately 10 to 20 oocytes are retrieved.  There are two main protocols; long luteal GnRH agonist (GnRHa) or a GnRHant cycle.

The long luteal GnRHa protocol begins with the administration of 0.1 mg GnRHa daily starting on cycle-day 21 in the preceding month. This turns off the pituitary secretion of LH (and FSH) during the ovarian stimulation, and the GnRHa is continued until the hCG injection. Gonadotropins are injected at doses ranging from 75 to 450 IU daily starting on cycle day 2 with dose adjustments based on follicular development and estradiol levels. The hCG injection is administered when at least three follicles reach 18 mm in size.

The GnRHant protocol entails the administration of daily gonadotropins (75 to 450 IU) starting on cycle day 2 or 3. The GnRHant is started to block the endogenous LH surge when the lead follicular diameter reaches 14 mm or on the sixth day of ovarian stimulation. When at least three follicles reach, 18 mm hCG is administered.

The minimal stimulation protocol utilizes clomiphene citrate, a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), or letrozole, an aromatase inhibitor, with or without gonadotropins. When decreasing or eliminating gonadotropin stimulation, the cost to the couple is reduced. The minimal stimulation protocol is gaining more support as studies have found that while the live birth rate is slightly decreased compared to the long GnRHa protocol (49% vs. 63%), there are significantly lower rates of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome and multiple pregnancies.

**Oocyte Retrieval**

Regardless of the stimulation protocol, mature oocytes are retrieved 34 to 36 hours after hCG administration. Oocyte retrieval is performed using ultrasound-guided transvaginal aspiration and intravenous sedation. The ovaries are visualized using a vaginal ultrasound probe, and an attached needle guide helps the physician direct the needle into each follicle and aspirate the oocyte and follicular fluid.

**Embryo Fertilization**

Insemination or ICSI is used to fertilize the oocytes. The semen sample is prepared by isolating the sperm by density centrifugation and washing it in media with a high protein concentration to promote capacitation, a process that is necessary for sperm to become fertilizable. Fifty to one hundred thousand sperm are incubated with an oocyte for 12-18 hours. Male factor infertility may require ICSI, where one immobilized sperm is directly injected into the oocyte. This bypasses the need for the sperm to penetrate the zona pellucida, the glycoprotein matrix that surrounds the oocyte.

**Embryo Transfer**

Fertilized embryos are transferred at the cleavage stage (3 days after fertilization) or the blastocyst stage (5 days after fertilization). The blastocyst stage transfer offers higher live births per cycle and is achieved with fewer embryo numbers and thus lower multiple gestation rates.

Embryos are transferred under transabdominal ultrasound guidance into the uterus by a catheter passing thru the cervix. The embryo(s) are placed 1 to 2 cm from the uterine fundus. After the transfer, the catheter is checked under the microscope to ensure no embryos are retained in the catheter and that all embryos were successfully placed in the uterus. The number of embryos transferred will depend on the embryo stage, embryo quality, maternal age, and patient preference. The American Society for Reproductive Medicine recommends no more than two blastocysts to be transferred in women 37 years-old or less, no more than three blastocysts in 38 to 40 year-olds as well as in women 41 to 42 years of age.

To optimize embryo implantation and a continuing pregnancy, progesterone supplementation is initiated on the day of oocyte retrieval or embryo transfer. Excess good quality embryos are cryopreserved for future use.