In a sterile operating room, the patient would be placed supine with the arm outstretched on an arm table. The operative arm is prepped and draped in a sterile fashion. Skin incisions are marked, then the procedure may begin. As already mentioned, the goals are to maintain forearm length and preserve the elbow joint.

The stages of the operation would be as follows:

- Anterior and posterior skin flaps are created equally to provide adequate soft tissue coverage. Do consider the need for free flaps and grafts if there is not sufficient tissue or including length and depth. When the skin flaps are too thin, there is a higher risk of breakdown, particularly in ischemic causes.

- The radial and ulnar arteries are identified and ligated.

- The muscle bellies of the 20 forearm muscles are transected.

- The radial, median, and ulna nerves are also transected. All nerves, if transected, will aim to regenerate, and therefore cause a neuroma. Thus, the goal in amputation is to identify the free nerve endings and resect them to a level where they can be in a healthy tissue bed, as far away as possible from external stimulus, which would cause pain.

- The ulna and radius are divided while aiming to maintain at least 5cm of the ulna for better elbow flexion. Aim to contour off the bone endings by palpating through the skin, as to improve prosthesis fit.

- Finally, the deep fascia, subcutaneous tissue, and then the skin is closed.

Post-operatively, early prosthesis fitting and mobilization of the forearm, elbow, and shoulder are paramount. Adjuncts to help this include compressive stockings, the stump, and drains to prevent hematoma/seroma formation.