A known allergy to a local anesthetic agent or an ingredient of the anesthetic solution contraindicates its use. Allergy is the only absolute contraindication to local anesthesia. However, some anesthetic agents or techniques should be avoided or used with caution in certain individuals.

Furthermore, toxicity and potential interactions need to be considered. Toxicity can result from exceeding the maximum recommended anesthetic dose or from the concomitant use of the anesthetic agent by the patient. Drug interactions with local anesthetics are rare. However, interactions of vasoconstrictors with beta-blockers, tricyclic antidepressants, amphetamines, and volatile anesthetics leading to hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias have been reported.

**Caution is Necessary for the Following Circumstances**

**Hepatic or Renal Impairment**

Lower anesthetic doses should be considered for patients with hepatic or renal impairment, as reduced liver or kidney function can affect the metabolism of anesthetic agents. Lidocaine and mepivacaine are almost entirely metabolized in the liver, with a small percentage being excreted unchanged in the urine. Prilocaine is metabolized by kidneys, lungs, and liver. Whereas for articaine, only 10-15% of the drug is metabolized by the liver, and the remaining drug is converted to articainic acid, a non-toxic and inactive form, in the blood.

**Cardiovascular Disease**

Adrenaline is commonly added to local anesthetic agents, and caution is recommended for patients with cardiovascular disease. A maximum dose of adrenaline of 0.04 mg is advised for patients with cardiovascular disease, compared to 0.2 mg for a healthy adult.

However, there is limited evidence on the effects of the adrenaline found in local anesthesia on patients with cardiovascular disease. Using a low dose of adrenaline does not significantly affect blood pressure or heart rate. Adverse effects can be associated with intravascular injection, injection of a highly vascular area, or exceeding the recommended dose.

Furthermore, intraligamental and intraosseous injection with adrenaline-containing anesthetics is not recommended for patients with cardiovascular disease as the drug rapidly enters the circulation with these techniques.

**Elderly Patients**

Caution is essential when delivering local anesthesia to the elderly, and lower doses should be considered due to reduced kidney and liver function. Cardiovascular disease is also more common in the elderly, and limiting the use of adrenaline should be considered.

**Pregnancy**

Lidocaine can be relatively safe, and there is no clear evidence that local anesthesia increases the risk of complications for the mother or fetus. However, any local anesthesia administered can cross the placenta and enter the fetus. Therefore, the operator should weigh the benefits and risks of local anesthesia, considering the health of the mother and fetus, the latest evidence regarding local anesthesia, and the risk of delaying treatment. It is generally recommended that elective dental treatment be deferred in pregnancy’s first and third trimesters.

Some clinicians avoid using prilocaine with felypressin in pregnancy as there is a theoretical risk of labor induction with felypressin and fetal methemoglobinemia with prilocaine. Nonetheless, these complications are rare at the low doses utilized in dentistry.

**Patients with Bleeding Disorders or Taking Anticoagulants**

Local infiltration techniques are preferred over block anesthesia for patients with inherited bleeding disorders. This is because of the risk of intramuscular hematoma with potential airway compromise associated with IAN or PSA nerve blocks in these patients.