The sublingual glands lie inferolateral to the tongue, below the mucosa of the floor of the mouth, and above the mylohyoid muscle. Sublingual tissue is palpable behind the mandibular canines. The sublingual gland acquires an oval shape when sectioned transversely, however, the gland shape is longitudinal and lentiform when sectioned parallel to the body of the mandible

The sublingual gland differs from the other major salivary glands, because it lacks intercalated or striated ducts, so the saliva secretes directly through the ducts of Rivinus. These ducts empty along an elevated ridge called the plica fimbriate formed by the sublingual folds, which are oblique to the frenulum linguae bilaterally. The sublingual duct of Bartholin joins Wharton’s duct to form the draining orifice on each side of the lingual frenulum

The sublingual tissue is predominantly a mucous gland, however, is considered a mixed serous and mucous gland. It is made up of mainly mucous acini with serous demilunes. It is the only unencapsulated major salivary gland. Sublingual tissue primarily produces a thick mucinous fluid and lubricates the oral cavity which allows for swallowing, initiating digestion, buffering pH, and dental hygiene

The composition of saliva depends on the salivary flow rate and can vary given each gland's flow rate and overall contribution. Saliva is comprised of both organic and inorganic components. Inorganic components include electrolytes, urea, and ammonia. The organic elements of saliva contain immunoglobulins, enzymes, and proteins

The primary protein found in mucous saliva is mucin, which functions to lubricate and competitively inhibit bacterial attachment to the salivary duct epithelium. This action allows for antimicrobial protection of the sublingual gland

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Normal Appearance of the Sublingual Gland**

The sublingual gland is located on the sublingual depression, resting on the mylohyoid muscle. It is separated from the genioglossus muscle medially by Wharton's duct. The sublingual gland appears on TI-weighted MRI as a structure of an intermediate signal intensity that is lower than that of the fat tissues surrounding the gland although higher than the signal intensity of the muscles