The primary physiological function of the coronary veins is to carry deoxygenated blood from the myocardium and empty them into the chambers of the heart. Coronary veins can be organized into two groups: the greater and smaller cardiac venous system.

**Greater Cardiac Venous System**

The greater cardiac venous system returns three-quarters of the deoxygenated blood from the myocardium to the cardiac chambers. The main venous vasculature of this system includes the coronary sinus and its tributaries, marginal veins, anterior cardiac veins, ventricular veins, and atrial veins.

**Coronary Sinus**

The coronary sinus is the largest cardiac vein with multiple smaller vessels converging into it. Located along the left posterior atrioventricular groove, the coronary sinus empties directly into the right atrium through the coronary sinus orifice. The venous tributaries that merge into the coronary sinus include the great cardiac vein, middle cardiac vein, small cardiac vein, left posterior ventricular, and oblique cardiac vein.

**Great Cardiac Vein**

Starting from the apex of the heart and running parallel with the anterior interventricular artery, the great cardiac vein travels up along the anterior interventricular sulcus towards the base of the left atrium’s auricle

**Middle Cardiac Vein**

The middle cardiac vein originates from the apex of the heart but on the posterior side. The middle cardiac vein travels alongside the posterior interventricular artery in the posterior interventricular sulcus, and empties deoxygenated blood into the coronary sinus.

**Small Cardiac Vein**

Located in the coronary sulcus between the right atrium and right ventricle, the small cardiac vein eventually coalesces with the coronary sinus on the posterior side of the heart and drains to the right atrium.

**Right Marginal Vein**

The right marginal vein is located on the very inferior margin of the anterior surface of the heart and serves to empty the anterior and diaphragmatic walls of the right ventricle.

**Anterior Cardiac Veins**

Anterior cardiac veins return blood from the anterior right ventricle and drain them directly into the anterior right atrium. The anterior cardiac veins are more superior to the right marginal vein.

**Left Marginal Vein**

Also known as the obtuse marginal vein, the left marginal vein drains the myocardium of the left ventricle.

**Left and Right Ventricular Veins**

The left and right ventricular veins vary from person to person, but generally, they function to drain the external walls of the ventricles

**Left and Right Atrial Veins**

The left atrial veins consist of the septal veins, posterolateral veins, and posterosuperior veins that all carry the deoxygenated blood from the left atrium into the right atrium. The right atrial veins drain the right atrial walls.

**Inferior Vein of the Left Ventricle**

Also known as the posterior vein of the left ventricle, the inferior left ventricular vein returns the deoxygenated blood from the inferior and lateral walls of the left ventricle into the coronary sinus. This vein travels between the middle and great cardiac veins.

**Oblique Vein of the Left Atrium**

The oblique vein of the left atrium is a relatively small-sized vein that rounds obliquely and inferiorly towards the posterior left atrium. The vein is also observed to unite with the great cardiac vein to merge with the distal coronary sinus.

**Smaller Cardiac Venous System**

The smaller cardiac venous system returns one-quarter of the deoxygenated blood from the inner layers of the myocardium to the cardiac chambers. This system is mainly composed of Thebesian veins draining deoxygenated blood from all sections of the myocardium chambers. Thebesian veins also drain the right side of the heart more than the left side.