There are different types of characteristics of the digital deformities; they may be static or dynamic, flexible or rigid and may occur in conjunction with other pathologies such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, cavus deformity and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). RA is distinctive in the way that it causes hammertoe formation by progressive joint destruction at the MTPJ leading to subluxation and dislocation. Whether due to neuromuscular, anatomic abnormalities such as the second ray being longer than the first or improperly fitted shoes, there is an imbalance in the extrinsic or intrinsic forces that are exerted on the digit causing a deformity.

There are three major categories explaining the cause of the deformity and the loss of intrinsic and extrinsic muscle balance at the MTPJ; flexor stabilization, extensor substitution, and flexor substitution. These biomechanical mechanisms will induce deformity at different levels of the digits.

- **Flexor Stabilization**- the most common cause of digital deformities and occurs with excessive pronation. With the pronation of the subtalar joint, it unlocks the midtarsal joint as well as causing hypermobility of the forefoot. In an attempt to stabilize the forefoot, the flexors now fire longer and earlier and overpower the interosseous muscles. It is easily recognizable by adductovarus rotation of the fifth digit, as well as hammering or clawing of the lesser digits in stance position.

- **Flexor substitution**- occurs when there is a weak triceps surae muscle, and the deep and lateral leg muscles try to compensate for inadequate plantarflexion. This leads to the flexors gaining a mechanical advantage over the interossei muscles.

- **Extensor substitution**- clinically recognizable by bowstringing of the extensor tendons. In this mechanism, the extensors gain a mechanical advantage over the lumbricals and cause contractions at the MTPJ.