**Pulmonary Surgical Anatomy**

Pulmonary surgical anatomy spans a complex subdivision of anatomical structures involved in a lobectomy. It could sort out as lung parenchyma, vascular system, and bronchial division. Classic pulmonary anatomy nomenclature has become simplified with the advent of 3D-CT anatomy for VATS segmentectomy.

**Lung Parenchymal Division**The lung parenchyma is the functional tissue of the lung, and its segmentary division uses the S prefix.

**1.  Right Lung Parenchymal Division**Right upper lobe: Posterior segment (S2), apical segment (S1), and anterior segment S3. Right middle lobe: lateral segment (S4) and the medial segment (S5). Right lower lobe: superior segment (S6), medial basal segment (S7), anterior basal segment (S8), lateral basal segment (S9), and posterior basal segment (S10).

**2. Left Lung Parenchymal Division**Left upper lobe: apico-posterior segment (S1+2) and anterior segment (S3). Left upper lobe lingular division: superior segment (S4) and inferior segment (S5). Left lower lobe: superior segment (S6), anteromedial basal segment (S7+8), lateral basal segment (S9), and posterior basal segment (S10).

**Bronchial Topographic Anatomy And Segmentary Division**

**1. Right Main Bronchus**The right main bronchus anatomy divides into three segments; the right upper bronchus, the bronchus intermedius, and the lower lobe bronchus. The right main bronchus highlights are; 1.2 to 1.5 cm in length for the right upper lobe bronchus. The bronchus intermedius highlights are; approximately 2 cm in length and form the middle lobe bronchus (anterior) and superior segmental bronchus (posterior). The lower lobe bronchus forms the lower basal bronchi.

- Right bronchus segmentary division.****The segmental bronchial division uses the B prefix with B1-B10 terminology with the same previous lung segmentary (S) names

- Right bronchus intermedius: The right bronchus intermedius feeds to the middle lobe bronchus, which becomes segmented when entering the parenchyma. 90 % presentation has a common trunk for B4+5. In some cases, B4 and B5 are separated branches. The right superior segmental bronchus****raises from the intermedius bronchus as a single  B6 branch. Another presentation is a double B6 branch.

- Right lower lobe bronchus:  The lower lobe bronchus is a common basal trunk forming three bronchial branches (when entering into the parenchyma); B7+8, B9, and B10. Other anatomic bronchial variants are; 8% is B7, B8+9, and B10 presentation, and 6% have B7, B8, B9, and B10 separated branches presentation.

**2. Left Main Bronchus**It is more simple than the main right bronchus; it consists of a main left bronchus that length 4 to 6 cm and forms the upper lobe and lower lobe bronchi. The bronchial segmentary division consists of the upper lobe and lower lobe bronchi. The bronchial division uses the B prefix with B1-B10 nomenclature with the same previous segmentary names; B7 in some literature does not exist or has the name B7+8.

- Upper lobe bronchus: bifurcates and forms a common trunk for B1+2, B3, and a lingular bronchus for B4+5.

- Lower lobe bronchus: bifurcates giving B6 and common basal trunk giving B8 and B9+10 (80%); in other cases, B8+7, B9, and B10 are isolated branches (16%).

**Vascular Topographic Anatomy And Segmentary Division**

The lung's vascular supply consists of two systems; the bronchial and pulmonary vascular (arterial and venous) systems.

**Arterial Bronchial Supply**Arterial bronchial supply is a high-pressure system with low capacitance for bronchi irrigation. It runs posteriorly to the airways and progressively is segmented to irrigate lobar and segmental bronchi. Characteristics of the topographic anatomy of the bronchial vascular system depend on each main bronchus irrigation. The most common configuration is one right and two left bronchial arteries. This one to two arterial arrangement in surgical terms makes the right main bronchus more susceptible to ischemia.

**Venous Bronchial System**Proximal right and lefts bronchial veins drain into the pulmonary veins. Segmental and subsegmental right bronchial veins drain into the azygos vein. Segmental and subsegmental left bronchial veins drain into the hemiazygos vein.

**Pulmonary Vascular System**The pulmonary vascular system consists of a main pulmonary artery and one superior and one inferior pulmonary vein (left and right), which are progressively segmented to give vascular supply for lobar, segmental, and subsegmental lung.

**Pulmonary Artery System**The pulmonary arterial circulation is a low-pressure system with high capacitance for gas exchange, which is the main airways irrigation supply (75% to 90%) at the level of lobar and segmental bronchi. Before this level exists, a rich anastomosis interconnection network with bronchial arterial circulation. The pulmonary arterial system's topographic-anatomical configuration is the main pulmonary artery (pulmonary trunk) that emerges from the right ventricle, the pulmonary trunk (below the aortic arch) forming the right and left pulmonary arteries.

**Right Pulmonary Artery Topographic Anatomy**The right pulmonary artery highlights are; intra-pericardial portion (over 3/4 length is into the pericardium, runs below the carina behind the ascending aorta and superior vena cava), and an extra-pericardial portion (run anterior and inferior to the right main bronchus). For topographic surgical anatomy comprehension, the central running of the extra-pericardial right pulmonary artery gets divided. Each division subsequently forms important branches for lobar and segmental irrigation. Extrapericardial right pulmonary artery division is a right pulmonary artery and the right interlobar artery (between the fissure). The right pulmonary artery (first extra-pericardial portion) irrigates the right upper lobe. The right interlobar artery (inferior to bronchus intermedius and anterior to superior pulmonary vein) gives irrigation for S2 (some cases), middle lobe, and inferior lobe.

**Right Pulmonary Artery Segmentary Division**The right pulmonary artery segmental anatomy uses "A" prefix nomenclature with the same previous bronchi segmentary names.

**Left Pulmonary Artery Topographic Anatomy**The left pulmonary artery highlights are; Intra-pericardial portion run below the aortic arch (aortopulmonary window). Long length extra-pericardial-portion that exits pericardium at ligamentum arteriosum level runs above and behind left main bronchus (arc 3/4 left main bronchus circumference). The extra-pericardial left pulmonary artery divides, forming the branches for the left superior lobe, lingular lobe, and left lower lobe.

**Left Pulmonary Artery Segmentary Division**The left arterial segmental anatomy uses "A" prefix nomenclature with the same previous bronchi segmentary names.

**Pulmonary Venous System**The pulmonary venous system flows through four pulmonary veins that drain into the left atrium. Pulmonary veins enter the mediastinum anterior and below the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary veins' topographic arrangement is; one superior and one inferior pulmonary vein for each lung (4 pulmonary veins).

**Right Pulmonary Veins Topographic Anatomy**The superior pulmonary vein drains the right upper and middle lobes, the lower lobe is drained by the inferior pulmonary vein. At the hilum, the superior pulmonary vein is the most anterior structure, and the inferior vein is the most inferior structure.

**Right Superior Pulmonary Vein Segmentary Division**The right superior pulmonary vein has three branches; The upper root that gives V1, the central vein that gives V2+3, and the middle lobe vein V4+5.

**Right Inferior Pulmonary Vein Segmentary Division**The right inferior pulmonary vein has three principal branches; Superior segment vein V6, the inferior basilar vein V9+10, and the superior basilar vein V7+8. Anatomic variants highlights are; the two basilar veins could have a common trunk, the basilar veins can present as isolated intercommunicating branches.

**Left Pulmonary Veins Topographic Anatomy**The superior pulmonary vein drains the left upper lobe, and the inferior pulmonary vein drains the lower lobe. At the hilum, the superior pulmonary vein is the most anterior structure, and the inferior vein is the most inferior structure. The superior and inferior pulmonary veins could share a large or short common trunk that drains into the left atrium in 25% of cases.

**Left Superior Pulmonary Vein Segmentary Division**The left superior pulmonary vein has three principal branches;  The superior vein, the middle vein, and the inferior (lingular) vein.

**Left Inferior Pulmonary Vein Segmentary Division**The left inferior pulmonary vein has three principal branches; The superior segment vein V6, the inferior basal vein, and the superior basal vein.