In pruritis, specialized cutaneous somatosensory nerve fibers sense different stimuli resulting in itch. The physiology underlying pruritus has been increasingly described over the past few decades; however, much remains to be explained. Primarily, the neuron type that was found responsible for itch was the slow-conducting, histamine-dependent, unmyelinated C fiber; however, various nonhistaminergic neurons have been recently discovered that also get involved in the neural pathways producing itch, likely accounting for the common finding of pruritus non-responsive to antihistamines.

Uremic pruritus has not been studied as extensively as pruritus in general. Furthermore, pruritus in kidney disease may be caused by different mechanisms as opposed to those underpinning pruritus from other causes. In uremia, the itch is secondary to the profound changes that happen with hyperparathyroidism-associated bone disease, structural changes in the skin due to dehydration, and systemic inflammation and immune dysfunction. This then leads to morbidity in CKD patients.

Emerging evidence suggests that CKD patients could also have primary changes in nociceptive sensory pathways in the central and/or peripheral nervous system. In one study, the distribution of pruritus was observed in large and non-dermatomal areas with “striking mirror symmetry,” suggesting a potential central neurogenic etiology.

Additionally, an imbalance of opioid receptors is seen both in the central and peripheral nervous system in CKD, and uremic pruritis may be a consequence of a neuropathic mechanism as opposed to pruritus occurring with other conditions. Therefore opioid modulators and gabapentin are efficacious in treating uremic pruritis, as described in further detail later. CKD-aP correlates more with uremic toxins, suggesting that these toxins play a more important role in the pathophysiology of uremic pruritus than the glomerular filtration rate.