Treatment of enterovesical fistula includes treatment of the fistula itself and the underlying disease.

**Conservative or Non-Operative Approach**

Medical treatment of the symptoms and possible complications like UTI, skin excoriation, dehydration, and site infection is often needed. This approach alone can be considered in high-risk patients and with a severe, underlying disease. The associated complication rate from this approach is found to be low in recent studies.

Medical treatment includes treating UTI and the associated symptoms, maximizing medical treatment of the underlying disease like in Crohn's or diverticulitis, and support of the general patient's condition.

Other conservative treatment includes non-operative measures to close the fistula like fibrin glue or other occlusive measures. The success rate of these measures is not high. They are still an option to consider in high-risk patients.

**Operative Approach**

The basic principle of the surgical approach is to excise the involved segment of the bowel and the fistula. After the diagnosis of the fistula and the underlying disease is confirmed and characterized, surgical treatment can be planned accordingly.

Some fistulae, for example, enterovesical fistula, may sometimes be identified intraoperatively while operating on the underlying disease. Dense adhesions of the intestine on the bladder are the trigger to suspect the fistula. Unless it is cancer surgery, the operative approach is usually the same. If the pathology cannot be confirmed, a frozen section of the fistula tissue is needed to role out malignancy.

Operative treatment of the entero-cutaneous fistula might be different. The focus is on the intestinal part where the leak started. When the conservative treatment fails, and after medical optimization of the patient, surgical treatment is planned to excise the diseased intestinal segment with primary anastomosis when possible. The fistulous tract is debrided and drained as part of the intra-abdominal adhesiolysis and debridement. Debriding all unhealthy tissue and closing with viable, healthy tissue edges is essential for successful healing and fistula closure.