**Vision Loss**

Retinal and Vitreous Detachment

- Often presents with complaints of “flashes” or “floaters” in vision, partial or complete vision loss. Retinal detachment is visualized on ultrasound as a mobile hyperechoic membrane or flap, often described as having serpentine motion with eye movement. Retinal detachments are tethered to the optic nerve and ora serrata. Posterior vitreous detachments have lower echogenicity and are not tethered to the optic disc.

Vitreous Hemorrhage

- Vitreous hemorrhage appears as a heterogeneous matter within the globe that will swirl when the eye is moved. This has been described as “snow globe” effect. It may also occur in the setting of trauma.

Central Retinal Artery Occlusion

- Presents with painless acute vision loss. Case reports have described central retinal artery occlusion on ultrasound as a hyperechoic spot posterior to the globe, confirmed with lack of arterial flow with color Doppler.

**Headache**

Increased Intracranial Pressure and Papilledema

- The optic nerve is contained within a dural sheath that communicates directly with the subarachnoid space. When intracranial pressure rises the nerve sheath expands and eventually the optic disc bulges into the vitreous chamber. This is referred to as papilledema and can be visualized on ultrasound. Studies have shown a correlation between increased intracranial pressure and optic nerve sheath diameter greater than 5 mm,  measured 3 mm posterior to the retina. Papilledema may also be directly visualized with ultrasound as a bulging optic disc elevated more than 0.6 mm from the retina.

**Trauma**

Foreign Body

- Foreign bodies that are echogenic such as metal, glass or wood can be visualized within the globe. The presence of a foreign body should raise suspicion of globe rupture, and ocular ultrasound should be discontinued.

Lens Dislocation (ectopia lentis)

- The lens can be visualized in the vitreous chamber outside its normal position behind the iris.

Globe Rupture

- If there is a high clinical suspicion of globe perforation or rupture ultrasound examination is not recommended. The typical appearance of a globe rupture on ultrasound is that of a heterogeneous collection of hematoma, blood and vitreous humor in the posterior chamber.

Retrobulbar Hematoma

- An accumulation of blood in the retrobulbar space that can lead to pain increased intraocular pressure and stretching of the optic nerve. It usually occurs in the setting of trauma and can be rapidly progressive and is an ocular emergency. Retrobulbar collections of blood and hematoma may be seen on ocular ultrasound.

Increased Intracranial Pressure

- Can be evaluated using optic nerve sheath diameter as described above. In clinical situations where concern for increased intracranial pressure is high, ocular ultrasound has the added benefit of being easily repeatable for frequent monitoring of optic nerve sheath diameter. This can be especially helpful if the patient is sedated or otherwise unable to participate in a neurologic exam.

Consensual Pupillary Response

- Significant periorbital soft tissue swelling may prevent examination of the direct pupillary reflex of the affected eye. Ocular ultrasound can be used in this setting to visualize the affected eye consensual pupillary response.

Vitreous Hemorrhage

- Vitreous hemorrhage appears as a heterogeneous matter within the globe that will swirl when the eye is moved. This has been described as “snow globe” effect.

Retinal Detachment

- May also occur in the setting of trauma and is visualized as described.