# Continuing Education Activity

Chloroprocaine is an ester class local anesthetic and is indicated for neuraxial anesthesia (caudal, epidural, and spinal) and peripheral nerve blocks and obstetric anesthesia (pudendal and paracervical blocks). Due to its short duration, it has been used in test doses to evaluate the function of peripheral nerve and epidural catheters. This activity reviews the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, toxicity, dosing, pharmacodynamics, and monitoring of chloroprocaine, pertinent for interprofessional team members where patient care requires local anesthesia that would be met using chloroprocaine.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the approved and off-label indications for chloroprocaine.
- Summarize the mechanism of action of chloroprocaine.
- Outline the necessary monitoring of chloroprocaine.
- Describe the importance of interprofessional team members to improve patient outcomes in patients receiving chloroprocaine for local anesthesia.

# Indications

Chloroprocaine is an ester class local anesthetic with labeled indications to provide anesthesia through infiltration, peripheral nerve, epidural, and caudal block. Due to its low potential for systemic toxicity, chloroprocaine has been used to identify inadvertent intravascular epidural catheter insertion in pregnant and non-pregnant adults.

The most common application for chloroprocaine is the obstetric setting, where it is used to provide fast onset epidural anesthesia when urgent or emergent cesarean delivery is indicated.

Reports of adhesive arachnoiditis, cauda equina syndrome, anterior spinal artery syndrome, and other non-specified forms of permanent neurologic injury after intrathecal chloroprocaine administration were reported in the 1980s.

# Mechanism of Action

Chloroprocaine causes reversible nerve conduction blockade by decreasing nerve membrane permeability to sodium.

All local anesthetics exhibit differential blockade—the observation that nerve fibers associated with different functions have dissimilar sensitivity to the sodium channel blocking properties of local anesthetics.

In general, the speed of onset for a local anesthetic is determined by its pKa (dissociation constant)—the pH at which half the drug is ionized (protonated) and half the drug is nonionized (uncharged).

Chloroprocaine is an exception to this rule. Chloroprocaine has a pKa (8.7) greater than lidocaine, ropivacaine, bupivacaine, and mepivacaine, yet it can provide faster onset epidural anesthesia.

The nerve membrane is heavily occupied by lipids. Accordingly, more lipophilic substances cross the nerve membrane more easily, which provides more molecules to block nerve conduction.  In this manner, lipid solubility is one of the main determinants of local anesthetic potency.

Local anesthetics that exhibit higher degrees of plasma protein binding generally have a longer duration of action.  This is because protein binding in plasma can be used as a surrogate for local anesthetic affinity for protein binding in the sodium channel.

Local anesthetics are not specific for peripheral nerves; nerves in the central nervous system and cardiac conduction system may also be blocked.  Because of this, severe symptoms involving the central nervous and cardiovascular system may result when large doses of local anesthetic are injected—a syndrome commonly referred to as local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST).

# Administration

Chloroprocaine is supplied as a 1%, 2%, and 3% solution. The spinal formation is 1% and preservative-free. Some of the solutions indicated for infiltration, epidural, and peripheral nerve block contain the preservatives methylparaben and disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA).

The maximum recommended chloroprocaine dose for infiltration, or peripheral nerve block is 11 mg/kg when chloroprocaine is administered alone, not to exceed 800 mg.

The 3% chloroprocaine solution is typically used in lumbar epidural catheters to facilitate urgent or emergent cesarean delivery. Because chloroprocaine is used in the obstetric setting to facilitate quick onset anesthesia, the 3% solution is always used.  A volume of 15 to 25 mL is usually sufficient to obtain a T4 dermatome level—the level required to achieve a painless cesarean delivery. Since epidural anesthesia in the non-obstetric setting is often not as urgent, both 2% and 3% chloroprocaine are used.  Similar volumes are used in the non-obstetric population. A repeat dose of epidural chloroprocaine can be administered every 45 minutes to continue anesthesia; recovery following epidural block with chloroprocaine takes 30 to 60 minutes.

The recommended dose of 1% intrathecal chloroprocaine in the non-obstetric population is 50 mg. This has been shown to produce a reliable and dense block to the T10 dermatome. Epinephrine should not be administered with spinal chloroprocaine as it has been associated with the following flu-like symptoms: malaise, myalgias, arthralgias, fever, nasal congestion, and loss of appetite.

# Adverse Effects

The most common adverse effect is pain related to the procedural injection of chloroprocaine. The next most common adverse effects are related to spinal, epidural, and caudal anesthesia: hypotension, bradycardia, nausea, and headache.

Similar to other local anesthetics, if too much chloroprocaine is administered into the epidural or intrathecal space, a high block may occur. The most common scenario is an accidental intrathecal injection during epidural placement.  If the block is higher than the T1 dermatome, the cardiac accelerator fibers will be blocked, and bradycardia will ensue. This will usually be accompanied by hypotension, nausea, significant patient anxiety, and akathisia. If the block continues to rise, brainstem dysfunction may occur with associated loss of consciousness and apnea—this constellation of symptoms is commonly referred to as a “total spinal.”

One case of cauda equina syndrome has been described after an appropriate dose of preservative-free intrathecal chloroprocaine. The patient developed urinary retention, severe lower extremity burning pain, leg weakness, and loss of sensation in the buttock and bilateral thighs. The patient’s symptoms resolved over 5 to 6 weeks.

Anaphylaxis to local anesthetics is very rare. Ester local anesthetics, such as chloroprocaine, may have a higher incidence of allergic reactions due to one of their metabolites, para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), which is structurally similar to methylparaben.

# Contraindications

Chloroprocaine is contraindicated in patients with a known allergy to para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA).

Chloroprocaine is pregnancy category C. Studies involving pregnant animals have not been conducted.  Despite the category C classification, chloroprocaine is used regularly on labor and delivery units throughout the world.  Low concentrations of chloroprocaine and only trace amounts of its byproducts (2-chloro-aminobenzoic acid and 2-dimethylaminoethanol) have been found in umbilical arterial or venous plasma after properly administered paracervical blocks (the rate of systemic absorption of local anesthetics increases paracervical > epidural > IM > spinal).

It is unknown how much chloroprocaine is excreted into breast milk, but based on the low amounts of other local anesthetics, it is not thought to cause infant toxicity.

Chloroprocaine should be used with caution in patients with end-stage liver disease as it is metabolized by pseudocholinesterase, which is produced in the liver. Somnolence and a prolonged epidural block have been described in a parturient with pseudocholinesterase deficiency.

Dosing for pediatric patients younger than four years old has not been established.

# Monitoring

According to the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA), oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation should be continuously monitored during the performance of a regional anesthetic. The patient's condition may rapidly deteriorate with the provision of any type of anesthesia. Accordingly, qualified anesthesia personnel should be continuously present and prepared to escalate care should untoward clinical events occur.

During the performance of a block with chloroprocaine, oxygenation must be continuously assessed. The pulse oximeter is the most commonly used method to quantitatively assess the adequacy of oxygenation.

During the performance of a regional block with minimal or no sedation, the adequacy of ventilation can be assessed by observation of chest excursion, mask fogging, and auscultation of breath sounds.  In July 2011, the ASA changed its recommendation to assess ventilation during moderate or deep sedation.

Circulation should be continuously evaluated during the performance of a block with chloroprocaine. The electrical activity of the heart should be continuously assessed with an electrocardiogram. In addition, arterial blood pressure and heart rate should be monitored at 5-minute intervals or more frequently.

The temperature should be assessed whenever clinically meaningful changes in body temperature are expected. Due to the short duration of procedures that involve chloroprocaine administration, temperature monitoring is usually not required while blocks are being performed.

# Toxicity

Local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) refers to local anesthetics reaching toxic plasma levels. Initial signs of LAST are tinnitus, perioral numbness, and metallic taste. Classically, LAST progresses from central nervous system excitation (anxiety, muscle twitching, seizures) to depression (sleepiness, loss of consciousness, and respiratory depression) followed by cardiac excitation (tachycardia, hypertension) and finally depression (bradycardia, hypotension, arrhythmias, asystole).

Chloroprocaine doses greater than 11 mg/kg may cause LAST. Please note that LAST has been reported with local anesthetic doses below the maximum recommended dose.

Careful attention to the prevention of overdose is necessary, with monitoring of the cardiovascular system and level of consciousness following each injection. If overdose is suspected, full hemodynamic support may be required. Benzodiazepines are the preferred treatment for seizures. Airway management for local anesthetic toxicity may range from supplemental oxygen to assisted ventilation to initiation of invasive airway devices and positive pressure ventilation.

Critical differences in local anesthetic-induced cardiac arrest treatment include reduced doses of epinephrine (<1mcg/kg) and avoidance of vasopressin, calcium channel blocks, beta-blockers, or other local anesthetics. Dosing is 100 ml (or 1.5ml/kg for patients less than 70kg) 20% lipid emulsion given as a bolus followed by infusion is the treatment of choice for LAST.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Bupivacaine is the most commonly used local anesthetic for spinal anesthesia. Bupivacaine has a long history of safe use, a low incidence of transient neurologic symptoms (post-spinal temporary radiating pain down the buttock and thighs), and it produces a reliable block.

Intraperitoneal chloroprocaine has been used off-label to provide adjunctive anesthesia for parturients undergoing cesarean delivery under the neuraxial block. In one case series, 32 patients were administered intraperitoneal chloroprocaine as part of a multimodal approach to avoiding general anesthesia when there was an imperfect neuraxial blockade.

Epidural chloroprocaine is commonly used in the obstetric setting to provide rapid onset anesthesia for emergent cesarean delivery when an epidural catheter is in place. Chloroprocaine can be rapidly administered in large doses to provide rapid onset anesthesia without risking maternal or fetal systemic toxicity. The half-life of chloroprocaine in maternal and fetal plasma is 11.2 seconds and 15.4 seconds, respectively.

While LAST is quite unlikely with chloroprocaine due to its rapid metabolism, vigilance for signs and symptoms of LAST is always recommended. Management of chloroprocaine-related toxicity (LAST) includes prompt recognition of the signs and symptoms and an interprofessional team to manage the potential consequences. LAST is an emergency condition that requires the full attention of nurses, technicians, and clinicians to maintain the airway and treat neurologic and cardiac complications.