# Definition/Introduction

Vascular thrombi are formed in the setting of low flow and shear stress and mainly consist of fibrin strands, red blood cells, and a few platelets. In 1856, Rudolf Virchow, a renowned Berlin scientist and physician recognized these factors due to his extensive work on venous thrombosis.

Rudolf Virchow is one of the first physicians to describe the concept at a cellular level, believing that most conditions, including pathological thrombosis, were caused by cellular pathology.

Virchow sought to explain the causation of pulmonary thromboembolism and theorized that pulmonary arterial embolus arises from peripheral/distant thrombosis. He attempted to explain the mechanism or define the specific conditions necessary to initiate peripheral clotting and how a thrombus may dislodge from a peripheral vein, travel to the right heart, and enter the pulmonary arterial system. The three factors of Virchow's triad include intravascular vessel wall damage, stasis of flow, and the presence of a hypercoagulable state.

In theory, **Virchow's triad**postulates the presence of three factors that predisposes a person to develop vascular thrombosis. These factors include:

- 
**Hypercoagulability of blood**

- 
**Alteration in blood flow in the vessels**

- 
**Vessel wall injury/ Endothelial damage**

# Issues of Concern

Thrombosis, by definition, is the formation of a clot within a blood vessel. As described earlier, Virchow's triad represents three qualities in physiology that can result in thrombosis. These include:

**Endothelial Damage**

A healthy endothelium provides an anticoagulant and anti-platelet surface with certain cell surface glycoproteins and the release of various molecules, some of which are stored pre-formed in specialized and unique Weibel-Palade bodies.

Nevertheless, since increased levels of all the plasma forms of cell surface molecules are found in atherothrombotic disease, it may be presumed that they reflect a shift towards thrombosis.

- Damage to a vessel's endothelial wall alters blood flow dynamics. Endothelial disturbance can result from insults such as smoking, chronically elevated blood pressure, and atherosclerotic disease secondary to hyperlipidemia. When an insult to the wall occurs, flow disruption or "turbulence" occurs. Turbulent flow within a vessel occurs when the blood flow rate becomes too rapid, or blood flow passes over an affected surface; this creates disordered flow and eddy currents, increasing the flow friction within a vessel. Reynold's number can represent the tendency for turbulence to occur.

- Re = (v x d x p) / n

- 
              
- Where v = mean velocity, d = diameter (in centimeters), n = viscosity (in poise), and p = density.

- Turbulence within the vessel may occur due to various factors, such as irregular atheromas from plaque formation, bifurcations in the vessel, and areas of stenosis, most prominent in patients with vascular disease.

**Alteration in Blood Flow**

In streamlined (laminar) flow, endothelial cell morphology and function are affected by the shear stresses, and accordingly, to minimize this, they elongate and align in the direction of flow.

Atherogenesis occurs preferentially at arterial bifurcations and bends; at these sites, flow separation results in areas of low-flow, low-shear recirculation of blood cells and proteins in contact with the vessel wall. Such flow conditions favor the adhesion of platelets and monocytes, as well as infiltration of plasma components such as low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and fibrinogen causing the development of a plague.

Arterial thrombosis usually follows the rupture of atherosclerotic plaques and is the commonest pathophysiological process in acute coronary syndromes, ischaemic stroke, and critical leg ischemia.

Some examples of blood flow alteration include atrial fibrillation, LV wall akinesis, valvular heart disease, prolonged immobility such as bedridden patients or prolonged travel, surgery, and trauma.

-  When an insult to the wall occurs, flow disruption or "turbulence" occurs. Turbulent flow within a vessel occurs when the blood flow rate becomes too rapid, or blood flow passes over an affected surface; this creates disordered flow and eddy currents, increasing the flow friction within a vessel. Reynold's number can represent the tendency for turbulence to occur.

- Re = (v x d x p) / n

- 
              
- Where v = mean velocity, d = diameter (in centimeters), n = viscosity (in poise), and p = density.

- Turbulence within the vessel may occur due to various factors, such as irregular atheromas from plaque formation, bifurcations in the vessel, and areas of stenosis, most prominent in patients with vascular disease.

**Hypercoagulability of Blood**

The constituents of blood are many and varied, but soluble coagulation factors (such as fibrinogen and tissue factor) and cells (such as platelets) are implicated in the process of thrombosis. Understandably a continuum exists between healthy and hemostatic abnormalities in prothrombotic or hypercoagulable states and 'overtly' increased clotting in acute thrombosis.

**Platelets**

The role of platelets in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and as a constituent of atheroma is well elucidated. Platelet function can be quantified by its tendency to aggregate and measure its levels in urine and plasma. The alpha granule constituents (beta thromboglobulin, platelet factor 4 (PF-4)) and the adhesion molecule P-selectin can be measured in the plasma. The PF-4 competes with antithrombin III for binding to heparan glycosaminoglycans, thereby impairing heparan-catalyzed inhibition of thrombin. Raised levels of various platelet molecules are abnormal in cancer, peripheral disease, acute myocardial infarction, diabetes, and hypertension.

The adhesion molecule P-selectin (CD62P) is of particular interest because of its role in modulating interactions between blood cells and the endothelium and the possible use of the soluble form as a plasma predictor of adverse cardiovascular events. For example, it is known that thrombin induces surface expression of P-selection on platelets.

**Fibrinogen**

Thrombogenesis is finely balanced between coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways. The fibrinolytic system is primarily influenced by the interaction between plasminogen activators (such as tissue plasminogen activators) and inhibitors that modulate this activity (e.g., plasminogen activator inhibitor, PAI-1). Plasma fibrinogen is the primary determinant of blood viscosity and blood flow. It affects the aggregation of platelets, interacts with plasminogen binding, and mediates the final steps of clot formation after it combines with thrombi.

**Fibrin D-dimer Levels**

Raised levels of fibrin D-dimer are fibrin degradation products, an index of intravascular thrombogenesis, and fibrin turnover.

# Clinical Significance

The function of Virchow's triad is to demonstrate the underlying physiology that drives the formation of a thrombus. Clots within the vasculature place the patient at risk for thromboembolic events such as CVA, pulmonary arterial embolus or organ infarction, ischemia, and cell death. Understanding physiology enables clinicians to understand better the risk factors for developing deep vein thrombosis.

**Thrombogenesis in Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT)**

The simultaneous presence of venous stasis, hypercoagulability and vascular injury increases the risk for clot formation, as described in Virchow's triad. Venous thrombosis tends to occur in areas with decreased or mechanically altered blood flow, such as the pockets adjacent to valves in the leg's deep veins.

A venous thrombus has two components, an inner platelet-rich white thrombus forming the so-called lines of Zahn surrounded by an outer red cell dense fibrin clot. Fibrin and extracellular DNA complexed with histone proteins forms the outer scaffold, which may be important in determining thrombus susceptibility to tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) and thrombolysis.

In addition to promoting thrombin generation, prothrombin inhibits the anticoagulant properties of activated protein C, thereby dampening a natural anticoagulant pathway. There are three pathways: the protein C anticoagulant pathway (protein C, protein S, thrombomodulin, and perhaps EPCR), the heparin-antithrombin pathway, and the tissue factor inhibitor pathway. Defects in these pathways are associated with an increased risk for thrombus formation. In humans, less is known regarding the role of the tissue factor inhibitor pathway.

Several familial variants predispose to thrombus formation by increasing the levels of factors VII, VIII, IX, von Willebrand factor, and prothrombin. Other risk factors for clot formation include cancer, oral contraceptives, obesity, and advancing age. Malignancy can exert a compressive effect on veins contributing to stasis. It also leads to shedding procoagulants, such as tissue factor on membrane particles that promotes thrombosis.

Finally, advancing age is associated with an increased risk for thrombosis. While the cause for this remains unsettled, several factors related to aging have been observed: greater prevalence of obesity, increased frequency of illness and periods of prolonged immobility, comorbid medical conditions, and an increase in the level of procoagulants without a commensurate increase in anticoagulants such as protein C.

**Thrombogenesis in Pregnancy**

- Progesterone causes systemic venous dilation.

During pregnancy, the blood becomes hypercoagulable with increases in pro-coagulation factors V, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XII and von Willebrand factor.

**Thrombogenesis in Atrial Fibrillation**

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common supraventricular arrhythmia associated with a high risk of stroke and thromboembolism.

**Thrombogenesis in LV Thrombus Post-MI**

The mechanism involving LV thrombus formation following AMI involves the principle of Virchow's triad. Mechanically, infarct expansion with regional thinning and dilation of the damaged endothelium in the infarct zone begins almost immediately, increases wall stress, and may lead to ventricular aneurysm formation.

Larger infarcts, evidenced by higher levels of cardiac enzymes, have also been associated with increased rates of LV thrombus formation compared with patients with smaller infarcts. Baseline C-reactive protein, fibrinogen, and the neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio are independent predictors of early LV thrombus formation after AMI. In this context, the propagation and growth of small thrombi into larger thrombi protruding into the ventricular cavity and exposed to circulating blood flow may lead to embolism.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Given the serious nature of thrombosis, an interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians, nurses, mid-level providers, and specialists, should be familiar with Virchow's triad and recognize the presentation when examining or interacting with patients. Prompt recognition can lead to further testing and specialized intervention, resulting in better patient outcomes.

Multiple studies show regular exercise reduces the risk of arterial and venous thrombotic events. One mechanism may be that regular exercise reduces circulating levels of viscosity and hemostatic and inflammatory variables.