The periosteal or endosteal layer of the dura mater is simply a layer of periosteum that covers the inner surface of the skull. The layer does not extend beyond the foramen magnum to become contiguous with the dura mater of the spinal cord. The spinal cord dura mater has no periosteal layer.

In the brain, the periosteal layer provides a tubular sheath-like covering for the cranial nerves as they pass through the different foramina of the skull. As soon as the cranial nerves exit the foramen, the periosteal layer fuses with the epineurium of nerves.

The meningeal layer of the dura mater is a durable, dense fibrous membrane that passes through the foramen magnum and is continuous with the dura mater of the spinal cord. The meningeal layer of the dura mater creates several dural folds that divide the cranial cavity into freely communicating spaces. The function of the dural folds is to limit the rotational displacement of the brain.

The folds include the following:

- The falx cerebri is a meningeal projection of dura in the brain. It is a sickle-shaped fold of dura mater located at the midline between the two cerebral hemispheres. Being a dural structure, the falx is stiffer than surrounding tissue and plays a vital role in supporting the brain by dampening brain motion inside the skull.

- Falx cerebelli is a vertical fold that separates the two cerebellar hemispheres and lies inferior to the tentorium cerebelli.

- Tentorium cerebelli is a crescent-shaped fold of the dura mater and forms a roof over the posterior cranial fossa. It shields the superior surface of the cerebellum and supports the occipital lobes of the cerebral hemispheres.

- Diaphragma sellae is a small circular fold of dura that forms the roof of the sella turcica. The diaphragma sellae has a tiny opening in the middle segment that allows the passage of the stalk of the pituitary gland.

**Potential Spaces**

- Epidural space: The epidural space is a possible space between the dura mater and skull containing fat and blood vessels. Damage to these blood vessels leads to the rapid accumulation of blood in the epidural space forming an epidural hematoma.

- Subdural space: Recent studies have questioned the idea of the subdural space as a potential space and suggest that it does not exist. The subdural space can be opened by tearing the subdural compartment between neurothelial cells alongside the collagen fibers of the dura mater.

The dura mater serves the following function:

- Envelops and protect the brain and spinal cord

- Regulate the generation and migration of neural progenitors

- Limit the rotational displacement of the brain

- Regulate survival and proliferation of radial glial

- Regulate axon behavior at central nervous system-peripheral nervous system (CNS-PNS) interface