**Laboratory Tests**

- Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)

- Aldolase (serum)

- Arterial blood gases (ABG)

- Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)

- Creatine kinase (CK, CPK) and creatine kinase isoenzymes (CK-MB & CK-MM)

- Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)

- Urinalysis (UA)

**Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT): **The normal range in males is 10 to 40 U/L. The normal range in females is 8 to 35 U/L; it is elevated in muscular dystrophy.

**Aldolase (Serum):**The normal range is 0 to 6 U/L. It is elevated in muscular dystrophy but decreases in later stages of muscular dystrophy.

**Arterial Blood Gases (ABG): **Normal ranges: PO2 is 75 to 100 mmHg; PCO2 is 35 to 45 mm Hg; HCO3- is 24 to 28 mEq/L; pH is 7.35 to 7.45. Respiratory acidosis can develop if there are defects in muscles involved in respiration.

**Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST):**Normal ranges from 0 to 35 U/L. Elevated in muscular dystrophy.

**Creatine Kinase (CK, CPK) and Creatine Kinase Isoenzymes (CK-MB and CK-MM): **Normal ranges from 0 to 130 U/L. Elevated in muscular dystrophy (hyperCKemia).

**Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH): **Normal ranges from 50 to 150 U/L. Elevated in muscular dystrophy. LDH 4: 3 to 10%, LDH 5: 2 to 9%.

**Urinalysis (UA): **Glucose in urine is commonly associated with muscular dystrophy due to the high incidence of diabetes mellitus within this population.

**Radiographic Tests******

- Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)

- Computerized Tomography (CT)

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI): **Coronal T1 weighted MRI may confirm the nonuniform fatty atrophy.

**Computerized Tomography (CT): **Axial CT shows denervation hypertrophy of the tensor fascia lata. The muscle becomes enlarged with an increase in intramuscular fat.

**Other Tests**

- Chromosomal analysis

- Electrocardiogram (ECG)

- Electromyography (EMG)

- Genetic testing

- Immunocytochemistry

- Muscle biopsy

- Polysomnogram

- Slit lamp

- Western blot analysis

**Chromosomal Analysis: **DNA testing for common mutations and chromosomal analysis can now rule out Down syndrome, myotonic dystrophy, and other disorders. In both Becker and Duchenne dystrophies, the DNA deletion size does not predict clinical severity.

**Electrocardiogram (ECG):**Often, patients will have annual echocardiograms to stay ahead of any developing cardiomyopathy. This study will demonstrate atrial and atrioventricular rhythm disturbances. The typical electrocardiogram shows an increased net RS in lead V1; deep, narrow Q waves in the precordial leads.

**Electromyography (EMG): **Allows assessment for denervation of muscle, myopathies, and myotonic dystrophy, motor neuron disease. EMG demonstrates features typical of myopathy.

**Genetic Testing: **A definitive diagnosis of muscular dystrophy can be established with mutation analysis on peripheral blood leukocytes.

**Immunocytochemistry: **A definitive diagnosis of muscular dystrophy can be established based on dystrophin deficiency in a biopsy of muscle tissue.

**Muscle Biopsy: **The muscle biopsy shows muscle fibers of varying sizes as well as small groups of necrotic and regenerating fibers. Connective tissue and fat replace lost muscle fibers.  Muscle biopsy usually shows nonspecific dystrophic features, although cases associated with FHL1 mutations have features of myofibrillar myopathy.

**Polysomnogram:**Excessive daytime somnolence with or without sleep apnea is not uncommon. Sleep studies, noninvasive respiratory support (biphasic positive airway pressure [BiPAP]), and treatment with modafinil may be beneficial.

**Slit Lamp: **An examination for cataracts that may be present in patients with muscular dystrophy.

**Western Blot: **A diagnosis of Duchenne dystrophy can also be made by Western blot analysis of muscle biopsy specimens, revealing abnormalities on the quantity and molecular weight of dystrophin protein. On Western blot, Becker muscular dystrophy individuals dystrophin levels will appear normal, although the protein itself is abnormal; this is in comparison to Duchenne muscular dystrophy affected individuals who have a significantly decreased dystrophin on Western blot.