# Continuing Education Activity

Subcutaneous emphysema is the de novo generation or infiltration of air underneath the dermal layers of skin. The development of subcutaneous air may be a benign symptom or an indication of a deeper, more concerning pathologic disease state. This activity will review the etiologies, risk factors, and management of subcutaneous emphysema and the importance of interprofessional care during the evaluation and treatment of affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the difference between benign from extensive subcutaneous emphysema.
- Review patient symptoms associated with subcutaneous emphysema. 
- Outline the treatment of subcutaneous emphysema. 
- Identify how an interprofessional team can improve care and how communication will promote better patient outcomes in subcutaneous emphysema.

# Introduction

Subcutaneous emphysema is the de novo generation or infiltration of air in the subcutaneous layer of skin. Skin is composed of the epidermis and dermis, with the subcutaneous tissue being beneath the dermis.  Air expansion can involve subcutaneous and deep tissues, with the non-extensive subcutaneous spread being less concerning for clinical deterioration.   However, the development of subcutaneous emphysema may indicate that air is occupying another deeper area within the body not visible to the unaided eye. Air extravasation in other body cavities and spaces can cause pneumomediastinum, pneumoperitoneum, pneumoretroperitoneum, and pneumothorax.  The air travels from these areas along pressure gradients between intra-alveolar and perivascular interstitium, spreading to the head, neck, chest, and abdomen by connecting fascial and anatomic planes.

# Etiology

Subcutaneous emphysema can result from surgical, traumatic, infectious, or spontaneous etiologies. Injury to the thoracic cavity, sinus cavities, facial bones, barotrauma, bowel perforation, or pulmonary blebs are some common causes. Iatrogenic causes may occur due to malfunction or disruption of the ventilator circuit, inappropriate closure of the pop-off valve, Valsalva maneuvers that increase thoracic pressure, and trauma to the airway. Air may enter into the subcutaneous spaces via small mucosal injury in the trachea or pharynx during traumatic intubation, overinflation of endotracheal tube (ET) cuffs, or increased airway pressure against a closed glottis.

The positive pressure applied by ventilator inspiration can promote the expansion of the gas through the communicating fascial planes down the partial pressure gradient. While non-invasive ventilation correlates with lower rates of barotrauma, bag-mask ventilation in CPR and incorrect oxygen mask attachment that prevents exhalation may have devastating outcomes.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of subcutaneous emphysema is anywhere from 0.43% to 2.34%.

# Pathophysiology

The development of subcutaneous emphysema is thought to be caused by the following mechanisms

- Injury to the parietal pleura that allows for the passage of air into the pleural and subcutaneous tissues

- Air from the alveolus spreading into the endovascular sheath and lung hilum into the endothoracic fascia

- The air in the mediastinum spreading into the cervical viscera and other connected tissue planes

- Air originating from external sources

- Gas generation locally by infections, specifically, necrotizing infections

# History and Physical

Obtaining full history is critical to explore the causes of subcutaneous emphysema and its complications. On physical examination, the most common finding associated with subcutaneous emphysema is crepitus on palpation. Distention or bloating may be present in the abdomen, chest, neck, and face. Palpebral closure resulting in visual distortion and phonation changes from vocal cord compression may also be present.

Grading classifications that help evaluate the extent of subcutaneous emphysema have received validation in some studies; however, it is not universally implemented or routinely used.

There are suggestions that patients who use inhalational corticosteroids may be at increased risk for tracheal injury with endotracheal intubation due to friable and thin mucosa.

# Evaluation

Imaging including radiographic (X-ray) and computed tomography (CT) can help identify subcutaneous emphysema. On a radiograph, there are intermittent areas of radiolucency, often representing a fluffy appearance on the exterior borders of the thoracic and abdominal walls. On chest radiograph, a ginkgo leaf sign may be present, showing striations of gas along the pectoralis major, resembling that of a ginkgo leaf.

If cervical or facial subcutaneous emphysema develops during patient intubation, it is recommended to perform laryngoscopy before extubation to evaluate for impending airway compromise or pharyngeal emphysema.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of the underlying cause or precipitating factor should be considered first because it usually leads to gradual resolution of the subcutaneous emphysema. For mild cases that do not cause significant patient discomfort, observation is appropriate.

During endotracheal intubation, trauma can occur to the posterior trachea, causing a linear laceration of the mucosa. A tracheostomy may be required to bypass the tear and prevent further subcutaneous emphysema expansion or additional complications.

During laparoscopic procedures, insufflated CO2 management is typically done by increasing the minute ventilation. However, patients that develop slow onset and delayed hypercarbia despite minute ventilation adjustment may have CO2 escape into the subcutaneous layers.

In patients with extensive subcutaneous emphysema, there are reports that 2cm infraclavicular incisions bilaterally can reduce further subcutaneous expansion.

# Differential Diagnosis

In limited case reports, subcutaneous emphysema has been mistaken for allergic reactions and angioedema after a patient presented with difficulty breathing and facial swelling.

# Prognosis

The majority of subcutaneous emphysema is nonfatal and self-limited.

# Complications

Tense and extensive air expansion in the subcutaneous tissues can prevent the thoracic cavity from expanding, reaching appropriate tidal volumes, resulting in desaturations, respiratory compromise, and dreadful cardiac arrest.

# Consultations

Consultation placed to other specialists is dependent on the source of subcutaneous emphysema identified. For example, if there is a tracheal tear, a thoracic surgeon should be consulted.  If bowel perforation is suspected, the recommendation is for a general surgery consultation.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

For patients with limited subcutaneous emphysema, education can help provide significant relief. Instructing patients that the air may cause discomfort and abnormal sounds with touch, is a benign process that will quickly resolve. In cases of palpebral closure, educating that this is a reversible cause of vision loss due to eyelid swelling may alleviate concerns. For cases of massive subcutaneous emphysema, discussing decompression techniques and the possible sequelae will enable the patient to make informed decisions about their care. Furthermore, when consenting patients for general anesthesia, communicating the risk of subcutaneous emphysema will increase awareness of expected management if subcutaneous emphysema does develop.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Care from different members of the health care team including physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health care professionals provide different perspectives and skillsets in patient evaluation, management, and treatment of subcutaneous emphysema when all caregivers work collaboratively. In the post-anesthesia care or critical care unit, nurses can outline gaseous spread with a pen, watch vital signs, and monitor the patient more frequently than a physician. Grading the degree of subcutaneous emphysema can be easily done at the bedside.

Subcutaneous emphysema may be a self-limited process or a medical/surgical emergency requiring intervention. An interprofessional and interprofessional approach offers significant value when diagnosing and managing patients with subcutaneous emphysema.[Level 5]