**Screening for Family and Domestic Violence**

Over 80% of victims of domestic and family violence seek care in a hospital. Others may seek care in health professional offices, including dentists, therapists, and other settings. Routine screening should be conducted by all healthcare practitioners including nurses, physicians, physician assistants, dentists, nurse practitioners, and pharmacists. Screening is a critical component protecting victims and minimizing negative health outcomes.

Health professional interventions reduce the incidence of morbidity and mortality associated with domestic violence.

- As family and domestic violence is a significant public and social problem, all health professionals should we aware of and use screening tools to assess for family and domestic violence.

- The United States Preventive Service Task Force has recommended routine screening of women for intimate partner violence in all primary care settings.

- Insurance plans are required to cover the costs for intimate partner violence screening for adolescent and adult women.

- Screening for family and domestic violence raises concerns regarding compromising patient privacy as well as the ethical, legal, and professional and legal responsibilities of clinicians.

**Screening Tools**

- The American Academy of Pediatricians has free guides for the history, physical, diagnostic testing, documentation, treatment, and legal issues in cases of suspected child abuse.

- The Kempe Family Stress Inventory questionnaire assesses maltreatment in young single women of low socioeconomic status.

- The Maternal History Interview uses open-ended questions and subscales to assess personality, parenting skills, life stress, and child abuse risk.

- The Center for Disease Control provides several scales assessing family relationships, including child abuse risks.

- The physical examination is still the most significant diagnostic tool to detect abuse. A child or adult with suspected abuse should be undressed, and a comprehensive physical exam should be performed. The skin should be examined for bruises, bites, burns, and injuries in different stages of healing. Examine for retinal hemorrhages, subdural hemorrhages, tympanic membrane rupture, soft tissue swelling, oral bruising, fractured teeth, and organ injury.

**Screening for Child Abuse**

Child abuse and neglect may result in acute trauma, anxiety, depression, unwanted pregnancy, substance abuse, suicide, and risky behaviors. Children are more likely to be involved in family and intimate partner abuse.

The most common risk factors for child abuse and neglect are poverty, low education, large family size, single-parent, young parents, step-parents in the home, and psychiatric disease.

Clinicians must take responsibility to identify child abuse to prevent recurrent injuries. While it has not been established that routine child abuse screening is necessary, clinicians should screen for abuse if it is suspected. Multiple missed appointments and delays in seeking medical treatment may indicate abuse or neglect.

Many organizations offer free screening tools. However, most lack sufficient sensitivity and specificity. False positive and false negative results can entail serious consequences including both under- and overreporting of abuse.

**Screening for Intimate Partner Violence**

Some experts believe screening should only occur when signs and symptoms are present. Routine screening may, in fact, be problematic because it can stigmatize patients and result in anxiety. Further, in cases of domestic violence, victims are often unwilling to use available resources to end abuse.

Several national organizations, such as the American Medical Association and Family Violence Prevention Fund recommend screening all women for intimate partner violence. Screening tools for abuse are available for assessment, intervention, documentation, and referral.

Studies have shown that abused women who receive counseling have fewer instances of intimate partner violence during and after pregnancy.

Screening has the potential to decrease abuse and improve health outcomes. While victims may not be willing to use the information provided, serious consequences follow if abuse is ignored. A clinician can provide the resources in an effort to ensure that the patient is educated and informed.

The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides numerous tools to assist practitioners in the free publication, Intimate Partner Violence and Sexual Violence Victimization Assessment Instruments for Use in Healthcare Settings. These tools include:

- AAS (Abuse, Assessment, Screen): A tool used to detect abuse limited to women

- HITS (Hurt, Insult, Threaten, Scream): a screening tool used in outpatient medical offices

- PVS (Partner, Violence, Screen): an abbreviated emergency department screening tool

- RADAR (Routinely, Ask, Document, Assess, Review): helps providers recognize and treat intimate partner violence

- WAST (Woman, Abuse, Screening, Tool): a screening tool used by family and emergency practitioners

**Screening for Elder Abuse**

Elderly patients are at risk of abuse in the home environment as well as in institutional settings. Risk factors for elder abuse both at home and in institutions include increased age, dementia, abnormal behaviors, cognitive decline, physical dependency, and daily living activities impairment. In an institutional setting, there may be shortages of qualified assistants. Nursing aids and other support staff become tired, stressed and overwhelmed, resulting in anger and aggression that may be taken out on patients.

Screening for elder abuse should include a review of social and financial information. The Abuse Suspicion Index is a useful screening tool for cognitively intact patients. In patients with dementia, the practitioner must rely more heavily on the physical exam. Bruising can be an indicator of physical abuse, but elders commonly take blood thinning agents that result in easy bruising. Victims of physical abuse tend to have bruises with the following characteristics: bruises of varying age; bruises larger than five centimeters; bruises located on the face, lateral right arm, or posterior torso. In many instances, the victim may recall how the bruise occurred.

If abuse is suspected, radiographs of ribs, small bones, and face should be considered. A CT of the head should also be considered to rule out subdural hemorrhage. While difficult, a pelvic examination should be considered if there are any signs of sexual abuse. Weight loss may be a sign of physical or medical neglect due to malnutrition, but other common causes of weight loss should be ruled out. Pressure ulcers should raise suspicion for neglect.

All clinicians should be aware of the potential signs and symptoms of elder abuse and should be familiar with screening tools. When abuse is suspected, the history and physical exam should be carefully conducted and documented with additional laboratory, and imaging tests considered.

**Challenges in Screening**

While screening is crucial to identify domestic and family, several barriers exist. In spite of the prevalence of domestic violence, many clinicians do take the time to screen patients. Unfortunately, no universal approach has been established to assess for domestic violence. In addition, many clinicians do not have the time, resources, or desire to get involved with an abuse or neglect investigation. Many health professionals remain ignorant of the warning signs and risk factors. In most states, reporting of suspected elder abuse or neglect is required by statute. However, few health professionals are prosecuted for failure to comply, further hindering reporting. Routine screening increases the odds domestic abuse cases will be identified.

Ongoing challenges include:

- Lack of recognition

- Lack of standard screening tools

- Limited time

- Limited resources

- Lack of motivation to screen

**Screening Recommendations**

- Evaluate for organic conditions and medications that mimic abuse.

- Evaluate patients and caregivers separately

- Clinicians should regularly screen for family and domestic violence and elder abuse

- The Elder Abuse Suspicion Index can be used to assess for elder abuse

- Screen for cognitive impairment before screening for abuse in the elderly

- Pattern injury is more suspicious

**National Statutes**

Federal Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA)

Each state has specific child abuse statues. Federal legislation provides guidelines for defining acts that constitute child abuse. The guidelines suggest that child abuse includes an act or failure recent act that presents an imminent risk of serious harm. This includes any recent act or failure to act on the part of a parent or caretaker that results in death, physical or emotional harm, sexual abuse, or exploitation.

Elder Justice Act

The Elder Justice Act provides strategies to decrease the likelihood of elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation. The Act utilizes three significant approaches:

- Creation of a Coordinating Council and an Advisory Board which are charged with recommending multidisciplinary tactics for reducing elder abuse at the local, state, and federal levels

- Allotment of grant money and monetary incentives to improve staffing, quality of care, and technology in long-term care facilities and increase states, adult, protective services departments

- A provision of the EJA that requires facilities receiving federal funding to adhere to a strict reporting requirement

Patient Safety and Abuse Act

The Violence Against Woman Act makes it a federal crime to cross state lines to stalk, harass, or physically injure a partner.  Entering or leaving the country also violates the protective order. Finally, it is a violation to possess a firearm or ammunition while subject to a protective order or if convicted of a qualifying crime of domestic violence. The victim has a right to:

- Restitution

- Information about the offender

- Notification and presence at court proceedings

- Dignity and privacy

- Protect from the accused offender

- Conference with an attorney

**State Statutes**

Florida Statute 415.502 requires anyone “who knows, or has reasonable cause to suspect, that a child is an abused or neglected child, shall report such knowledge or suspicion.” Thus, health professionals report when there is suspicion. Health professionals do not need confirmatory proof. Health professionals must report all cases of reasonable cause to believe that a child or adolescent has been abused or neglected or is in danger of being abused.

In Florida, the reporting requirement is not limited to first person reporting. In other words, a health professional cannot assume that the report has been made. Health professionals must always make a report if he suspects a child is or has been abused.

- Florida Statute 456.031 mandates a two-hour continuing education course on domestic violence as part of every third biennial re-licensure or recertification for health care providers.

- Florida. Statute 626.9541 (1)(g)(3) applies to health, life, disability and property insurance. Florida insurance carriers cannot refuse to issue, reissue, or renew a policy, refuse to pay a claim, cancel or otherwise terminate a policy, or increase rates based upon the fact that the proposed insured has made a claim or sought or should have sought medical or psychological treatment in the past for abuse.

- Florida Statute 741.316 allows for the establishment of domestic violence fatality review teams at a local, regional, or state level in order to review fatal and near-fatal incidents of domestic violence, related domestic violence matters, and suicides. Membership must include a representative from the Office of the Medical Examiner and other victim’s services.

- Florida Statute 790.24 requires any physician, nurse, or employee thereof and any employee of a hospital, sanitarium, clinic, or nursing home who knowingly treats or is requested to treat any person suffering from a gunshot wound or life-threatening injury indicating an act of violence to report immediately to the sheriff’s department. Willful failure to report is punishable as a misdemeanor.

- Florida Statute 877.155 requires any person who treats, or is requested to treat, second or third degree burns affecting 10% or more of the body, to report such treatment to the sheriff’s department if the burns were caused by a flammable substance and if the injury could be the result of violence or other unlawful activity.

**National Resources**

The following agencies provide national assistance for victims of domestic and family violence:

- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) / TTY 888-232-6348

- Childhelp: National Child Abuse Hotline: 800-4-A-CHILD (800-422-4453)

- The coalition of Labor Union Women (cluw.org): 202-466-4615

- Corporate Alliance to End Partner Violence: 309-664-0667

- Employers Against Domestic Violence: 508-894-6322

- Futures without Violence: 415-678-5500 / TTY 800-595-4889

- Love Is Respect: National Teen Dating Abuse Helpline: 866-331-9474 / TTY: 866-331-8453

- National Center on Domestic and Sexual Violence

- National Center on Elder Abuse

- National Coalition Against Domestic Violence (www.ncadv.org)

- National Network to End Domestic Violence: 202-543-5566

- National Organization for Victim Assistance

- National Resource Center on Domestic Violence: 800-537-2238

- National Sexual Violence Resource Center: 717-909-0710

- National Teen Dating Abuse Helpline: 866-331-9474 / TTY 866-331-8453

- Rape Abuse and Incest National Network (RAINN): 800-656-HOPE

- Sexual Assault Training and Investigations (SATI) (mysati.com): 619-561-3845

- Speaking Out About Rape (SOAR): 407-898-0693

- Stalking Resource Center, National Center for Victims of Crime: 1-800-FYI-CALL (800-394-2255) / TTY: 800-211-7996

- The Battered Women's Justice Project: 800-903-0111

- The National Center for Victims of Crime (www.victimsofcrime.org)

- The National Domestic Violence Hotline (www.thehotline.org): 800-799-7233 / TTY 1-800-787-3224

- U.S. Department of Justice, Office on Violence Against Women: 202-307-6026

- Workplaces Respond to Domestic and Sexual Violence: A National Resource Center (www.workplacesrespond.org

**State Resources**

To report abuse of children, the disabled, and the elderly:

- Department of Children and Families Florida Abuse Registry: 1-800-96-ABUSE (1-800-962-2873)

For information and referral relating to domestic violence:

- Florida Coalition Against Domestic Violence: 1-800-500-1119

- Florida Council Against Sexual Violence: 1-888-956-RAPE

For further local assistance, the police and sheriff’s departments and local shelters should be contacted.