Initial infection with the varicella-zoster virus causes a disseminated vesicular rash with fever, known as chickenpox. During the acute phase of this infection, the virus is spread by respiratory droplets. After the viremia and exanthem have resolved, the virus can remain dormant in cranial nerves and dorsal root ganglia. During times of physiological stress or immunocompromise, reactivation of the virus within the distribution of the nerve in which it has been dormant can occur. In Ramsay Hunt syndrome, the virus lays dormant within the geniculate ganglion and primarily reactivates along the facial nerve, although other cranial nerves may be involved.

According to Coulson et al., the initial presenting symptom is typically pain in the ipsilateral ear (55% of patients), with facial paralysis and vesicles appearing within 2 to 3 days. In 23% of patients, facial paralysis is the presenting symptom, and in only 2%, vesicles appear first. While 86% of their patients reported that the rash occurred only on the auricle, 7% only had vesicles in the oral cavity, and 8% had them in both locations.

The proximity of the facial nerve to the vestibulocochlear nerve can result in hearing loss, tinnitus, and vertigo. Sensorineural hearing loss was present in 43% of patients in Coulson's series, imbalance or vertigo in 51%, and tinnitus in 20%.

The facial paralysis resulting from Ramsay Hunt syndrome has a worse prognosis than that seen in Bell's palsy, with only 70% regaining normal or near-normal facial function compared with over 90% in Bell's palsy.

When patients fail to recover premorbid function, synkinesis is a common sequela, in which aberrant reinnervation connects axons with neuromuscular junctions differently from the ones to which they were connected prior to the inflammation. Severe neuritis and resultant swelling of the facial nerve against the bony Fallopian canal that encases it within the temporal bone causes direct, physical neuronal injury.