**Acute Ischemic Stroke**

Fibrinolytic therapy in acute ischemic stroke breaks up blood clots, preventing blood flow to the brain to restore blood flow to the brain areas that have not yet suffered an infarct. According to AHA(American heart association/ASA(American Stroke Association) guidelines, Intravenous alteplase (tPA) is the mainstay of thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke that improves functional outcomes significantly when administered within 4.5 hours of stroke onset. All patients with acute ischemic stroke who present within a 4.5-hour window from their last known well time and without any absolute contraindication should receive treatment with intravenous alteplase (tPA). The benefit is significant when treatment with thrombolytics occurs early after stroke onset and declines with time.

Mechanical thrombectomy is beneficial when an acute ischemic stroke results from a proximal intracranial arterial occlusion.

**Acute Myocardial Infarction**

Fibrinolytic therapy remains vital as a treatment for ST-elevation myocardial infarctions in many places where acute percutaneous coronary intervention is not an option and during transport to hospitals with this facility. Fibrinolytic therapy is a proven therapy in the treatment of AMI. It is widely available and can be administered by qualified health care professionals even in the prehospital setting. The greater the time necessary to deliver the therapy after the AMI lessens its efficacy. A useful means to quantify the time window is the "door to needle time," which should be kept under 30 minutes to get the maximum results.

According to the 2022 American college of cardiology(ACC)/American heart association(AHA) guidelines; rescue PCI can be recommended in patients with evidence of failed reperfusion after thrombolysis as it is associated with a decrease in cardiovascular events compared with conservative care or repeat thrombolytic therapy. In addition, risks associated with fibrinolytic therapy, i.e., increased bleeding and stroke, can be reduced by using half-dose tenecteplase in patients >75 years of age. In addition, fibrinolytic therapy is recommended only in patients in which primary PCI is not immediately available, and the delay from hospital admission to PCI is expected to be >120 minutes. Approximately 35% of patients treated with fibrinolysis do not achieve reperfusion, and 10% have ineffective reperfusion (Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction] flow grade <3); hence the rapid transfer of patients to centers competent for performing PCI is required.

**Alteplase:**Accelerated and 3-hour regimens are used in acute myocardial infarction.****

Accelerated alteplase infusion regimen: The recommended accelerated infusion dose regimen consists of an IV bolus followed by an IV infusion. For patients weighing> 67 kg, the bolus dose is 15 mg; 50 mg is infused in the first 30 minutes, and 35 mg is infused in 60 minutes. For patients weighing≤ 67 kg, the bolus dose is 15 mg; 0.75 mg/kg is infused in the first 30 minutes, and 0.50 mg/kg is infused in 60 minutes.

3-hour alteplase regimen: For patients weighing ≥ 65 kg, the recommended dosage is 100 mg intravenously given as 60 mg in the first hour (6-10 mg is administered as a bolus), 20 mg in the second hour, and 20 mg in the third hour. For patients weighing < 65 kg, clinicians may use a 1.25 mg/kg dose administered over 3 hours.

**Tenecteplase:**Tenectaplase is administered  as a single IV bolus over 5 seconds. Tenecteplase is preferred in acute MI due to the simplified single bolus regimen. The recommended daily dose should not exceed 50 mg and is based on patient weight. The dose, according to the manufacturer's labeling, is given below.

- Weight<60 kg:30 mg single IV bolus dose of tenecteplase

- Weight≥60 to <70 kg: 35 mg single IV bolus dose of tenecteplase

- Weight≥70 to <80 kg: 40 mg single IV bolus dose of tenecteplase

- Weight ≥80 to <90 kg: 45 mg single IV bolus dose of tenecteplase

- Weight≥90 kg:50 mg single IV bolus dose of tenecteplase

**Reteplase:**Reteplase is administered 10 units intravenously over 2 minutes and then administered the following dose of 10 units 30 minutes after the first dose. Heparin and reteplase are incompatible. Do not administer reteplase by the same IV line.

**Acute Limb Ischemia**

Primary fibrinolysis is the treatment of choice for non–life-threatening limb ischemia from in-situ thrombosis of fewer than 14 days of duration. Local fibrinolysis usually takes 6 to 72 hours to achieve clot lysis; therefore, it is unsuitable for patients with limb-threatening ischemia.**Pulmonary Embolism (PE)**

The most commonly used thrombolytic agent used in acute massive PE  is alteplase. The recommended dose of alteplase is 100 mg administered by IV infusion over two hours. Clinicians should initiate parenteral anticoagulation immediately following the alteplase infusion when the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) or thrombin time returns to twice normal or less. Tenecteplase is currently under study but not yet recommended. Clinicians should avoid simultaneous administration of unfractionated heparin (UFH) in acute massive PE. According to guidelines, thrombolytic therapy should be used only for patients with pulmonary embolism with significant hypotension(systolic BP <90 mm Hg).

Anticoagulation is the mainstay of initial treatment for DVT. However, certain patients with extensive acute DVT with a low risk of bleeding can undergo catheter­directed thrombolysis to lyse the intravenous clot. Patient criteria include symptoms of less than 14 days (acute DVT),upper-extremity DVT or proximal DVT, and good functional status.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Use with caution in patients with severe hepatic impairment due to the increased risk of bleeding due to coagulopathy.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**Use with caution in patients with end-stage renal disease(ESRD) due to the increased risk of bleeding due to hemostatic defects and bleeding tendencies.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Pregnancy is a relative contraindication for using thrombolytic agents due to the increased risk of bleeding. Thrombolysis in normotensive patients with pulmonary embolism was associated with increased mortality.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Information regarding the excretion of tenecteplase in human milk is unknown. There is no data on the presence of reteplase in human milk or the effects on the breastfed infant. Reteplase has not been studied in nursing mothers. Therefore, caution should be exercised when a nursing woman is administered tenecteplase or reteplase. Alteplase should be used cautiously during breastfeeding, especially while nursing a newborn or preterm infant.