The differential diagnosis and their differentiating features include:

- Addison’s disease: Described as primary or secondary results from inadequate levels of adrenocorticotrophic hormone. Primary Addison disease results in hyperpigmentation described as more generalized with a predilection for sun-exposed areas and recent scars. A few reports of coexistent vitiligo have been described. Cutaneous lesions seem to precede systemic features of fatigue, lethargy, myalgia, nausea, personality changes, and hypotension.

- Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: An autosomal dominant condition characterized by intestinal polyposis and increased susceptibility to malignancies. Mucosal pigmentation differs from Laugier-Hunziker syndrome by crossing the vermilion border. Nail pigmentation is not seen in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.

- McCune-Albright syndrome: Manifests with café-au-lait macules and not lentiginous lesions, as seen in Laugier-Hunziker syndrome. Other features are polyostotic fibrous dysplasia and precocious puberty.

- Cronkhite-Canada syndrome: This sporadic disorder manifests with gastrointestinal polyposis, anosmia, and dysgeusia. Hyperpigmentation is described with more proximal involvement (arms, legs) than in Laugier-Hunziker syndrome.

- Lentiginosis profusa and Leopard syndrome: Autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by multiple lentigines, hypertelorism, deafness, and cardiac conduction defects.

- Carney syndrome: An autosomal dominant syndrome comprising of lentiginous pigmentation, endocrinopathy, and malignancies.

- Bandler syndrome: Hyperpigmentation resembles Laugier-Hunziker syndrome; however, systemic involvement is seen as intestinal vascular malformations.

- Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): A diffuse hyperpigmentation may develop in advanced cases.

Other disorders include lichen planus, Smoker’s melanosis, Benign racial pigmentation, melanonychia striata, post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, Nutritional deficiency (vitamin B12 and folate), and heavy metal poisoning (lead, arsenic, mercury, gold, bismuth, and silver).

Generalized hypermelanosis can be seen with minocycline, phenothiazine, antimalarials, zidovudine, amiodarone, oral contraceptives, clofazimine, and chemotherapeutic agents.

Disorders that display pseudo-Hutchinson sign include Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, subungual hematoma, Bowen disease, and AIDS, while the true Hutchinson sign is specific to melanoma.