VKH is a systemic disease, and complications of the disease include hearing loss, dysacusis, tinnitus, aural fullness, vitiligo, vertigo, and ophthalmic complications.

The most common integumentary symptoms of VKH are poliosis and vitiligo. Poliosis and vitiligo have been shown to slow and respond well to systemic treatment with corticosteroids and IMT. Further, topical treatment with calcineurin inhibitors and corticosteroids has shown reversal of depigmented areas of skin.

In the acute uveitic phase of the disease, VKH can lead to ciliary body inflammation and edema with subsequent closure of the anterior segment angle leading to acute angle-closure glaucoma.

Visually significant ophthalmic complications of chronic VKH include cataracts, glaucoma, neovascular glaucoma, macular holes, chronic retinal detachments, subretinal fibrosis, and choroidal neovascularization.

One study noted a desirable postoperative outcome with one month of inflammation control with IMT and corticosteroids. Notably, up to 10% of eyes can develop hyphema postoperatively, and ocular hypertension occurs in up to 13% of eyes postoperatively, but both conditions resolve spontaneously. Consistent with an intraocular inflammatory condition, up to 50% of patients with VKH develop posterior capsular opacification after phacoemulsification.

Ocular hypertension and glaucomatous optic neuropathy are common in patients with VKH. Up to 33% of patients with VKH will develop ocular hypertension. Significant risks for the development of ocular hypertension include poor visual acuity at initial presentation, time from symptoms to treatment, and the number of recurrent episodes of disease. Glaucoma develops in 16 to 18% of patients, and the primary cause of glaucoma in these patients is open-angle and not steroid-induced, but a significant percent of VKH patients who develop glaucoma developed glaucomatous optic neuropathy from pupillary block secondary to posterior synechiae.

Chronic serous retinal detachments leading to subretinal fibrosis are a significant cause of severe vision loss. Subretinal fibrosis occurs in 6% of eyes with VKH. Still, it has been shown to occur much earlier in Hispanic patients – roughly six months in Hispanic patients compared to 6 years in non-Hispanic patients. Subretinal fibrosis appears to be much more common in the Western Hemisphere, with rates as high as 6%, whereas studies in southern and eastern Asia have very few cases.

Subretinal fibrosis is also a poor prognostic indicator, with numerous studies showing worsening even with combined corticosteroid and IMT therapy. However, one study showed favorable outcomes with combination mycophenolate mofetil and systemic corticosteroids.

Choroidal neovascular membranes have been shown to occur in 14 to 17% of patients with VKH and are responsive to anti-VEGF therapy.