The diagnosis of Landau-Kleffner syndrome has its basis on the anamnesis, evaluation of clinical signs, and EEG findings.

**Clinical Evaluation**

The acquired aphasia in a child who previously had no problem is initially receptive and then involves expressive difficulties. Behavioral disorders such as hyperexcitability and hyperactivity surround the aphasia but are sometimes very marked. At this stage, the role of the pediatrician who performs the anamnesis and coordinates several specialists is very important. An audiometric examination is a requirement to rule out hearing impairment. A thorough evaluation must be carried out by the child neuropsychiatrist and by speech therapists and psychomotor experts. Moreover, the pediatrician is the figure of connection with the neurophysiologist.

**Sleep EEG Findings and Clinical Correlates**

EEG examination during wakefulness and sleep is fundamental for diagnosis. The EEG shows unilateral or bilateral activity most pronounced over posterior temporal regions around the Sylvian fissure. This EEG activity becomes much more widespread and intense during sleep (non-REM sleep) when it becomes characterized by an almost continuous spike-wave pattern with a frequency of 1.5 to 2.5 spikes/sec. Background EEG activity and sleep macro architecture are normal. Yet, during REM sleep, epileptic activity may partially break off, diminish, or cease.

Clinically, these findings occasionally hesitate in an electrical status epilepticus during sleep (ESES). ESES is characterized by marked enhancement of epileptiform discharges during the transition from wake to sleep, resulting in spikes and slow (almost) continuous, bilateral, or sometimes lateralized waves. These findings are observable for a significant part of non-REM sleep. Furthermore, the ESES in Landau-Kleffner syndrome can be unilateral or bilateral.

**Other Evaluations**

Through a volumetric analysis using magnetic resonance (MRI), it could be possible to observe a reduction in the volume of the brain areas responsible for language development. This data, however, has no diagnostic utility but is recommended to exclude structural lesions such as brain tumors. The analysis of the GRIN2A gene is not part of routine clinical procedures, although the test is available in some specialized centers. However, because in families with a GRIN2A mutation, an autosomal dominant transmission has been proposed, genetic counseling can be suggested. In some countries, such as Norway, the evaluation of serum neuronal antibodies is a recommendation before treatment.