Treatment for cecal volvuli usually entails a surgical intervention. Other inventions such as a barium enema or a colonoscopy, can offer a non-operative reduction of a cecal volvulus. However, these modalities are rarely successful. For these non-operative treatments, there is a high risk of perforations and should not be attempted. Colonic necrosis can be miss up to approximately 20% to 25% of the time when non-operative modalities are used.  Surgical treatment and will vary based on patient stability and findings seen intraoperatively.  Intraoperatively, the surgeon will ascertain if there is bowel compromise or if the bowel is viable. These findings will help dictate appropriate surgical intervention.

For patients who are stable with no bowel compromise, an ileocolic resection or a right hemicolectomy should be performed.  In patients that receive an ileocolic resection, an additional colopexy to tack the right remnant colon to the posterior peritoneum to minimize the recurrence of another volvulus.

For patients who are hemodynamically unstable without bowel compromise, a cecopexy should be performed in conjunction with a cecostomy tube placement or cecopexy can be done alone.

For patients who are stable with bowel, the surgeon should proceed with a right hemicolectomy or ileocolic resection followed by an ileocolic anastomosis.

For patients who are unstable with bowel, the surgeon should proceed with a right hemicolectomy or ileocolic resection with an ileostomy creation. Later, once the patient is stabilized, the ileostomy may be reversed.