**Definitions Generally Used**

- Oxygen saturation: The proportion of hemoglobin inside red blood cells that can bind oxygen. This generally means functional hemoglobin or functional arterial oxygen saturation.

- SaO2 is arterial saturation measured by ABG. This entity excludes certain dyshemoglobinemia and only includes effective hemoglobins. SaO2 is expressed as 100% X (O2Hb)/(O2Hb + Hb).

- SpO2 is oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry using light wavelength. Commercially available oximeters use 2 light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that emit light at the 660 nm (red) and the 940 nm (infrared) wavelengths.

- The pressure of any inspired gas (P gas) is equal to the partial pressure of the gas times the barometric pressure. The normal partial pressure of oxygen at sea level is simply the fractional inspired of oxygen (FiO2) (0.21) times the barometric pressure (760 mm Hg at sea level), which is 160 mm Hg or 159 (if one uses 0.2093 as the FiO2).

- The A-a gradient (or difference) is defined as the alveolar oxygen content minus the arterial oxygen content obtained from an arterial blood gas (ABG). Theoretically, there should be no gradient, but in reality, there is at least a 5 mm Hg or more gradient. The alveolar oxygen content comes from at least 300 to 400 million or more alveoli present at birth and tends to be a calculated value.

**Alveolar oxygen tension (PAO2)**

It is essential to understand how the alveolar oxygen equation is developed.

PAO2 = (Patm – PH20) FiO2 – PaCO2/RQ where Patm is atmospheric pressure and RQ is the respiratory quotient.

Patm is equal to 760 torrs at sea level, and the PH2O is the partial pressure of water vapor pressure in humans of 47 mmHg at body temperature (37 degrees Celcius). The room air FiO2 is 0.21. The respiratory quotient (RQ) varies from 0.707 to 1.0 and is usually estimated as 0.80 for an average diet (that includes carbohydrates, protein, and fat).

Based on these assumptions, the following calculation is made:

PAO2 = (760 mm Hg – 47 mm Hg) 0.21 – 40 mm Hg/0.8 = 150 mm Hg – 50 mm Hg = 100 mm Hg. Therefore at sea level on room air, the only variables that should change to get the PAO2 or alveolar oxygen are the arterial PaCO2 and the RQ. Assuming an RQ of 0.8 (volume of CO2 released/volume of O2 consumed) means the PaCO2 is the only variable that changes. The common exceptions would be at high altitudes and hypoventilation, where the PA02 decreases.

**Arterial Oxygen Tension (PaO2)**

PaO2 refers to the small amount of oxygen dissolved in the plasma after it diffuses from the alveolar spaces in the lung. PaO2 is usually obtained from an arterial blood sample. The PaO2 measurement is useful, especially when false values of SpO2 are suspected (such as in dark skin, dyshemoglobinemia, or severe anemia).

**Alveolar-Arterial Oxygen Gradient or (A-a) Gradient**

The difference between the PA02 and PaO2 is known as the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient. This varies from about 5 to 25 mm Hg. It is calculated as the PAO2 (100 mm Hg) – PaO2 (approximately 95 mm Hg in a healthy young and nonsmoking person) equals 5 mm Hg. Therefore, the A – a difference (or A-a gradient) on room air last sea level is calculated as follows:

PAO2 [(760 mm Hg– 47 mm Hg) 0.21 – 40 mm Hg/0.8 = 150 mm Hg – 50 mm Hg] – PaO2 (95 mmHg) = 5 mm Hg (or more with age).

For older individuals, there are formulas to adjust for age to calculate the A-a difference, such as [A-a difference adjusted for age= A-a difference (age/4) + 4].

A normal PA02 is about 100 mm Hg, with the arterial Pa02 varying from about 95 mm Hg to as low as 75 mm Hg (or lower, depending on who one talks to). It is well known that the arterial PaO2 in mm Hg on room air decreases with age.

If on room air, the difference is probably closer to 100 mmHg. Also, once the saturation is 100%, all 4 oxygens on each hemoglobin molecule have one oxygen and are full. Therefore, the only way to further increase oxygen transport is to increase hemoglobin.

Also, if the A-a gradient is calculated with inspired oxygen greater than room air, the alveolar PA02 will increase faster than the arterial PaO2 resulting in an increasing A-a gradient. This is normal. Another point is that the A-a gradient on room air can increase faster with disease (and not just age). This is important to remember.

**Arterial Hyperoxia**

Arterial hyperoxemia refers to a high PaO2 in arterial blood.2 of >300 mm Hg post-cardiopulmonary arrest.2 is now considered risky in acute myocardial infarction, as noted in the DETOX-AMI trial (Hofmann et al) and others.

**Arterial Hypoxia**

Hypoxia is where oxygen at the tissue and organ level is unavailable to provide adequate homeostasis.2 in arterial blood. An actual value is a PaO2 <60 mm Hg on pulse oximetry or an ABG saturation <90%. The ABG is still the gold standard because pulse oximeters can read up to 2 mm Hg above or below the true value.

Arterial hypoxia symptoms include anxiety, confusion, tachypnea, and dyspnea. Chronic low oxygen, particularly with cancer, results in hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) cell synthesis, which allows oxygen-deprived cells to survive and proliferate. When there is no hypoxia, von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) changes and binds to HIF, which is degraded.

VHL does not change when hypoxia is present, and HIF is not changed. Hypoxia treatment includes exogenous oxygen to return to normal levels, then treating the underlying disease. All causes of hypoxia can cause cell death, or there can be recovery. There are at least 4 common causes of hypoxia which are:

- Hypoxemic hypoxia: Hypoxemia is present and may cause weakness and fatigue; it is the most common cause of hypoxia. Oxygen therapy and treatment of the underlying disease are the treatments of choice.

- Anemic hypoxia: This is due to either low hemoglobin or deshemoglobminemia (methemoglobinemia, sulfhemoglobinemia, and carboxyhemoglobinemia) (functional anemia).

- Histotoxic hypoxia (reduced oxygen-carrying capacity): The inability to use available oxygen due to cyanide toxicity.

- Circulatory hypoxia (stagnant hypoxia) or ischemic hypoxia: Heart failure is often a problem. In this instance, one needs to treat the underlying cause of heart failure.

- Other mechanisms of hypoxia: Increased O2 extraction or pseudo hypoxemia (due to hyperleukocytosis in patients with hematological malignancies who are susceptible to acquired infections).

**Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve (ODC) and Oxygen-Myoglobin Dissociation Curve and Binding**

Oxygen in blood is transported primarily by hemoglobin; only about 2% is dissolved and follows Henry’s Law. Usually, 4 oxygen molecules are bound to each hemoglobin tetramer when the molecule is completely saturated. A sigmoid shape occurs when plotting oxygen tension on the x-axis and oxygen saturation on the y-axis.

The curve tends to be flat at high oxygen tensions in the pulmonary circuit because oxygen saturations are close to 100% or 100%. The curve goes from flat to much steeper at low oxygen tensions as oxygen is added to hemoglobin. With the addition of each new oxygen molecule to hemoglobin, the conformation of hemoglobin changes, which facilitates the binding of the next oxygen molecule. This property is called binding cooperativity. The p50 is when 50% of the hemoglobin molecules are bound with oxygen.

A normal p50 is from 26 to 27 mm Hg. A high p50 indicates a low oxygen affinity for hemoglobin and vice versa. The high p50 also means easy delivery of oxygen to the tissues. This is seen with acidosis, elevated temperature (exercise), increased 2,3 BPG (stays high in stored blood for at least one week), and increased temperature. (see table). The converse is also true. A low p50 (high oxygen affinity for hemoglobin) is seen with CO poisoning, methemoglobin, and fetal hemoglobin. The high oxygen affinity with fetal hemoglobin allows it to take oxygen from the mother for its own use.

**Table. Left versus Right Shift in the Sigmoid Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve**

**Factor Type**

**Factor Change-2**

**Factor Change-3**

**Oxygen Avidity by factor change**

2,3 BPG

Increased, Right shift

Decreased, Left shift

First 2, Then 3

Acidity

Increased, Right shift

Decreased, Left shift

First 2, Then 3

pCO2

Increased, Right shift

Decreased, Left shift

First 2, Then 3

Temperature

Increased, Right shift

Decreased, Left shift

First 2, Then 3

Myoglobin is found in skeletal muscle and has a higher affinity for oxygen than other adult hemoglobin. This entity becomes saturated at lower oxygen levels and holds onto oxygen until oxygen in the muscles is very low. The delayed release of oxygen slows the start of anaerobic metabolism and lactic acidosis. The myoglobin molecule is a single polypeptide chain, and the oxygen-myoglobin dissociation curve is logarithmic and not sigmoidal. Myoglobin is not capable of cooperative binding.

CO-oximetry is also useful in rare congenital or acquired conditions responsible for dyshemoglobinemias, such as methemoglobinemia and Sulfhemoglobinemia.