There are many causes of atrial fibrillation (AF), but it shares a strong association with other cardiovascular diseases. The commonly encountered causes include:

- Advanced age

- Congenital heart disease

- Underlying heart disease - valvular disease, coronary artery disease, structural heart disease, atrial ischemia

- Increased alcohol consumption

- Hypertension - systemic or pulmonary

- Endocrine disorders - diabetes, pheochromocytoma, and hyperthyroidism

- Genetic factors

- Neurologic disorders - subarachnoid hemorrhage or stroke

- Hemodynamic stress - mitral or tricuspid valve disease, left ventricular dysfunction, pulmonary embolism

- Obstructive sleep apnea

- Inflammation - myocarditis and pericarditis

Any condition that leads to inflammation, stress, damage, or ischemia affecting the anatomy of the heart can result in the development of atrial fibrillation. In some cases, the cause is iatrogenic.

Atrial fibrillation is referred to as recurrent when a patient has two or more episodes. The three patterns of atrial fibrillation include:

Paroxysmal AF: If recurrent AF reverts spontaneously, it is called paroxysmal AF. Here, the episodes terminate spontaneously within seven days. In younger patients, paroxysmal AF has been commonly found to be secondary to electrically active foci within the pulmonary veins. Elimination of these foci is found to be effective in treating this type of AF since it eliminates the trigger for such episodes.

Persistent AF: If recurrent AF persists, needing either pharmacological or electrical cardioversion, it is called persistent AF. In this case, the episodes last more than seven days, and if it is associated with a rapid and uncontrolled ventricular rate, it may lead to electrical remodeling in the cardiac myocytes causing dilated cardiomyopathy. This type of AF may present as the first episode or as a result of recurrent episodes of paroxysmal AF.

Long-standing persistent AF: AF that has been present for more than 12 months, either due to the failure of initiation of pharmacological intervention or failure of cardioversion.

Permanent AF: It is the type where a decision has been made to abort all therapies because the rhythm is unresponsive.