The first step is ensuring that the patient is regularly getting at least 6 hours of sleep per night for at least two weeks. Although this can be done with a patient-reported sleep log alone and still be considered valid for additional testing, patients often overestimate their total sleep time. Two weeks of actigraphy with a sleep log is recommended before further testing. If the patient is getting less than 6 hours of sleep per night averaged over two weeks, they cannot be diagnosed with narcolepsy.

If the patient is getting a minimum of 6 hours of sleep per night, then a reasonable next step is a polysomnogram (PSG) to rule out other possible sleep disorders such as sleep apnea. Following the PSG, a Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) is conducted the next day as long as there were at least 6 hours of sleep during the PSG, and no other sleep disorders are found. The patient is given four to five 20-minute nap opportunities at 2-hour intervals. A positive test will show a rapid onset of REM sleep (less than 15 minutes) at least twice during the test, and a shortened mean sleep latency averaged across all trials (less than 8 minutes). One of the sleep-onset REM periods (SOREMPs) can occur during the PSG with only one during the MSLT and still meet diagnostic criteria. If the MSLT is negative, but there is strong clinical suspicion for narcolepsy, the test should be repeated.

When conducting the MSLT, the patient must be allowed to sleep until they wake up on their own from the PSG the night before the test to prevent a possible false positive. If the patient doesn’t get enough sleep the night before the test or it is started too early in the morning, SOREMPs may be present for the first couple of naps even in a patient without narcolepsy. Those with chronic insufficient sleep can also have SOREMPs on MSLT if they are not screened appropriately with actigraphy and sleep logs before testing. This can also occur with shift workers who are tested during their usual sleep period.

Narcolepsy type 1 can also be diagnosed if hypocretin-1 is low in the cerebrospinal fluid (<110 pg/mL or <1/3 the mean normal value for a given assay). This testing could be helpful to confirm or exclude the diagnosis. Although HLA DQB1*0602 is present in most narcolepsy type 1 patients, there is no common diagnostic utility in testing for it.