- Human trafficking is a global problem. Due to its large size and location on an international border, Texas reports significant numbers of human trafficking cases.

- Texas law required medical license holders to complete a course of trafficking prevention. Texas law enforcement has a section devoted to human trafficking and international/organized crime. In addition, the Human Trafficking Prevention Coordinating Council oversees plans to end and prevent human trafficking in Texas.

- Risk factors for trafficking include poverty, youth, disability, language barrier, unstable housing, domestic and child abuse, and sexual orientation.

- The evaluation of a suspected trafficking victim should include evaluation for physical and psychological trauma and medical conditions common to trafficking victims.

- Clinicians should offer the trafficked patient community and healthcare resources. If the patient does not want to leave the situation, the clinician should offer resources such as follow-up visits, birth control, hotline information, and community resources.

- Texas requires reporting child abuse, elder abuse, and disabled-patient abuse. However, reporting is not required for human trafficking alone.

- The healthcare encounter should offer the patient medical treatment, mental health resources, help in escaping from the trafficker without increasing the danger to the patient.

- Patients and clinicians can call the National Human Trafficking Hotline (1-888-373-788) for help treating trafficking.