After synthesis in the presynaptic terminal, norepinephrine is released into the synaptic cleft to bind post-synaptic receptors, undergo reuptake by the presynaptic neuron, or undergo degradation.

**Receptor Binding**

Following an action potential into the presynaptic terminal, voltage-gated calcium channels are stimulated and bring an influx of calcium from the extracellular to intracellular space. This influx causes norepinephrine (stored in vesicles) to bind the cell membrane and get released into the synaptic cleft via exocytosis. Norepinephrine can then go on to bind three main receptors: alpha1 (alpha-1), alpha-2, and beta receptors. These receptors classify as G-protein coupled receptors with either inhibitory or excitatory effects and different binding affinities to norepinephrine.

Alpha-1 receptors further subdivide into alpha-1a, alpha-1b, and alpha-1d receptors. These receptors are located postsynaptically in regions of the brain including the locus coeruleus, olfactory bulb, cerebral cortex, dentate gyrus, amygdala, and thalamus. Alph-1 receptors have intermediate binding affinity to norepinephrine and couple to the Gq protein signaling pathway. In this pathway, phospholipase C (PLC) is activated to convert phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) to inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG) on the cell membrane. IP3 is released to the cytosol and binds to transmembrane IP3 receptors located on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) which functions as a calcium channel. When bound, the receptor undergoes a conformational change leading to the release of calcium from the ER to the cytosol. DAG remains in the cell membrane and positively regulates protein kinase C (PKC), which functions to phosphorylate other proteins. These combined effects produce excitatory cellular effects.

Alpha-2 receptors subdivide into alpha-2a, alpha-2b, and alpha-2c receptors. These receptors are located both presynaptically and postsynaptically in regions of the brain including locus coeruleus, amygdala, and hypothalamus. These receptors have the highest binding affinity to norepinephrine and couple to the Gi/o protein signaling pathway. In this pathway, cAMP levels are decreased thereby leading to decreased adenylyl cyclase activity, producing inhibitory cellular effects. Presynaptic noradrenergic terminals contain alpha-2 autoreceptors which prevent further release of norepinephrine.

Beta receptors subdivide into beta-1, beta-2, and beta-3 receptors. These receptors are in various regions of the brain, with beta-1 and beta-2 receptors being most prevalent in the cerebral cortex. These receptors have the lowest binding affinity to norepinephrine and couple to the Gs protein signaling pathway. In this pathway, cAMP levels increase leading to protein kinase A (PKA) activation which goes on to phosphorylate other proteins inside the cell and leads to excitatory cellular effects. Beta-2 receptors also couple to Gi protein signaling pathways. Beta-3 receptors are present in adipose tissue.

In the adrenal medulla, acetylcholine stimulates adrenaline and noradrenaline release. Acetylcholine binds to nicotinic receptors located on adrenal chromaffin cells, which generate action potentials sustained by voltage-gated sodium and potassium channels. This action potential triggers calcium influx into the cytosol, leading to norepinephrine vesicles binding to the cell membrane leading to the release of norepinephrine into the blood circulation where travel to bind alpha and beta receptors on smooth muscle and adipose cells.

**Presynaptic Reuptake**

Reuptake is the most common route of removal of norepinephrine from the synaptic cleft. Norepinephrine transporter (NET) located on presynaptic terminals, is a sodium-chloride dependent transporter that mediates the reuptake of norepinephrine into the presynaptic terminal where it can either undergo degradation or storage in vesicles.

**Catabolism**

Norepinephrine can be degraded intracellularly or in the synaptic cleft by the enzymes monoamine oxidase (MAO) or catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). MAO oxidizes norepinephrine while COMT metabolizes deaminated norepinephrine through O-methylation. MAO and COMT are found in adrenal chromaffin cells, while sympathetic nerves contain MAO only. COMT is found in all organs.