# Continuing Education Activity

Abnormal uterine bleeding due to ovulatory dysfunction causes irregular and often heavy menses. This condition, if left untreated, can have a significant negative effect on a patient's quality of life. This activity reviews the pathophysiology, evaluation, and treatment of abnormal uterine bleeding associated with ovulatory dysfunction (AUB-O) and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in properly managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of abnormal uterine bleeding associated with ovulatory dysfunction.
- Review the evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding associated with ovulatory dysfunction.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for abnormal uterine bleeding associated with ovulatory dysfunction.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to aid in the diagnosis of abnormal uterine bleeding associated with ovulatory dysfunction and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Abnormal uterine bleeding associated with ovulatory dysfunction (AUB-O) or anovulatory bleeding, is non-cyclic uterine bleeding characterized by irregular, prolonged, and often heavy menstruation.

# Etiology

The etiology of AUB-O is believed to be rooted in a disturbance in the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis.

Various common etiologies of anovulation are as follows:

- Hyperandrogenism (e.g., PCOS, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, androgen-producing tumors)

- Hyperprolactinemia

- Anorexia

- Excessive exercise

- Stress

- Thyroid dysfunction

- Primary pituitary dysfunction

- Premature ovarian failure

- Medications

Medications that correlate with ovulatory dysfunction include antiepileptics, such as valproate and lamotrigine, and antipsychotics.

# Epidemiology

Abnormal uterine bleeding is a common problem. In the United States, there are reports of AUB at an annual rate of 53 per 1000 women in one study of reproductive-aged women.

- Perimenarchial

- Perimenopausal

- Obese (which may be an independent risk factor for anovulation)

- Of extremely low BMI (anorexia, relative energy deficiency in sport)

# Pathophysiology

The follicle is the primary functional unit in the ovary – responsible for germ cell development and steroid production. The peak of follicular maturation occurs at the midpoint of the ovulatory cycle. At this time, increased estrogen levels, followed by a surge in LH and FSH from the pituitary, results in ovulation. The follicular cells subsequently reorganize to become the corpus luteum. The corpus luteum supplies the hormone progesterone, which serves to stabilize the endometrium until implantation occurs. In the absence of ovulation, no corpus luteum forms; this results in lower levels of progestin, which leads to the persistence of proliferative endometrium. This unstable endometrial tissue is prone to irregular and heavy shedding. Additionally, the presence of high levels of estrogen unopposed by progesterone, are believed to contribute to increased vascular fragility and decreased vascular tone in the endometrium resulting in an increased volume of blood loss. Abnormal prostaglandin synthesis and prostaglandin receptor upregulation, increased fibrinolytic activity locally, and an increase in the activity of tissue plasminogen activator have all been implicated as mechanisms of abnormal uterine bleeding secondary to ovulatory dysfunction.

# History and Physical

As with any medical condition, a detailed history and physical exam can significantly narrow the differential diagnosis, and help in selecting appropriate testing and imaging to evaluate for AUB. For adolescent patients, it is essential to take a history both with the patient’s parents present and again in their absence, as adolescent patients may not be willing to candidly discuss their symptoms and sexual practices in the presence of a parent. Irregular bleeding that is associated with AUB-O usually demonstrates by phases of amenorrhea that can last for months, and phases with either heavy bleeding or spotting. Typical premenstrual symptoms are usually absent. AUB-O should be suspected in women, especially at the extremes of reproductive age, who have an irregular bleeding pattern.

Assessment of history should include:

**Bleeding History**

- Frequency, regularity, and duration of bleeding

- The volume of blood loss

- Studies have shown that patient perception of blood loss during menstruation is unreliable.

- Presence/absence of postcoital bleeding

- The presence of postcoital bleeding is more suggestive of an extrauterine cause (e.g., cervical polyps).

- Bleeding with stools

- The presence of this symptom suggests a gastrointestinal etiology, which may be confounding the perception of blood loss.

**Associated Signs/Symptoms**

- Fevers, chills, pelvic pain, vaginal discharge, bowel or bladder dysfunction

**Signs/symptoms Associated with Known Causes of AUB-O**

- PCOS: Obesity, male-pattern or rapidly worsening hirsutism, acne, acanthosis

- Thyroid dysfunction: Palpitations, tachycardia, hot/cold intolerance, fatigue, weight gain

- Hyperprolactinemia: Galactorrhea, spontaneous, or expressed lactation on an exam

- Coagulopathy: Positive family history, easy bruising, petechiae

**Sexual History**

- Last intercourse

- Number of partners

- Contraception use

- Sexually transmitted infection (STI) exposure history

- History of abnormal cervical cancer screening

**Medical History**

Current medications (include pills, powders, shakes, and supplements)

**Surgical History**

Family history with special focus on:

- Menstrual history of mother and siblings

- Coagulopathies (e.g., von Willebrand disease, factor VIII deficiency)

- Hormone-sensitive cancers (e.g., breast, ovarian)

Physical exam should include an evaluation of:

- Vital signs: Vital signs, including orthostatic blood pressures if hypovolemia or anemia is a concern

- General: BMI/body composition assessment

- Head & neck: Conjunctival or mucosal pallor, thyroid exam

- Abdomen: Tenderness, masses, distension

- Pelvic/perineal: Vulva, vaginal exam, speculum exam, pap smear, and cervical cultures if concern for STI. Rectal exam if concern for rectal source of bleeding.

# Evaluation

Initial evaluation for AUB-O begins with a general evaluation for AUB. If history or physical exam suggests a particular pathology, targeted testing can take place right away. At a minimum, all patients should have a blood or urine pregnancy test and complete blood count (CBC). The CBC is especially important if the patient complains of heavy menses, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, dizziness, fatigue, or pica as these symptoms could suggest anemia or thrombocytopenia.

Once pregnancy is ruled out, and anemia is either ruled out or discovered and treated, attention can focus on the history, physical exam, and family history for clues as to the etiology of the bleeding. Appropriate testing for some concerning history elements:

- Thyroid dysfunction: Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)

- Prolactinemia: Serum prolactin

- PCOS: 17-OH-progesterone, total and free testosterone, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH)

- Coagulopathy: CBC, prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen test, factor VIII level, platelet aggregation studies

Treatment of patients with positive findings on workup should target the specific pathology. For patients with no concerning findings or positive tests, it is reasonable to initiate medical management.

**Age-based Considerations**

Menarche to 18 years:

- Concern for endometrial hyperplasia is low in this age group. However, the persistence of anovulatory cycles for more than two years without an identified cause warrants evaluation with endometrial biopsy.

- Half of the girls with bleeding disorders present with heavy menstrual bleeding. It is appropriate to screen for blood dyscrasias in this age group.

- Consider other pathologies that may cause platelet dysfunction resulting in excessive bleeding to include: leukemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, and hypersplenism.

19 to 39 years:

- 6% to 10% of women in this population have hyperandrogenic chronic anovulation (e.g., PCOS).

- Patients who do not respond to medical therapy should have an endometrial biopsy performed.

40 years to Menopause:

- Endometrial biopsy is warranted as first-line testing for age over 45 years or in cases with concerning personal or family history.

**Acute AUB**

In cases of acute AUB, where there is a discrete episode of bleeding requiring immediate medical attention, the clinician should first stabilize the patient, then undergo an assessment with transvaginal ultrasonography to assess for uterine pathology and sonohysterography to evaluate for endometrial pathology.

**Imaging**

Imaging may be used as a first-line evaluation tool if warranted by history or symptoms. It can also be used secondarily in patients who fail medical management. The most common modalities are hysteroscopy, transvaginal ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and saline infusion sonohysterography.

# Treatment / Management

The determination of treatment for AUB-O is through the etiology of the anovulation and the patient's therapeutic goals. Underlying endocrine abnormalities should be corrected. Normalization of eating disorders or stress, while challenging, can be achieved. If medications are causing ovulatory dysfunction, the patient should receive counsel regarding the indication for that medication, the risks/benefits of any alternatives, and any ways in which there can be mitigation of the effects of the drug. The choice of management often hinges on a patient's reproductive desires. Ultimately, patient safety is paramount, as ovulatory dysfunction may lead to endometrial hyperplasia or malignancy.

Medication management is the mainstay of treatment for AUB-O. The medical treatment options include progestin-only therapy and combined hormonal contraception. Progestin therapy is available in several forms, including an intrauterine device (IUD), intramuscular injection, and oral progestin-only hormonal pill. Non-contraceptive progestins can be prescribed in a cyclic manner (7 to 10 days each month) to induce regular withdrawal bleeding. The levonorgestrel-releasing IUD is appropriate for treatment in all age groups. Combined hormonal contraception is available as an oral pill, transdermal patch, and intravaginal ring. All of these options can protect the endometrium from hyperplasia or malignancy. Cyclic progestins or combined hormonal contraceptives may also improve the regularity of patients' bleeding if that is their desire.

If the patient desires fertility, contraceptives no longer align with her treatment goals. Brief courses of the above may be a strategy until the patient is ready to try to actively achieve pregnancy. Correction of underlying disorders, again, is essential. For women with polycystic ovarian syndrome, weight loss has been shown to lower circulating androgens. A reduction in body weight of as little as 5% may lead to the spontaneous resumption of normal menses.

Surgical management for AUB-O is indicated in cases of medication treatment failure and/or medication contraindication. Laparoscopic ovarian drilling has been an option in patients with PCOS who desire fertility but have been resistant to medications such as clomiphene citrate. Unfortunately, there is no conclusive evidence that this procedure significantly improves clinical pregnancy rates, live birth rates, or miscarriage rates in these patients.

Due to the risk of hyperplasia and malignancy, endometrial tissue sampling, such as with endometrial biopsy or dilation and curettage, should be performed as a first-line test in women with AUB who are older than 45 years.

Alternatively, endometrial ablation is a surgical procedure that has the potential to help many patients with abnormal uterine bleeding. However, endometrial ablation is not a recommendation in patients who have endometrial hyperplasia or malignancy.

# Differential Diagnosis

Abnormal uterine bleeding accompanying ovulatory dysfunction is a diagnosis of exclusion. The differential diagnosis includes all etiologies of AUB. The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) created the PALM-COEIN system in 2011 to identify the common causes of AUB in non-pregnant women. The PALM group represents structural abnormalities that can be measured with imaging or histopathology and often undergo surgical treatment. The COEIN group represents non-structural etiologies that generally receive medical management.

P: Polyp

A: Adenomyosis

L: Leiomyoma

M: Malignancy

C: Coagulopathy

O: Ovulatory dysfunction

E: Endometrial

I: Iatrogenic

N: Not yet classified

Specific causes of ovulatory dysfunction that merit consideration include:

- Pregnancy (uncomplicated, threatened miscarriage, incomplete miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy)

- Menarche, perimenopause, premature ovarian failure

- Lactation

- Endocrinopathy (thyroid dysfunction, hyperprolactinemia, pituitary disorder)

- Medication use

- Especially antipsychotics, antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), verapamil, antiemetics

Extra-uterine causes of vaginal bleeding include vaginitis, genital trauma, foreign body, vulvar neoplasia, and vaginal neoplasia.

# Prognosis

The overall prognosis for patients with AUB-O is good. Symptoms can generally be managed medically with significant improvement in patient quality of life as a result.

# Complications

The most common complications of anovulation are infertility and irregular menses. Irregular menses can undergo improvement with hormonal contraception; however, if fertility is a patient's desire, treatment with ovulatory induction agents such as clomiphene or letrozole may be appropriate. Depending on the primary clinician’s level of comfort, this may require referral to an obstetrician-gynecologist. Chronic anovulation and unopposed estrogen can lead to endometrial hyperplasia and malignancy, and patients with AUB-O must be counseled regarding this dangerous complication of their irregular menses when discussing recommendations for treatment.

The most common complication of irregular heavy menses is iron-deficiency anemia, which can receive treatment with oral or intravenous iron therapy. Clinicians may recommend that a patient with symptomatic anemia who is taking oral contraceptives, skip the placebo week to prevent menstrual blood loss.

Sheehan syndrome (pituitary infarction) is a theoretical complication of endometrial ablation. Patients require counsel on this risk before being offered this treatment.

# Consultations

Specialty care can be helpful in the rapid diagnosis and treatment of AUB-O. Most patients can be reasonably managed in the primary care setting. An OBGYN consult is necessary for cases with structural pathology or when surgical management is warranted. OBGYN consultation is also appropriate in patients with AUB-O who wish to conceive. A hematology-oncology referral is appropriate for patients with a known or suspected underlying bleeding disorder.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be advised to maintain healthy body weight; obesity associates independently with chronic anovulation.

Counseling patients on the normal physiology of menarche and menopause may help to allay anxieties that correlate with symptoms of AUB-O during those transitional periods.

Patient education regarding what constitutes normal versus abnormal bleeding will help them to know when to make an appointment to discuss their bleeding with their clinician. Many of the complications of AUB increase with the length of time between identifying and managing the abnormality.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Anovulation may be physiologic at the extremes of reproductive life.

- A thorough history and physical exam are vital to the diagnosis.

- For adolescent patients, the history should be taken both with and without the patient’s parents present.

- AUB-O is a diagnosis of exclusion made after other causes of AUB have been ruled out.

- The mainstay of treatment is combined oral contraceptives or progestin-only therapy.

- The levonorgestrel-releasing IUD is more effective than other medical therapies for the treatment of heavy bleeding.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Abnormal uterine bleeding with ovulatory dysfunction (AUB-O) is a frequently encountered complaint in both primary care and OBGYN clinics. Because there are many causes, it is crucial to have an interprofessional team dedicated to this health problem. Most patients initially present to the primary care clinician or nurse. A referral to a gynecologist should take place as soon as possible to prevent delays in diagnosis and treatment. While the patient is being worked up by the specialist, the primary clinicians should encourage the patient to maintain a healthy body weight, discontinue smoking, eat a healthy diet, and exercise regularly.

Given the myriad of pharmaceutical options available for treatment, it is prudent to include a pharmacist at every step of the way for agent selection, dosing, drug-drug interaction checking, and patient counseling. Nursing staff can also cover drug administration, answer patient questions, and help assess therapeutic effectiveness. Both pharmacy and nursing need open communication with the treating clinician so that all members of the interprofessional team are operating from the same information and can provide input to patient care to achieve optimal results. [Level 5]

The ability to diagnose the condition quickly allows for more rapid initiation of treatment and specialty referral if necessary. Appropriate interprofessional team treatment of AUB-O has been shown to improve patient quality of life. [Level 5]