Pregabalin is administered orally and is available in capsules or oral solutions. Following oral administration, pregabalin reaches peak plasma concentrations within 1.5 hours and achieves a steady-state within 24 to 48 hours. The absorption of pregabalin is independent of the dose. Pregabalin readily crosses the blood-brain barrier. Humans cannot significantly metabolize pregabalin. Its elimination is primarily as an unchanged drug (less than 2% metabolized) by renal excretion. In patients with normal renal function, the mean elimination half-life is 6.3 hours. Researchers have studied pregabalin at dosages up to 600 mg per day. However, they did not find 600 mg per day to provide significant additional benefit and was less well tolerated due to side effects.

When discontinuing pregabalin, the recommendation is to taper the drug gradually over one week. In patients with seizure disorders, withdraw pregabalin gradually to minimize the risk of increased seizure.

- **Management of****Neuropathic Pain Associated****with****Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy:**The recommended maximum therapeutic dose is 300 mg/day. The suggested starting dose is 50 mg three times per day. The dose can increase up to 300 mg/day within one week of starting treatment.

- **Management of****Neuropathic Pain Associated with Spinal Cord Injury:**The recommended therapeutic dose is 150 mg to 600 mg per day. The recommended starting dose is 75 mg twice per day. The dose may be increased to 150 mg twice per day within one week of initiating treatment. Patients with suboptimal pain relief following 2 to 3 weeks of treatment with 150 mg twice a day may be increased up to 300 mg twice per day. In spinal cord injury, pain improvement can be seen as early as one week after initiating treatment. However, to evaluate the efficacy of pregabalin, it is recommended to try the medication for 4 to 6 weeks if tolerated by the patient.

- **Management of****Postherpetic Neuralgia****:**The recommended therapeutic dose is 150 mg to 300 mg per day, divided into dosing twice or three times per day. The recommended starting dose is 75 mg two times per day or 50 mg three times per day. The dose can increase up to 300 mg per day within one week of starting treatment. After 2 to 4 weeks of treatment with 300 mg per day, patients with suboptimal pain relief can be increased to 600 mg per day, divided into twice per day or three times per dosing.

- **Management of Fibromyalgia:**The recommended therapeutic dose is 300 mg to 450 mg per day. The recommended starting dose is 150 mg/day divided into twice per day dosing. The dose can increase to 300 mg per day within one week of starting treatment. Patients with suboptimal pain relief on 300 mg per day may further increase to 450 mg per day, divided into twice per day dosing.

- **Adjunctive Therapy for Adults with Partial Onset Seizures:**Pregabalin is FDA-approved only as an adjunctive for treating partial-onset seizures. The effective dose is 150 mg to 600 mg per day, divided twice or three times per dosing. The suggested starting dose is no greater than 150 mg per day. The total dose can increase to a maximum of 600 mg per day.

- **Cough and Chronic Refractory:**Pregabalin is off-label used in cough and chronic refractory conditions. The initial starting dose is 75 mg per day, which may increase by 75 mg per day during the first week of treatment. The maximum dose can be up to 300 mg per day, divided into three times per dosing.

- **Generalized Anxiety Disorder:**Pregabalin is also off-label used in generalized anxiety disorder. The initial starting dose is 75 mg per day, which may increase by 75 mg per day during the first week of treatment. The maximum dose can be up to 300 mg per day, divided into three times per dosing.

- **Chronic Pruritus:**Pregabalin is also off-label used as a preferred treatment in patients with pruritus resistance. The initial starting dose is 75 mg twice daily, which may increase by 150 mg to 300 mg in two to three divided doses daily. This dose may go up to 600 mg daily in oncology patient populations.

- **Restless Legs Syndrome:**Another off-label use of pregabalin is in restless legs syndrome. The initial starting dose is 50 mg to 75 mg daily before bedtime, which may increase by 75 mg to 150 mg every week. The usual therapeutic dose is up to 150 mg to 450 mg daily based on the effectiveness and tolerability of therapy.

- **Social Anxiety Disorder:**Pregabalin is off-label used as mono or adjuvant therapy in social anxiety disorder, cough, and chronic refractory conditions. The initial starting dose is 100 mg three times a day, which may increase by 150 mg per day over one week. This dose may go up to 600 mg daily based on response and tolerability.

**Specific Population**

- **Renal Impairment:**Pregabalin is eliminated primarily by renal excretion. Adjust the dose in patients with impaired renal function. According to prescription drug manufacturers following are recommendations on dose reductions for patients with reduced creatinine clearance and those undergoing hemodialysis.
- CrCl greater than or equal to 60 mL/min- no dose modification recommended
- CrCl  30 - 60 mL/min - 50% dose of recommended daily dose 
- CrCl  15- 30 mL/min - 25% dose of recommended daily dose
- CrCl  less than or equal to 15 mL/min - 16% to 8% dose of recommended daily dose
- Supplementary dosage of approximately an additional 25 mg of recommended daily dose following hemodialysis is recommended

- **Hepatic Impairment:**Although not explicitly studied, because pregabalin is not protein-bound, it is unlikely that patients with hepatic impairment require dosing modifications.

- **Pregnancy:**To monitor pregnancy outcomes in women exposed to pregabalin during pregnancy and provide information on the effects of in utero exposure to pregabalin, clinicians should help enroll pregnant patients in the North American Antiepileptic Drug (NAAED) Pregnancy Registry.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**Because the potential risk outweighs the benefits, breastfeeding or pregabalin should be stopped, especially while nursing newborns or infants.