Basic laboratory studies can show anemia, leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, high erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and elevated gamma globulin.

Echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cardiac MRI), cardiac computed tomography (cardiac CT), PET scan, and coronary angiography are valuable evaluation tools. Generally, the information obtained from these noninvasive imaging tools can provide sufficient information about the type of tumor, its location, and the need for surgery.

**1) Echocardiography**

Echocardiography is usually the diagnostic modality of choice. It can characterize the size, location, attachment, and mobility of the atrial mass, as well as the extent the tumor can obstruct circulation and act as a source of emboli. Transesophageal echocardiography is superior to transthoracic echocardiography in profiling atrial mass, even though transthoracic echocardiography is simpler and usually first obtained if there is clinical suspicion.

**2) Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography**

Cardiac MRI is another diagnostic test of choice. Cardiac MRI not only characterizes anatomic images in detail but also gives insight into the microenvironment within a tumor in the T1- and T2-weighted sequences.

**3) PET scan**

Though not used very often, a PET scan can also characterize atrial myxomas.

**4) Coronary angiography**

Coronary angiography is essential in assessing the tumor's blood supply. If patients need to undergo surgical resection of the atrial tumor, coronary angiography is part of the routine preoperative evaluation.

**5) Transvenous biopsy**

The need for a transvenous biopsy is determined on a case-by-case basis. Generally, noninvasive imaging is sufficient to identify and characterize atrial myxoma. Transvenous biopsy carries the risk of mobilizing emboli associated with the tumor.