The prevalence of diabetes has increased fourfold in the last three to four decades. It currently affects more than 500 million people in the world. Of these, 90% of this is type 2 diabetes. Although oral medications can also manage type 2 diabetes, a significant percentage of these people require insulin for proper glycemic control. Type 1 diabetes is solely insulin-dependent and involves a substantial portion of young kids < 18 years of age, posing a considerable challenge to their management.

Insulin delivery has evolved remarkably over the last century. In the early 20th century, the first type 1 diabetic was treated with insulin, which served as a lifesaving measure for this patient.

Late in the 20th century, a continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) delivery system was developed, which is currently commonly known as an insulin pump. The first insulin pump was about the size of an Army backpack. The closed-loop pumps were designed to deliver insulin and dextrose as needed as a computerized algorithm calculated the dosing through the real-time measurement of blood glucose since the blood glucose analyzer was inside the insulin pump. But the size and the complexity of those devices limited their use, and they were solely used for research purposes. The next generation devices had an open-loop insulin delivery, which was delivered intravenously at a preset rate and boluses at 15 times the set rate. But recurrent infections and phlebitis also limited the use of these sets of insulin pumps. In 1976 the first commercial insulin pump was developed that was called blue brick and was later termed the Auto Syringe. It was designed by Kamen. Complications, including hyperglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis, and infection at the injection site, were common with early pumps causing the limited acceptance of this technology until the 1990s.

Newer and more refined technology has now revolutionized insulin pumps in terms of their ease of use and the quality of care, resulting in improved glycemic control. There has been growing popularity of these devices, and insulin pumps are now becoming the mainstay of treatment for insulin-dependent diabetes. Recent studies report population disparity in the access to insulin pumps even when medical insurance plans cover the cost.

Insulin pumps are devices that continuously deliver short-acting insulin at a predetermined or auto-adjusted rate per hour.

**Insulin Pump Parts**

- The pump itself

- Infusion set

- Sensor and transmitter in sensor-augmented insulin pumps

For most devices, the pump and infusion set are separate, connected by thin plastic tubing, but some devices combine both into one called the tubeless pump. The infusion set is attached to the patient with a cannula placed in the subcutaneous tissue and secured with adhesive. Infusion sets are typically placed into the upper arm, abdomen, lower back, or upper thigh. The pump contains the reservoir and the battery. The reservoir is changed every two to three days. The reservoir typically holds a two to three-day supply of rapid-acting insulin analog depending on the patient's total daily insulin needs. It requires replacement after all the insulin is used up in the reservoir. Battery requirements vary from device to device; some contain a rechargeable lithium battery that uses a cable, whereas others require a standard alkaline battery. Pumps should always be on if there is a functioning battery. Often the pump will be in standby mode to conserve battery. From the home screen of the insulin pump, there will be options to review basal insulin settings and the history of delivered insulin boluses. Additionally, there will be settings for priming the device for changing infusion sets and insulin reservoirs. Returning to an active home screen requires a specific series of button presses that vary depending on the device.

**Insulin type used:**This is usually rapid-acting insulin-like lispro, aspart, or glulisine, but also any kind of rapid-acting insulin can be used in an insulin pump.

**Insulin Delivery**

Basal: Insulin is continuously delivered at a preset rate or an auto-adjusted rate for a basal supply lasting 24 hours.

Mealtime Bolus: Insulin is also delivered at the time of meals as a mealtime bolus. Bolus is calculated based on the number of carbs entered by the patient. The insulin to carb ratio (ICR) has to be entered into the pump beforehand by the patient or their clinician and is calculated by the formula: ICR: 450/TDD. ICR reflects the number of grams of carbs covered by one unit of insulin. With insulin pumps, there is the option for different bolus profiles, including dual wave, short extended, and long extended boluses, which will be discussed below.

The patient also gets a correction bolus along with the mealtime bolus insulin, and the correction is calculated based on the insulin sensitivity factor (ISF). ISF shows how much the blood glucose is lowered by 1 unit of insulin. ISF is calculated by the formula: 1700/TDD.

There are currently two different modes in which the insulin pumps can be used:

- Auto mode: In this mode, the pump is usually connected to or communicates to a continuous glucose monitoring device (CGM). Preset algorithms will change the basal rate of insulin delivery and adjust it based on blood glucose. There is a basal IQ and also a control IQ as some examples of the auto mode. There are also temporary basal rates in situations with higher or lower insulin requirements. The rate is adjusted based on the ISF.

- Manual Mode: In this mode, the user, or the physician, can set a predetermined basal rate based on the total daily dose of insulin needed by that patient. The rates can be adjusted and have to be entered manually.

The hybrid closed-loop system is the first generation of automated insulin delivery, which dynamically modulates basal insulin delivery but still requires the users to administer boluses.

Some newer modalities will come to market, like fully automated multi-hormonal closed-loop systems.

Automated adjustment of bolus calculators is available to improve glycemic control and postprandial spikes.

Insulin pump treatment is associated with improved glycemic control and decreased number of daily injections. Although the data does not document a clear difference in glycemic control in young children, there is increased user satisfaction among the parents of the kids with the use of insulin pumps.

There is also a feature that allows for a dual wave bolus, which involves a usual pre-meal insulin bolus followed by an extended bolus delivered evenly over many hours as programmed by the patient. The study comparing the normal bolus delivery with the dual wave bolus showed improved glycemic control in patients receiving the dual wave bolus, and it prevented prolonged postprandial hyperglycemic excursions.

Duration of insulin action: This is the time rapid-acting insulin will take to control blood glucose. Duration of insulin action is a decline in bolus activity by 20 to 25% each hour. As a result, a certain percentage of insulin is still available at the end of 3 to 4 hours. In general, the greater the bolus amount of insulin is, the higher the amount of insulin is available at the end of that time.

There are also features associated with hypoglycemia suspension of the pumps used in auto mode with the sensor-augmented version. This function is referred to as threshold suspend (TS), or low glucose suspends (LGS).