**Oral Candidiasis**

Patients with oral candidiasis often complain of a burning sensation or unpleasant taste lasting for weeks, months, or even years. There are several clinical forms of oral candidiasis.

Pseudomembranous candidiasis, commonly known as thrush, presents as white plaques in the buccal mucosa, tongue, and palate, which can be removed by scraping or rubbing, exposing an underlying erythematous mucosa. The acute form is commonly observed in infants, which can be attributed to their underdeveloped immune systems. It can also occur with the use of steroid inhalers, rinses, gels, and ointments. Xerostomia may also be a contributing factor.

Erythematous candidiasis manifests as erythematous areas with depapillation on the dorsum of the tongue.

Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis, previously referred to as candidal leukoplakia, presents as non-scrapable white plaques, mostly in the buccal mucosa. This form of candidiasis has the potential for malignant transformation.

Candida-associated lesions are angular cheilitis, denture stomatitis, and median rhomboid glossitis. Denture stomatitis is a form of chronic atrophic erythematous candidiasis. It is commonly seen in the palate of the denture-wearers as erythema.

It is common in denture-wearers with decreased vertical occlusal dimension and may be associated with denture stomatitis. Median rhomboid glossitis or central papillary atrophy presents as the erythematous area in the midline of the posterior dorsum of the tongue.

Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis refers to candidiasis seen in a rare group of immunologic disorders. Patients may present with candida infections of the oral cavity, skin, and nails during the first few years of life. Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dysplasia (APECED) syndrome is a syndrome characterized by the development of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, adrenocortical failure (Addison disease), and hypoparathyroidism. It is an inherited disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene.

The patients with APECED syndrome have multi-organ autoimmunity and ectodermal dystrophy and develop endocrinal disturbances like Addison's disease, hypoparathyroidism, hypothyroidism, and diabetes mellitus months or years after the onset of candidiasis. Enamel defects can also be observed in these patients.

**Aspergillosis**

Clinical presentation of aspergillosis depends on the immune status of the patient. Non-invasive infection can occur in an immunocompetent host and may present as allergic sinusitis.

Oral aspergillosis presents as painful gingival ulcers with diffuse swelling, which may undergo necrosis. Invasive aspergillosis can affect the paranasal sinuses of immunocompromised individuals. Dissemination is common in the lungs.

**Mucormycosis**

Six clinical variants of mucormycosis have been observed: rhinocerebral, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, cutaneous, disseminated, and uncommon site infections. Rhinocerebral is the most common form, which manifests clinically as nasal obstruction, nasal discharge, facial pain, and swelling. It may present as a fatal rhino-orbito-cerebral form or less fatal rhino-maxillary form.

In the oral cavity, the palate is commonly affected due to the involvement of sphenopalatine and greater palatine arteries, resulting in thrombosis of the turbinate and palatal necrosis. Initially, intra-oral swelling of the maxilla is evident, which may later present as a black, necrotic ulcer and palatal perforation.

**Histoplasmosis**

Three clinical forms of histoplasmosis exist, primary acute pulmonary, chronic pulmonary, and disseminated. Patients with acute histoplasmosis are usually asymptomatic but may present with pulmonary symptoms like nonproductive cough accompanied by fever and headache. The chronic form is common in immunocompromised individuals. Oral lesions are frequently associated with chronic disseminated histoplasmosis and typically present as painful ulcers with rolled margins and irregular surfaces.

**Blastomycosis**

Pulmonary infection can be asymptomatic or symptomatic with fever, malaise, hemoptysis, cough, chest pain, and dyspnea. Blastomycosis in the oral cavity manifest as intraoral pain, progressively growing verrucous or papular growth or ulcers with rolled borders. These lesions may develop in any area of the oral cavity.

Bone involvement may present as non-healing extraction sockets. Osteomyelitis results from the direct spread of infection from contiguous sites. These lesions may develop in any area of the oral cavity.

**Cryptococcosis**

Cryptococcosis infection is usually asymptomatic in immunocompetent individuals. Meningoencephalitis may present as headache, fever, and pulmonary cryptococcosis may present as productive cough, chest pain, weight loss, and fever. Oral cryptococcosis may present as a non-healing ulcer, draining sinuses, erythematous plaques, or granuloma.

**Paracoccidiomycosis**

The oral cavity may be the first site of manifestation and may present as mulberry-like ulcers with a granular appearance.

**Geotrichosis**

The clinical manifestation of oral geotrichosis is similar to oral candidiasis. It may present as pseudomembranous white plaques, hyperplastic lesions, or palatal ulcers.