Pediatric myasthenia gravis can present as neonatal myasthenia gravis (CMS, TNM) or during adolescence (JMG). The latter is an autoimmune disease that can have a variable presentation.

If a mother has a neonate with transient MG, her subsequent babies are at higher risk of developing transient MG. However, the duration and severity of MG in the mother are not predictive of the development of neonatal MG. So all deliveries should be conducted in a tertiary birth center.

Symptoms can be variable, ranging from mild ophthalmic symptoms, such as isolated fatigable ptosis, to myasthenic crises involving the respiratory muscles, requiring ventilator support. Making a formal diagnosis of the disease can be difficult, but when suspicion is raised for a fatigable deficit, appropriate diagnostic testing should be pursued. Treatments should be tailored to the subtype of disease and the severity of illness. Variable responses to medications and surgical interventions can be seen between patients.

Children with myasthenia gravis do not tolerate neuromuscular blocking drugs, such as succinylcholine and pancuronium, and maybe paralyzed for weeks after a single dose. An anesthesiologist should carefully review myasthenic patients who require a surgical anesthetic, and such anesthetics should be administered only by an experienced physician/anesthesiologist. Also, certain antibiotics can potentiate myasthenia and should be avoided; these include the aminoglycosides, beta-blocking agents, procainamide, chloroquine, and fluoroquinolones.

Children with the involvement of the extraocular musculature should be followed by a pediatric ophthalmologist to monitor for ophthalmic complications associated with JMG.