Echocardiography allows for direct visualization of the heart including the size of the chambers, the thickness of the ventricular walls, and any structural abnormalities. It also allows for an assessment of contractility and left ventricular ejection fraction. Transesophageal echocardiography has become the test of choice for detecting valvular vegetations and thrombi within the heart. Transesophageal echo also allows visualization of the left atrial appendage, which is often too difficult to visualize with standard transthoracic echocardiography. In the setting of renal dysfunction, transesophageal echo has become the modality of choice for evaluation of aortic dissection. Stress echocardiography is routinely used to evaluate cardiac function in the setting of exercise and can determine myocardial ischemia. For those able to exercise, echocardiography is performed during the use of a treadmill or bicycle. For those unable to exercise, pharmacologic stimulation is used to simulate exercise as an echocardiogram is performed. Wall motion abnormalities are used to signify areas of possible ischemia. Echocardiography is unique in that it can provide a great deal of clinical data and remain safe without any exposure to radiation.

Radionuclide imaging is most often used for evaluation in those patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease. Nuclear imaging allows for not only diagnosis but also for risk stratification and can be used for the assessment of myocardial viability before revascularization. Radioactive tracers mark areas where blood can reach the capillaries, a sign of myocardial perfusion. Areas with hypoperfusion are indicative of regions of myocardial ischemia. Nuclear imaging can also be used as a stress test with imaging before and after stress again precisely marking areas of decreased perfusion as areas of ischemia.

Cardiac CT allows for direct visualization of coronary vasculature in three dimensions without the need for an invasive procedure like coronary catheterization. CT also allows for calcium scoring which is the ability to detect the presence of coronary artery calcification; calcification has been associated with atherosclerosis and mortality. CT angiography has emerged as imaging study of choice for rapid assessment of cardiac vasculature especially in the setting of suspected aortic dissection given normal renal function.  Newer applications utilizing cardiac CT for perfusion and fractional flow reserve are on the horizon and are set to expand the diagnostic armamentarium of cardiac CT.

Cardiovascular MRI is mainly used to assess cardiac structure as well as function. The contrast between cardiac tissue and vasculature is better visualized leading to a sharper definition when compared to cardiac CT. CMR perfusion utilizing first pass gadolinium imaging is also employed to test for myocardial ischemia and has been compared with other imaging modalities. Late gadolinium enhancement CMR is used for the identification of infarcted myocardial tissue. This technique is routinely used along with perfusion CMR to assess whether a territory in question is ischemic or infarcted (scar). Additionally, phase contrast and myocardial tagging sequences utilizing CMR allow for valvular and flow assessment as well as myocardial performance assessment in patients. CMR has a wide range of diagnostic capability. However, it requires attention to detail especially in the proper acquisition sequences used, and analysis of these images is reserved to be performed in centers with clinical training and expertise in this imaging modality.

Coronary angiography via cardiac catheterization allows for the comprehensive evaluation of coronary anatomy and severity of cardiac disease. Not only does it allow for visualization but also allows for interventions to reperfuse the myocardium. Cardiac catheterization is the treatment of choice in emergency situations such as acute myocardial infarction and therefore remains the gold standard for assessment of coronary anatomy.  Intravascular ultrasound is an invasive technique utilized during cardiac catheterization that uses ultrasound to visualize the lumen and the wall of blood vessels. This can be especially useful in the assessment of plaques in the arteries that may be significant but are not causing major stenosis to blood flow. Another complementary technique used during cardiac catheterization is fractional flow reserve assessment. Fractional flow reserve determines the ratio between the achieved blood flow in a stenosed coronary artery and the expected maximum flow in a normal coronary artery.  By this measurement, a luminal stenosis which may be borderline (approximately 40% to 60%) can be functionally assessed to determine its clinical hemodynamic significance. Finally, transcatheter structural invasive procedures are now performed (for example, transcatheter aortic valve replacement or transcatheter mitral valve repair). These procedures are generally guided by noninvasive cardiac imaging both before the procedure for patient evaluation and selection (transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography, cardiac CT, cardiac MRI), during the procedure for direct guidance (transesophageal echocardiography), and after the procedure for survey of the procedure results and possible complications (echocardiography).