In every case of hyperchloremic acidosis, the primary treatment is aimed at identifying and treating the inciting event of pathology. If respiratory fatigue and failure occur, these patients will need to be intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation. Hyperventilation of the patient on ventilator control can help reduce the acid load. In gastrointestinal causes, it is essential to administer intravenous (IV) normal saline to maintain fluid load as patients will easily dehydrate from diarrhea or suctioning of the intestines. Additionally, electrolytes need to be monitored and replenished as applicable. Of specific importance is the potassium level. The acidosis is moderated by supplementing bicarbonate into the saline fluids until the underlying pathology is repaired. In proximal renal tubular acidosis, large quantities of bicarbonate, vitamin D, and potassium administration are required. The usual dose of bicarbonate is 5-15 mE/kg/day. In hypokalemic distal renal tubular acidosis long-term alkali administration to counterbalance bicarbonaturia and endogenous acid production. Potassium supplements are also needed. In hyperkalemic distal renal tubular acidosis, obstructive uropathy must be identified. If fluid overload is a concern, diuretics with supplemental potassium may be administered for some effect. If the acidosis is resistant to therapy, it may be necessary to utilize dialysis therapy.

As always, a variety of medications are known to induce hyperchloremic acidosis and should be avoided or used with caution. Gastrointestinal bicarbonate loss is known to occur with calcium chloride, magnesium sulfate, and cholestyramine use. Proximal renal tubular acidosis is associated with streptozotocin, lead, mercury, arginine, valproic acid, gentamicin, ifosfamide, and outdated tetracycline usage. Distal renal tubular acidosis is associated with amphotericin B, toluene, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and lithium use.