Sexual dysfunction in the United States has been reported in approximately fifty percent of women. Among the many causes of sexual dysfunction in women, hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD) is the most commonly identified cause. Hypoactive sexual desire disorder is defined by limited or absent sexual fantasy and desire which causes interpersonal strain or heightened distress and has been present for at least six months.

The diagnosis cannot be attributed to relationship issues, psychiatric or medical conditions, or effects of medication or drug use. Specific physiologic etiologies for HSDD are not precisely known; however, it is postulated that it is influenced by neurotransmitters and hormones.

Study participants had a mean age of 36, a mean relationship duration of 11 years, and a mean duration of HSDD of 5 years. Clinical trial results showed statistical significance with efficacy in endpoint measurements using the Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) and satisfying sexual events (SSE). The FSFI addressed two questions, (1) "Over the past four weeks, how often did you feel sexual desire or interest?" and (2)"Over the past four weeks, how would you rate your level of sexual desire or interest?". The SSE gathered patient responses for the question, "Indicate your most intense level of sexual desire." In both endpoint measurements, values were calculated with a scale from 1 to 5 (almost never or never to almost always or always) or 0-3 (no desire to strong desire), respectively. All three clinical trials had an additional endpoint of "How often did you feel: Bothered by low sexual desire?" which was measured on a scale of 0-4 (never to always) within a 7-day timeframe. Results of this endpoint were comparable to that of FSFI, suggesting improvement in sexual satisfaction with a mean change from baseline at week 24 of approximately 0.7 for FSFI and -0.7 for the additional endpoint.