**Underlying Duodenal Pathology**

- Peptic ulcer disease (PUD): H. pylori infection and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are two major causes for PUD and subsequently duodenal perforation.
- Smoking, physiological stress, previous history of PUD, and corticosteroids are other risk factors for a perforated peptic ulcer (PPU).
- Alcohol consumption is known to cause to increase gastrin secretion and damage gastric mucosa. However, studies did not show that alcohol can cause PUD.

- Duodenal diverticula

- Infectious disease (TB, rotavirus, norovirus, Ascaris lumbricoides)

- Autoimmune conditions, including scleroderma, Crohn disease, and abdominal polyarteritis nodosa.

- Duodenal ischemia

- Impacted gallstones in the duodenum

- Chemotherapy

- Tumors

**Iatrogenic:**Due to the widespread use of endoscopic procedures, it is becoming more common.

- Endoscopic perforations: It includes diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. However, the incidence of perforation is higher in therapeutic procedures.

- Operative injury: Surgical instruments can cause duodenal perforation. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy can perforate the duodenum (0.015%) during thermal burns by electrocautery or blunt or sharp dissection.

**Trauma:**Isolated duodenal injuries are uncommon and usually occur with other organ injuries.

**Foreign bodies:**Thin and sharp foreign bodies correlations with higher perforation risk.

**Spontaneous perforations:**It occurs in neonates with unknown underlying causes.