Recognition of septic shock should initiate prompt resuscitative efforts. Facility-based sepsis protocols are essential in guiding management.

Skin cellulitis and blisters should be cultured. Necrotic skin lesions should be debrided. Cutaneous abscesses should be drained. Topicals, such as silver sulfadiazine, should be used to cover infected skin. Underlying necrotizing fasciitis and myonecrosis demand prompt surgical debridement and fasciotomy. This is imperative to prevent limb necrosis and subsequent amputation. As always, adequate fluid resuscitation, an adequate airway, and vasopressors as necessary should precede any septic patient going to the operating room. Patients with necrotizing fasciitis who do not receive surgical debridement promptly have a very high mortality rate.

Correct antibiotic selection and administration should immediately follow cultures. However, delay in obtaining cultures should never hinder the prompt administration of antibiotics. Combination antibiotic therapy is recommended. However, multiple antibiotic resistance has been found in up to 50% of Vibrio infections.

In vitro susceptibility has shown that third-generation cephalosporins, tetracyclines, carbapenems, fluoroquinolones, sulfa-trimethoprim, piperacillin-tazobactam, and aminoglycosides are all effective against V. vulnificus. However, the CDC recommends combination therapy with intravenous ceftazidime with either a quinolone (ciprofloxacin) or a tetracycline (doxycycline). Intravenous ciprofloxacin, in combination with IV doxycycline or IV tigecycline, has also been used with success.  Of note, patients who were septic on arrival and given appropriate antibiotics within 24 hours of admission still had a mortality rate of approximately one-third. Mortality approaches 100% when the administration is delayed past 72 hours.

The management of primary, limited gastroenteritis should include fluid replacement, antipyretics, analgesics, and anti-emetics.  Fluids, urine output, electrolytes, as well as renal function should be closely monitored and used to direct replacement therapy.

Current research activity is seeking the development of a vaccine against V. vulnificus.