The laryngeal muscles divide into intrinsic muscles, the primary function of which is voice production, and extrinsic muscles that move the larynx. We shall proceed to examine the former before the latter.

**Intrinsic Muscles**

The cricothyroid muscle has two concave surfaces, the superior and inferior; it attaches to the cricoid arch and the lower lamina of the thyroid to the superior belly and the inferior cornu the inferior belly. These muscles produce elongation of the vocal folds, resulting in higher pitch phonation.

The posterior cricoarytenoid muscle attaches to the posterior cricoid cartilage to the arytenoid cartilages. These muscles abduct (open) the vocal cords, the opposite action to the lateral cricoarytenoids muscles.

The lateral or anterior cricoarytenoid muscles extend from the lateral cricoid cartilage to the muscular process of the arytenoid cartilage. These muscles adduct the vocal folds, the opposite action to the posterior cricoarytenoid muscles.

The thyroarytenoid muscles arise from the thyroid cartilage and the middle cricothyroid ligaments and insert into the arytenoid cartilages. These muscles relax and approximate the vocal folds.

The aryepiglottic muscles attach to the arytenoid cartilages and extend to the epiglottis. These muscles adduct the aryepiglottic folds.

The arytenoid muscles extend to the transverse and oblique portions between the arytenoid cartilages. The transverse arytenoid muscle is the only impaired intrinsic muscle of the larynx. These muscles adduct the vocal folds.

**Extrinsic Muscles**

The extrinsic larynx muscles are paired and allow the movement of the larynx.

The thyrohyoid muscle inserts on the thyroid cartilage and the body of the hyoid bone. The receives innervation from the first cervical nerve, along with the hypoglossal nerve. Its primary function is to depress the hyoid bone thus elevating the larynx.

The sternothyroid muscles are situated beneath sternohyoideus muscle; they arises from the sternum and first rib and goes to the lamina of the thyroid cartilage, and are innervated by the ansa cervicalis. These muscles depress the larynx.

The inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscles extend from the cricoid and thyroid cartilages to the pharyngeal raphe. These muscles are innervated by the vagus nerve via branches of the pharyngeal plexus and recurrent laryngeal nerve and narrow the pharynx diameter to contribute to swallowing.

The stylopharyngeus muscles stretch from the styloid process in the temporal bone to the thyroid cartilage. These muscles receive their nreve supply from the glossopharyngeal nerve, and their function is to elevate the larynx and the pharynx.

The palatopharyngeus muscles stem from the palatine aponeurosis and pterygoid processes and inserts into the thyroid cartilage. They are part of the soft palate, are innervated by the pharyngeal branch, and their action is to elevate the larynx and pharynx. blark

Other muscles that are not strictly considered laryngeal, as they do not insert in the larynx or any of its parts, may also contribute to the movement of the larynx such as the geniohyoid, mylohyoid, digastric, or stylohyoid muscles that elevate the larynx, while the omohyoid and sternohyoid muscles cause laryngeal depression.