# Continuing Education Activity

Labyrinthitis is an inflammation of the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear and typically presents with vertigo, nausea, vomiting, tinnitus, and/or hearing loss. It is normally caused by a bacterial or viral infection; however, it can be a manifestation of systemic autoimmune disease or human immunodeficiency virus in some cases. Although most patients achieve complete recovery, patients may be left with residual balance or hearing problems. Treatment is tailored to the etiology as well as symptom control. Although most patients will achieve complete recovery, patients may be left with residual balance or hearing problems. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of labyrinthitis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the different causes of labyrinthitis.
- Explain the common examination findings associated with labyrinthitis.
- Outline the treatment options for the different etiologies of labyrinthitis.
- Summarize the importance of communication and coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the care of patients with labyrinthitis.

# Introduction

Labyrinthitis is an inflammation of the membranous labyrinth of the inner ear and typically presents with vertigo, nausea, vomiting, tinnitus, and/or hearing loss.

**Anatomy**

The inner ear consists of two structures: the bony labyrinth and the membranous labyrinth. The bony labyrinth is a collection of bony cavities within the skull's temporal bone. It has three main parts, the vestibule, cochlea, and three semicircular canals.

All three of these structures contain a substance known as perilymph.

# Etiology

Labyrinthitis is an inflammation of the membranous labyrinth. It can be caused by viruses, bacteria, or systemic diseases.

**Viral Labyrinthitis**

The most common cause of labyrinthitis is secondary to a viral upper respiratory tract infection. Labyrinthitis secondary to maternal rubella or cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections is one of the most common causes of congenital deafness. In the post-natal period, mumps and measles are the leading causes of viral hearing loss.

**Bacterial Labyrinthitis**

Bacterial labyrinthitis typically arises from either bacterial meningitis (20% of children with bacterial meningitis will develop auditory or vestibular symptoms) or otitis media.

**Autoimmune Labyrinthitis**

Labyrinthitis has been demonstrated to be a rare complication of both polyarteritis nodosa and granulomatosis with polyangiitis.

**HIV/ Syphilis**

Both syphilis and HIV have been associated with labyrinthitis. However, there is limited research as to whether the inflammation is caused by opportunistic infections as a result of the HIV-related immunosuppression or the virus itself.

# Epidemiology

There is little research into the incidence and prevalence of labyrinthitis, however, in South Korea, the prevalence of vestibular dysfunction varied from 3.1% to 35.4%, and the incidence increased with age.

Suppurative bacterial labyrinthitis, as a complication of bacterial meningitis, is the commonest cause of deafness in children under age 2. Fortunately, this is exceedingly rare in the post-antibiotic era. Otogenic suppurative labyrinthitis can occur at any age and is typically found in cholesteatoma or secondary to untreated, longstanding otitis media.

# History and Physical

When taking a history from a patient with suspected labyrinthitis, it is important to screen for risk factors. These include recent viral infections (commonly upper respiratory tract infections), cholesteatoma or history of ear surgery, history of temporal bone or skull fracture, meningitis, and acute/chronic otitis media.

Nausea, vomiting, and severe ‘room spinning’ vertigo are the most common symptoms of labyrinthitis.

On examination, patients will often display nystagmus; the fast phase will move away from the affected ear. Patients may also present with gait and balance disturbances; therefore, both Romberg’s and tandem gait are critical components of the required comprehensive neurological examination (including cerebellar and meningeal tests). Rinne and Weber hearing tests will likely demonstrate sensorineural hearing loss in the affected ear, and formal audiological evaluation is required if the patient reports any hearing abnormalities. Otoscopy may give clues to the etiology of the disease, e.g., otitis media or cholesteatoma. Finally, if querying bacterial meningitis, thoroughly examine the patient for the classical non-blanching rash.

# Evaluation

Audiometry is useful to assess the extent of sensorineural hearing loss. Specific investigations into the vestibular system (e.g., evoked myogenic potentials, electronystagmography, and rotary chair tests) are not indicated in the acute phase of the disease. However, they can be useful in assessing long-term compensation and residual deficits.

The laboratory tests should be tailored to the patient's symptoms and differential diagnoses. If the patient presents with severe vomiting, then a urea and electrolytes panel should be performed to assess whether electrolyte replacement needs to be initiated. If bacterial meningitis is suspected, then cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures should be sent. Subsequently, consider HIV and syphilis serology in high-risk individuals or atypical presentations. Finally, consider autoimmune screens in patients with systemic symptoms or atypical presentations with negative serology.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) imaging may be useful in ruling out alternative pathology. 13% of acoustic neuromas present with sudden hearing loss, which can be diagnosed using an MRI. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (GdMRI) is extremely accurate in predicting if a patient with bacterial meningitis will subsequently develop hearing loss, a complication in 14% of cases.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment must be tailored to the etiology and symptoms. Viral labyrinthitis should principally be managed by hydration and bed rest in the outpatient setting. However, patients must be counseled to seek further medical help if their symptoms deteriorate or they experience any neurological disturbances (e.g., weakness/numbness, diplopia, slurred speech, and gait disturbance).

In bacterial labyrinthitis, antibiotic type and route depend on the source. Oral antibiotics are the first-line treatment for acute otitis media with an intact tympanic membrane; however, intravenous antibiotics may be necessary if the infection fails to respond. If bacterial meningitis is queried, then treat immediately with intravenous antibiotics while performing confirmatory imaging or CSF sampling.

The initial management of autoimmune labyrinthitis is corticosteroids. If patients are refractory to corticosteroid therapy, other immunomodulators may be considered, such as azathioprine, etanercept, or cyclophosphamide. These agents are often used in chronic conditions due to their reduced side effect profile compared to corticosteroids. However, this treatment should be overseen by a specialist.

While suffering from initial vertigo, patients will want to lie motionless with their eyes closed. They must attempt to mobilize as soon as possible (even if this exacerbates their vertigo), which is believed to help with vestibular compensation and prognosis.

Benzodiazepines and antihistamines can be used to treat initial vertigo. However, symptoms should not persist for longer than 72 hours. Therefore, only short courses of these medications should be prescribed as they can inhibit vestibular compensation. Antiemetics, such as prochlorperazine, should help control nausea and vomiting. Patients with sudden hearing loss should receive a course of corticosteroids and be referred to a specialist.

A small minority of patients may be left with residual tinnitus from sensorineural hearing loss. It is important to recognize the relationship between this and reactive depression and intervene early with treatments such as tinnitus re-training, tinnitus maskers, hearing aids, and/or biofeedback.

Surgical intervention is only required in a minority of cases, for example, mastoidectomy in patients with cholesteatoma or severe mastoiditis. Occasionally patients may require drainage of effusions or myringotomy in labyrinthitis secondary to otitis media.

Once the acute labyrinthitis has resolved, patients may be left with persistent vestibular symptoms, which can seriously impact their life.

# Differential Diagnosis

**Vestibular neuritis:**This has a similar presentation to labyrinthitis but without hearing loss.

**Meniere disease:**This also causes hearing loss and vertigo; however, the episodes are usually intermittent.

**Benign positional vertigo:**This causes dizziness but not hearing loss, and patients will have a positive Dix-Hallpike test.

**Posterior fossa CVA:**If a patient presents with any neurological signs, ataxia, hoarseness, dysarthria, or dysphagia, a CT/MRI head should be requested immediately to rule out a CVA.

**Acoustic neuromas/ vestibular schwannomas:**These can be visualized using a GdMRI.

**Inner ear malformations:**e.g. (missing crura of the stapes, atresia, abnormal incus): This typically presents with progressive hearing loss and can be diagnosed using CT or MRI imaging.

**Temporal bone fracture:**This should be considered if there is a recent history of head trauma and can be confirmed with CT imaging.

**Inner ear hemorrhage:**Commonly associated with trauma and easily demonstrated on MRI.

**Temporal bone neoplasm:**Usually presents with cranial nerve deficits or facial paralysis and should be investigated with MRI and/or CT.

**Multiple sclerosis:**This is more likely to present alongside other systemic symptoms such as spasticity or signs of optic neuritis.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Superoxide dismutase has been shown to limit the hearing loss and prevent labyrinthitis ossificans in gerbils with bacterial meningitis. Tnf-alpha inhibitors appear to reduce postmeningitic cochlear injury and hearing loss.

# Prognosis

The acute vertigo of labyrinthitis should resolve within a couple of days; however, milder symptoms may persist for several weeks. The prognosis is usually good if the patient has no serious neurological sequelae. However, neurological complications may require further interventions, and the prognosis becomes more guarded. For example, ventriculoperitoneal shunts may be required in patients with hydrocephalus secondary to bacterial meningitis.

# Complications

Bilateral vestibular hypofunction is a debilitating complication associated with bilateral labyrinthitis, most commonly caused by bacterial meningitis. It can result in visual impairment (oscillopsia) and impaired spatial awareness, often leaving patients reliant on mobility aids.

Complete deafness is a rare complication of bilateral labyrinthitis, usually caused by bacterial meningitis. Labyrinthitis ossificans is recognized as a complication of suppurative labyrinthitis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Labyrinthitis is often secondary to another infection, such as otitis media or meningitis. Therefore early diagnosis and effective management of these is important to prevent (or minimize the risk of) the development of labyrinthitis or at least minimize the risk of long-term complications. It is also key that populations are up to date with their vaccinations to reduce the risk of contracting measles, mumps, or rubella.

Patients with vertigo should be encouraged to attempt mobilizing as soon as possible, as this is believed to help with vestibular compensation and prognosis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The interprofessional team is crucial in delivering optimum care for a patient with labyrinthitis. Firstly, it is key that primary and secondary care clinicians are well aware of both the signs and symptoms of labyrinthitis and the other common/ serious differential diagnoses. This will ensure that the patient receives prompt and effective management and that potentially life-threatening conditions that can mimic labyrinthitis, such as cerebellar CVA, are not missed.

Both nurses and pharmacists are essential in the initial management of a patient with labyrinthitis and, therefore, must have a good understanding of the condition. For example, nursing staff must be aware that the patient could be at high risk of falls and may need assistance with transfers due to vertigo. They may also take much longer completing tasks and should not be rushed. Pharmacists should advise on the most appropriate medications to help treat the patient's symptoms, e.g., nausea and vertigo. For example, benzodiazepines and antihistamines to manage acute vertigo should only be prescribed short-term as they can hinder vestibular recovery. They should also be aware of medications that can cause symptoms that mimic those of labyrinthitis when taking a drug history, as this is a cause that is occasionally overlooked. Aby concerns regarding the patient's medication regimen, including adverse effects or interactions, should be communicated to the prescribing clinician for remediation. Nurses must likewise assist in monitoring the patient and liaise between various team members. This interprofessional approach will yield the best patient results with the fewest adverse events or outcomes. [Level 5]

Patients can be left with residual vestibular symptoms, which severely impact their quality of life. This is when input from both occupational and physiotherapists is essential. Occupational therapists can perform assessments of the home environment and implement changes to improve patient safety and maintain quality of life. While physiotherapists can offer vestibular rehabilitation. After 1 or 2 sessions of vestibular rehabilitation, symptoms can be significantly improved or may be eliminated.