- Position in the left lateral position; flex the hips and knees and position the buttocks at the edge of the examining table.

- Part the buttocks to expose the anal verge and natal cleft and inspect the skin and anal margin.

- Lubricate the examining index finger with a water-soluble gel and then press the examining finger against the posterior anal margin (6 o'clock).

- The finger should slip into the anal canal, and the fingertip is directed posteriorly following the sacral curve.

- Evaluate the anal tone by asking patients to squeeze the finger with their anal muscles.

- Move the finger through 180°, feeling the walls of the rectum.

- Rotate the finger to the 12 o'clock position, and palpate the anterior wall. Rotation facilitates further examination of the opposing walls of the rectum.

- In males, the prostate will be palpated anteriorly.

- In women, the cervix and a retroverted uterus may be felt with the tip of the finger.

- Feel the walls of the rectum throughout the 360°.

- Exam of the prostate gland (felt anteriorly):

- Normal size is 3.5 cm wide and it should protrude about 1 cm into the lumen of the rectum.

- The prostate is normally rubbery and firm, with a smooth surface and a palpable sulcus between the left and right lobes.

- It should not be tender and there should be no nodularity.

- Massage of the prostate may reveal prostatic fluid at the urethral meatus.

- On removal of the finger, check the tip of the glove for stool color and the presence of blood.