Assessing and caring for a trauma victim is a team effort and requires proper organization and effective communication. Poor patient outcomes can occur from missed diagnosis, communication errors, and lack of situational awareness. To avoid missing a diagnosis, there are several things to remember. Assume the worst-case scenario, listen carefully to EMS but remember that the information may be inaccurate, repeatedly reassess the patient, cooperate and be professional with other members of the trauma team, and never get stuck on your initial diagnosis. To avoid communication errors, it is crucial to have one team leader. The team leader is responsible for assigning roles and specific tasks. The team leader should continuously update the entire team of new findings and changes in the patient’s stability and change in the overall plan. Closed-loop communication should be used at all times. To maintain situational awareness, the team leader should encourage all members of the team to announce any concerns or abnormal findings. Proper patient monitoring and constant reevaluation of the patient will help maintain situational awareness.

**Summary**

The trauma assessment begins prior to the patient’s arrival with information gathering, the formation of the trauma team, and equipment preparation. On patient arrival, the team begins with the primary survey, which includes an assessment of the patient’s airway, breathing, circulation, disability, and exposure. Once the patient has been stabilized, and if they don’t require surgical intervention, the secondary survey begins. This involves a thorough history and physical exam to avoid missing an injury. Patient outcomes can be improved with efficient teamwork and effective communication. One team leader should lead the trauma assessment, and closed-loop communication should be used at all times.