The etiology of atopy is unknown. Twin and epidemiological studies, as well as family and animal experiments, provide striking evidence that the genetic factors play a crucial role in the propensity for atopy, regulating the total IgE synthesis, and in the production of IgE antibodies to specific epitopes. The inheritance of several genes influences the tendency to overproduce IgE, and this runs in families as shown clearly in the autosomal transmission of allergy, but the full inheritance pattern is believed to be multigenic.

A theory that explains the genesis of atopy suggests that it may arise through abnormal regulation by T helper cells and suppressor T lymphocytes that should help in the production of IgE by plasma cells.

Examples of chromosomal locations and genes associated with atopy are 5q associated with cytokine gene cluster (IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, CD14, beta-2-adrenergic receptor, and GM-CSF). IL-4 and IL-13 promote IgE switching, and IL-5 stimulates eosinophil growth and activation. Beta-2-adrenergic receptors regulate contraction of bronchial smooth muscles. The chromosome 6p houses MHC class II, and some of the alleles regulate T cell responses to environmental antigens or allergens. The chromosome 11q gene (high-affinity IgE receptor beta-subunit) that mediates mast cell activation. Chromosome 12q houses genes for stem cell factor (intervene in mast cell growth and differentiation), IFN-gamma (inhibits IL-4 synthesis) and STAT6 (mediates IL-4 signal transduction). Other genes associated with atopy are IL-4 receptor alpha chain, DPP10 (a protein that regulates chemokine and cytokine activity), ADAM33 metalloproteinase, which is involved in airway remodeling, and CD80/CD86 located in 3q and RANTES in 17q are genes thought to be involved in atopy. Finally, PHF11 in 13q encodes for a transcriptional regulator involved in the clonal expansion of B cells and immunoglobulin expression.

Nonspecific triggers of asthma include infections (viral respiratory infections), climatic factors (ozone, cold air, and SO2), physiologic factors (exercise, hyperventilation, psychological factors) and ingestants (aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).

There is a list of occupational allergens causing IgE-mediated allergic asthma that includes animal products (cows, pigs, mice, dogs, cats, and horses), insect dusts (mealworms, storage mites, cockroaches, bees, and flies), plant products (dust, flours, grain and cotton dusts), fruits, seeds, leaves and pollens (castor beans, tobacco and weeping fig), vegetable, dusts, gums and extracts (western red, California redwood, and exotic woods), microbial agents (fungal allergens, alginates, protozoa, bacteria, and fungi), enzymes (papain, hog trypsin, pancreatic extracts, subtilisin, and pineapple bromelain), therapeutic agents (penicillins, tetracycline, cephalosporins, sulfonamides, and spiramycin), sterilizing agents (chloramides), inorganic chemicals (metal fumes and salts, aluminum, cobalt, fluoride, nickel, platinum, vanadium, and zinc) and organic chemicals (amines, anhydrides, and azodicarbonamide).