Injury in MVC trauma is related to change in velocity and dissipation of energy. High vehicle speed, vehicle rollover, passenger ejection, and loss of consciousness with a low Glasgow coma scale (GCS) are predictive of more force transmission and, therefore, severe injury.

Seat belts are designed to transmit the energy to the clavicle, chest wall, and superior pelvis (anterior superior iliac spine [ASIS]). When a seatbelt rests on the neck or well above the ASIS, force is transmitted to the softer neck area and the more vulnerable abdominal viscera.

All injury patterns are explained by the transmission of physical force. The seat belt can act as a fulcrum, with a point of contact remaining fixed in the same location while the areas above and below continuing forward.

The "seat belt sign" was first described by Garrett and Braunstein in 1962 as an ecchymosis across the abdominal wall in the location of a lap belt. The "seat belt syndrome" referred to the musculoskeletal and visceral injuries associated with the force transmitted by the seat belt.

Skin abrasions and bruising occur on the surface, while common internal injuries are bowel and mesenteric injuries, along with fractures of the lumbar spine. Solid-organ injuries such as liver and spleen laceration can occur in these patients. Likewise, injuries to the pancreas, kidneys, and any other visceral organ can occur.

When the seat belt impacts the neck, the clinician may diagnose the cervical vascular injury, cervical spine fracture, or clavicle fracture.

Thoracic injuries due to seat belt force include sternal fracture, rib fracture, pulmonary contusion, and more rarely myocardial contusion.