The immune mechanism mediates the pathogenesis of drug-induced AIN. Drugs act as haptens that bind to the cytoplasmic or extracellular components of tubular cells during secretion and generate a host immune response. In some patients' serum, IgE levels are elevated, suggesting a type -1 hypersensitivity reaction. While in other cases, the latent period between drug exposure and development of a rash, eosinophilia, and presence of positive skin tests to drugs suggests a T-cell mediated type-IV hypersensitivity reaction.

The exact pathophysiology of infection associated with AIN is still unclear, though some mechanisms are proposed. Some microbial antigens can deposit in the interstitium (planted antigen) that can mimic a normally present antigen in the tubular basement membrane, inducing an immune response directed against this antigen. Additionally, direct cytopathic effects of the microorganism or the cytokine-mediated inflammation can explain the kidney damage.

As outlined above, anti-TBM antibodies are implicated in the pathogenesis of the anti-TBM disease. The anti-TBM antibodies are directed against the tubulointerstitial nephritis antigen, specifically in the kidney's proximal tubular basement membrane (TBM).

The pathogenesis of TINU is likely multifactorial. The ubiquitous findings of predominantly lymphocytic and monocytic interstitial infiltrate in the kidney biopsies and association with HLA specific subtypes support cellular immunity's role. More specifically, a delayed hypersensitivity type reaction mediated by the T-helper cell type TH1/TH17 axis is implicated in the pathogenesis of TINU syndrome.