Once metastasis is found within the lung, the next step is to discover whether they arise from the lung or a distant focus. Immunohistochemical stains play a pivotal role in the identification of metastatic focus origin.

The identification of metastasis to the lung uses immunohistochemical stains into different cell lineages. i.e., epithelial, mesenchymal, lymphoid, melanocytic.

In the case of epithelial-derived lesions, the expression of thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is a highly specific marker for primary lung adenocarcinomas. It requires inclusion in diagnosis between primary and metastatic adenocarcinomas of the lung. TTF-1 is a tissue-specific transcription factor that plays an important role in the early embryonic differentiation and morphogenesis of both lung and thyroid. In adults, it almost exclusively expresses in thyroid and pulmonary epithelial cells. It is highly specific in differentiating lung epithelial cancer (TTF-1 positive) pulmonary metastases of extra-thoracic origin. It bears mentioning that some adenocarcinoma markers may also express in a small minority of lung metastases of distant primary epithelial tumors such as breast, ovarian, and hepatocellular cancers.

To differentiate neuroendocrine lung tumors, INSM1 (Insulinoma-associated protein 1) is a  transcriptional factor. It is inactivated by the HES1 (Hairy and Enhanced of Split-1) transcription factor. It promotes the expression of three neuroendocrine molecules: chromogranin A (CHGA), synaptophysin (SYP), and neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) via activation of transcription factors. INSM1 is emerging as a novel, sensitive, and specific IHC marker that may serve as a first-line marker of neuroendocrine differentiation.