**Lynch Syndrome Management**

Individuals found to have a deleterious Lynch syndrome mutation are at increased cancer risk with the greatest risk of colorectal and endometrial cancers, followed by gastric and ovarian cancers. Fortunately, there are risk management guidelines for carriers of Lynch syndrome which are associated with a decrease in cancer-related deaths. Recommended surveillance for Lynch syndrome carriers is outlined as follows:

**Screening/Risk Reduction Guidelines forMLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2 and EPCAM mutation carriers**

**Colon**

- Colonoscopy beginning at age 20 to 25 repeating every one to two years; or two to five years before the earliest colorectal cancer if diagnosed before age 25 years.

**Colectomy**

- Can be performed if colon cancer is diagnosed or if an advanced adenoma is found that cannot be otherwise removed. Because surgical management is evolving, the option of segmental or extended segmental colectomy for patients with confirmed adenocarcinoma and/or adenomatous polyps is based on individual considerations and discussion of risk. Follow-up surveillance with lower endoscopic examination is suggested every one to two years postoperatively.

- Can be considered if surveillance measures cannot be followed.

**Endometrium (Uterus) and Ovaries in females**

- Pelvic exam, transvaginal ultrasound, endometrial aspiration and/or CA-125 can be considered on an individual basis. The efficacy of this regimen remains uncertain.****

- Any abnormal uterine/vaginal bleeding warrants immediate evaluation.

**Hysterectomy with Salpingo-Oophorectomy (Females)**

- Recommended when childbearing is complete

**Other Extracolonic Cancers (**MLH1, MSH2 and EPCAM mutation carriers only)**

** The risk for other Lynch syndrome-related malignancies is reported to be low in MSH6 and PMS2 carriers; due to limited data, the NCCN does not make recommendations for management for these other MSH6- and PMS2-related malignancies at this time. Recommendations can be made by treating physician(s).

- Upper endoscopy (esophagogastroduodenoscopy) with extended duodenoscopy every three to five years beginning at age 30 to 35 years can be considered in select individuals or families or those of Asian descent. Consider testing and treating for H. Pylori.

- Urinalysis, consider beginning annually between age 30 to 35. (The optimal age to begin screening for urinary tract cancers has not been determined, but the risk for developing such types of cancer before age 30 years is low).

- No additional surveillance for central nervous system/brain and pancreatic tumors beyond annual physical/neurologic examination, starting at age 25 to 30 is recommended at this time.

- Despite data indicating an increase in pancreatic cancer risk, no effective screening techniques have been identified; thus, no guidelines exist that this time.

- Of note, it remains unclear whether there is an increased risk of breast cancer in individuals with Lynch Syndrome; therefore breast cancer screening is currently based on personal and family history.

**Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs**(**NSAIDs)**

- The efficacy of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in individuals with Lynch syndrome is under investigation. There is data suggesting aspirin use may decrease the risk of colon cancer in Lynch syndrome, but the optimal dose and duration remains uncertain.

A diagnosis of 
Lynch syndrome
 in a patient can also be of significance for at-risk family members. Patients should be advised to discuss with family members regarding possible cancer risk and their opportunity for testing, screening, and surveillance. At-risk family members should be offered genetic counseling, and testing if desired
.