Clinicians should review the subtype of morphea, the depth of involvement, and disease activity, which play a significant role in treatment decisions. Early diagnosis and treatment are necessary to minimize damage such as cosmetic sequelae and joint contractures or limb deformities in patients with severe forms of morphea.

In patients with superficial circumscribed lesions, topical treatments are appropriate and offer an excellent therapeutic response. Topical corticosteroids are first-line treatment for superficial morphea, and the usual treatment is for 3-4 weeks. Topical tacrolimus 0.1% is an alternate choice for superficial circumscribed morphea.

For patients with more widespread lesions and deep morphea, the first-line treatment is phototherapy with ultraviolet A1 (UVA1). Lower wavelength phototherapy ultraviolet A (UVA) has greater tissue penetration than ultraviolet B (UVB) and has a low risk of sunburn. If UVA1 is not available, other options for phototherapy include broadband UVA, narrowband UVB, and PUVA (psoralen and long-wave ultraviolet A).

Patients who do not have access to UVA therapy can be treated with high potency topical corticosteroids, intralesional corticosteroids, or topical tacrolimus.

Rapidly progressive lesions require treatment with systemic therapy with corticosteroids or methotrexate. Oral or IV corticosteroids have shown to be effective in treating morphea, but symptoms relapse after discontinuation of treatment. For patients in this category, the combination of methotrexate and systemic corticosteroids is considered first-line treatment.

Surgical treatments like autologous fat grafting can be considered in patients with en coup de sabre.