Reversal of rocuronium-induced paralysis is possible with the use of two subgroups of drugs.

- Anticholinesterases - Drugs like neostigmine and rarely edrophonium and pyridostigmine have been the cornerstone of the reversal of neuromuscular blockade. Neostigmine is an anticholinesterase drug that prevents the metabolism of Ach in the synapse by blocking the action of cholinesterase, increasing the level of Ach in the synaptic cleft, and overcomes the neuromuscular blockade of non-depolarizing drugs like rocuronium. The typical dosing depends on the amount of neuromuscular blockade monitored by the TOF response to the peripheral nerve stimulator. If there are no twitches visible in response to TOF, the administration of neostigmine is not recommended. It is advisable to wait for the twitch response to occur before administering neostigmine. If there are less than two twitches present, 0.07 mg/kg of neostigmine is recommended along with an anticholinergic to prevent the cholinergic side effects like glycopyrrolate or atropine. If 3 or 4 twitches are present, 0.04 mg/kg of neostigmine is recommended with appropriate anticholinergic drugs.

- Sugammadex - A novel gamma-cyclodextrin molecule that works by encapsulating steroidal neuromuscular blockers like rocuronium and vecuronium has been extensively used in Europe before being approved recently in the US. Its novel mechanism of action produces a complete reversal of neuromuscular blockade by encapsulating rocuronium and preventing the interaction of rocuronium at the neuromuscular junction. Suggamedex additionally has some affinity in reversing Vecuronium and Pancuronium. Since it does not work by interacting with cholinesterase, it produces no cardiac side effects and can be safely used at any level of neuromuscular blockade. The dosing is based on the depth of neuromuscular blockade. If there are no twitches and the reversal is necessary after an intubating dose of rocuronium, then it is recommended to use a 16 mg/kg dose. If there are no twitches to TOF, but there are one to two post-tetanic responses, a 4 mg/kg dose should be used. If there are four twitches present to TOF, then a 2 mg/kg dose can be used. The Suggamadex-NMB complex is eliminated through 75% biliary clearance and 25% biliary clearance as well as excreted via the urine at 65 to 97%. Additionally, a female who takes hormonal contraceptives should be counseled on backup method contraceptives within seven days of its administration.