Treatment of osteoradionecrosis requires an interprofessional approach. Patients should be managed by surgery, infectious disease, radiology, and hyperbaric medicine specialists. None of these treatments can exist in a vacuum and if attempted separately, will likely not be successful. Patients should be staged and treated with surgical intervention and perioperative hyperbaric treatments as noted based on the stage of the osteoradionecrosis. All necrotic bone must be removed.

Osteoradionecrosis is the result of an avascular, aseptic necrosis. Much of the pioneering studies on hyperbaric oxygen for osteoradionecrosis were done by Robert Marx, DDS who developed a staging system and treatment protocols for osteoradionecrosis. Marx's scale classifies mandibular necrosis and is used to describe the severity of the osteoradionecrosis.

**Scale of Osteoradionecrosis**

Stage I: Patients with exposed bone that has been chronically present or which developed rapidly. Patients are treated with 30 hyperbaric treatments preoperatively followed by bony debridement. Postoperatively they are given an additional ten treatments.

Stage II: These are patients who do not respond favorably to 30 pre-operative treatments, or when a more major operative debridement is required. Surgery for stage II osteoradionecrosis patients must be focused on preserving the integrity of the mandible. If mandibular resection is anticipated, patients are advanced to Stage III.

Stage III: Along with patients who have progressed from stages I and II, patients with stage III osteoradionecrosis have serious and potentially grave prognostic findings such as pathologic fracture, percutaneous fistulae, and lytic lesions that extend to the inferior border of the mandible. For patients with stage III osteoradionecrosis, mandibular resection is planned as part of the surgical treatment. It is critical that all necrotic bone be debrided and removed in stage III patients. Stage III osteoradionecrosis patients receive 30 treatments preoperatively followed by ten hyperbaric oxygen treatments postoperatively.