Pediatric autopsy series reveals no incidental cases of cerebral aneurysms in 3000 pediatric autopsies.

**Demographics and Location**

Childhood aneurysms most often become symptomatic from birth to age 6 and then from 8 years to adolescence A peak in the first six months characterizes the early childhood group with the majority of cases occurring within the first two years of life. Early childhood cases have also had associations with a higher incidence of lesions localized along the middle cerebral artery and its distal branches and involving the vertebrobasilar system.

In adults, there is a 1.6 to 1 female predilection. The incidence is equal before age 40. In ages 70 to 87 years, there is a 4.16 to 1 female to male ratio. The ratio in childhood cases is believed to be 1.3 to 2.8:1 male to female ratio. The male to female ratio was 1.3 to 1 in our own series and 4 to 1 for our 13 cases under the age of 5. We found that 62% of giant aneurysms occurred in boys.

Carotid bifurcation aneurysms are found in 29 to 54% of all childhood cases, primarily in juvenile and adolescent cases, as compared to 4.4 to 4.5% of all aneurysms in adults. Carotid bifurcation aneurysms can also present in very young patients. The childhood data do not reflect the typical adult predilection for the anterior circulation (93%), anterior communicating artery (28%), and the posterior-communicating artery (25%).

Multiple aneurysms are not uncommon in the adult population and are observed in 10-20% of cases and are far less common in children occurring in only 4 to 5 percent of cases; this is likely the result of the relationship between the presence of hypertension and the formation of multiple intracranial aneurysms in adults. When multiple aneurysms are present in children, they usually associate with factors such as prior cranial irradiation, moyamoya disease, fibromuscular dysplasia, sickle cell disease, cardiac myxoma or arteriovenous malformations.