Cerebral ischemia can be global or focal. Global cerebral ischemia is a result of systemic processes, often shock. The most common cause of global brain ischemia is systemic hypotension. Transient cerebral hypoperfusion can occur when autonomic and neurohormonal mechanisms that control blood pressure and heart rate are disrupted, as in vasovagal syncope and postural tachycardia syndromes. Structural and functional heart problems, mostly arrhythmias, are the second most frequent cause of transient global brain ischemia. When the effect is transient, the condition often manifests as a presyncope or syncope. Prolonged global ischemia, on the other hand, can result in permanent neurological injury.

In contrast, focal brain ischemia most commonly arises from obstruction of arterial blood flow to the brain, often as a result of thrombosis or embolism. If the ischemia persists long enough, irreversible neuronal loss occurs, resulting in an ischemic stroke. Sudden thrombosis of a previously stenotic cerebral or internal carotid artery ruptured plaque will lead to ischemia in the region supplied by the artery affected. Embolization of a clot formed in the heart or a large artery is the most common source of brain ischemia, accounting for almost 60% to 70% of brain TIA and stroke cases. Emboli of other material, such as fat, air from an iatrogenic cause, or amniotic fluid during pregnancy, are possible but much less frequent.

There are various additional rare causes of ischemia. Dissection of cervical blood vessels can rarely cause brain ischemia and may be a cause of stroke in younger patients. Vasospasm is a relatively uncommon secondary cause of brain ischemia. This can be provoked by medication, or it can be secondary to trauma, inflammation, or recent subarachnoid hemorrhage. Rarely, an infection can lead to strokes. Notably, an increased incidence of stroke has occurred with COVID-19.

One simple method of classification of causes for brain ischemia and ischemic stroke is the TOAST criteria.