# Continuing Education Activity

Biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma (BSNS) is an emerging subtype of sinonasal malignancy. It has not been previously well-studied but has characteristic gene fusion products and associated phenotypic features unique to it. Although rare, it has the potential to become large and infiltrate into bone over a prolonged period, with nonspecific preceding symptoms. It was first described in 2012, and more studies are needed before definitive decisions can be made regarding adjuvant treatments in addition to surgery. This activity reviews the evaluation, management, and overarching principles of BSNS and highlights the role of the healthcare team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the typical presentation of biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma and its distinctions from other sinonasal malignancies.
- Outline the typical immunohistochemical findings for biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma.
- Summarize new developments in the identification of biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma via molecular testing methods.
- Explain the importance of distinguishing biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma from other malignancies in the differential diagnosis.

# Introduction

Sinonasal malignancies only constitute 1-5% of head and neck malignancies but have a wide differential diagnosis and relatively non-specific symptoms.

A lesser-known and recently classified entity is biphenotypic sinonasal carcinoma (BSNS), which will be reviewed in this article. BSNS was first described in 2012 as "low-grade sinonasal sarcoma with neural and myogenic features" and was first recognized in the 2017 4th edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Head and Neck Tumors.

Cervical nodal metastasis is rarely demonstrated in any sinonasal malignancy and has not yet been demonstrated in patients with BSNS.

Unlike squamous cell carcinoma, with an anticipated 5-year survival of only 25 to 50%, there have been no patients with BSNS who developed metastases, and only one death has been recorded in the literature.

# Etiology

There are no specific risk factors for the development of BSNS. Broadly, hazardous industrial chemicals used in textiles, furniture, and leather processing and production are risk factors for all tumors of the paranasal sinuses.

At the genetic level, fluorescence-in-situ hybridization (FISH) is remarkable for a characteristic PAX3-MAML fusion protein that leads to the development of BSNS pathology.

# Epidemiology

Multiple studies have demonstrated a female preponderance to BSNS, with a ratio of 1.8:1 up to 2.27:1 in females versus males.

# Pathophysiology

PAX3 is a gene involved in developing skeletal muscle, the central nervous system, and neural crest cells. In BSNS, fusion proteins due to the interaction of PAX3 with MAML drive amplification of neuroepithelial expression.

# Histopathology

Histopathologic examination of BSNS demonstrates hypercellular, uniform, long spindle-shaped cells in a fascicular pattern occasionally described as a "herringbone" configuration.

The cytoplasm of involved cells is scant and pale, and the tumor itself appears unencapsulated.

Infiltrative tumors will be embedded in a bony matrix.

Genetic features displayed by BSNS involve chromosomal translation t(2,4) and a fusion protein formed by the interaction of the PAX3-MAML genes.

# History and Physical

The most common presenting symptoms are progressive nasal obstruction, intermittent nasal congestion, anosmia, facial swelling and pain, epistaxis, anosmia, periorbital numbness, intermittent blurry vision, and rhinorrhea.

In some patients, the presentation can be confused with sinusitis, as patients present with secondary mucopurulent sinonasal drainage.

# Evaluation

Both computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are used in assessing sinonasal tumors to detect their presence, size, and invasiveness. In patients with BSNS, CT generally demonstrates a sinonasal mass with areas of hyperostosis, erosion of adjacent bony structures, and often post-obstructive sinus opacification.

On MRI, the tumor is isointense on T1 and T2, appearing similar to gray matter on T2. BSNS enhances heterogeneously with contrast.

Positron emission tomography (PET) scans may be ordered to determine the presence of metastases; however, the utility is limited in BSNS as these tumors display none-to-low PET avidity, and they rarely, if ever, metastasize either locally or distantly.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment, as discussed further below, is primarily surgical. The utility of radiation therapy is unclear. Chemotherapy does not seem to add any therapeutic benefit.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for BSNS includes other uncommon sinonasal tumors, and it has been incorrectly diagnosed previously due to paucity of knowledge and resultant gaps in histopathological study.

Sinonasal tumors with similar presenting features include solitary fibrous tumor (SFT), fibromatosis, myofibrosarcoma, schwannoma, leiomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma (SS), malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with or without rhabdomyoblastic features (Triton tumor), glomangiopericytoma, and inverted papilloma.

Although difficult to separate visually due to overlapping presentation, the histopathological analysis provides a definitive ability to classify rare sinonasal tumors. In preparation for these comparisons between BSNS and other tumors in the differential diagnosis, recall briefly the features of BSNS - hypercellular, spindle-shaped, patchy or diffuse S100 and SMA staining, lack of SOX10 staining, PAX3-MAML fusion, and rare mitoses or necrosis.

- Solitary fibrous tumors, unlike BSNS, express cytokeratin.

- Fibrosarcomas are less cellular and not S-100 positive.

- Schwannomas and nerve tumors stain positive for SOX1.

- Leiomyosarcoma does not demonstrate S-100 positivity, and features include perinuclear halos around cigar-shaped nuclei.

- Synovial sarcoma can mimic BSNS due to the presence of pseudoglandular structures.

- Fibromatosis, specifically neurofibromatosis type 1, is strongly associated with Triton tumor. While Triton tumor has features of rhabdomyosarcoma in addition to neural features, it is seen in patients slightly younger than those with BSNS.

- Glomangiopericytoma is more epithelioid, does not stain positive for S100, and has a short instead of long fascicular pattern with round or ovoid nuclei.

- The invaginated respiratory epithelial component of BSNS is also seen in inverted papilloma, but inverted papilloma has a significantly more prominent glandular pattern and no spindle cell proliferation.

None of the listed etiologies in the differential demonstrate PAX3-MAML fusion on fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH), which is diagnostic for BSNS.

Synovial sarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and low-grade malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are most often misdiagnosed in place of BSNS.

# Surgical Oncology

Surgical resection is the primary therapy for BSNS. However, the operative surgeon may need to leave positive margins of the tumor to limit the violation of critical structures like the orbit or skull base.

Both endoscopic and open-surgical approaches have been described, and the most appropriate approach depends on the location and extent of the tumor and the surgeon's preference. Open approaches include bifrontal craniotomy and lateral rhinotomy.

If present, resulting skull base defects may be repaired with autologous tissue, such as a pedicled pericranial flap or synthetic dural repair grafts.

# Radiation Oncology

There is no guidance regarding neoadjuvant, adjuvant, or salvage radiation dosing or technique for BSNS. Treatment plans have been very case-specific, and radiation has thus far been utilized as adjuvant therapy, both prophylactically and for positive surgical margins.

Due to the few cases reported in the literature and the lack of BSNS-specific photon radiotherapy or proton beam therapy (PBT) studies, no specific recommendations can be made regarding adjuvant photon radiation or proton beam therapy. However, based on broad studies of all sinonasal tumors, adjuvant radiation (photon or proton beam) may be considered in patients with advanced T-stage, bony or neural invasion, dural or intracranial involvement, positive margins, or tumors that cannot be completely resected due to high surgical morbidity.

# Medical Oncology

Chemotherapy has been used in treating 12% of patients with BSNS, although there is no guiding evidence for its use.

# Staging

Before establishing the AJCC staging system, Ohngren attempted to classify infrastructure versus suprastructure tumors based on a theoretical line drawn between the angle of the mandible to the medial canthus. By separating the superomedial/superolateral and inferomedial/inferolateral sites of the paranasal sinuses, he theorized that those with suprastructure involvement of the eye, skull base, pterygoid musculature/bone, and infratemporal fossae had a poorer prognosis.

The 8th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Cancer Staging Manual describes primary tumor staging for sinonasal tumors of the maxillary sinus and nasal cavity/ethmoid sinus only since the involvement of the frontal and/or sphenoid sinuses automatically qualifies the tumor as being T4a.

Only staging for the nasal cavity and ethmoid subsites will be reviewed since BSNS has not been reported in the maxillary sinus. A T1 tumor involves only the nasal cavity or an isolated ethmoid sinus and may or may not invade bone.

Tumors within the T4 category are divided into T4a and T4b. T4a involves anterior orbital contents, the skin of the nose and/or cheek, and to a minimal extent, the anterior cranial fossa, pterygoids, frontal sinuses, or sphenoid sinuses. T4b indicates that the tumor has extended into the cranial vault, involving the orbital apex, cranial nerves, nasopharynx, dura, brain, middle cranial fossa, and/or the clivus.

Nodal staging guides overall staging. Metastasis to a single node on the same side as the tumor, as long as it measures less than 3 cm, is staged as N1.

An overall stage is assigned based on the tumor, nodal, and metastasis (TNM) staging. A T1N0M0 tumor is stage 1, and T2N0M0 is stage 2. Stage 3 includes both T3N0M0 tumors and T1/2/3 tumors with N1 nodal staging.

Stage 4B tumors are any T stage with N3 nodal status and T4b tumors with any nodal status N0/1/2/3, without metastasis. If the patient has a distant metastasis, they are staged as M1 with an overall stage of 4C, regardless of the T or N staging.

# Prognosis

Based on the limited studies into the behavior of BSNS, the prognosis is unclear. However, the 5-year survival is much likely higher than the reported 25-50% 5-year survival for SCC in the paranasal sinuses.

The recurrence-free range was one year to 9 years.

# Complications

There are few reported direct complications of BSNS due to its slow growth pattern. The most commonly reported surgical morbidity is recurrence.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Postoperative care after endoscopic surgery for BSNS is similar to standard postoperative care for other endoscopic sinonasal and skull base procedures, including sinus precautions and endoscopic debridements. Appropriate rehabilitation services should be provided pending the degree of disability in the postoperative period and if the patient had complications from radiation therapy.

# Consultations

If the tumor displays orbital or intracranial invasion, ophthalmology and neurosurgery should be consulted, respectively. If there is an extensive disease or positive margins, radiation oncology should be consulted for further adjuvant treatment planning. As with any other malignancy, all new BSNS cases should be presented at a multidisciplinary tumor board.

# Pearls and Other Issues

There is ongoing research on BSNS and the gene rearrangements that cause BSNS that could further elucidate the behavior of this particular pathology.

The tumor is often mistaken for other pathologies. Therefore, its genetic composition and staging should be closely examined to provide an accurate prognosis and treatment plan for the patient.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Although surgery is the primary treatment modality of choice, optimal treatment of any sinonasal malignancy, BSNS included, involves collaboration with other services and members of an interprofessional healthcare team. It is important to review imaging for these tumors with a radiologist, specifically a neuroradiologist if available, to help determine tumor extent and possible involvement of adjacent structures.

If the tumor is extensive at the time of presentation, which it often is, consultations for ophthalmology and neurosurgery should be considered to help in surgical planning. Furthermore, just as with any other malignancy, all new BSNS cases should be formally discussed at a multi-disciplinary tumor board meeting. Post-operatively, the patient may require an intensive care unit stay for frequent neurologic monitoring. In any post-operative admission, communication between the hospitalist medicine team, nursing staff, and floor technicians is vital for excellent patient care.