The first-line therapy for distal clavicular osteolysis remains conservative with activity modification/avoidance, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication use, and physical therapy.

Modification of bench press motion modification is widely recommended. Narrowing barbell hand placement to less than 1.5 times the bi-acromial width and controlling the descent phase of the bench press to end 4-6cm over the anterior chest, often aided by towel or spacer use, can help decrease the stress placed on the distal clavicle.

An essential adjunct to conservative management is corticosteroid injection. Intra-articular AC joint injection may be beneficial therapeutically and diagnostically. It can help correctly identify the primary pain generator by decreasing pain and improving function. If pain is not improved after injection, other targeted injections can evaluate for alternate shoulder pathology.

An emerging option for treating intractable DCO-associated pain is botulinum toxin injection. A case study showed benefit to one patient with severe, intractable DCO-associated pain, citing the antinociceptive properties of botulinum toxin injection, specifically in osteoarthritis, as evidence of the mechanism of action.

There is no current literature demonstrating the efficacy of orthobiologic injectables, such as platelet-rich plasma, bone marrow aspirate concentrate, or adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Surgical management can be highly effective for those who fail nonoperative management or athletes unable to modify specific athletic tasks and activities. The mainstay of surgical intervention is resectioning the distal clavicle with no more than 8 mm of excision to avoid iatrogenic AC joint instability. This is performed through an open or arthroscopic technique.

The open procedure offers the surgeon direct visualization and the ability to adjust the resection margin with a broader frame of reference. Additionally, many patients have a large superior osteophyte, which is more easily resected through an open approach. Recovery time for the open approach ranges from 5 to 12 weeks. The argument against the open technique is that it disrupts the deltotrapezial fascia superiorly.

The two arthroscopic approaches are direct and indirect. Advantages of these techniques are less tissue dissection and potentially an earlier return to sport and recovery.

The indirect method requires three portals (anterior, posterior, and lateral), utilizing the subacromial space to visualize the inferior AC joint capsule. Both procedures involve a cutting burr to remove no more than 8 mm of the distal end of the clavicle to preserve the anterior and posterior AC ligaments.

In a study directly comparing the two approaches, out of 34 patients included in the final analysis, all reported excellent outcomes and returned to sport except for one treatment failure. However, the study noted that the direct approach had a faster return to sport time with a mean of 21 days compared to a 42-day average for the indirect approach. Additionally, functional performance measures were higher in the direct approach group at all postoperative assessments.