**The main variables**to consider in managing a PCL injury is whether it is an acute or chronic injury, isolated or combined injury. Historically, nonoperative management was the first line of treatment for isolated PCL injuries regardless of how severe the injury is. This was partially due to the unreliable results of PCL reconstruction in restoring knee function and kinematics with residual laxity being commonly reported postoperatively. With advances in arthroscopy techniques, PCL reconstruction is becoming a more reliable procedure, although there is a lack of long term outcomes

**Non-operative treatments**are indicated for:

- Acutely isolated grade I and II injuries with posterior tibial translation between 8 mm and 12 mm.

- Those with grade III who are mildly symptomatic or participate in low demand activities

PCL has an intrinsic ability to heal. This usually accomplished in a lax position

**Operative treatment**is indicated for:

- Acute PCL injuries with tibial translation > 12 mm, associated repairable meniscal tears, knee dislocation or bony avulsions, and combined capsuloligamentous injuries.

- Chronic PCL injuries with posterior tibial translation > 8 mm

**Operative techniques for PCL reconstruction:**

- Most are performed arthroscopically including ORIF for bony avulsion.

- Single bundle vs double bundle techniques.

- Autograft e.g Bone-patellar tendon-bone or hamstrings vs allograft e.g Achilles, hamstring, bone-patellar tendon-bone, and anterior tibialis. Clinically there is no difference in failure rate between the two graft types. But, with autograft, there is an increase in surgical time and donor site complications

- Tibial inlay vs Transtibial techniques.

**The single-bundle technique (isometric point or anatomical):**This is the classic PCL reconstruction technique. The anatomical technique relies on radiographic and arthroscopic references and is more preferred versus the isometric point technique which tends to result in laxity in the postoperative period as time passes due to over constraint of the joint.

**The double-bundle reconstruction technique:**

Theoretically, this should restore the normal knee kinematics in comparison with single-bundle reconstruction which restores kinematics only between the first 0° to 60° of flexion

**There are two main types of graft fixation; the transtibial tunnel versus the tibial-inlay techniques.**

- The transtibial tunnel technique simulates the origins of the anterolateral bundle both on the femur and tibia. This technique has the biomechanical disadvantage of what is known as the "killer turn" which is the sharp angle on the exit of the tibial tunnel which can result in attenuation with subsequent failure of the graft

- The tibial-inlay techniques used for ORIF of bony avulsions and to secure bone-to-bone tibial attachment with an anchor or screw. Its disadvantage is having a screw fixation within 20 mm of the popliteal artery. The technique can be performed by a posteromedial approach between semitendinosus and medial gastrocnemius, but multiple all-arthroscopic techniques have been described

**High Tibial Osteotomy (HTO):**It is indicated in the setting of chronic PCL deficient knees and varus malalignment.it affects the mechanical weight-bearing axis of the knee by altering both the coronal and sagittal planes