The general approach to treatment should focus on treating potential etiologic causes and controlling HIV. In patients with suspected HIV-associated progressive polyradiculopathy, empirical therapy for CMV must be considered.

In HIV patients with CMV-PP, intravenous ganciclovir administration for 2 to 3 weeks is the first-line treatment for severe disease, while oral valganciclovir could be given for mild disease. Maintainance therapy with oral valganciclovir is advised for six months or until the CD4 count is increased above 0.1 x 10^9/L.

With prompt therapy, the progression of neurological symptoms is controlled within two weeks, and virological tests become negative in three weeks course, but residual neurological deficits are still commonly seen after treatment completion. The antivirals prevent further replication of the virus; however, they do not cure the latent infection; thus, relapses are frequently seen. Hence, many studies suggest an indefinite course of ganciclovir in these patients.

For other infectious causes, a relevant antibiotic course should be given, accompanied by corticosteroids if necessary, to prevent the worsening of symptoms.

In the case of neoplastic or paraneoplastic etiology, remission is seen with chemo/radiotherapy.

In radiculopathy patients, supportive measures are advised to relieve pain, improve function, and better cope with the disease physically and psychologically. Some interventions like epidural corticosteroid injections and percutaneous spinal decompression are performed.