Although usually not associated with symptoms, acute HCV infection may cause malaise, nausea, and right upper quadrant pain, followed by dark urine and jaundice. This is clinically indistinguishable from any other acute viral hepatitis. Persistently infected individuals tend to be asymptomatic for the most part. Symptoms are nonspecific and include fatigue or malaise, intermittent right upper quadrant pain, and joint pain as well as a general feeling of being unwell with overall reduced quality of life. It is challenging to relate these symptoms to HCV alone, as there could be a potential psychological basis due to the knowledge of having an underlying chronic disease.

Ten percent to 20% of HCV-infected persons with cirrhosis will decompensate clinically within five years, as evidenced by the development of portal hypertension, esophageal varices, ascites, coagulopathy, encephalopathy, or hepatocellular carcinoma. At this stage, they could have physical signs indicating stigmata of chronic liver disease with caput-medusae, spider angiomas, palmar erythema, asterixis, anasarca, and fluid thrill. Moreover, they may have signs and symptoms of other extrahepatic manifestations like mixed cryoglobulinemia, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, porphyria cutanea tarda, lichen planus, neurocognitive changes, insulin resistance, and B cell lymphoproliferative disorders.

The physical exam may reveal signs of end-stage liver disease, which include:

- Temporal muscle wasting, cyanosis, icterus, enlarged parotid gland

- Palmar erythema, asterixis, clubbing, Dupuytren contracture

- Gynecomastia, small testes

- Fetor hepaticus

- Ankle edema, spider nevi, petechiae, scant body hair

- Caput medusae, paraumbilical hernia, hepatosplenomegaly