**Preoperative Prognostic Factors**

Different OCT indices have revolutionized the assessment of the prognostic factors in macular holes (MHs).

**Good Preoperative Prognostic Factors**

- An idiopathic macular hole has a better prognosis than a traumatic macular hole which has not undergone spontaneous resolution and myopic MH.

- Less duration of symptoms

- Good preoperative vision

- Stage of the MH ( earlier the stage, better the prognosis)

- Size of MH (smaller the size, better the prognosis)

- OCT indices: Few OCT indices are calculated preoperatively to grade the prognosis.

**Hole Forming Factor (HFF)**

It is the ratio of the right and left arm length (measured to the minimum diameter of the hole from the base) to the base diameter of the MH. HFF greater than 0.9 carries a good prognosis, and less than 0.5 carries a poor prognosis for anatomical closure.

**Macular Hole Index (MHI**)

It indicates the ratio of MH height to MH base diameter. MHI greater than 0.5 carries a better prognosis.

**Diameter Hole Index (DHI)**

It is the ratio of the minimum diameter of the hole to the diameter of the hole base. It signifies tangential traction. DHI less than 0.5 carries a good prognosis.

**Tractional Hole Index (THI)**

It indicates the ratio of maximum MH height to the minimum diameter of MH. It signifies vertical traction or retinal hydration.

Cystic changes in retinal layers and subretinal fluid carry a good prognosis.

**Good Intraoperative Prognostic Factors**

- Micro-incision vitrectomy surgery (MIVS)

- ILM staining with BBG, rather than with ICG

- Intraoperative tamponade agents: C3F8 is better than SF6, though this is controversial

**Good Postoperative Prognostic Factors**

- Head positioning: Facedown positioning in larger (greater than 400 micrometers) macular holes is effective to close the hole

- Type of closure: Type 1, i.e., without foveal neurosensory retinal (NSR) defect, carries a good prognosis, while type 2, i.e., with foveal NSR defect, carries a bad prognosis.