Individual racism is a personal belief in the superiority of one’s race over another. It may result in discriminatory behavior, which is a reflection of both implicit and explicit bias. Historically, racist beliefs regarding biological differences between Blacks and Whites were used to justify slavery and medical experimentation on men and women of color. Unfortunately, the legacy of this false belief in fundamental and innate biological differences between Blacks and Whites is still present in medical practice, leading to health disparities such as the undertreatment of pain in Black patients. A research study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America demonstrates the connection between false beliefs about biological differences between Blacks and Whites and racial bias in pain assessment and treatment recommendations.

Structural racism is rooted in societal, historical, and cultural norms that support racial group inequality.  As an institution, medicine has adopted and implemented practices and policies that promote structural racism. Race-adjusted algorithms are based on the historic racist belief that Blacks are physiologically different.  For instance, “race corrected” estimated glomerular filtration rate measurements are based on the unscientifically supported belief that Blacks are more muscular and have higher creatinine levels. Consequently, this may result in a higher reported estimated glomerular filtration rate, which is interpreted as the better renal function for anyone identified as Black.

At a systems level, the failure to identify the health implications of racism and access to care may result in developing a structurally racist system that promotes health disparities. For example, an algorithmic bias was identified in a medical artificial intelligence program that took into account past healthcare costs when predicting clinical risk.