Treatment of HF starts with the prevention of overt HF by controlling the risk factors. Hypertension is a significant risk factor, and the cause of HF and intensive blood pressure control (systolic BP under 120 mmHg) was more beneficial for the prevention of cardiovascular diseases than standard treatment (systolic BP goal of less than 140 mmHg) in the SPRINT trial.

Treatment of HF is indicated in all patients with LV dysfunction (diastolic or systolic) regardless of symptoms. The goal of treatment is to improve survival and symptoms, reduce the length of stay and HF readmission, decrease morbidity, prevent organ damage from HF, and prevent symptoms in asymptomatic LV dysfunction. Treatment of HF can fall into non-pharmacological therapy, pharmacological therapy, devices and non-surgical interventions, and invasive strategies.

**Nonpharmacological therapy**

Non-pharmacological therapy is indicated for all types of HF regardless of EF. It is consistent with behavioral and lifestyle modifications, including dietary and nutritional consultation (sodium restriction to 2 to 3 g/day, fluid restriction to 2 L/day if there is hyponatremia, and caloric supplementations if cardiac cachexia), strict adherence to therapy and diet, daily weight and diuretic dosing adjustment for sudden weight changes, patient education to facilitate self-care/close observation/follow up, aerobic exercise training (can reverse LV remodeling in stable patients), controlling of HBP, DM and lipid disorders, and smoking/alcohol/illicit drug use cessation.

**Pharmacologic therapy for HFrEF**

Initial pharmacologic therapy includes a combination of diuretics (as needed for volume overload to improve symptoms, but they do not improve survival and routine use of loop diuretics without volume overload signs or symptoms may even increase mortality

**1- ACEi or ARBs (class IA)**are the first-line therapies, and the dose should titrate up to the maximum tolerated evidence-based doses. ACEis inhibit the activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and therefore prevent the formation of angiotensin II from angiotensin I, and that causes natriuresis, diuresis, and a reduction in arterial blood pressure and, thereby, afterload. ACEIs have been in use for many years, and multiple clinical trials have shown survival benefits and decreased hospitalization in chronic symptomatic HFrEF, as in the Cooperative North Scandinavian Enalapril Survival Study (CONSENSUS) and the Studies of Left Ventricular Dysfunction (SOLVD).

Angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI) sacubitril/valsartan was approved by FAD in 2015 for HFrEF treatment after the Prospective Comparison of ARNI with ACE-I to Determine Impact on Global Mortality and Morbidity in Heart Failure (PARADIGM-HF) trial in 2014 that found a markedly decreased cardiovascular and all-cause mortality in patients with HFrEF in the sacubitril/valsartan group compared to enalapril.

**2- Beta Blockers (Class IB)**: one of the pathophysiologies of HFrEF is ongoing sympathetic activation that adversely affects the cardiac myocytes and contractility, so blocking this pathway with beta-blockers reverses this mechanism and helps improve HFrEF. Beta-Blockers improve survival, reduce HF hospitalizations, and increase LVEF in chronic HFrEF.

**3- Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists (MRAs)**: the class IA indication for MRAs as per the 2013 ACCF/AHA guidelines is in patients with NYHA class II-IV who have EF of 35% or less, serum creatinine less than 2 .5 mg/dL, or an estimated glomerular filtration rate over 30 mL/min/1.73 m, and stable serum potassium less than 5.0 mEq/L at the initiation of therapy. MRAs also decrease mortality and hospitalization in chronic HFrEF (NYHA class II-IV). However, a meta-analysis of 1575 patients enrolled in 14 studies reported an improvement in LVEF of 3.2% and a significant improvement in NYHA class among subjects treated with aldosterone antagonists (p<0.001) regardless of baseline LVEF or NYHA class.

**4- Nitrates Plus Hydralazine**: they both decrease afterload, and nitrates also reduce the preload. According to the 2013 ACCF/AHA guidelines, it is a Class IA indication that decreases mortality and morbidity in HFrEF among African Americans, with NYHA class III-IV HF receiving optimal medical therapy (OMT) with ACEi and beta-blockers.

**5- Digoxin**: it can decrease hospitalization of HFrEF (class IIA, level of evidence B), but it does not improve survival. Some evidence suggests that digoxin increases mortality in women but not in men; its use requires caution in women with symptomatic heart failure.

**6-****Aspirin and statin**for ischemic HF.

**7- Ivabradine**was approved by FAD in 2015 to reduce the risk of HF hospitalization. It is indicated in stable, symptomatic patients with chronic HFrEF with EF under 35%, who are in sinus rhythm and demonstrate a resting heart rate exceeding 70 bpm on the maximum tolerated dose of beta-blocker or have contraindications for beta-blockers.

**8- Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor**: in patients with HFrEF who still have symptoms and elevated BNP levels on optimal medical therapy (OMT) and device therapy, the recommendation is to add dapagliflozin (versus no additional drug therapy) (grade 1 B) even in patients without DM as shown by the DAPA-HF Trial.

**9-****Continuous intravenous inotrope**(dobutamine or milrinone) is reasonable as bridge therapy for cardiac transplantation or Ventricular Assist Devices (VADs) in patients with stage D HF refractory to Guideline Directed Medical Therapy (GDMT) (class IIa, LOE:B) or as a palliative care as per the 2013 ACCF/AHA guidelines.

- 
**Medications to avoid in HF**

According to the ESC guidelines, some treatments can be harmful in patients with HF and should be avoided

1- Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), COX-2 inhibitors: can worsen HF, increase hospitalization, worsen kidney functions, and cause more sodium and water retention.

2- Calcium Channel Blockers (CCB), excluding amlodipine and felodipine:

3- Thiazolidinediones (TZDs): can cause fluid extension and exacerbate an existing HF and increase the risk of HF in patients without HF. The benefit/risk profile of TZDsmerit consideration when treating DM in patients with or without prior HF.

4- Adding an ARB to an ACEi and an MRA possibly will worsen kidney function and increase the risk of hyperkalemia.

5- Dronedarone should not be an option in patients with NYHA class III-IV HFrEF as per ANDROMEDA (antiarrhythmic trial with dronedarone in moderate to severe CHF evaluating morbidity decrease study). Dronedarone also demonstrated worse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with HFpEF.

Other medications that should be avoided or at least used with caution in patients with HF are metformin (increase the risk of potentially lethal lactic acidosis), phosphodiesterase inhibitor (PDE-3 inhibitors increased mortality, PDE-5 inhibitors are harmful in patients with HF who have borderline low BP and/or low volume status), antiarrhythmic agents (especially class I and III) due to negative inotrope activity (amiodarone is the preferred drug for the treatment of arrhythmias in patients with HF.

- 
**Devices and non-surgical interventions**

These include implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) and cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT). Before proceeding with device therapy, patients should be treated with ACEi/ARB plus Beta-blockers for at least three months and then reassess the LVEF. If EF remains less than or equal to 35%, the recommendation is a referral for device therapy.

ICD

ACC/AHA 2013 guidelines

ESC 2016 guidelines

CRT

ACC/AHA 2013 guidelines recommend CRT for patients with HF with sinus rhythm, LVEF ≤ 35%, left bundle branch block (LBBB) with QRS duration ≥ 150 ms, and NYHA class III (I-A) or ambulatory IV (I-A) or II (I-B) on GDMT.

ESC 2016 guidelines recommend CRT for symptomatic HF with sinus rhythm and LVEF ≤ 35% despite GDMT with LBBB with QRSd ≥ 150 ms (I-A) or 130 to 149 ms (I-B).

- 
**Invasive therapies**

Coronary revascularization (Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting or CABG, angioplasty, and Percutaneous Coronary Intervention****or PCI) is indicated for patients with HF (HFpEF, HFrEF, or HFmrEF) on GDMT with angina and suitable coronary anatomy (class IC).

- 
**Surgical treatment of HF**

Despite the advances in the medical management of HF, there are some circumstances in which surgery is the best treatment option. Surgical approaches to HF treatment include heart transplantation and procedures that reshape the heart, repair the heart, or replace all or part of the heart function. The basis for any decision to surgically treat HF depends on functional status, prognosis, and severity of the underlying HF and comorbidities. It should take place in centers with multidisciplinary medical and surgical teams.

Heart Transplantation

According to Heart Failure Society of America (HFSA) 2010 heart failure guidelines, it is recommended to evaluate patients for heart transplantation in severe HF, debilitating refractory symptoms, ventricular arrhythmia, or congenital heart disease that remains uncontrolled despite drug, device, or alternative surgical therapy (strength of evidence B).

Ventricular Assist Devices (VADs)

The blood is removed from the failing ventricle and diverted into a pump that delivers the blood to either the aorta (in case of LV failure and LVAD) or the pulmonary artery (in case of right ventricle failure and RVAD). Devices for this process include a left ventricular assist device (LVAD), right ventricular assist device (RVAD), or biventricular assist devices (BiVAD), which is inserted percutaneously into the LV and draws blood from LV and expels it into the ascending aorta. These VADs are used as a bridge therapy to heart transplantation in refractory stage D heart failure according to the ACCF/AHA, ESC, and HFSA guidelines, or as a destination therapy if not a candidate for heart transplantation as LVADs as destination therapy, in this case, is superior to medical therapy according to the Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH) trial.

Surgical Ventricular Restoration (SVR)

One of the mechanisms of HF pathophysiology is ventricular remodeling and the shape change from an elliptical shape to a spherical shape, especially post transmural MI. Correction of this pathologic remodeling by incising and excluding the nonviable myocardium with either patch or primary reconstruction to decrease the ventricular volume may be hypothetically helpful in treating patients with HF. However, the STICH trial, which is the major study for ventricular reconstruction, found that adding ventricular surgical reconstruction to CABG reduced the left ventricular volume, as compared with CABG alone, but this did not correlate with a greater improvement in symptoms or exercise tolerance or with a reduction in the mortality rate or hospitalization for cardiac causes.

**Treatment of HFpEF and HFmrEF**

There are no disease-modifying therapies for HFpEF or HFmrEF that improve outcomes compared to HFrEF agents. Efficacious therapies for HFrEF have failed to demonstrate a benefit for HFpEF, and more research is required to evaluate them in HFmrEF.

**Treatment of Right Heart Failure**

The most frequent causes of RV failure are LV failure and primary pulmonary diseases, and treating the underlying cause is essential in RV failure treatment. ACEi/ARB and beta-blockers efficacy in isolated RV failure is not known, but they are beneficial if RV failure is secondary to LV failure. If severe unstable RV failure, the use of inotrope may be a consideration. The prognosis in patients with RV failure depends on the etiology. Volume overload, pulmonary stenosis, and Eisenmenger syndrome are associated with a better prognosis. Decreased exercise tolerance predicts poor survival.

**Treatment of Acute Decompensated Heart Failure (ADHF)**

Diagnosis of ADHF is based on symptoms and signs with the help of BNP, NT-proBNP concentration if the clinical diagnosis is uncertain. Hospitalization is necessary if severely decompensated HF (hypotension, worsening renal function, or altered mentation), dyspnea at rest, hemodynamically significant arrhythmia (including new-onset rapid atrial fibrillation), or acute coronary syndromes. Successful inpatient therapy for ADHF involves a comprehensive care plan. Etiology and precipitating factors require identification, chronic oral therapy should be optimized, treatment to relieve symptoms should be applied (loop intravenous diuretics or ultrafiltration if diuretic resistance, and vasodilators to decrease preload and afterload), the patient that may benefit from revascularization or device therapies should be identified, education about dietary sodium restriction/self-assessment of volume status and principal cardiac medications should be provided. The use of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation may be useful in severely dyspneic patients with evidence of pulmonary edema. The cornerstone of ADHF is volume removal. Loop diuretics (furosemide, torsemide, or bumetanide) are the preferred initial diuretics, and if inadequate diuresis, a second diuretic can be added (e.g., a thiazide). Vasodilators (nitroprusside, nesiritide, or nitroglycerin) are also recommended as an adjuvant to diuresis to relieve symptoms but should be avoided if systolic BP is less than 90 mmHg or in cases of significant aortic or mitral stenosis.