**Preparation**

- Approximately 7-14 days of low-iodine diet is recommended prior to the procedure. Since iodine is selectively taken up by thyroid tissue, a low-iodine diet increases the effectiveness of the I-131 therapy as well as the accuracy of I-131 pre-and post-therapy scans.

- Thyroid cells have TSH receptors, and high TSH improves iodine intake and optimizes the imaging. High TSH levels can be achieved by two different methods:

- Patients who are status post total thyroidectomy or near-total thyroidectomy placed on thyroid hormone either in replacement doses or suppressive doses depending on thyroid cancer risk category. The thyroid hormone is withdrawn 4-6 weeks before the procedure to stimulate pituitary TSH secretion. While this method is preferred in advanced and high-risk thyroid cancer, severe hypothyroidism can be dangerous in the elderly and in patients with certain medical problems like congestive cardiac failure, seizure, or some mental disorders.
- Preparation with Thyrogen: it is a recombinant-TSH (rhTSH) molecule to increase TSH levels without holding thyroid hormone replacement hence avoiding hypothyroidism symptoms. Preparation includes 2 doses of Thyrogen 0.9 mg subcutaneous injections 24 hours apart from each other, and this method has been approved by the American Thyroid Association (ATA) for remnant ablation after total thyroidectomy in differentiated thyroid cancer patients without evidence of distant metastasis.

**Procedure**

- The patient is instructed to be NPO (nothing by mouth) at least 4 hours prior to iodine dose and one hour after.

- Diagnostic I-131 scan: A small dose of radioactive Iodine given orally as capsules or liquid form and scan is performed 4-48 hours later.

- Post-therapy I-131 scan is performed 3-7 days after an I-131 ablation/adjuvant therapy dose is given.

- The patient lies supine on a movable exam table, and images are obtained for planar images and also for single-photon emission computerized tomography with integrated computed tomography (SPECT-CT).

- Planar images: A gamma emission collector camera captures whole body images on one plane.

- SPECT-CT: Combined with a radioactive iodine scan, it helps to accurately localize and differentiate physiologic uptake from metastatic lesions. It improves the detection of smaller lesions by providing a cross-sectional three-dimensional view.

- Serum thyroglobulin and anti-thyroglobulin antibody assays should be obtained simultaneously.