Sotalol's adverse effect profile is inherent in its mechanisms of action as both a potassium-channel blocker and a non-cardioselective beta-blocker. The potassium channel blockade, primarily in phase 3 of the cardiac action potential, prolongs the QTc. Thus the ECG must be monitored upon initiation of sotalol or addition of other QTc-prolonging medications. Prolongation of the QT interval occurs in 1% to 2% of cases, which could lead to torsades de pointes or new ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation.

The adverse effect of sotalol on QT prolongation is directly related to its serum levels.

Other adverse effects associated with its non-cardioselective beta-blockade include bradycardia, fatigue, dyspnea, and worsening heart failure.

**Boxed Warning**

**Life-threatening Proarrythmias:**To reduce the risk of drug-induced arrhythmia, start sotalol in a healthcare facility that can provide continuous electrocardiographic monitoring and cardiac resuscitation. Sotalol can cause life-threatening ventricular tachycardia associated with QT interval prolongation. If the QT interval ≥ 500 msec, decrease the dose, increase the dosing interval, or discontinue the drug. Before starting sotalol, calculate creatinine clearance to determine appropriate dosing. Drug isomers may differ in their risk of pro-arrhythmia. For example, sotalol, an antiarrhythmic drug, has d- and l- enantiomers. A recent study using molecular dynamics found that d-sotalol has a higher pro-arrhythmia risk of d-sotalol than l-sotalol.