Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy is characterized by an impaired cardiac response to stress, which results from a combination of autonomic dysfunction, alterations in cell membrane composition, ion channel defects, and an overproduction of cardio depressant factors. Patients with cirrhosis have effective central hypovolemia, despite an absolute volume overload, due to splanchnic vasodilation caused by the production of nitric oxide, carbon monoxide, and endocannabinoids. (This splanchnic vasodilation results in a decrease in systemic vascular resistance, initially compensating for cardiac dysfunction and producing an asymptomatic clinical picture at rest.) The state of functional hypovolemia activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the sympathetic nervous system, which chronically leads to the downregulation of beta-adrenergic receptors in the plasma membrane with resultant autonomic dysfunction.

Patients with cirrhosis are also noted to have elevations in cell membrane cholesterol content, altering membrane fluidity and disrupting the number and function of receptors. The decrease in L-type calcium channels and potassium channels increases action potential duration and leads to QT prolongation. Additionally, the dysregulation of Na/Ca channels leads to massive calcium influx into cells and stimulates cardiomyocyte apoptosis. The combination of prolonged action potentials, resulting in impaired myocyte relaxation and alteration of titin and collagen configurations, produces eccentric left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction. Systolic dysfunction will eventually develop due to impaired energy metabolism and reduced myocardial reserve.