The complete Hakim triad is seen in 50% to 75% of patients, with gait and cognitive disturbances occurring in 80% to 95%, and urinary incontinence in 50% to 75% of patients. The International Society for Hydrocephalus and Cerebrospinal Fluid Disorders guidelines define “probable NPH” by the combination of insidious onset gait dysfunction after 40 years old without precipitating events, lasting at least 3 to 6 months, in the absence of comorbidities which could fully explain the symptoms.

Gait disturbance

Gait disturbance is generally the first and most common symptom to appear and also the first one to resolve postoperatively.

With disease progression, the patient’s gait deteriorates finally becoming broad-based, slow, short-stepped, and glue-footed (a gait disturbance of the astasia-abasia type).

Typical features of gait in iNPH are the following:

- External rotation in foot posture

- Poor foot clearance (festination, shuffling, tripping)

- Notable difficulty turning on the body’s long axis (multistep turns)

- Gait initiation failure or freezing of gait

Dysequilibrium in NPH is usually worse with the eyes closed, but patients require a broad standing base even with their eyes open. The upper body typically is mildly stooped, but retropulsion can also be present, either spontaneous or on provocatively. Motor abnormalities in the upper limbs are either mild or absent and generally restricted to bradykinesia. The slowness of gait and in the movements of both upper and lower limbs can improve following shunting. A tremor in the extremities, which is present in 40% of iNPH patients, does not respond to shunt surgery.

Urinary frequency/incontinence:

The bladder symptoms are due to detrusor overactivity, which can cause increased frequency and urgency of micturition or frank incontinence.

Dementia:

The dementia of iNPH is of subcortical type and characteristically presents with inertia, forgetfulness, and poor executive function.

An objective examination with the help of specific psychometric tests is necessary for the assessment of subcortical frontal lobe deficits. Some examples are the grooved pegboard test, the Stroop test, the digit span test, the trail-making A/B test, and the Rey auditory-verbal learning test.