# Continuing Education Activity

Creative art therapy is a complementary therapy used to assist patients with serious illness to ameliorate symptom burden and adapt to the stressful life experiences associated with a life-limiting diagnosis. This activity reviews the definition of art therapy as defined by the American Art Therapy Association (AATA) and highlights personnel qualifications, techniques utilized, and application in palliative care patients.

**Objectives:**
- Review the definition of palliative care and art therapy.
- Describe the techniques and personnel needed for creative art therapy in palliative care.
- Summarize the clinical significance of art therapy in palliative care patients, including cancer sufferers, chronic heart failure, HIV/AIDs, dementia, and end-stage renal disease patients.
- Outline the importance of the an interprofessional approach involved in the care of a palliative care patient and the importance of integrating alternative therapies such as creative art therapy to improve patient outcomes for patients with serious illness.

# Introduction

Palliative care medicine is the interprofessional subspecialty focused on relieving suffering and improving the quality of life in patients with serious illness as well as their families. Beyond the aspects of physical illness, palliative care -as defined by the World Health Organization- strives to implement “means of early identification and impeccable assessment and treatment of pain and other problems, physical, psychosocial and spiritual.”

As defined by the American Art Therapy Association (AATA) in About Art Therapy (2018), art therapy, as facilitated by a professional art therapist, is a therapeutic modality used over ongoing sessions to “improve cognitive and sensorimotor functions, foster self-esteem and self-awareness, cultivate emotional resilience, promote insight, enhance social skills, reduce and resolve conflicts and distress and advance societal and ecological change.”

# Personnel

As required by the America Art Therapy Association (AATA), art therapists must obtain the minimum of a master's degree to satisfy entry-level qualifications. Advanced graduate studies include establishing foundations in psychology and creative arts. Certified personnel must also complete a rigorous hourly requirement of supervised practicum and clinical internship. After having met the educational requirements, board certification and licensing (depending on the state of practice) can be obtained through the Art Therapy Credentials Board.

# Technique or Treatment

Standardized applications of art therapy in palliative care patients are not specific, and techniques are customizable to the ever-changing life of the patient.

# Clinical Significance

Art and health have been a focus of human interest from the beginning of recorded history.

**Cancer**

Cancer patients invariably seek complementary therapies as adjuncts to their oncologic treatments. The average cancer patient reports up to a dozen symptoms, including fatigue, pain, anorexia, cachexia, dyspnea, and anxiety.

**Heart failure**

Major cardiology societies have recently recognized the integration of palliative care in chronic heart failure patients and made recommendations for early palliative care involvement in the disease trajectory appear in ACCF/AHA guidelines.

**HIV/AIDs**

Despite the advent of antiretroviral therapy, HIV/AIDS patients often seek alternative nonpharmacologic therapies to relieve debilitating symptoms associated with their chronic illness. Along with physical suffering, HIV/AIDs, patients can experience ample emotional suffering that accompanies the negative stigma associated with their disease. The AIDS Memorial Quilt served was one of the first objective forms of art therapy and emotional expression for those people living with HIV/AIDs.

**Dementia**

Dementia patients often suffer from debilitating neuropsychiatric symptoms that negatively impact their quality of life. Considering the limited efficacy in pharmacologic treatments for progressive dementia, non-pharmacologic alternatives are considered to be a valuable adjunctive approach, and there have been suggestions for an array of modalities.

**End-Stage Renal Disease**

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients who commit to the highly demanding lifestyle of long term hemodialysis exhibit a lower health-related quality of life and increased rates of anxiety and depression, subsequently increasing the risk of non-adherence, increased symptom burden, and increased mortality. Although few high-quality studies have examined the effects of art therapy interventions in the ESRD population, some literature looking at the impact of music and other art-based therapies in hemodialysis patients found improvements in the perception of bothersome symptoms, including pain and itching. Improved treatment compliance, health-related quality of life, and reductions in anxiety and depression have also been reported.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing patients with chronic, life-limiting illnesses can be challenging and complex and require the coordination of care across multiple disciplines. These patients invariably require a patient and family-centered interprofessional approach focused on managing complex symptoms of severe illness and addressing the physical, emotional, psychosocial, and existential components of suffering.****Multiple large medical societies, including the World Health Organization (WHO), The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), the European Society of Medical Oncology (ESMO), and the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) have all recognized the benefit. They recommend the integration of palliative care early in the disease trajectory.

**Evidence-Based Approach**

In the last two decades, there has been an emphatic shift in medical literature towards investigating the healing power of art in the realm of palliative care patients. Although the role of art therapy as an alternative treatment in these patient populations has expanded, and results are encouraging, the amount of quality evidence is sparse. Despite the literature implying the positive effects of art therapy on quality of life, coping mechanisms, and mental well being in patients with serious illness, results require cautious interpretation. Collectively the vast heterogeneity amongst the studies patient populations, clinical profiles, definition of art therapy, methods of randomization, sample sizes, study design, and indices measured yields low-quality evidence. Further research and extensive, high-quality studies are warranted to expand on the benefit of a holistic approach and utilization of creative art therapy to enhance patient-centered care and improve patient outcomes. [Level 2]