The indication for performing urodynamics should be discussed with the patient before arranging the test along with a written information leaflet. This approach assists in understanding and promotes cooperation, though studies have shown that it may not necessarily improve overall patient satisfaction**.**

Before the procedure, the clinician should review all relevant clinical information. Appropriate contemporaneous consent should be gained and documented where necessary. Patient allergies should be reviewed, following the standard World Health Organization surgical checklist protocols. Adequate counseling regarding the relevant risks of the procedure is essential. These include dysuria, haematuria, urinary tract infection, failure to catheterize, urinary retention, failure to reproduce symptoms, and failure to arrive at a urodynamic diagnosis.

A uroflowmetry is the initial step, followed by the measurement of post micturition residual volume using transabdominal ultrasound or urinary catheter.

During urodynamics, the pressure measurement is by using transducers, and the bladder is filled with a pump. A computer screen displays live pressure traces and infuse volume.

Both fluid-filled and air-charged urodynamic catheters exist; however, the ICS has set standardized pressures based on fluid-filled catheters**.****.**

The patient is placed supine, and a multi-lumen urodynamic catheter is inserted into the bladder. This specialist catheter is usually 6-7Fr and made of polyvinyl chloride or polyurethane. It has multiple lumens for concurrent pressure monitoring and fluid infusion simultaneously. The catheter is introduced into the bladder with an aseptic technique using local anesthetic lubricant gel. A second catheter is introduced into the rectum or vagina to measure abdominal pressure. Other cavities such as an intestinal stoma and stomach are also options.

The transducers for the fluid-filled system are external and adjusted to the height of the superior border of the symphysis pubis, the approximate anatomical level of the base of the bladder. It is set to this level to avoid artifacts occurring due to hydrostatic pressure effects. If the patient changes position during the urodynamic test, the height of the transducer should be adjusted accordingly.

The vesical pressure at the beginning of the test should be zero or close to zero. A cough test is performed, and pressure change should reflect on both vesical and abdominal pressure traces. The peaks should be roughly equal in amplitude. If one peak is less than 70% of the other, the line with the lesser peak should be flushed with fluid and cough test repeated until similar pressure amplitudes are measured.

The filling phase occurs with the infusion of warmed sterile water or physiological saline. Filling rates can either be physiological or nonphysiological**.**

During cystometry, the pressure trace should be marked with annotations of the patient's subjective sensations. These markers should signify the patient's 'first sensation of filling,' 'first desire to void,' and 'strong desire to void.' The patient may be asked to cough, strain, or perform other stressing actions (crouching, exercises), to reproduce any of their usual incontinence symptoms. Regular cough tests at intervals of one minute or every 50 ml of infusate assure that the maintenance of the quality of pressure transmission throughout the test. Cystometry also measures bladder volume and bladder compliance.

A "permission to void" command follows after stopping the infusion pump. A pressure flow study is the next step, with the observation of pressures during uroflowmetry for the voided volume.