The therapeutic potentials for rTMS have been demonstrated for the following:

- Treatment-resistant depression

- Obsessive-compulsive disorder

- Posttraumatic stress disorder

- Tourette disorder

- Chronic pain syndrome

- Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)

- Bipolar disorder

- Movement disorders such as Parkinson disease, functional tremors, focal epilepsy, cortical myoclonus, spasticity.

Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation has been approved by the U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD) by 2008. It is perceived as a treatment modality alternative to Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). The first device was cleared for the treatment of MDD targeting the left DLPFC. Later, FDA approved 5 more rTMS devices and modified the initial rTMS device's indication to target the broader patient range suffering from treatment resistance with one or more antidepressant medication.

For chronic pain, studies have shown definite efficacy in the use of high-frequency rTMS contralateral to the side of pain at the primary motor cortex (M1), and the FDA approved it by 2013. There is a possible efficacy for the use of HF-rTMS of the left DLPFC for schizophrenia, likely targeting the negative symptoms. Studies have shown possible usage of Low-frequency rTMS for tinnitus and auditory hallucinations(Left temporoparietal cortex). High-frequency rTMS, when applied sequentially to left DLPFC and superior medial frontal cortex (SMFC), showed promising results in reducing the craving in chronic smokers and thus helping in smoking cessation. FDA approved marketing TMS for treatment of OCD in the year 2018.