**Sleep apnea**

Individuals with sleep apnea experience airway collapse in deeper sleep states, causing them to experience reduced time in stage N3 and REM sleep. This leads to excessive daytime drowsiness as proper, efficient sleep is not obtained throughout the night. There are two types of sleep apnea: central and obstructive. Central sleep apnea occurs when the brain fails to properly signal respiratory muscles during sleep. In contrast, obstructive sleep apnea is a mechanical problem in which there is a partial or complete blockage of the upper airway.

**REM Sleep Disorder**

During REM, we are typically atonic, meaning we do not move due to temporary muscle paralysis. If the temporary atonia of REM sleep is disturbed, it may be possible to physically act out (often unpleasant) dreams with vocalizations and sudden limb movements. This is called rapid eye movement (REM) sleep disorder. The cause of this disorder is not entirely known but may be associated with degenerative neurological conditions such as Parkinson disease or Lewy body dementia.

**Narcolepsy**

Narcolepsy is a sleep cycle disorder in which individuals present with persistent daytime sleepiness and brief episodes of muscle weakness (cataplexy). In narcolepsy, sleep regulation is disturbed, and individuals tend to skip the initial phases of sleep and go directly into REM sleep. These individuals can enter the REM phase and have dreams even during short naps. This limits their amount of sleep in the N3 deep-sleep stage and thus causes an irregular sleep pattern. These individuals may experience a sudden loss of muscle strength as body muscles are atonic and paralyzed in the REM-sleep phase. These lapses into REM sleep can happen anytime during the day and usually last from seconds to minutes.

**Somnambulism**

Also known as sleepwalking, somnambulism is a common occurrence in school-aged children. These individuals tend to make purposeful movements, but they are not acting out their dreams. Dreams occur during the REM phase of the sleep cycle, in which the body is fully paralyzed. Sleepwalking occurs because the sleep cycle is still in the maturing phase, and proper sleep/wake cycles are not yet regulated. Sleepwalking is typically associated with common behaviors, such as dressing, eating, and urinating. Therefore, sleepwalking occurs in the non-rapid eye movement phases, usually in N3.

**Depression**

Studies have demonstrated that individuals with depression have an increase in their total REM sleep but a decrease in their REM latency (i.e., the time between sleep onset and the start of the first REM period).

**Aging**

Difficulting initiating and maintaining sleep is cited in approximately 43% of elderly individuals. Older adults tend to experience insomnia and earlier wake times, with multiple studies hypothesizing it is due to the advanced circadian rhythm that accompanies age. This causes misaligned melatonin and cortisol secretion rhythms with the circadian clock. Decreased melatonin may be due to the gradual deterioration of the hypothalamic nuclei that drive circadian rhythms. Elderly individuals sleep 36% less than children at age 5. While the ability to sleep becomes more difficult, the need does not decrease. Additional factors include a continuous increase in sleep latency and nighttime awakenings, inconsistency of external cues such as light exposure, irregular meal times, nocturia, and decreased mobility leading to a reduction in exercise. The most notable change associated with aging is the progressive decrease in SWS.

**TBI**

Studies have shown that individuals with a traumatic brain injury (TBI) experience prolonged sleep onset latencies, shorter total sleep time, and more nighttime awakenings than controls. TBI patients were also found to spend less time in REM sleep. These individuals report poor sleep quality, more daytime dysfunction, and the use of more sleep medication.