For any patient presenting with chest pain concerning ACS, cardiac workup should be initiated, including history and exam as above, electrocardiogram (EKG), and cardiac biomarkers.

**EKG**

In a typical 12-lead EKG, posterior infarction is an indirect observation due to the placement of the leads.

Limb leads placement is on each of the four extremities.

Precordial leads are placed on the anterior chest

- V1 - 4th intercostal space on the right margin of the sternum

- V2 - 4th intercostal space on the left margin of the sternum

- V4 - 5th intercostal space at the midclavicular line

- V3  - midway between V2 and V4

- V5 - 5th intercostal space on the anterior axillary line at the level of V4

- V6 - 5th intercostal space on the midaxillary line at the level of V4

Areas of infarction

- Inferior - II, III, aVF (RCA or LCx)

- Lateral - I, aVL, V5, V6 (LCx or diagonal branch of LAD)

- Septal - V1, V2 (LAD)

- Anterior - V2, V3, V4 (LAD)

ST-elevation is visible if there is inferior, lateral, or inferolateral involvement associated with a posterior extension. However, ST-elevation will not show on the typical EKG in isolated posterior MI, and other EKG changes may be observable. However, for further clarification, posterior leads (V7-V9) may be placed to evaluate further.

Posterior leads V7-V9 get placed on the posterior chest wall in the same horizontal plane as V6

- V7 - left posterior axillary line

- V8- the tip of the left scapula

- V9 - left paraspinal region

ST-elevation may be more subtle, and ST-elevation greater than 0.5 mm in one lead indicates posterior ischemia and is diagnostic for posterior ST-elevation MI (STEMI). When possible, compare to old EKGs.

Other changes that may present in posterior STEMI include:

- ST-depression in the anterior leads, which may be deep (over 2 mm) and flat

- Large R-wave in V2-V3, which are larger than the S-wave

- R-waves in V2-V3 that are greater than those in V4-V6 is an abnormal R-wave progression

- Large and upright anterior T waves

- Signs of ischemia in inferior and/or lateral territories, including possible ST elevation

- Mirror image effect of EKG regarding posterior wall ischemia

- If turned upside down, tall anterior R-waves become deep posterior Q-waves, ST-depression becomes ST-elevation, and upright T-waves become inverted T-waves
- If these changes are not present, it does not rule out posterior STEMI

If there is an obvious posterior STEMI, and there is low suspicion of other pathology, the goal is to get the patient the lab for percutaneous intervention (PCI). There is no need to wait for lab results. IV access should be obtained, and labs sent. If there are more subtle EKG changes, but not definitive STEMI, consider serial EKGs. Sometimes on repeat EKGs, subtle ischemia evolves into STEMI.

**Lab Studies**

- CBC

- Metabolic profile

- Troponin

- Coagulation studies

- Consider  B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) / NT pro-BNP

**Imaging Studies**

- Obtain bedside chest x-ray (CXR) or two-view CXR

- Consider bedside echocardiography; this is an operator-dependent skill but can be of significant value. Bedside echocardiography can evaluate for pericardial effusion, gross wall motion abnormalities, size of the ventricles, valvular abnormalities, and ejection fraction estimation. A suprasternal notch view is useful to visualize the aorta and evaluate for possible dissection. The proximal aorta is usually dilated with or without a visible intimal flap.