The patient will be issued a gown to wear during his/her MRI procedure. Before entering the MR scanner room, patient and any accompanying relative and/or friends will be asked screening questions with a screening form pertaining to the presence of metallic devices and implants, and if present, patients are instructed to remove all metallic jewelry and metallic objects from their pockets and hair. Any accompanying individual will be instructed to fill out a screening form too, in order to ensure that he or she will be safe in the MR scanner room. If patients have additional questions and concerns, it should be brought to the radiologists and/or MRI technologists prior to MR procedure.

When a patient is prescribed MRI with contrast agent, an IV catheter line is inserted in a vein in the arm or an accessible limb, during the initial preparation and positioning of that patient. Following the placement of the IV line, it is flushed with heparin to prevent clogging of the vein. In general, a set of noncontrast enhanced images will be obtained first, before the contrast-enhanced images will be collected. Patients are injected with a specific Gadolinium-based contrast agent in a dose of 0.10 mmole/kg for the examination. Following the injection of the contrast agent, the IV line will be flushed with some saline. Gadolinium-based MRI contrast agent is administered intravenously in approximately, 0.2 mL/kg (0.1 mmoles/ kg) at a rate of 10 mL per 15 seconds.

**Gadolinium-based MRI contrast agents come from the manufacturer in following packages:**

1. Single-dose vials (5, 10, 15, 20 ml)

2. Single-dose, prefilled syringes (10, 15, 20 ml)

3. Pharmacy Bulk Packages (50, 100 ml)