During the course of treatment, NHL patients adjust to working closely with a multidisciplinary team that often includes medical oncologists, radiation oncologists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and others. Communication among the healthcare team is essential for providing excellent care to the patient. The involvement of the patient's primary care physician (PCP) continues during treatment and after the patient completes the treatment, as the PCP often has a longstanding and important relationship with the patient that predates the patient's lymphoma diagnosis.

The follow-up of cancer survivors can be discussed among the primary care provider (PCP), medical oncologist, and other cancer specialists. The type of cancer and treatment exposures, comorbidities, and other factors determine decisions regarding the need for shared care, mostly oncology care or transitioning to primary care. For example, head and neck survivors would best benefit from multi-specialty and multidisciplinary follow-up care. Also, specialty care may be required for some patients. For example, rehabilitation providers may have an important role in preventing and managing symptoms and late effects while uplifting survivor health and well-being.

The roles and responsibilities for survivorship care should be well-described for both patients and their providers, particularly during transitions. For the patients, the transition from oncology to primary care settings can be guided by the survivorship care plan (SCP). The SCP is established by the oncology team with the completion of treatment and is meant to be shared with the patient and his or her providers, including the PCP. The survivorship care plans help the patient meet the patient's emotional, social, legal, and financial needs. It includes referrals to specialists and recommendations for a healthy lifestyle, such as changes in diet and exercises and quitting smoking.

The medical oncologist usually follows the patient closely for several years after finishing therapy, and subsequently, the patient transitions back to the PCP. This transition period can be distressing, with miscommunication between even the most well-meaning providers. Establishing a survivorship care plan helps facilitate communication and allocation of responsibility during this time period. The patient's attendance at a survivorship clinic can also aid in promoting well-coordinated care.

Psychological effects of cancer are common and include depression, anxiety, fatigue, cognitive limitations, sleep problems, sexual dysfunction, pain, and opioid dependence or use disorder. Evaluation of symptoms and management is needed. Financial implications for care must be addressed.