**Muscle Energy Technique for an Internally Rotated AC Joint:**

- Have the patient in a seated position, with the arm in slight abduction and elbow slightly flexed

- While one hand monitors AC joint, use the other to "shake hands" with the patient and guide the AC joint into external rotation until the restrictive barrier is met

- The patient internally rotates their shoulder against isometric resistance from the provider for 3 to 5 seconds.

- The provider instructs the patient to relax and takes shoulder further into the restrictive barrier (thus, further into external rotation)

- Repeat steps 3 and 4 multiple times (typically 3 to 5 times)

**Muscle Energy Technique for an Adducted Clavicle**:

- Provider standing on the side of the table/patient (on the side of the adducted clavicle) and facing cephalad relative to the patient

- The patient abducts arm on the side of dysfunction to 90 degrees with the thumb facing down.

- The provider positions his/her thigh against the patient's abducted arm. The hand closest to the patient contacts the superior part of the SC joint.

- Patient instructed to push arm into the provider's thigh, while the provider isometrically resists (for 3 to 5 seconds)

- The provider instructs the patient to relax.

- The provider abducts the shoulder further to the restrictive barrier while maintaining an inferior force on the SC joint.

- Repeat steps 4 to 6 multiple times (typically 3 to 5 times)

- Recheck

**Muscle Energy Technique for a Horizontally Extended Clavicle:**

- Provider standing on the side of the table/patient (opposite the side of the dysfunction)

- Provider contacts the anterior surface of the dysfunctional SC joint with the palm of the hand

- Instruct patient to bring the hand to the ceiling (flexion of the shoulder) and wrap an arm around the provider's trapezius area

- The provider should then contact the scapular region with their free-hand.

- The patient is instructed to try to bring scapula down towards the table, while the provider resists (for 3 to 5 seconds)

- The provider instructs the patient to relax.

- While relaxed, provider further pushes SC joint posterior while simultaneously bringing the patient's shoulder/scapula region anterior

- Repeat steps 5 to 7 multiple times (typically 3 to 5 times)

- Recheck