# Introduction

The brachialis is an important flexor muscle of the forearm at the elbow.

# Structure and Function

The brachialis is an elbow flexor that originates from the distal anterior humerus and inserts onto the ulnar tuberosity. The brachialis is one of the largest elbow flexors and provides pure flexion of the forearm at the elbow.

The brachialis muscle is the strongest flexor of the elbow in the absence of supination, as with supination and flexion, its mechanical momentum becomes more disadvantaged than the biceps brachialis muscle.

# Embryology

As a skeletal muscle, the brachialis ultimately develops from the mesoderm layer.

Notably, anterior-posterior development is under the control of downstream signaling of sonic hedgehog protein, secreted at the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) in the posterior limb bud.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The blood supply of the brachialis is ultimately from the tributaries of the brachial artery and the radial recurrent artery. Occasionally, other arteries may supply the brachialis, including branches of the ulnar collateral arteries. The venous drainage from the brachialis muscle is ultimately the brachial vein, which later joins with the basilic vein tributary and forms the axillary vein. The upper limb contains both superficial and deep lymphatic channels.

The superficial channels generally follow superficial vasculature and perforate into the deep lymphatics at various points, particularly near the cubital fossa. The deep lymphatic channels generally follow the main vessels and ultimately drain into the axillary lymph nodes.

# Nerves

The brachialis often has dual innervation, being innervated medially by the musculocutaneous nerve and laterally by the radial nerve.

The musculocutaneous nerve passes between the biceps and brachialis muscles, wherein the terminal branch of the lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve emerges. The radial nerve passes between the brachialis and brachioradialis muscles in the lateral arm after spiraling and emerging from the spiral groove of the humerus.

# Muscles

The brachialis muscle relates anteriorly to the biceps muscle, the brachioradialis muscle, the pronator teres muscle, and the vascular-nerve bundle of the arm.

# Physiologic Variants

There have been some reports of anatomic variants of the brachialis muscle.

Another report described an accessory brachialis muscle that included a fibrous/muscular tunnel containing the brachial artery and median nerve, suggesting that this anatomic variant could yield nerve compression symptomatology with muscle contraction.

# Surgical Considerations

The brachialis typically gets split during anterior and anterolateral surgical approaches to the humerus.

Given anatomic variability, it may be difficult to predict the exact location of essential nerves within these muscle compartments, further complicating the surgical approach.

# Clinical Significance

Given that the brachialis muscle is an important elbow flexor, it is clinically relevant. Impaired elbow flexion can result from several etiologies, including neurologic, neurovascular, muscle rupture, or traumatic causes. Generally, injury to the biceps brachii is more commonly the cause of elbow flexor trauma, although there is also documentation of isolated injuries to the brachialis muscle.

Additionally, there has been documented use of brachialis tendon transfer, specifically to reconstruct the flexor digitorum profundus and the flexor pollicis longus after brachial plexus injuries.

For a manual evaluation of the strength of the brachialis muscle, the operator puts his resistance on the patient's wrist while the latter holds the elbow extended and with the palm of the hand forward. The patient will have to flex the elbow without supination; in this way, we are evaluating the flexor muscle strongest at the elbow.

# Other Issues

Brachialis syndrome results from a permanent injury to the median nerve following poor patient positioning during surgery, particularly due to a decompression of the median nerve in the antecubital fossa.

According to the literature, the brachialis muscle could be one of the causes of the alteration of the arthrokinematics of the shoulder (thanks to the anatomic-myofascial continuum), causing pain to the movement and disturbance to the rotator cuff of the shoulder. The presence of trigger points in the brachialis muscle could be a clue. In some patients, injecting drugs in the brachialis muscle can solve the shoulder problem.

Myositis ossificans in the sporting field generally involve specific muscle areas, including the brachialis muscle.

Angiosarcoma formation can affect the brachialis muscle, particularly in deep tissues.

Tendinopathy of the brachialis muscle at its insertion is a rare event. Generally, the symptom is a pain in the antecubital area, and conservative therapy (steroid injection) is the recommended approach to management.