Although research has yet to determine specific tasks unique to each astrocyte type, scientists widely accept that astrocytes play a pivotal role in structural support, metabolic regulation, neuroprotection, growth, and homeostatic maintenance of the central nervous system.

Using these tools, astrocytes perform a number of specific functions: neurotransmitter uptake and recycling, promotion of neuronal survival and synapse formation, regeneration of CNS damage, propagation of signal transmission between neurons via calcium signaling, potassium ion buffering, maintenance of pH and fluid levels in the brain, removal of free radicals in the CNS, regulation of the blood-brain barrier, coordination of cerebral blood flow based on regional neuronal needs, and secretion of trophic factors to guide axons and to promote development of neurons.

Metabolically, astrocytes coordinate cerebral blood flow based on regional neuronal needs. They synthesize glycogen, provide glycolytic components for neurons during periods of high demand, and remove free radicals from the CNS.

Astrocytes maintain CNS homeostasis by regulating pH and fluid levels in the brain, buffering potassium ion concentration in the extracellular fluid, taking up and recycling excess neurotransmitters, and detoxifying ammonia.

Astrocytes also specialize in neuroprotection, neural repair mechanisms, and axonal growth promotion. Although astrocytes already defend the CNS by way of metabolic and homeostatic regulation, they also satisfy an immune function in the brain. Astrocytes can release and respond to both pro- and anti-inflammatory signals, such as cytokines and chemokines. Specifically, astrocytes release substances such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tissue necrosis factors (TNF) alpha and beta to promote immune responses in the brain. Astrocytes can also respond to inflammatory signals by undergoing a process known as astrogliosis.