Patients present with complaints of fever, weight loss, or night sweats, also known as B symptoms. Systemic B symptoms are more common in patients with a high-grade variant of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. More than two-thirds of the patient present with painless peripheral lymphadenopathy. Waxing and waning episodes of lymphadenopathy, along with other symptoms, can be seen in low-grade lymphoma. Patients have different presentations and vary according to the site involved. Clinical features of the patients, according to the subtypes, are:

**Burkitt Lymphoma:**Patients often have rapidly increasing tumor masses. This type of lymphoma may present with tumor lysis syndrome.

**Endemic (African)**forms may have jaw or facial bone tumors in 50 to 60 percent of cases. The primary involvement of the abdomen is less common. The primary tumor can spread to extranodal sites like the mesentery, ovary, testis, kidney, breast, and meninges.

The **non-endemic (sporadic)**form involves the abdomen and presents most often with massive ascites involving the distal ileum, stomach cecum, and/or mesentery, bone marrow. Symptoms related to bowel obstruction or gastrointestinal bleeding, often having features of acute appendicitis or intussusception, can be seen. Approximately 25 percent of cases have involvement of the jaw or facial bones. If Lymphadenopathy is present, it is usually localized. Bone marrow and CNS involvement are seen in 30 and 15 percent of cases, respectively, at the time of initial presentation but are more common in recurrent or treatment-resistant diseases.

The patients with **immunodeficiency-related**Burkitt Lymphoma have presentation according to the signs or symptoms related to the underlying immunodeficiency (e.g., AIDS, congenital immunodeficiency, acquired immunodeficiency due to hematopoietic or solid organ transplantation). Immunodeficiency-related cases most often involve lymph nodes, bone marrow, and CNS.

**Mantle cell Lymphoma:**Most patients with mantle cell lymphoma have advanced-stage disease at diagnosis (70 percent). Approximately 75 percent of patients initially present with lymphadenopathy; the extranodal disease is the primary presentation in the remaining 25 percent.

**Gastrointestinal Lymphoma:**Usually presents with nonspecific symptoms such as epigastric pain or discomfort, anorexia, weight loss, nausea and/or vomiting, occult GI bleeding, and/or early satiety.

**Primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma:**Patients with primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma may present with headache, lethargy, focal neurologic deficits, seizures, paralysis, spinal cord compression, or lymphomatous meningitis.

Involved lymphoid sites should be carefully examined. These include Waldeyer's ring (tonsils, the base of the tongue, nasopharynx), cervical, supraclavicular, axillary, inguinal, femoral, mesenteric, and retroperitoneal nodal sites should be examined. The liver and spleen should be examined.

A Head and neck examination should be done. Enlargement of preauricular nodes and tonsillar asymmetry suggests nodal and extranodal involvement of the head and neck, including Waldeyer's ring.

Orbital structures like the eyelid, extraocular muscles, lacrimal apparatus, and conjunctivae can be involved in the marginal zone, mantle cell lymphoma, and primary central nervous lymphoma (primary CNS lymphoma). Therefore, these structures should be examined.

Mediastinal involvement can be seen in primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma or due to secondary spread. Patients with mediastinal involvement can present with a persistent cough, chest discomfort, or without any clinical symptoms, but patients usually have an abnormal chest X-ray. Superior vena cava syndrome can be part of the clinical presentation.

The involvement of retroperitoneal, mesenteric, and pelvic nodes is common in most histologic subtypes of NHL. Ascites may be present due to lymphatic obstruction, which is usually chylous.

About 50 percent of patients may develop extranodal disease (secondary extranodal disease), while between 10 and 35 percent of patients will have primary extranodal lymphoma at the time of diagnosis.

Testicular NHL is the most common malignancy involving the testis in men over age 60. It usually presents as a mass and comprises 1 percent of all NHL and 2 percent of all extranodal lymphomas.

Epidural spinal cord compression (ESCC) can cause irreversible loss of motor, sensory, and/or autonomic function. NHL is thought to first involve the paraspinal soft tissues and then invade the cord via the vertebral foramen without first causing bony destruction.