Shaken baby syndrome is difficult to diagnose. As a result, the incidence is uncertain. This results from a lack of a centralized reporting system, signs of maltreatment not being present, unclear presentation, and acute head trauma not being a single isolated event but one that is part of chronic neglect and abuse that ends in severe morbidity and mortality.

In the first year of life, the incidence of abusive head trauma is estimated to be approximately 35 cases per 100,000 infants. The morbidity and mortality from abusive head trauma are significant. Approximately 65% have significant neurological disabilities, and between 5 and 35% of infants die of injuries sustained. Most survivors have both cognitive and neurologic impairment.

Abusive head trauma is a subset of a much larger problem. Each year, millions of families of children are investigated by Child Protective Services for abuse and neglect. On average, over 3 million children per year are the subject of maltreatment reports. Of those, 20% are found to have confirmatory evidence of maltreatment.

Unfortunately, despite extensive research, there are no accurate statistics. Experts believe the incidence of pediatric abusive head trauma is about 1000 to 1500 infants per year. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), of the 2000 children who die from abuse annually, abusive head trauma accounts for approximately 10%. The victim of the shaken baby syndrome is typically between 3 and eight months. It is also reported in newborns and children up to 4 years of age. Up to 25% of all children diagnosed with shaken baby syndrome die from their injuries.

New York, California, Texas, Michigan, Florida, Illinois, Massachusetts, Indiana, Ohio, and Kentucky have the highest rates of child abuse.