Leydig cells are the primary source of testosterone or androgens in males. This physiology allows them to play a crucial role in many vital physiological processes in males, including sperm production or spermatogenesis, controlling sexual development, and maintaining secondary sexual characteristics and behaviors.

These crucial functions start with androgen production inside Leydig cells; this process is under the regulation and control of many factors, mainly luteinizing hormone (LH), a hormone produced from the pituitary gland. Abundant lipid content and well developed smooth endoplasmic reticulum are features that make Leydig cells more efficient in steroid (androgen) production.

With developments of male embryos, Leydig cells produce androgens inducing Wolffian duct development into male urogenital structures. Sertoli cells produce anti-Mullerian hormone preventing the development of female genital structures. In adults, infantile Leydig cells are replaced by adult Leydig cells maintaining androgen through life.

As mentioned before, Leydig cells exist in the interstitium outside seminiferous tubules, where spermatogenesis occurs. Androgens diffuse from the interstitium into seminiferous tubules to act on germ and Sertoli cells, inducing and maintaining sperm production. It is worth noting that testosterone levels are higher inside testes compared to the serum. Decreased intratesticular testosterone level is associated with defects in spermatogenesis; this has demonstrated links to decreased expression of essential proteins involved in germ cell regulation.