This is caused by an inability of the adrenal cortices to produce adequate adrenocortical hormones. Adrenal insufficiency is classified as primary or secondary.

**Primary Adrenal Insufficiency**

Any disease process which causes direct injury to the adrenal cortex can result in primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease).

Autoimmune: Autoimmune destruction of the adrenal glands is the most common cause of Addison disease. Autoimmune destruction can be an isolated finding or autoimmune polyglandular endocrinopathies (type 1 and 2). Patients with the autoimmune adrenal disease are more likely to have polyglandular autoimmune syndromes.

Type 1 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome is manifested by autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis, and ectodermal dysplasia. The classic triad consists of hypoparathyroidism, Addison disease, and mucocutaneous candidiasis.

Type 2 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome comprises several associations.

- Autoimmune thyroiditis (Schmidt syndrome).

- Type 1 diabetes (Carpenter syndrome).

- Autoimmune conditions such as pernicious anemia, vitiligo, or alopecia.

- Addison disease has been reported with celiac disease.

Infections: This includes sepsis, tuberculosis, cytomegalovirus, and HIV.

Adrenal Hemorrhage: Bilateral adrenal hemorrhages can be precipitated by DIC, trauma, meningococcemia, neoplastic processes. An Adrenal crisis due to meningococcemia is known as the Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome.

Infiltration: Adrenal infiltration occurs in hemochromatosis, amyloidosis, and metastases.

Other causes include sarcoidosis, lymphoma, and genetic disorders such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia and adrenal leukodystrophy.

Drugs: Certain drugs can cause adrenal insufficiency by blocking cortisol synthesis.

- Ketoconazole inhibits adrenal enzymes.

- Etomidate selectively inhibits 11β-hydroxylase, which converts deoxycortisol to cortisol.

**Secondary Adrenal Insufficiency**

Secondary insufficiency occurs most commonly due to exogenous steroid administration resulting in the suppression of ACTH synthesis. It is a pituitary-dependent loss of ACTH secretion, which results in a reduction of glucocorticoid production. However, mineralocorticoid secretion, including aldosterone, remains at a relatively normal level.

- Primary = autoimmune-mediated intrinsic adrenal gland dysfunction (both cortisol and aldosterone deficiency).

- Secondary = chronic glucocorticoid administration resulting in hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction (only cortisol****deficiency).