There are four modalities of treatment for echinococcal disease.

For WHO stage 1 and 3a (these cysts have a single compartment), cysts having a size less than 5 cm are treated with albendazole or PAIR (Puncture, Aspiration, Instillation, and Re-aspiration). In contrast, cysts larger than 5 cm are treated with PAIR along with the adjunctive treatment with albendazole.

For WHO stage 2 and 3b, in which cysts have multiple compartments rendering PAIR ineffective, these are managed with modified catheterization technique (Non-PAIR percutaneous therapy) or surgery with adjunctive albendazole.

WHO Stage 4 and 5 require only observation as they are inactive.

- **Surgery****:**Surgical options include liver resection, local excision of the cyst, and deroofing with the evacuation of the contents. During surgery, contamination of surgical sites with active daughter cysts is a major concern, and this can be avoided by adjunctive therapy with albendazole and perioperative addition of praziquantel. Also, the peritoneum should be packed with 20% hypertonic saline packs, and the same mixture should be instilled into the cyst before opening.

- **Percutaneous Therapy:**It includes PAIR (for cysts without the daughter cysts) and modified catheter technique (for cysts that may contain daughter cysts). In the former technique, an initial course of albendazole is given, followed by a puncture of the cyst under imaging guidance, Aspiration of its contents, instillation of hypertonic saline into the cyst cavity, and re-aspiration. In the presence of communication with the biliary tree, PAIR should not be attempted. In the latter, a wide bore catheter is introduced into the cyst cavity to evacuate all of its contents.

- **Medical Management:** In definitive treatment, albendazole (15 mg/kg/day divided into two doses or 400 mg twice daily with food in an adult) or mebendazole is given continuously for 1 to 3 months or even 6 months depending on clinical factors. It should be known that medical therapy is futile in cases of cysts larger than 5 cm or having daughter cysts. In adjunctive therapy to surgery and percutaneous management, albendazole or mebendazole is given 4 to 30 days preoperatively and should be given for 1 month in case of albendazole and 3 months in case of mebendazole after surgery. Adjunctive therapy reduces recurrence by inactivating the protoscolices and renders the cyst wall soft, thus facilitating its removal.

- **Observation:** This is for uncomplicated stage 4 and 5 cysts.

- For alveolar Echinococcus, surgery is the main treatment of choice with two years of adjunctive drug therapy.

- Follow-up by ultrasonography and serology is done for 3 to 5 years.