Amiloride works by inhibiting the epithelial sodium channels (ENaC) in the distal nephron (distal convoluted tubule and cortical collecting duct), lung, and colon. These ENaCs are composed of two domains that span the apical membrane. Those domains are M1 and M2. Intracellularly there C and N termini, while extracellularly, there is a large loop that contains 2 or 3 cysteine-rich domains. ENaCs consist of three subunits; alpha, beta, and gamma

Usually, sodium moves down its electrochemical gradient to enter the tubular cells through the ENaCs. This gradient results from the basolateral membrane Na/K ATPase. Reabsorption of Na is associated with depolarization of the apical membrane, which creates a lumen-negative transepithelial potential difference. This potential difference enhances potassium secretion through the apical potassium channels and, subsequently, potassium excretion. Amiloride selectively inhibits ENaCs resulting in a decrease in hyperpolarization of the apical membrane and consequently decreases potassium, hydrogen, calcium, and magnesium secretion. Because amiloride inhibits ENaCs, it can also lead to mild natriuresis.

Both the loop diuretics and thiazides will lead to increased Na concentration in the distal convoluted tubule and cortical collecting duct. This increase in Na concentration couples with increased Na reabsorption as well as increased potassium secretion and excretion. Therefore, co-administration of amiloride with thiazide or loop diuretics decreases their kaliuretic effect and augments their antihypertensive and diuretic effect.

Amiloride might be useful in treating insulin-induced edema. In this condition, there is upregulation of ENaCs, which results in increased Na reabsorption and subsequently increased potassium secretion and excretion. However, amiloride is not that effective in cases of hyperaldosteronism when compared to spironolactone and eplerenone.

Amiloride can induce apoptosis in multiple myeloma cell lines in mice, and therefore it might be used to treat relapsed multiple myeloma in the future. Also, amiloride had a synergistic effect when combined with melphalan, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone.