**Telomeres and Oxidative Stress**

DNA stressors include numerous endogenous and exogenous factors such as mitochondrial dysfunction, cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, inflammation, a high-fat diet, and other lifestyle and environmental factors.

Obesity is highly associated with chronic inflammation and increased ROS levels in adipose tissue. These patients with a higher body mass index (BMI) are associated with a higher blood volume, leading to greater proliferation of blood cells- all of which are related to the shortening of the telomere

**Cancer**

While the synthesis of telomeres by the reverse transcriptase, telomerase, is absent in the majority of human somatic cells, it is found in greater than 90% of tumorigenic cells and in-vitro immortalized cells.

**Telomerase-targeted Cancer Immunotherapy**

Because upregulated telomerase activity is significant in tumor cells, hTERT makes an attractive tumor antigen for telomerase targeted cancer immunotherapy. Several approaches exist, including oligonucleotide inhibitors, immunotherapeutic approaches, and telomerase-directed gene therapy. Oligonucleotide inhibitors are modified nucleic acids that are able to inhibit telomerase, thereby inducing telomere shortening and forced cellular senescence and apoptosis. Immunotherapeutic approaches use high-avidity T lymphocytes that are reactive against the catalytic enzyme. Finally, telomerase-directed gene therapy involves the selective killing of tumor cells by targeting telomerase promoters.