The widespread use of the Hib vaccine has greatly decreased the rates of early childhood meningitis and epiglottitis.

All healthcare team members need to be consistent regarding vaccination recommendations and educate the patients about how important the Hib vaccine (as well as any other vaccine) is to their child’s health and well-being. Staying up to date on current vaccine recommendations and having recommended vaccine schedules hanging up in the office or easily accessible to the staff are helpful ways to make sure everyone is aware of the recommendations. Decreasing missed visits can help ensure that children receive their vaccinations on time. Calling parents to remind them that their child has an upcoming visit for immunizations and calling after missed appointments to reschedule immunizations could help keep children on track with their vaccinations. Providers should also carefully consider postponing vaccinations due to acute illness. Vaccinating children who present to their immunization appointments in a mild-moderately ill state is a good way to prevent children from falling behind on their vaccinations. Providers can explain to parents that this is safe to do and is often the better option than postponing vaccinations which protect children from more severe illnesses.

It is also essential to emphasize the basis for the vaccination schedule for preterm or very low birth infants is on chronological age, not corrected age. Preterm infants are more likely to have an immature immune system, thereby necessitating the protection through vaccines from these invasive illnesses by Haemophilus influenzae. Perhaps the most crucial aspect of vaccinations to reassure parents about in this day and age is that vaccinations do not cause or increase the risk of autism.