Congenital heart disease comprises structural and functional disease of the heart. The incidence of congenital heart disease (CHD) is relatively uncommon. Nearly 1% of births are affected each year in the United States. The leading cause of death between 1999 and 2006 was CHD in 27,960 people; 48% of fatalities were infants due to complex surgeries and prolonged intensive care unit (ICU) stay.

There is fetal wastage due to congenital heart defects incompatible with life and some heart lesions that remain asymptomatic (e.g., bicuspid aortic valve and patent ductus arteriosus) in early life, thus making the true incidence unknown. The different population shows a different pattern of CHD. For instance, there is an increased prevalence of congenital disabilities in premature and small for gestational age infants compared to full-term newborns.

It is a unique challenge for an anesthesiologist caring for children with congenital heart defects undergoing surgery. There has been significant improvement in diagnostics, cardiopulmonary bypass techniques, perioperative monitoring, cardiac catheterization techniques, and minimally invasive procedures for sicker children.

Tailoring the anesthetic plans is crucial for each child with unique requirements, special considerations, and pathophysiological concerns. In this regard, the anesthetist must be innovative and flexible, as rigid protocols are never appropriate in stressful situations. For the success of a pediatric surgical program, good team effort and communication among the team members are essential. Early repair of congenital cardiac defects with advancement prevents progression to congestive heart failure and unrepairable complications. Some children may benefit from cardiac transplantation with unsuccessful surgical repair.