The diagnosis of LC is often challenging due to the low sensitivity of different diagnostic modalities. The initial diagnostic evaluation includes at least a high-quality MRI of the brain and spine and CSF studies. MRI with gadolinium contrast has a sensitivity of 70% and specificity of 77% to 100%. It may detect leptomeningeal enhancement, hydrocephalus, subependymal nodules/deposits (which may also be seen on cerebral convexities), cisterns, and on the tentorium. Spinal cord involvement may show patchy enhancement of nerve roots and extramedullary nodules.

If safe, then diagnostic evaluation should be furthered by a lumbar puncture (LP). In the case of LC, CSF studies usually show mild pleocytosis, hypoglycorrhachia (usually less than 60 mg/dL), and elevated protein (greater than 45 mg/dL). If the glucose levels are very low, then infectious etiologies must be ruled out. In 50% to 70% of cases, it may show elevated opening pressure (greater than 150 mm) as well. False-negative cytology results are common, and a study shows CSF cytology can have false-negative results of up to 36% when samples are refrigerated for 48 hours. These false-negative results can be minimized by securing a large volume (10 mL) of CSF for cytology, expediting sample processing without additional storage, and obtaining CSF from cisterns or the lumbar region or a site of known leptomeningeal involvement. In most cases, positive CSF studies and suggestive radiographic findings are enough to make a diagnosis, but a negative LP should be followed by at least one additional LP, especially if there is high clinical suspicion. The sensitivity of cytology is 50% to 60% after the first LP and approaches 85% to 90% with the second collection.

CSF tumor markers also have been evaluated as an aid in the diagnosis, but the relative lack of sensitivity and specificity limits this modality from routine use. Nonetheless, this method is an option in certain tumors if all other workup is negative. Certain tumor markers that can be tested include CEA in adenocarcinomas, alpha-fetoprotein in hepatocellular and testicular carcinomas, and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin in choriocarcinomas and testicular carcinomas. There is also some data on determining VEGF levels in CSF, but further research is yet to be conducted on the topic.

Recently, cell-free DNA in CSF has undergone evaluation to detect tumor-specific somatic mutations through next-generation sequencing, which may help detect certain tumors.

Rarely, CSF flow studies/ventriculography using Indium 111-DTPA or Technetium-99m labeled albumin may be used to identify CSF flow.

If there is no active systemic disease, then systemic restaging is advised to guide diagnosis and therapy.