Endoleaks are a complication in approximately 25% of EVARs that must be monitored with either postoperative triple-phase CTA scans or color duplex ultrasound. This surveillance is required as endoleaks allow blood to fill the aneurysm sac around the endograft and may contribute to the continued risk of sac rupture. Type II endoleaks are the most common and occur when aortic side branches such as lumbar, inferior mesenteric, or middle sacral arteries provide retrograde filling to the lower pressure aneurysm sac. These are often thought to be benign but are treated most commonly with translumbar or transarterial embolization when intervention is deemed necessary. Other endoleaks include Type I, sac filling around graft ends; Type III, sac filling at misaligned graft components; Type IV, sac filling through porous graft material; and Type V, sac filling through endotension).

Another devastating but rare complication following EVAR is graft infection. Its incidence has been reported to be between 0.2% to 5% of endovascular aortic repairs with an increased occurrence after emergent repairs and in patients with infection complicating the index operation. Patients often present with nonspecific symptoms which can delay diagnoses such as back pain, abdominal pain, fever or chills. Additional findings include aortic fistula, endoleak, or aneurysm rupture. Endograft infections are often polymicrobial or caused by gram-positive organisms. Surgical management is the mainstay of endograft infection with graft excision, tissue debridement, and aortic conduit reconstruction being the overarching approach. This was traditionally accomplished with graft excision, over-sewing the aorta and performing an extraanatomical bypass to ensure distal perfusion. In-line reconstructions with venous conduits, cryo allografts, or antibiotic-impregnated prosthetic grafts are more widely utilized approaches. As persistent sepsis or recurrent infection remains a possibility following these procedures, patients should be placed on long-term antibiotic therapy.