The care of the patient with Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) requires collaboration by all members of the healthcare team. Nurses are integral in coordinating care services in the acute phase of GBS and in recognizing and preventing GBS complications, including decubitus ulcers, and infection prevention. Pharmacists should be well-versed in the adverse effects that may occur with the administration of medications including IVIG as well as pain and cardiac medications. Respiratory therapists should assist in preventing problems such as aspiration pneumonia. Physical and occupational therapists are crucial in assisting with muscle strengthening exercises, gait training, ROM exercises, use of assistive devices such as walkers, canes, and wheelchairs as well as activities to improve functional status and activities of daily living (eating, grooming, bathing, etc). Psychological support should be coordinated with social workers, psychologists, or psychiatrists. GBS patients should have care coordinated in the acute phase of the illness by a hospital-based clinical care manager. Patients should be assessed for rehabilitation and care coordination with an assessment of rehabilitation potential by members of the rehabilitation team including MDs, physiatrists, speech therapists, social workers, and rehabilitation care managers and nurses.  Following GBS recovery, patients often find it helpful to enlist in support groups available through the GBS foundation. Education of the GBS patient and family members should be coordinated by the nurse throughout the course of the illness in collaboration with health educators.