**Continuous Venovenous Hemofiltration (CVVH):**This method utilizes hydrostatic pressure across a semipermeable membrane for ultrafiltration using convection to filter solutes.

**Continuous Venovenous Hemodialysis (CVVHD):**This method utilizes diffusion via a transmembrane concentration gradient across the membrane.

**Continuous Venovenous Hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF):**This combines both the convection and diffusion methods of filtration. In this method, dialysate is used in addition to the high rates of ultrafiltration and the use of replacement fluid. Small and middle-sized molecules are both efficiently removed.

The composition of the dialysate or the substitution fluids can be tailored to achieve the desired plasma composition. This is mainly applied in electrolyte derangements and lactic acidosis, where a bicarbonate buffer may be used.

If CRRT is employed only for volume management without using a substitute fluid, it is known as slow continuous ultrafiltration.

The preferred vascular access site is the right internal jugular vein due to a more direct pathway to the superior vena cava. An alternative to jugular access is the femoral vein. The subclavian vein is less preferred as it may result in stenosis of the vessel and may cause future issues if the patient requires an arteriovenous (AV) fistula. The ideal location of the catheter tip from an internal jugular approach is the junction of the superior vena cava and the right atrium. From a femoral approach, the ideal catheter tip location is close to or within the inferior vena cava. The positioning of the catheter needs to be able to sustain blood flow rates of around 200 to 300 mL/min. If the catheter is malpositioned, there is a higher chance of restricted blood flow, circuit flow interruptions, and filter clotting.

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients with AV fistulas should not use these if CRRT is needed. Using their established AV fistula increases the risk of needle dislodgment and bleeding. Existing tunneled catheters dialysis may be used.

In CRRT, using an extracorporeal circuit results in a prothrombotic state. If membrane clotting occurs, it will decrease the surface area available for diffusion or convection. In this situation, an anticoagulant is required to prevent clotting. The anticoagulant used can either be systemic or regional. Both systemic and regional anticoagulation have advantages and disadvantages as shown in Table 1. The options for systemic anticoagulation include unfractionated heparin or low molecular weight heparin.

If using this method, serum ionized calcium levels should be monitored frequently. These patients will often require a calcium infusion with rate adjustments based on the ionized calcium level. One option if anticoagulation cannot be used is intermittent saline flushes. This is performed every 15 to 30 minutes and helps wash off the fibrin strands. However, filter half-lives are generally reduced.

Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of anticoagulation methods.