An azygos lobe usually presents as an incidental finding on a chest x-ray or computed tomography that requires awareness by the operating surgeon. Technical problems in thoracoscopic procedures may arise with an azygos lobe. Sympathectomies and lobectomies involving azygos lobes have commonly been reported.

**Sympathectomy**

Sympathectomy is a surgical procedure involving the removal of a portion of the sympathetic nerve trunk in the thoracic region. The procedure is primarily used to treat hyperhidrosis of the palms. Other conditions that are less commonly treated with sympathectomy include Raynaud disease, complex regional pain syndrome, and facial blushing. An analysis of 1731 cases of bilateral video-assisted thoracic sympathectomies (VATS) reported that the most common technical difficulty was pleural adhesions in 116 cases (6.7%) followed by azygos lobes which were seen in 7 patients (0.4%) ****Although relatively rare, an azygos lobe may be associated with an anomalous azygos vein that is covering the upper thoracic chain. A review of 2272 patients who underwent endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy (ETS) for hyperhidrosis reported 20 cases of an azygos lobe**.**Of those 20 cases, two distinctive variations were described in which the venous drainage was either present (type 2) or in which the downward drainage system was not present (type 1). Given that the surgeon is made aware of the anomaly, usually by chest x-ray or CT scan, there are effective techniques for performing the procedure. The study reported similar results to those obtained in patients without an azygos lobe.

**Lobectomy**

Lobectomy is the surgical removal of a lobe of the lung, often performed in the early stages of non-small cell lung cancers. The procedure involves ligation of contributing pulmonary arteries, pulmonary veins, and lobar bronchi. Several cases of primary lung cancer arising from an azygos lobe have been reported in the literature. Technical difficulties were reported, but the outcomes were desirable, nonetheless. One study involving the removal of an azygos lobe containing positron emission tomography (PET) positive nodule with the use of VATS illustrated a technique involving caudal traction on the azygos lobe in order to allow circumferential exposure of the lobe and identification of the bronchovascular pedicle without the need for thoracotomy or extensive azygos vein dissection