The appearance of edema and exudate are expected within the first few days after treatment, and patients should be informed of this during pre-procedure counseling. The use of cooling compresses, saline/water soaks, and head elevation will help minimize edema and keep the skin moist, promoting rapid wound healing. Skin cleansing and application of ointment should be performed routinely until crusting resolves (3 to 4 days for fractional, 7 to 10 days for full-field laser resurfacing).

Pain associated with the post-procedure period can typically be managed with acetaminophen with or without stronger oral analgesic agents. Patients must be counseled to avoid scratching or rubbing the skin and engage in photoprotective activities, including avoidance of the sun and use of sunscreen to minimize the risk of persistent hyperpigmentation. Occasionally, pruritus may occur, and the patient should be monitored and provided with topical corticosteroids to apply twice daily for several days if needed.

The use of topical steroids, hydroquinone cream, retinoids, or peeling agents has been employed to reduce the development of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and to accelerate its resolution. Scarring can be managed with topical or intralesional steroids as well as nonablative fractional lasers.

Patients can generally return to work 14 to 21 days following a full field face CO2 laser resurfacing and 3 to 8 days following a full field Er:YAG laser skin resurfacing. Fractional CO2 lasers generally require a 4 to 10 day recovery period, while only 1 to 3 days off work are recommended after fractional Er:YAG laser resurfacing.

Patients should be informed of the expected recovery timeframe and regularly monitored by the interprofessional healthcare team to ensure normal healing.