Initiating early clinical trials after establishing proof of a concept commence after an Investigational New Drug Application (IND) has been reviewed and approved by the FDA. Similar procedures are used in the EMA, Japan, and other countries, although some nations limit new drug testing for the first time. The initial studies in humans can be in actual patients if the drug's toxicity or target would not be appropriate for volunteers. Increasing doses of the drug are used to establish the drugs' safety and determine the drugs' pharmacokinetics (the duration and extent of the drug in the body) as well as to measure the drugs' effect on biomarkers (serum or tissue enzymes, histology, or any other measure of drug effect such as glucose in diabetes). This data will be used to select doses to be brought into a proof of concept or phase 2 studies in a select patient population. Clinical trials like the TeGenero disaster are fortunately the exception and not the rule. In this study, the first volunteers received a 500 times lower dose than the safe dose as established in animal studies. However, all six human volunteers faced life-threatening conditions involving multiorgan failure, which required transfer to the intensive care unit. As a result, the implementation of new precautions and toxicity calculations became standard since that 2006 incident.

Registration or pivotal clinical trials demonstrate safety and efficacy in the target patient population. These trials may encompass thousands of patients or only a small number (as in ultra-rare diseases). The outcomes vary between pathologies and range from overall survival (in oncology indications) to reducing the incidence of asthma exacerbations requiring hospitalizations to effects on a biomarker like HbA1C in patients with diabetes. Patient selection is crucial to match the drug effects with the target patient population, but the data from the studies must also be extrapolated to the broader patient population. Endpoint selection is crucial because it must reflect a meaningful alteration in patient outcomes and be statistically achievable with the study design. These studies often take several years to complete and analyze.

Once the entire drug development package is complete with reports from discovery, preclinical, chemistry, manufacturing, and clinical, a regulatory submission integrates all of this data in a standard format. The submission can be many terabytes of data. Regulatory approval can take around a year, often through an outside review by experts (FDA Advisory Board) and a public hearing. If all goes well, the drug receives marketing approval and becomes available for patients.