Stomas can be divided into two broad categories depending on the part of the exteriorized bowel: ileostomies, involving a part of the ileum, and colostomies, created using a part of the colon. Both of these can either be end-ostomies -where the bowel is divided with the proximal part being used to form the stoma while the peripheral remains inside the abdomen as a stump with its end sutured- or loop ostomies, where the antimesenteric wall of the intestine is partially divided. The intestine is brought up to the skin, creating an ostomy with two openings, one “functional” and one unfunctional.

The main steps in creating an end-ostomy are common in both ileostomies and colostomies. First, a circular part of skin with a diameter of 2.5 to 3cm is removed at the desirable site using monopolar electrocautery, after being lifted using a Kocher clamp. The anterior rectus sheath is exposed next, after the blunt division of the overlaying subcutaneous fat. A cruciform incision is performed in the fascia, with 3 cm long limbs. The underlying muscle fibers are bluntly divided with a pair of straight scissors or a Kelly clamp to safeguard the inferior epigastric vessels. The posterior wall of the rectus sheath is thus revealed, and a vertical incision is made, dividing it and the parietal peritoneum. The proximal part of the divided bowel is then grasped with a Babcock grasper- which passes through the aperture made in the abdominal wall- and the bowel is exteriorized. The length of the bowel that ought to be protruding from the skin surface is 2 cm for colostomies and 5 cm for ileostomies. The midline incision should then be closed. Stoma maturation follows, with the excision of the protruding bowel's staple line using a No10 scalpel. The exteriorized bowel is fixed to the skin using interrupted, absorbable sutures. Ileostomies should be everted, creating a 2 to 3 cm spout protruding from the skin. Eversion is achieved by proper suturing technique: four sutures are initially passed through the subcuticular layer. A seromuscular bite is taken 4-5 cm away from the open end of the ileum, and a third full thickness is passed at the bowel's end. Colostomies can be matured either everted or flush. In the second stage, the enterocutaneous anastomosis is performed using full-thickness bites of the colon wall and dermal bites on the skin surrounding the stoma.

A loop ileostomy or colostomy is performed when fecal diversion is necessary. The procedure is similar for both operations. A bowel loop with enough mobility to be moved to the surface of the skin should be identified. Ideally, when creating an ileostomy, the chosen bowel loop should be at least 12 to 20 cm away from the ileocecal valve to ensure an easy reversal of the procedure in the future. The next step is to create a small gap in the mesentery or the mesocolon, through which a Penrose tube is passed to ensure control of the bowel loop. Sutures should be used to differentiate the distal and proximal limbs of the intestine. Next, an opening in the abdominal wall is created using the same method as mentioned above-and the bowel is delivered through this. The midline incision is closed and covered with sterile drapes. An incision is made in the antimesenteric part of the bowel, which should encompass about 80% of its circumference. At this point, it is possible to exchange the Penrose tube with a plastic bridging device. The enterocutaneous anastomosis is then performed, as mentioned above.

Special care should be taken to ensure the viability of the stoma. The bowel loop to be exteriorized ought to be adequately mobilized to minimize the tension exerted on the stoma. The trephine created in the abdominal wall ought to be wide enough not to strangulate the bowel loop but not so wide that the stoma will be prone to prolapse or retraction. Twisting of the protruding bowel or kinking of its mesentery jeopardizes the stoma's perfusion and is to be avoided.

Ostomy creation can also be performed laparoscopically, displaying the well-known advantages of laparoscopic procedures such as pain minimization, post-operative ileus reduction, rapid recuperation, shorter hospitalization duration, markedly decreased adhesion formation and subsequent small bowel obstruction episodes.