# Continuing Education Activity

Antibiotics are common agents used in modern healthcare. This was not always the case. From ancient times, people sought ways to treat those afflicted with infections. Dyes, molds, and even heavy metals were thought to hold promise for healing. Various microorganisms have medical significance, including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites. Antibiotics are compounds that target bacteria and, thus, are intended to treat and prevent bacterial infections. This activity will examine the various classes of antibiotics, their mechanisms of action, bacterial susceptibilities, and potential adverse events.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the various classes of antibiotic medications.
- Explain the various mechanisms of action of different classes of antibiotics.
- Review the potential adverse effects both of antibiotics in general and class-specific side effects.
- Summarize the monitoring requirements for patients receiving antibiotic therapy.

# Introduction

Antibiotics are common agents used in modern healthcare. This was not always the case. From ancient times, people sought ways to treat those with infections. Dyes, molds, and even heavy metals were thought to hold promise for healing.

# Function

**Classification**

The pharmacology behind antibiotics includes destroying the bacterial cell by either preventing cell reproduction or changing a necessary cellular function or process within the cell. Antimicrobial agents are classically grouped into two main categories based on their in vitro effect on bacteria: bactericidal and bacteriostatic. Common teaching often explains that bactericidal antibiotics "kill" bacteria and bacteriostatic antibiotics "prevent the growth" of bacteria. The true definition is not so simple. To accurately define each category, the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) must be understood. The lowest concentration that inhibits visible bacterial growth at 24 hours is the MIC.

Bacteriostatic activity is further defined by an MBC to MIC ratio greater than 4, whereas an MBC to MIC ratio less than or equal to 4 is bactericidal.Streptococcus pneumoniae.

**Types of Antimicrobial Agents**

**Drug Class and Specific Antibiotics**

**Bacteriostatic**

- Glycylcyclines: Tigecycline

- Tetracyclines: Doxycycline, minocycline

- Lincosamides: Clindamycin

- Macrolides: Azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin

- Oxazolidinones: Linezolid

- Sulfonamides: Sulfamethoxazole

**Bactericidal**

- Aminoglycosides: Tobramycin, gentamicin, amikacin

- Beta-lactams (penicillins, cephalosporins, carbapenems): Amoxicillin, cefazolin, meropenem

- Fluoroquinolones: Ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin

- Glycopeptides: Vancomycin

- Cyclic Lipopeptides: Daptomycin

- Nitroimidazoles: Metronidazole

**Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics**

Pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) parameters are used together to maximize the efficacy of antimicrobial therapy through optimization of dosing in patients. Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion are the PK components that affect the antibiotic concentration over time.

Bactericidal activity is either concentration-dependent or time-dependent. If an antibiotic displays concentration-dependent killing, for example, fluoroquinolones or daptomycin, the efficacy of bacterial killing increases as the concentration of the antibiotic increases.

After an antibiotic is absorbed, the distribution influences the extent of antimicrobial activity. The total amount of drug in the body to serum concentration is the volume of distribution.

The location of infection is crucial to note because some antibiotics are inappropriate for treating certain infections. In the treatment of meningitis, for example, the penetration of the blood-brain barrier is critical if one wants to achieve therapeutic antibiotic levels at the site of infection to prevent treatment failure.

# Issues of Concern

**Complications**

**Adverse Reactions**

All medications have the potential for an adverse reaction, and antibiotics are no exception. One in five hospitalized patients has been shown to develop an adverse reaction to an antibiotic, and nearly the same proportion of drug-related Emergency Department visits are due to adverse antibiotic reactions.

The anticipation of adverse events is warranted when initiating antimicrobial therapy. Certain patients are at higher risk, for example, the elderly, patients with multiple co-morbidities, and hospitalized patients.

**Adverse Reactions Associated with Organ Systems**

**Renal**

- Acute tubular necrosis

- Interstitial nephritis

- Renal failure

- Crystallization in renal tubules

**Cardiac**

- QT prolongation

**Hematologic**

- Thrombocytopenia

- Leukopenia

- Agranulocytosis

- Abnormal platelet aggregation

- INR increase (often due to drug interactions)

**Dermatologic**

- Rash

- Erythema multiforme

- Stevens-Johnson syndrome

- Toxic epidermal necrolysis

**Neurologic**

- Ototoxicity

- Vestibular dysfunction

- Seizure

- Peripheral neuropathy

**Other**

- Hepatotoxicity

- Myopathy

- Electrolyte abnormalities (i.e., hypokalemia, hypoglycemia)

- Drug-induced fever

- Drug-induced diarrhea

**Antibiotic Resistance**

The increased use of antimicrobial agents in clinical practice and other industries such as livestock farming has led to bacterial resistance to antibiotic agents. Bacteria have developed mechanisms to promote this resistance to survive.

The MIC of a bacterial isolate can serve as a metric for bacterial susceptibility to certain antibiotics.Mycoplasma species that lack this cellular component.

Bacteria also have the capability to gain resistance through attaining resistance genes from other bacteria or developing a mutation resulting in reduced or elimination of antibiotic efficacy. This type of resistance is known as acquired resistance.

More than one type of bacterial resistance may be present in a bacterial organism. Common resistance strategies are listed here.

**Mechanisms of Resistance and Examples**

**Reducing Intracellular Antibiotic Concentrations**

- Increased efflux

- Decreased influx

**Antibiotic Inactivation**

- Enzymatic modification

- Chemical degradation

**Target Site Alteration**

- Mutation of the target site

- Antibiotic modification

- Target site protection

- Elimination of the target site

# Clinical Significance

**Approach to Antimicrobial Therapy**

The causative organisms and infection source are not always known when a patient first presents. Antibiotic therapy is often initiated before an exact infectious disease diagnosis, and microbiological results are available. Antibiotics used in this manner are referred to as empiric therapy. This approach attempts to cover all potential pathogens. When microbiology tests result and antibiotic susceptibilities are known, definitive antibiotic treatment can be tailored to the specific infection etiology.

Prophylactic therapy is used to prevent infections in patients who do not have an active infection. Immunocompromised patients may receive prophylaxis against specific opportunistic pathogens. Prophylactic antibiotics are also used before surgical procedures and traumatic injuries such as open fractures and animal bites.

The severity of potential bacterial infection will determine the level of aggressiveness in antibiotic therapy. For example, in a life-threatening infectious disease such as sepsis, empiric broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics should be administered quickly after sepsis identification and continued until more information is gathered regarding the etiology and causative bacteria.

In addition to the possible source(s) of infection, likely pathogens, and situation urgency, different patient factors merit consideration.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**A Word on Antimicrobial Stewardship**

In the United States, it has been reported that nearly half of the antibiotics prescribed were incorrect in some way, and almost one-third of antibiotics were deemed unnecessary in hospitalized patients.

Antibiotic therapy and accompanying stewardship require the effort of an interprofessional healthcare team that includes physicians (MDs and DOs), mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), pharmacists, and nursing staff. This includes only using these agents when clinically indicated, targeted therapy based on the susceptibility of the infectious organism, and monitoring of side effects and, where indicated, drug levels. Employing interprofessional strategies with open information sharing can improve therapeutic results with antibiotic therapy and minimize adverse events. [Level 5]