All vessels in the human body are composed of 1 to 3 main layers: the outermost tunica adventitia, the middle tunica media, and the innermost tunica intima. These three layers have characteristic properties and vary relatively in their thickness in each type of vessel found in the body.

The adventitia is composed of strong fibrous connective tissue, which prevents vessels from bursting when carrying blood under high pressure. The tunica intima is composed of epithelial cells that play an important role in vascular function by signaling the smooth muscle of the tunica media to change its tone, especially in response to injury. Prostaglandins and nitric oxide are two important substances that the endothelium uses to regulate vascular tone.

The tunica media is composed of elastic connective tissue and smooth muscle. This layer is the most significant of the three when it comes to maintenance of blood pressure via SVR. The elastic fibers in this layer can hold the force exerted on the blood vessel as blood is pushed out of the heart.

The smooth muscle also found in this layer helps to maintain pressure on the blood by manipulating the diameter of certain vessels. In the arterioles, smooth muscle controls blood through capillary beds. The smooth muscle receives innervation from the autonomic nervous system, primarily the sympathetic nervous system via post-ganglionic noradrenergic neurons.

Another important mechanism for the alteration of SVR is the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.

Any change in caliber of blood vessels alters the amount of blood that can flow through so dramatically, that reducing the diameter of a blood vessel by 1/2 allows for only 1/16 of the previous blood flow. Most of the SVR arises from the arterial system, as the vessel walls of the venous system have relatively thin elastic layers and no smooth muscle layer to exert force onto the blood within. Arteries, on the other hand, have a very thick tunica media and tunica adventitia, allowing them to maintain the high pressures needed to perfuse the tissues and organs with blood.

The viscosity of the blood also plays an important role in SVR.