Radiographically, enchondromas have varied appearances based on location and extent of calcification, and they may resemble medullary bone infarcts. Enchondromas typically appear as well-defined solitary defects in the metaphyseal region of bones, especially in the long bones. Their appearance depends heavily on the location and extent of the calcification of the tumor. Centrally located lesions usually appear as well-circumscribed areas of rarefaction, most frequently diaphyseal, with an expanded cortex around it. Juxtacortical lesions are eccentric and beneath the periosteum in well-defined cortical defects. Small, flocculent foci of calcification are visible within the tumor.

Radiographically visible calcifications appear as fine, punctate stipplings and, if pronounced, may suggest a bone infarct. The calcifications can range in size from punctate to rings. Larger lesions can cause endosteal scalloping along with expansion and thinning of the cortex. Heavily calcified lesions may resemble bone infarct or bone islands, while an unclassified lesion may appear lytic. The appearance of cortical thinning, expansion, or breach of the cortex or soft tissue involvement signifies either advanced lesions or chondrosarcoma.

Computed tomography (CT) is useful for detecting matrix mineralization and cortex integrity, while Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) adds insight into the aggressive and destructive features of the tumor. Indicators of potential malignancy include large size, a large unmineralized component, significant thinning of the adjacent cortex, and bone scan activity greater than that of the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS). Progressive destruction of the chondrite matrix by an expanding, non-mineralized component, an enlarging lesion associated with pain, or an expansile soft tissue mass is strongly associated with the malignant transformation of an enchondroma.

On MRI, enchondroma, and chondrosarcoma often appear similarly on first pass analysis. Both exhibit low signal intensities on T1 with reciprocal high-intensity changes on the T2-weighted images with a lobular growth pattern. Both show enhancement with gadolinium contrast in peripheral and spatial areas. Neither dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI nor advanced techniques such as diffusion-weighted imaging and hydrogen proton spectroscopy have proved effective in differentiating enchondroma from chondrosarcoma. To differentiate the two, peritumoral edema must be assessed. Although this finding has not undergone prospective examination, case series have revealed consistency. In the case series analysis, no peritumoral edema was noted with enchondromatous lesions, while chondrosarcoma lesions showed the edema. Both CT and MRI can easily distinguish bone infarct from enchondroma.

Only two known biomarkers distinguish enchondroma from chondrosarcoma: periostin and alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR). Periostin, a stromal-related protein, is reportedly absent in enchondroma but is present in low-grade chondrosarcoma.