An in-depth history and thorough physical exam are essential, and commonly the first line of diagnosis for aortic valvulopathy. Symptoms of aortic stenosis or regurgitation often are not present or are too mild for the patient to notice until the pathology has become severe. Due to this, a careful cardiac physical exam is essential for early detection.

For aortic stenosis, a systolic ejection murmur can often be heard best over the right sternal border at the second intercostal space. This murmur will peak early during systole when the disease is mild, and as severity increases will peak later, it also tends to radiate to the carotid arteries along with a slowly rising carotid upstroke. Auscultation often reveals a sustained apical impulse as well. In severe disease states, a thrill can sometimes be palpated over the carotid arteries and aortic area. Additional physical exam findings due to complications and sequelae of aortic stenosis include those associated with heart failure and left ventricle remodeling, such as third and fourth heart sounds, pulmonary crackles, jugular venous distention, and pedal edema.

Aortic regurgitation when acute and/or severe can be suspected when the patient has a wide pulse pressure, and a low pitched early diastolic murmur is auscultated again over the right sternal border at the second intercostal space. Accentuated P2 may also be noticed due to elevated pressures in the pulmonary vasculature. Chronic aortic regurgitation may illicit a blowing diastolic decrescendo murmur with a positive correlation between the duration of murmur and the severity of the disease. Often auscultation of a laterally and inferiorly displaced apical impulse is present and sustained. Often there is the phenomenon of Corrigan pulse (water hammer), a bounding and forceful pulse that rapidly increases and collapses. Other less common physical exam findings include the de Musset sign, which is subtle head bobbing with a pulse, as well as the Quincke sign and Muller sign (pulsations on the fingernails and uvula, respectively). Similar physical exam findings to aortic stenosis can also be seen late in disease progression. Acute aortic regurgitation will present differently depending on the etiology. If a patient presents with tearing severe chest pain along with physical exam findings such as variation in blood pressure between the right and left extremities, consider aortic dissection as a cause. If the patient presented with a history of streptococcal infection along with fevers, swollen and tender joints, skin nodules, new onset of rash, then rheumatic heart disease would be high on the differential.

Chronic aortic regurgitation and late in disease progression of aortic stenosis symptoms generally fall into two categories; heart failure and decreased coronary and systemic perfusion. Overtime increased pressures in the left ventricle lead to congestive heart failure; patients may complain of pedal edema, shortness of breath, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and exertional dyspnea. Patients may state that they require additional pillows at night to sleep because lying flat causes them to be short of breath. Additionally, patients may complain that they have decreased exercise tolerance, the number of city blocks they can walk before feeling short of breath or lightheaded decreasing. In severe disease states, patients may present with syncope or may also complain of anginal symptoms.