# Continuing Education Activity

COX inhibitors are medications used in the management and treatment of chronic pain syndromes. They are in the anti-inflammatory class of drugs. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for COX inhibitors as valuable agents in the management of a variety of different pain syndromes in many various diseases. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of a multi-disciplinary health team in the management of patients with chronic pain syndromes and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of COX inhibitors.
- Describe the adverse effects and contraindications of COX inhibitors.
- Review the toxicity of COX inhibitors.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance COX inhibitor use and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitors enjoy use in a wide variety of conditions and diseases for their analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antipyretic properties. Diseases and conditions in which COX-inhibitors are indicated include but are not limited to osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, musculoskeletal injury, spondyloarthritis, migraines, and colon cancer (aspirin). According to the World Health Organization ladder, COX inhibitors are indicated for mild pain. Most professional societies, including the American College of Rheumatology, recommend the lowest dose and shortest duration regimen due to the risks associated with COX inhibitors.

# Mechanism of Action

COX inhibitors divide into non-selective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), COX-2 selective nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (c2s NSAIDs), and aspirin. NSAIDs include ibuprofen, naproxen, ketorolac, and indomethacin. C2s NSAIDs only include celecoxib. Meloxicam and diclofenac are cox-inhibitors that are not categorized.

The cox enzyme catalyzes the conversion of arachidonic acid into prostaglandin.

The COX-1 enzyme regulates many cellular processes, including platelet aggregation, kidney afferent arteriole vasodilation, and gastric mucosa acid protection.

C2s NSAIDs work by preferentially inhibiting COX-2. Aspirin irreversibly inhibits both COX-1 and COX-2 but, more so, inhibits COX-1 than COX-2.

There have been several other mechanisms of action attributed to COX inhibitors. Amongst them is inhibition of neutrophil function and inhibition of the inducible nitric oxide synthetase.

# Administration

COX inhibitors are most commonly given orally by mouth. Ketorolac administration can be via the intramuscular or intravenous route. Several COX inhibitors are administered topically, as well. Topical NSAIDs have been shown to have the least amount of systemic side effects.****

# Adverse Effects

Adverse effects vary depending on the COX inhibitor used.

**Mortality Rate**- The mortality rate associated with COX inhibitors is 21 per million and 24.8 per one million for NSAIDs and low-dose aspirin, respectively.

**GI Effects**

COX inhibitors can cause upper and lower gastrointestinal side effects ranging from mild irritation to more severe adverse events such as bleeding and perforation. Risk factors include patients older than 65 years old, have had a history of peptic ulcer disease, or are also on steroids or blood thinners. It is best to avoid NSAIDs in these patients.

Upper GI side effects get reported more frequently.

Lower GI side effects are present within 75% of patients taking NSAIDs.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is now implicated in increasing the risk of peptic ulcer disease in patients who are on NSAIDs, and eradication of H.pylori before the initiation of NSAID use has been shown to reduce the risk of upper GI ulcers and can be useful as a preventative tool.

The current recommendation is the lowest possible dose of celecoxib with a PPI for patients with significant GI bleeding risk who require NSAID therapy.

**CV Effects**

Non-aspirin cox inhibitors increase the risk of cardiovascular events, namely myocardial infarction, cardiovascular-related mortality, and stroke. The risk is small in patients without cardiovascular disease and slightly greater in patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease.

**Renal Effects**

The risk of renal effects with cox inhibitors is 1 to 5%.

Acute renal failure, chronic renal failure, acute interstitial nephritis, sodium and fluid retention, and hypertension have all had reports as adverse effects of COX inhibitors. PGE2 and PGI2 both act as vasodilators in the kidney, and a decrease in them is thought to lead to adverse renal effects. Acute renal failure is dose-dependent, duration-dependent, and reversible and is believed to occur due to a decrease in PGE2 and PGI2.

NSAIDs may decrease blood flow to the papillae leading to destruction and renal papillary necrosis. There have been cases reported for both traditional NSAIDs as well as celecoxib.

Acute interstitial nephritis occurs when there is inflammation within the interstitium of the kidney at the level of tubules; this can be due to a hypersensitivity reaction. Acute interstitial nephritis is reversible and occurs days after exposure. It commonly leads to nephrotic syndrome and can also lead to chronic renal failure.  At this time, the mechanism of how NSAIDs cause acute interstitial nephritis is unknown.

NSAIDs can cause sodium retention leading to weight gain and edema. Hyperkalemia can occur as well. Celecoxib and diclofenac have a higher risk of causing hyperkalemia.

**Hematologic Effects**

COX inhibitors have been known to cause platelet inhibition by inhibiting thromboxane A2 production. Aspirin causes irreversible inhibition of COX, and therefore, the duration of platelet inhibition lasts until 7 to 10 days after drug discontinuation. Patients with other reasons for increased bleeding, such as alcohol, anticoagulants, or liver failure, have enhanced bleeding risk.

Platelet inhibition increases bleeding time. NSAIDs cause reversible COX inhibition, and therefore the duration of platelet inhibition depends on specific pharmacokinetics such as drug dosing and half-life.

**Malignancy**

COX inhibitors have commonly shown favorable effects on cancer rather than adverse ones. Continuous aspirin use has demonstrated effectiveness in colorectal cancer prevention through a multitude of colorectal cancer pathways. It is recommended to select patients who are also at increased cardiovascular risk.[15] Aspirin and NSAIDs have been studied in prostate cancer as well, and results have shown that COX inhibitors could reduce the risk of prostate cancer, but currently, there are no clear guidelines or indications. Furthermore, long-term use has to balance against the negative effects.

**Hypersensitivity Reactions**

NSAIDs are the most common medications that cause hypersensitivity reactions.  The number of hypersensitivity reactions caused by NSAIDs is extensive, complex, and classification is evolving. Hypersensitivity reactions vary widely in presentation and mechanism. They can be due to a specific drug, termed selective responder in the literature, or due to any NSAID, termed cross intolerant. Clinical manifestations include urticaria, rhinitis, asthma, angioedema, bullous or desquamating skin lesions, DRESS syndrome, or toxic epidermal necrolysis. Some reactions are organ-specific clinical entities, causing bile duct syndrome, meningitis, or vasculitis. Mechanisms can be IgE mediated, T cell-mediated, prostaglandin inhibition mediated, or are often unknown. Other possible causes are present as well, and clinicians may miss NSAIDs as the primary cause. Ibuprofen is the most common among all NSAIDs to cause a hypersensitivity reaction.

The most described hypersensitivity reaction is NSAID exacerbated respiratory disease. It has a complex mechanism involving eosinophils and many other mediators. Chronic inflammation leads to symptoms such as rhinitis, nasal polyps, sinusitis, and asthma. It can result from an NSAID and has cross-intolerance. Single NSAID-induced urticaria, angioedema, and anaphylaxis can occur, and symptoms usually occur in less than one hour.

# Contraindications

- Allergy

- History of ulcers

- History of GI bleeding

- History of coronary artery bypass

- Renal impairment

- Cirrhosis

- Preexisting platelet defects

# Monitoring

NSAIDs interact with anticoagulants, aspirin, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, diuretics, and steroids, and increased monitoring of kidney function, coagulation, and GI effects may be necessary. Kidney function may require monitoring in patients who are at risk for renal failure as well.

# Toxicity

Overdose of COX inhibitors is rare and leads to minor symptoms or no symptoms at all, both in adults and children. Severe symptoms have occurred, but those patients had taken multiple drugs at the same time.****

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

COX inhibitors are among the most commonly used medications in the world. Although they are available over the counter, they can have serious side effects and are associated with mortality. Patients need to speak to their physicians about taking COX inhibitors, especially if they plan to take them for an extended period. Clinicians should educate patients regarding having a list of medications, including over-the-counter medications with them available at all times. Patients at risk may require regular monitoring of kidney function as well as an endoscopy exam. The monitoring of renal function and/or coagulation has its basis on level III evidence.

If planning a procedure for a patient on aspirin, communication is essential with the prescribing physician.

When a patient does have an NSAID-associated complication such as a GI bleed, all interprofessional healthcare team members must be aware of the contraindications and possible adverse effects. This involves excellent communication between gastroenterologists, primary care providers, nurses, and pharmacists. The contraindication should be communicated clearly with the patient and made clear in the patient's chart. Nursing will carry much of this responsibility since they have more frequent contact with the patient and can assess therapeutic effectiveness and monitor for adverse effects. The pharmacist can verify appropriate dosing and check for drug interactions, and communicate any concerns to the prescriber. All interprofessional team members need to communicate and collaborate to make COX inhibitor therapy successful, optimizing patient outcomes. [Level 5]