# Continuing Education Activity

Calcium carbonate is an inorganic salt primarily used in the management and treatment of low calcium conditions, GERD, CKD, and various other indicated conditions. It is classified as a calcium supplement, antacid, and phosphate binder. This activity outlines the significant indications, actions, and contraindications for calcium carbonate as a valuable agent in treating osteoporosis, hypothyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis, many other conditions or disorders that lower serum calcium levels. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the healthcare team in the care of patients with low serum calcium, GERD, CKD, and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanisms of action of calcium carbonate.
- Describe some possible adverse effects of calcium carbonate.
- Review the appropriate monitoring for patients using calcium carbonate.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance calcium carbonate and improve outcomes.

# Indications

Calcium carbonate, chemically CaCO3, is a resonance-stabilized inorganic salt therapeutically used as a food additive, a dietary supplement, an antacid, and a phosphate binder. Calcium carbonate is among the most abundant compounds found in the earth's crust and is commonly found in organic substances, such as egg and oyster shells, crustaceans exoskeletons, and dark leafy greens, such as broccoli and kale.

Calcium carbonate is indicated for low serum calcium conditions, such as osteoporosis, osteomalacia, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, pseudohypoparathyroidism, DiGeorge syndrome, kidney dysfunction, pancreatitis, rheumatoid arthritis, Fanconi syndrome, pregnancy, nursing mothers, post-menopausal women, and while using certain medications.

- Rifampin (antibiotic)

- Loop-diuretics

- Anti-seizure medications (phenytoin and phenobarbital)

- Bisphosphonates (alendronate, ibandronate, zoledronic acid, and risedronate)

- Calcitonin

- Chloroquine

- Corticosteroids

- Plicamycin

- Citrate use during apheresis (anticoagulant)

As an antacid, calcium carbonate is indicated for heartburn caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), NSAID upper gastrointestinal mucosal damage, duodenal and gastric ulcers, biliary reflux, stress gastritis exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, bile acid-mediated diarrhea, Non-ulcer dyspepsia, and urinary alkalization.

Calcium carbonate is also indicated for use in treating hyperphosphatemia seen in chronic kidney disease, as a phosphate binder, as a way of treating overdose by causing urinary alkalization, and as a prophylactic treatment in pregnant patients before birth to prevent aspiration pneumonitis.

New research suggests that the indications for calcium carbonate may also include cancer treatment by using calcium supplements to treat colorectal adenomas and using rare-earth-doped calcium carbonate with cerium to kill tumor cells via X-ray-induced photodynamic therapy.

# Mechanism of Action

Calcium is naturally present in the body. Most of the body's stored calcium is within the bones and teeth, as hydroxyapatite. The rest of the body's calcium is in blood, extracellular fluid, muscle, and other body tissues.

Calcium absorption occurs in the small intestine by active transport dependent on Vitamin D and diffusion.

Calcium carbonate has three separate mechanisms of action that have pharmacologic effects. Calcium affects the stomach, small intestine, and blood.

As an antacid, calcium carbonate neutralizes gastric acid by acting as a buffer in the stomach's acidic environment. When CaCO3 enters the stomach, it dissociates into ionized calcium (Ca2+) and a carbonate anion (CO32-). The carbonate anion will then bind to the free protons (H+) found in the stomach to increase the pH by decreasing the concentration of hydrogen ions. By increasing the pH in the stomach, pepsin, bile acids, and the toxins of Helicobacter pylori become inhibited.

The inhibition of pepsin, an enzyme that can degrade tissue protein, and inhibition of bile acid helps reduce damage to and promote the healing of ulcers in the mucosal lining of the stomach and duodenum and injury to the esophagus caused by GERD.

As an antacid, calcium carbonate also increases gastrointestinal motility and initiates peristalsis.

As a phosphate binder and drug chelator, calcium carbonate works in the small intestines. In individuals with hyperphosphatemia or overdose, calcium will bind to form an insoluble compound blocking dietary phosphate or excess drug absorption and excreting it in feces.

Lastly, calcium carbonate also works in the blood to treat or prevent negative calcium balance seen in low serum calcium conditions.

# Administration

**Manufacturing, Bioavailability, and Absorption**

Calcium carbonate comes in tablet, chewable, oral suspension, or powder form. Tablets should be swallowed while drinking a full glass of water. The oral suspension should be well shaken before measuring the dose to ensure the ingestion of the proper amount. The bioavailability of calcium from calcium carbonate is higher as a powder.

Dosing depends on the indicated condition and patient age. For adult use for heartburn, dosing exceeds 1 gram (1000 mg) but should not exceed 7 grams in a day. For adult use for calcium supplementation, 1 to 1.2 grams may be taken orally per day, divided, and taken at meals. For adults with hyperphosphatemia, 1.5 to 3 grams per day effectively achieves optimal phosphate control in 65% of patients.

Beyond age and form of calcium carbonate, calcium absorption can be affected by the dose given, pH of the stomach, size of the patient, estrogen status, vitamin D level, and genetic polymorphisms.

**Distribution, Metabolism, and Elimination**

As previously mentioned, calcium storage in the body is primarily in bones and teeth. However, most of the calcium is found as the ionized, physiologically active form in the blood. Calcium carbonate is not metabolized in the traditional pharmacokinetic sense. Calcium carbonate is excreted in the feces as unabsorbed calcium carbonate, in the urine depending on glomerular filtration and renal tubule reabsorption controlled by parathyroid hormone (PTH) and Vitamin D, and as carbon dioxide from the lungs.

**Pregnancy and Breast Feeding**

Calcium can travel through the placenta and into breast milk during nursing. Calcium carbonate is safe to use for pregnant patients who have GERD, for aspiration prophylaxis before labor, and for nursing.

**Storage and Drug Interactions**

Calcium carbonate should be stored at room temperature and not frozen or exposed to heat.

Additionally, calcium carbonate will limit many drugs' effectiveness if taken together by increasing stomach pH and decreasing their absorption.

# Adverse Effects

Due to the short-term, periodic nature of calcium carbonate/antacid use and the small dose of calcium carbonate used for supplementation, most adverse effects are minor. However, if large doses are taken for an extended time or abused, overdose can occur. The patient can experience moderate to severe side effects of an overdose.

- Coma

- Confusion

- Irregular heart rhythms

- Muscle twitching

- Bone pain

- Abdominal pain

- Pancreatitis

- Acute renal failure

- Kidney stones

- Headache

- Milk-alkali syndrome

- Gall stones

Milk-alkali syndrome was historically a much more common severe side effect.

Common Side Effects

- High calcium levels

- Low phosphate levels

- Vomiting

- Nausea

- Constipation

- Gas

- Loss of appetite/anorexia

- Irritability

- Xerostomia

- Acid rebound

Additional side-effects occur in individuals taking calcium carbonate as a phosphate binder to treat hyperphosphatemia, including calcification of vascular tissues and death.

# Contraindications

Calcium carbonate use is contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity, renal calculus, high urine calcium levels, elevated serum calcium, low serum phosphate, achlorhydria, or suspected digoxin toxicity.

Care is necessary for patients with a history of kidney disease, heart failure, edema, or endocrine disorders, such as hypoparathyroidism.

# Monitoring

Adult patients using calcium carbonate as a supplemental therapy should have their serum phosphate and calcium levels periodically monitored to prevent adverse reactions and electrolyte imbalances. If patients continually return to using calcium carbonate, their symptoms require investigation to determine the root cause. Importantly, any patients using calcium carbonate for any reason should never be prescribed ceftriaxone to prevent end-organ failure.

Administration of calcium carbonate should be separated from the administration of all medications that have drug interactions mentioned above, apart from vitamin D. Patients with hyperphosphatemia should have their serum calcium routinely monitored to prevent hypercalcemia and other sequelae, including myocardial infarction, vascular calcification, and death.

Pediatric and elderly patients should be routinely monitored if using calcium carbonate and advised against long-term use.

# Toxicity

The FDA recognizes calcium carbonate as a generally safe drug and food additive.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

As a non-prescription drug, calcium carbonate is easily accessible "over the counter" and often used. Proper patient education by clinicians and pharmacists is needed to avoid improper use. Symptomatic relief provided by calcium carbonate often masks underlying gastrointestinal disorders that will not improve by using the drug. Patient awareness is necessary to hasten the correct diagnosis and treatment. Furthermore, patients on polypharmacy need to understand calcium carbonate's drug interactions. Clinicians should advise their patients to take their medications at separate times of the day and limit additional calcium intake that could lead to overdose and milk-alkali syndrome. Working with a pharmacist to assist with medication reconciliation would be a prudent choice to prevent any adverse drug-drug interactions. Nursing can also work with the patient to answer questions, review appropriate dosing and ensure patient compliance. These are examples of how interprofessional teamwork and communication can improve patient results with calcium carbonate therapy, respective of the reason the patient takes it. [Level 5]

Proper clinician education on considerations when prescribing, monitoring, and stopping treatment is also necessary. Vigilance is essential, and routine monitoring should occur when prescribing calcium carbonate to patients with hyperphosphatemia due to the possibility of calcification of vascular tissues. Care is also necessary when prescribing calcium carbonate to infants and the elderly because of renal function changes. Additionally, calcium carbonate should not be coadministered with ceftriaxone because of an increased risk of end-organ failure.

Nurses and other healthcare team members can improve healthcare outcomes by ensuring patient compliance. Patient compliance is problematic with calcium carbonate because of its interactions, adverse effects, and frequency of administration. Calcium carbonate can be inconvenient because it must be taken alone, except for vitamin D and other drugs that do not require a low stomach pH. Calcium carbonate has many gastrointestinal side effects, especially for the elderly. Calcium carbonate prescriptions can also translate to a high pill burden, like patients with hyperphosphatemia that may require more than 17 doses per day. Encouraging patient compliance and proper scheduling would greatly help improve patients on polypharmacy, those with comorbidities, and those that need to limit dietary electrolytes.