Elucidating a history of chronically decreased vision, such as a history of amblyopia, cataracts, advanced glaucoma, or retinal pathology, can trick the examiner into thinking the patient has eye misalignment from trauma. However, this may be due to a sensory visual deprivation that results in sensory esotropia (more common in younger children) or sensory exotropia (more common in older children and adults). Other important clinical histories include previous head and neck trauma, vascular disease, or aneurysmal disease that resulted in a cranial nerve deficit that can also blur the etiology of diplopia and strabismus. In all of these groups of patients, the forced duction testing will be negative.

Important parts of the ophthalmic exam, such as visual acuity and EOM motility assessment, can be limited if the patient is sedated or uncooperative. Therefore, performing as much of the other parts of the ophthalmic exam as possible, forced duction testing, and CT imaging are critical.

Appropriate antibiotics should be given preoperatively to reduce the risk of infection. In the case of open globe injury, a fourth-generation fluoroquinolone is given pre-and post-operatively to prevent endophthalmitis. If Pseudomonas aeruginosa or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection are suspected, fortified topical antibiotics, such as fortified cefazolin or vancomycin and fortified tobramycin are recommended. Suspected fungal infections should be treated accordingly with antifungals. Intravitreal antibiotic injections are considered in eyes with heavy soil contamination, retinal periphlebitis, vitreous inflammation, hypopyon, or IOFB.

Antibiotic prophylaxis in orbital surgery to prevent surgical site infections should be given pre- or intra-operatively.

General anesthesia is the preferred anesthetic method for open globe and orbital fracture repair because it allows appropriate anesthesia and akinesia to perform safe microsurgery.