I-131 scan is a non-invasive radionucleotide scan used for imaging of functional thyroid tissue and thyroid cancer remnant/metastasis. Theranostics in nuclear medicine described as combining diagnostic imaging and treatment for a specific disorder by using the same molecule either radiolabeled in a different form or same radiolabeled agent in different doses.

The thyroid gland produces thyroid hormones, which are essential to survive and modulate energy metabolism. Iodine is required for thyroid hormone production. Ingested iodine is selectively taken up by thyroid follicular cells with the help of sodium-iodine symporters (NIS) to be processed.

Thyroid stunning can occur during a radionucleotide scan. It is defined as a suppression of iodine production from thyroid, which is temporary. It occurs due to radiation given off the scan from I-131, thus trapping function of the thyrocytes and thyroid cancer cells. It is a radiological phenomenon that a clinician needs to be aware of when administering radioactive iodine.

The two most common radiotracers used in thyroid scans are I-123 and I-131. The differences between these two isotopes are as follows:

- I-123 has a short half-life (approximately 13 hours), decays by gamma emission, has better imaging quality, less stunning effect, expensive, and less readily available.

- I-131 has a longer half-life (approximately 8.2 days), decays by beta emission, is cheaper, readily available, but may have a potential stunning effect due to higher energy capture, allows delayed imaging.