# Continuing Education Activity

Field intubation is the placement of an advanced airway or endotracheal tube (ET) by emergency medical services (EMS) personnel outside the hospital setting. Endotracheal tube intubation (ETI) has long been the standard for airway control in the prehospital setting and is the focus of this activity. While ET placement has a long history of use in the prehospital setting, its use is not without controversy. When compared to in-hospital intubation, higher failure and complication rates have brought the practice of field intubation into question. Nevertheless, there are times when airway control is paramount, and the ability to intubate a patient who has no airway control is a critical skill for prehospital providers. This procedure requires sufficient knowledge of the proper technique and indications for its use. Local protocols and medical direction should guide prehospital providers regarding their use. This activity outlines field intubation procedures in the prehospital setting and highlights the role of the prehospital provider in performing field intubations on patients who require definitive airway control in the prehospital setting.

**Objectives:**
- Review the anatomy relevant for performing endotracheal tube intubation. 
- Summarize how field intubations impact patient outcomes.
- Review the limitations of performing endotracheal tube intubations in the prehospital setting.
- Explain the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to ensure appropriate training, enhance the delivery of care, and improve outcomes for patients undergoing endotracheal tube intubation in the prehospital setting.

# Introduction

Field intubation is the placement of an advanced airway or endotracheal tube (ET) by emergency medical services (EMS) personnel outside the hospital setting. There are many techniques available to control a patient’s airway or provide rescue ventilation and oxygenation to a patient. ET intubation (ETI), nasotracheal intubation, supraglottic airway devices, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), and bilevel positive airway pressure (BPAP) machines are all viable options in the right clinical situations. ETI has long been the standard for airway control in the prehospital setting and is the focus of this article.

The decision to intubate a patient should carefully be planned. The procedure can be technically challenging and lead to additional problems even in the best of circumstances. Provider competency and comfort with the procedure may also dictate whether a patient should be intubated. If a provider is unfamiliar or uncomfortable with performing field intubation, alternatives should be used if possible. Supraglottic airways and alternatives to intubation, such as continuing to provide ventilatory support via a bag-valve-mask (BVM) with airway adjuncts or CPAP and BPAP machines, might be better and safer alternatives in certain situations. The use of supraglottic airways, airway adjuncts, and CPAP/BPAP are discussed in separate articles and are not addressed here. There will be minor variances in technique and equipment used in-field intubation depending on provider competency and local protocols, but the main concepts should apply across all EMS jurisdictions. Field intubation should be used in patients that have lost control or have an impending loss of their airway, or patients that require increased ventilatory support that cannot be maintained through BVM ventilation and the use of airway adjuncts. Training and practice, appropriate patient evaluation and selection, and preparation in advance of difficult airway situations are all critical to the success of field intubation.

Despite a long history of prehospital airway management, there is conflicting evidence to show morbidity or mortality benefit when using prehospital intubation.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The relevant anatomy for field intubation is the oropharynx, larynx, esophagus, and upper airway. Providers need to be able to identify key landmarks when attempting field intubation to ensure good outcomes. For direct laryngoscopy, the provider should be able to locate at the very minimum the structures of the oropharynx, epiglottis, arytenoids, and vocal cords to ensure direct visualization of the ET tube entering the trachea. Variances in patient anatomy such as the location of the epiglottis and vocal cords relative to an anterior and posterior position in the oropharynx, or the size of the airway for patients of different body types and ages, can lead to difficulties when intubating a patient. Several mnemonics, acronyms, and scoring systems are available to help identify potentially difficult airway characteristics. A commonly used acronym to help predict a difficult airway is LEMON.  LEMON stands for:

- L: Look externally

- E: Evaluate the 3-3-2 rule

- M: Mallampati score

- O: Obstruction

- N: Neck Mobility

When looking externally, a provider should look for any signs that this may be a difficult airway. Physical characteristics including short or thick necks, obesity, dental conditions such as underbites and overbites, missing teeth, or facial trauma that may make the airway unstable, can all increase the difficulty of the procedure. Three anatomical measurements make up the 3-3-2 rule. Ideally, a patient should be able to open their mouth three finger widths, there should be three finger widths from the chin to the hyoid bone along the mandible, and there should be two finger widths from the hyoid bone to the thyroid notch. Variation in these measurements can indicate a patient with difficult anatomy for intubation. The Mallampati score is an assessment of the oropharyngeal structures that can also identify difficult airways. A patient is scored I to IV on the Mallampati scale based on the oropharyngeal structures seen with the patient's mouth open. A score of I indicates the ideal airway with the entire posterior pharynx fully exposed. A score of II indicates only partial visualization of the posterior pharynx. A score of III indicates that the posterior pharynx cannot be seen, but the base of the uvula is still visible. A score of IV indicates the most difficult airway when no posterior structures are visible. Airway obstruction may be anything that could interfere with the direct visualization of the ET tube into the trachea, such as trauma, edema, or masses in the mouth or neck. Neck mobility may be limited by cervical collars, trauma, or preexisting comorbidities and will decrease the provider’s ability to align the airway for maximum success.

In a study by Gaither et al., difficult airway predictors were identified in a retrospective of patients that required intubation in the ED after failed prehospital attempts or non-attempts before arrival in the ED.

# Indications

Patients require an advanced airway under two sets of circumstances: failure to maintain a patent airway and the inability to oxygenate and ventilate the patient adequately.

- A diminished level of consciousness with concern for the loss of airway control (Glasgow coma scale less than 8)

- Hypoxemic or hypercarbic respiratory failure

- Cardiac arrest

- Risk of aspiration with vomiting, secretions, or blood

- Airway obstruction

Each provider's local protocols will identify definitive indications for field intubation and can guide a provider to the appropriate action.  The online medical command can also provide real-time guidance to providers in the field to help improve outcomes.

# Contraindications

There are generally accepted contraindications to performing field intubation. Absolute contraindications are hard to define, but if the procedure cannot be completed in a manner that is reasonably safe for both the provider and the patient, field intubation should not be attempted.

Field intubation should also never be used in a punitive manner.  Patients that are intoxicated or uncooperative and have no other medical need for urgent airway control should not be intubated.

The time required for arrival to care can be another relative contraindication to field intubation.

# Equipment

When performing field intubation, a provider should use the equipment with which he or she is most comfortable. This choice is often both provider and company-specific. At a minimum, the provider will require:

- An appropriate size laryngoscope blade MAC, Miller, or combination blade, with a functioning light source

- An appropriate size ET based on patient anatomy and age

- An appropriate size stylet for ET tube used.

- Ten-mL syringe to inflate the balloon after insertion

- Medications to provide sedation in SAI or sedation and paralytic medications used in RSI as allowed by local protocols.

- Intravenous (IV) access if SAI or RSI is to be utilized or to provide resuscitation medications.

- Age-appropriate BVM with a reservoir and needed attachments to ventilate the patient before and after the procedure

- Suction equipment to clear vomitus, secretions, among others

- Rescue equipment such as a gum elastic bougie, multiple sized tubes to account for stenosis or anatomical differences in patients, supraglottic airway devices, or video laryngoscopy equipment, if available.

- Equipment for surgical airway as allowed by local protocols in the event of a catastrophic airway failure

- Methods for tube placement confirmation such as end-tidal carbon dioxide (CO2) monitoring equipment, waveform capnography, or color change CO2 detectors

- Tape or commercially available "tube holders" to maintain an appropriate ET position.

- Gloves, mask, and goggles as personal protective equipment

# Personnel

All personnel involved in field intubation must be adequately trained and be proficient with the procedure. Field intubation should not be undertaken alone if possible since it is nearly impossible to prepare for and safely perform the intubation and other ancillary resuscitative tasks simultaneously without help. Additional personnel can assist with BVM respirations, equipment set-up and control, patient positioning, and external laryngeal positioning. Having multiple staff available capable of performing the procedure can also increase the overall success rate by allowing another provider to attempt the procedure if the first provider fails.

# Preparation

Providers should place and position the patient in as controlled an environment as possible.

# Technique or Treatment

Intubation technique may vary slightly depending on the operator and equipment used, but the following overarching principles should apply to all situations. The “P’s” of airway control and intubation have long been taught to help providers effectively and safely perform the procedure.

- Plan—providers should plan for the procedure and evaluate the environment to ensure the safety of patients and providers.

- Preparation – the patient should be positioned as described above; all drugs, personal protective equipment, and instruments must be available.  All providers should understand and agree to the plan to intubate the patient and how to best care for the patient post-intubation. A Broselow Tape is beneficial when treating pediatric patients to ensure appropriately sized equipment and medication doses.

- Protect – the cervical spine should be protected in the setting of trauma with an additional provider holding in-line stabilization.

- Preoxygenation—patients are typically provided high flow oxygen via a non-rebreather mask or ventilatory support with a BVM and supplemental oxygenation to prevent potential decompensation during laryngoscopy.  These measures replace nitrogen in the airways with oxygen to create a reservoir for oxygen exchange during the procedure (Dunford).  Apneic oxygenation via high flow nasal cannula may also help maintain oxygen reserves during the peri-intubation period.

- Pretreatment—local protocols may call for the use of pretreatment medications to attenuate the physiologic response patients experience from intubation, such as lidocaine, to blunt the intracranial pressure response to laryngoscopy or atropine to offset bradycardia in pediatric patients.  Studies have shown mostly equivocal findings in the OR for premedication but no definitive evidence that it is beneficial in the prehospital setting.

- Local protocols set paralysis and Induction-indications and procedures to induce, sedate, or paralyze the patient and choice of medications available through the medical direction. In general, agents with rapid onset and short durations are best to mitigate problems arising from a failed airway.

- Placement with proof – Appropriate equipment and technique are utilized to place an endotracheal tube through the cords with direct visualization. ETCO2, chest rise, and auscultation should all be used to confirm placement.

- Postintubation management—Patients should be appropriately sedated after intubation to ensure comfort and safety per local protocols.  Care must be made to avoid hypoxia, hypoventilation, and hyperventilation, all of which can be detrimental to long-term outcomes and mortality.

Following this approach can mitigate potential problems and ensure a provider can respond to challenging situations if necessary. Proper preparation can also increase the likelihood of first-pass success.  First-pass success is critical to help prevent many of the complications described below.  Multiple attempts have been associated with an increased risk of intubation failure and complications.

# Complications

Although field intubation has been part of a prehospital provider’s scope of practice for some time, there persists a higher complication rate with prehospital intubation than in the in-hospital setting.  The most catastrophic of these complications are the result of misplaced ET tubes, which can lead to hypoxia and a patient's death.  Misplaced endotracheal tubes were found to occur 25% of the time in a study by Katz and Falk in a cohort of 108 field intubations.

- Dental injury

- Vocal cord injury

- Laryngeal injury

- Tracheal injury

- False passage creation

- Vomiting

- Aspiration

- Pneumonia

- Barotrauma

- Autonomic instability

- Hypoxia

Special note should be made of complications that can arise in the peri- and post-intubation phases of the procedure.  Dunford et al. examined a subset of patients from the San Diego Rapid Sequence Intubation Trial, which looked at the incidence of transient hypoxia and pulse rate reactivity during field intubations.

# Clinical Significance

Field intubation can be a life-saving procedure that should be part of all ALS and critical care prehospital providers' skill set. There are clinical situations where no other options for airway control and patient ventilation are possible.  Despite this need, the decision to perform field intubation should not be taken lightly.  The procedure is technically difficult and fraught with complications.  Multiple studies and editorials even question its utility and show concern for a trend of worse outcomes from field intubation versus basic airway management by EMS.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

When examining the efficacy of field intubation, it is important to recognize that these procedures are not performed in a controlled environment of the ED or OR. The use of prehospital airway control is reserved for the “sickest of the sick” patients, with no other intervention available to bridge the patient until definitive treatment is obtained at a hospital facility. Based on the environmental and resource limitations providers face in the field, it may be unreasonable to expect field intubation success rates to equal those of in-hospital care, but this should not deter further examination and quality improvement measures. The focus of future studies should not only examine overall trends for the success rate of field intubations but also explore how this procedure can be made safer and identify which patients would benefit from the intervention. There should be a conscious effort, like those proposed by Carlson et al., to identify the latest improvements in training methods, equipment, monitoring, and techniques that are proven to show benefit to patient outcomes.