The use of a standard antitubercular drug regimen for pulmonary TB is also applicable to the treatment of miliary tuberculosis. As per the World Health Organisation, a standard 6-month treatment regimen consists of two months of intensive phase treatment with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol and four months of continuation phase with isoniazid and rifampicin.

The duration of treatment can be modified according to the age group affected and the site of the primary disease. Longer duration of treatment is advisable for children, immunocompromised individuals, patients with slow clinical response, tubercular meningitis, tubercular lymphadenitis, and skeletal TB. The generally recommended minimum duration of therapy is nine months for skeletal TB and 12 months for TBM.

It is important to suspect and document the neurological involvement (particularly TBM) in all cases of miliary TB for two reasons: To ensure the adequate duration of therapy (which is generally 12 months in TBM) and the need for concomitant steroid therapy.

For previously treated patients, the WHO guidelines advocate that specimens for culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST) be obtained from all previously treated TB patients at or before the start of treatment. DST should be performed for at least isoniazid and rifampicin, and in settings where rapid molecular DSTs are available, the DST results should guide the choice of regimen. The duration of treatment can also be individualized according to the clinical setting encountered.

It is advisable to screen for diabetes and HIV status of the patient suspected of miliary TB before the administration of antitubercular treatment and vice-versa. Anti-retroviral treatment (ART) for all HIV-positive TB patients within the first eight weeks of starting TB treatment and within two weeks in profoundly immunosuppressed HIV-positive TB patients with low CD4 counts less than 50 for fear of immune reconstitution inflammatory response (IRIS).

Necessary medical and surgical interventions are advisable both for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Mechanical ventilation for the complication of ARDS, GI surgery for small bowel perforation, and ventriculoperitoneal shunt surgery for TBM can be done to decrease the complications of TB.

Although there is a lack of substantial evidence, the use of corticosteroids in miliary TB has shown clinical efficacy in a few scenarios, namely adrenal insufficiency, TB meningitis, large pericardial or pleural effusion, immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), immune-complex nephritis and secondary hemophagocytic syndrome.

Liver function tests (LFTs) should be done both at the start of ATT and during the course of treatment. Serial LFTs should be done to check for ATT-induced hepatitis. The criteria for ATT-induced hepatitis have evolved over time. It is considered when, in the absence of symptoms, there is an elevation of transaminases up to 5 times the upper limit of normal (ULN) and in the presence of symptoms up to 3 times the ULN or bilirubin rises twice the ULN, provided competing causes such as acute viral hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, and others liver diseases are ruled out.

Once the patient is found to have ATT-induced hepatitis, all hepatotoxic drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin, and pyrazinamide) should be stopped, and the patient is started on modified ATT to prevent further liver damage. Rechallenge of ATT can be done according to either British Thoracic Society guidelines or American Thoracic Society guidelines once the LFTs have normalized. They advocate either for an incremental increase of ATT drugs or re-introduction at full dosage.