When treating leprosy, dapsone is bacteriostatic against Mycobacterium leprae at concentrations of 1 to 10 mg/L. It acts via inhibition of the folic acid pathway. In particular, it prevents the bacteria from utilizing para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) for the synthesis of folic acid by competitively antagonizing PABA. It is a competitive inhibitor of dihydropteroate synthase.

In treating conditions with neutrophilic infiltrates in the skin, the drug acts by affecting neutrophilic functions. Dapsone inhibits the myeloperoxidase-peroxide halide-mediated cytotoxic system, which is a component of the neutrophil respiratory burst. Thereby, it controls the degree of neutrophil-induced destruction in lesions. In leprosy treatment, dapsone exerts its therapeutic effect by inhibiting the folic acid pathway. In conditions with neutrophilic infiltrates in the skin, the drug acts by affecting neutrophilic functions. It also may inhibit the synthesis of chemotactic lipids and interfere with LTB4 (leukotriene B4) mediated chemotaxis in neutrophils and migration of neutrophils to lesions. Dapsone also decreases the adhesion of neutrophils to IgA.

Though the actual mechanism of action of dapsone is not known for dermatologic conditions, the drug does have a specific effect on human neutrophils, perhaps by moderating the level of damage by neutrophils at the site of lesions and by decreasing neutrophil migration to lesions.

Dapsone also may have an action on eosinophils and monocytes. The efficacy of the drug in conditions like granuloma annulare and eosinophilic cellulitis, in which monocytes and eosinophils have significant roles, respectively, points to this hypothesis.