The exact causes of arachnoiditis are often not known since it is a rare condition with multiple possible causes, highly variable time from possible intial insult until clinical manifestations appear, and variable findings on imaging that delays or complicates making the diagnosis. Purported causal factors can be divided into three general categories: chemical, mechanical, and infectious. Possible chemical causes include various types of intentional or unintentional injections into the subarachnoid or subdural space where injectates may contain various possibly neurotoxic substances such as sulfite-containing preservatives, blood, other contaminants, or lesss likely direct local anesthetic toxicity. Mechanical causes may include accidental trauma or surgical interventions. Possible infectious causes include various bacterial or viral infections such as tuberculosis and HIV. In a study of 50 patients with arachnoiditis, it was noted that 90% of these patients had a previous history of intervertebral disease, iofendylate myelography, and lumbar spine surgery. Various causative factors have been suggested through case reports over the past 50 years, where previous trauma, spinal surgery, and subarachnoid hemorrhage are among the most frequently reported causes. Other commonly-listed possible causes include CNS infections, contrast myelography, spinal anesthetic agents, accidental chemical injection, and disc herniations. Less commonly reported causes include ankylosing spondylitis, Guillain-Barré syndrome, autoimmune vasculitis as well as idiopathic. Above mentioned causes precipitate scar tissue encapsulation of nerve roots, impaired blood supply, starvation of oxygen and nutrients, and accumulation of waste products, frequently resulting in pain and neurological deficits.