Psychological assessments for residents living in LTC should examine residents’ participation in meaningful activities, cognitive abilities, and emotional well-being because of the interconnectedness between each of them as they impact health, well-being, and quality of life.  Occupational therapy practitioners should incorporate these assessments into the traditional rehabilitation evaluations they already conduct.

Occupational therapy practitioners should use psychological assessment results further to promote participation in meaningful activities, especially leisure-type, because of the strong correlations with health, well-being, and quality of life.therapeutic activity, which is a Medicare current procedural terminology billing code, is invaluable to the therapy process.  Leisure-type interventions promote motivation and enjoyment in the therapeutic process. They are also highly gradable and adaptable, such as doing the activity in standing, increasing speed, raising the work surface, adding wrist weights to the resident.  Leisure-type interventions are also more therapeutic than rote exercise because they offer the ability to recruit multiple body systems and skills, such as proprioception, vestibular, vision, cognition, emotion, muscle tone, range-of-motion, endurance, motor planning, and gross and fine motor coordination.

Practitioners can also integrate leisure activities into functional maintenance programs (FMP) with restorative aide staff or activity personnel who continue helping the residents to do the leisure-type interventions/therapeutic activities after practitioners discontinue occupational therapy services. Traditionally, the FMPs have been rote exercised-based; however, leisure-based FMPs will offer superior outcomes because these types of activities are often more meaningful and engaging to the residents, which prompts residents to exert more effort in the therapeutic process.

An occupational therapy practitioner can also share psychological assessment results with the LTC team to guide care planning.  Medical doctors can then use results for the Annual Wellness Visit (a Medicare benefit under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act) to address medical areas of concern and make referrals to other healthcare team members further to promote health, well-being, and quality of life.

Psychological assessments should include an analysis of participation in meaningful occupations, cognitive health, and emotional well-being.  Results are useful to enhance participation, health, well-being, and quality of life among residents in LTC facilities.