The oral or parenteral administration of drugs is limited, mainly due to the shielding effect of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) on the macromolecules. In contrast, intrathecal therapy allows releasing drugs directly into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) through which they reach the site of action such as the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, thus eluding first-pass metabolism and the filter of the BBB. The CSF delivery involves a reduction in doses and, thanks to limited interaction with systemic receptors, reduces the potential occurrence of drug-induced adverse effects. In the case of opioids, these drugs act at the level of the dorsal horn; here, opioids interact with mu and delta (mainly) metabotropic G-protein coupled receptors in a presynaptic position between the primary and secondary neurons and on the body of the postsynaptic neuron. The activation of these receptors involves the inhibition of the release of substance P and other neurotransmitters. Again, the action on the postsynaptic neuron further enhances this inhibitory effect on the central transmission of the impulse that via the spinothalamic tract reaches the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL) of the thalamus. Opioid drugs also act directly on periaqueductal gray (PAG) in the midbrain, where there is a particular expression of opioid receptors. PAG plays a pivotal role in modulating pain through an influence on the descending path. In particular, PAG functionally connects to the serotoninergic raphe nuclei, which project to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This descending system interacts with inhibitory enkephalinergic interneurons into lamina II of the medullary gray matter (Rolando's gelatinous substance). In turn, the activation of these interneurons induces the release of the endogenous opioids enkephalin and dynorphin that bind to the mu-opioid receptors on the C and A-delta fiber axons that carry pain signals from peripheral nociceptors.