Treatment of neurosyphilis, including tabes dorsalis, is penicillin, just as it is for primary and secondary syphilis; only the dose and duration of treatment are different. Benzathine penicillin G is the drug of choice. In tertiary syphilis with normal CSF, treatment is 7.2 million units of penicillin administered IM as 3 weekly doses of 2.4 million units per injection. Patients should be screened for HIV prior to treatment. For clinically evident neurosyphilis, the treatment is intravenous injection of aqueous crystalline penicillin G (18 to 24 million units per day) or intramuscular injection of aqueous procaine penicillin G (2.4 million units/day) followed by probenecid (500 mg 4 times a day) for 10 to 14 days. If signs and symptoms persist in conjunction with clinical assessment of interval serologies and CSF testing, further courses of penicillin must be given. The chance of relapse is high in HIV-infected patients. Treatment of early neurosyphilis usually arrests disease progression and often symptoms. Treatment of late neurosyphilis, however, may only arrest disease progression with persistent symptomatology.

Doxycycline (100 mg oral, twice a day) or tetracycline (400 mg orally, twice a day) for 4 weeks is indicated in HIV-negative early syphilis patients with penicillin allergy except in pregnancy. If penicillin desensitization is not possible, ceftriaxone (2 g/day IM or IV for 10 to 14 days) can be used for penicillin-allergic patients with neurosyphilis, although cross-reactivity between penicillin and ceftriaxone is possible. One study reported the use of ceftriaxone and dexamethasone as a good alternative to the failure of penicillin G treatment.

Other additional treatments are symptomatic and depend upon the types of visible signs and symptoms. Analgesics such as opiates and valproate can be given in associated severe pain crises. Physical therapy or occupational therapy can be administered to prevent muscle wasting and weakness. Sexual partners should be given preventive drug therapy.