There are two search options in the MAUDE database, the ‘simple search’ and the ‘advanced search.' There is only one search field in the simple search where the researcher can enter the product name or the product code, or any other product identifier to search for the desired medical device reports. The advanced search mode provides much more comprehensive options. On the advanced search page, the database can be searched by the following categories: product problem, product class, event type (four categories described earlier), product manufacturer, model number, report number, brand name, product code, and the date the report was received by the FDA.

After filling out the relevant information, anywhere from 5 to 100 records can be displayed per page. The data for the desired dates can be downloaded in the Microsoft Excel format, which allows users to access the data offline as well. The search allows a maximum of only 500 records to be returned from a single search entry. If more results are desired, 2 separate searches by putting 2 different dates will be required. In the online MAUDE database query form, several different keyword combinations may need to be entered to capture the maximum number of results available. Furthermore, the device field entry may be combined with the manufacturer field entry to capture accurate data.

Certain elements of the report may be protected from public exposure under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). For instance, (b)(4) may be found in lieu of the composition of the product, and (b)(6) may replace the age of the patient. Navigating through the database can be challenging at first; however, after reviewing few reports, the research can familiarize themselves with the database; effective utilization of this resource can provide valuable information.