- Pneumothorax

- Pericardial effusion/tamponade

- Bleeding

- Arterial puncture with an expanding hematoma (can cause airway compromise in IJ)

- Infection

- Thrombosis

- Injury to the nerves

- Losing guidewire inside the vein

- Air embolism

- Arrhythmias

After a completed procedure of line placement, evaluation for all of the above must begin. During any line placement that is occurring within the thorax (i.e. subclavian, IJ, supraclavicular approaches), it is recommended that the patient is on continuous cardiac monitoring to watch for any arrhythmia or significant ectopy which could indicate to deep a placement of the line itself or simply irritation of the myocardium by the wire. Rare, but well-documented cases of fatal cardiac arrhythmias, including asystole, have been documented. Other acute complications include the development of bleeding at the site, expanding hematoma nerve injury, pericardial effusion, and pneumothorax. If the patient is awake a neurologic exam is recommended to assess for possible peripheral nerve injury. Evaluation for hematoma is performed clinically, however, ultrasound is also a useful tool for this as well as these other rapid complications. While chest x-ray has been considered the gold standard for evaluation of line placement and its complications, ultrasound has significant usefulness in these patients. Ultrasound can be used to assess for pneumothorax, and as in trauma patients, patients undergoing central line placement are often supine and air may not be as readily seen on a chest x-ray as air tracks anterior. Evaluation for lung slide with ultrasound is a quick and accurate way to assess for this in experienced hands.