Pramipexole is a selective dopaminergic agonist with a minor agonistic activity at other receptors. According to the dissociation constant (Km in nmol/L), the lower the value, the higher the drug's affinity to a receptor. Pramipexole recorded the lowest Km value with the D3 dopaminergic receptor and a slightly higher value for the D2 receptor. Therefore, pramipexole is highly specific to D3 and D2 receptors, with affinity to D3 being about eight times higher than D2. Affinity to D1 receptors is insignificant, being around 200000 times lower than D3. Apart from dopaminergic activity, pramipexole exhibits a small affinity to some serotonergic and adrenergic receptors.

Pramipexole's efficacy in PD is attributed to its D3 selectivity. It binds to presynaptic dopamine autoreceptors exerting negative feedback on endogenous dopamine synthesis. This process leads to a decrease in oxidative stress, which mitigates the damage to the nigrostriatal pathways.

Although the exact pathophysiology of RLS has remained undiscovered, studies strongly suggest a dopaminergic involvement. Unlike in PD, where the nigrostriatal pathways are affected, a set of neurons in the midbrain appears to be the target in RLS. These neurons project into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, modulating nociception. Pramipexole, given to RLS patients, restores optimal neurotransmission in these pathways.

Pramipexole exerts an anti-depressant effect in PD and cases of major depressive disorder. Studies show that such patients have downregulation of dopaminergic receptors, increasing their suicidal propensity. Pramipexole plays a role in the upregulation of such receptors and their potentiation in the mesolimbic system, an area of the brain responsible for mood regulation.

**Pharmacokinetics**

According to product labeling, pramipexole exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over the clinical dosage range. Its terminal half-life is approximately 8 hours in young, healthy volunteers and about 12 hours in elderly volunteers. Steady-state concentrations are attained within two days of dosing.

**Absorption:**Pramipexole is quickly absorbed, reaching plasma peak concentrations in approximately 2 hours. Food does not affect pramipexole absorption, but the time of maximum plasma concentration (T max) is delayed by about one hour when the drug is taken with a meal. The absolute bioavailability of pramipexole is more than 90%, indicating that it is well absorbed and undergoes low first-pass metabolism.

**Distribution:**It is extensively distributed and has a volume of distribution of about 500 L. About 15% of the pramipexole is bound to plasma proteins.

**Metabolism:**Pramipexole is metabolized to a negligible extent (less than 10%). Therefore, no specific active metabolite has been identified in human urine or plasma.

**Elimination:**Pramipexole is primarily excreted via kidneys, with 90% of a pramipexole dose recovered in urine, almost all as an unchanged drug. The renal clearance of pramipexole is approximately 400 mL/min, approximately three times higher than the glomerular filtration rate. A cross-study comparison of records suggests that the clearance of pramipexole may be reduced by about 30% in patients with Parkinson disease compared with healthy elderly volunteers. This difference results from reduced renal function in patients with Parkinson disease, which may be related to their poorer general health. Due to the high intrasubject variability in plasma concentrations at the same dosage, monitoring plasma pramipexole might be helpful.