The typical presentation is an initial loss of consciousness following trauma, a complete transient recovery (“often termed as a lucid interval”), culminating in a rapid progression of neurological deterioration. This occurs in 14% to 21% of patients with an EDH.  However, these patients may be unconscious from the beginning or may regain consciousness after a brief coma or may have no loss of consciousness. Therefore, the presentations range from a temporary loss of consciousness to a coma. Beware that the lucid interval is not pathognomonic for an EDH and may occur in patients who sustain other expanding mass lesions. The classic lucid interval occurs in pure EDHs that are very large and demonstrate a CT scan finding of active bleeding. The presentation of symptoms depends on how quickly the EDH is developing within the cranial vault. A patient with a small EDH may be asymptomatic, but this is rare. Also, an EDH may also develop in a delayed fashion.

A posterior fossa EDH is a rare event. This kind of EDH may account for approximately 5% of all posttraumatic intracranial mass lesions. Patients with posterior fossa EDH may remain conscious until late in the evolution of the hematoma, when they may suddenly lose consciousness, become apneic, and die. These lesions often extend into the supratentorial compartment by stripping the dura over the transverse sinus, resulting in a significant amount of intracranial bleeding.

This enlarging hematoma leads to eventual elevation of intracranial pressure which may be detected in a clinical setting by observing ipsilateral pupil dilation (secondary to uncal herniation and oculomotor nerve compression), the presence of elevated blood pressure, slowed heart rate, and irregular breathing. This triad is known as the “Cushing reflex.” These findings may indicate the need for immediate intracranial intervention to prevent central nervous system (CNS) depression and death.