Cervical spondylosis is considered a natural process of aging with a 95% prevalence by age 65 years. Most people remain asymptomatic but can present with axial neck pain, as well as progress to cervical radiculopathy and/or cervical myelopathy. Healthcare providers need to obtain a thorough history and detailed physical exam, which will help determine the severity of the pathology and guide treatment options.

The management of patients with cervical spondylosis is optimal with an interprofessional team that can include a primary care physician, nurse practitioner, neurologist, neurosurgeon, orthopedic surgeon, radiologist, physiatrist, pain specialist, physiotherapist, and pharmacist. The treatment approach should be in a stepwise fashion. Patients experiencing axial neck pain without neurologic symptoms will typically have a resolution of symptoms within days to weeks, without any intervention. If symptoms persist, conservative therapy should initiate, including NSAIDs and physical therapy. Patients with axial neck pain, cervical radiculopathy, or mild cervical myelopathy should work formally with a physical therapist on neck-specific strengthening and range of motion exercises, general exercises, and pain coping strategies before undergoing surgical treatment.

Orthopedic nursing can assist in arranging therapy, taking patient history, giving medication and therapy counsel, and coordinating care between other practitioners and the treating clinician. All medications cited above should be vetted and verified by the pharmacist, who will check for drug interactions as well as verifying dosing.

Additionally, patients can receive a referral to a pain specialist or a physiatrist specializing in spine medicine for cervical translaminar or transforaminal epidural steroid injections. Epidural steroids should have an analgesic effect, as well as an anti-inflammatory effect on the affected nerve root, thereby decreasing its sensitivity to compression.

Individuals who have intractable pain and/or progressive neurologic compromise should obtain a referral to a neurosurgeon or orthopedic surgeon. In the short term, surgical decompression can provide faster relief of pain, weakness, and sensory loss in patients with cervical radiculopathy or myelopathy. However, it is still unclear whether long-term benefits offset the risks and complications of surgery.

The outcomes of cervical spondylosis depend on the severity of the symptoms and underlying pathology. However, the recommendation is that members of the interprofessional healthcare team be promptly consulted as needed to improve outcomes.