Hydroxyapatite has been long used in hard tissue engineering due to its chemical similarity to the mineral of hard tissue. The era of hydroxyapatite (HA) in regenerative science dates back to the 1950s when bioceramics were used to fill the bone defects. However, after more than 6 decades of scientific innovation through research and development, HA has restructured the traditional philosophy of using ceramics in medical sciences through the wide range of its applications in dentistry and drug delivery.

HA application in orthopedics can vary from bone defects repair and bone augmentation to coatings for human body metallic implants. The HA-based implant can provide an interlocked porous structure

Another significant application of HA can be seen in dentistry since 1979. HA cylinders have been used for tooth replacement. This application was followed by the utilization of HA blocks and coating to enhance the bone fixation in a restorative dental procedure in the early 1980s. Now, HA is found not only in dental cement and fillings but also in toothpaste. HA in toothpaste acts as a polisher to decrease the deposition of accretions on teeth

The application of HA also can be found in drug delivery. The naturally porous structure with a high-binding affinity of HA provides a niche for drug loading, thus makes HA a good fit as a drug carrier

The applications of HA in hard tissue restoration and drug delivery do not use HA in pure form. The mechanical properties of pure HA are relatively low and brittle for load-bearing applications. Therefore, HA is usually incorporated in composite or polymer to increase its application

There are several methods to produce HA either from synthetic material or natural sources. Synthetic HA uses raw materials in the form of calcium carbonate, calcium hydroxide, calcium nitrate, diammonium hydrogen phosphate, and ammonium hydroxide. The fabrication process of HA is known as a wet method and solid-state reaction, followed by calcination or sintering process. Both of these methods use chemical reaction by varying the content of calcium oxide (CaO) and tricalcium phosphate (TCP) to reach HA stoichiometric conditions.

The wet method produces non-stoichiometric HA powder, with impurities such as ions of hydrogen phosphate, carbonate, chloride, and sodium. These impurities cause the formation of calcium-deficient HA

Hydroxyapatite from the natural source is commonly fabricated from fishbone, coral, bovine bone, eggshell, and seashells through the calcination process. HA produced from natural sources is non-stoichiometric due to the presence of trace ions found in the natural sources

The mechanical properties of HA depend on several variables, such as phase composition, crystal size, and the synthesis process. Pure HA has bending, compressive, and tensile strength is in the range of 38 to 250 MPa, 120 to 150 MPa, and 38 to 300 MPa, respectively. Young’s modulus varies from 35 to 120 GPa, depending on the impurities

Phase composition and preparation method affect the chemical stability of HA. For example, the exchange between magnesium, carbonate, or strontium with the apatite promotes an increase in solubility