Congenital protein S deficiency is autosomal dominant, with variable penetrance. 50% of patients who are heterozygous for protein S deficiency develop VTE; the remaining 50% are asymptomatic and never develop VTE. The annual incidence of venous thrombosis is 1.90%, with 29 years being the median age of presentation. Protein S deficiency can occur as a homozygous state, and these individuals develop purpura fulminans. Purpura fulminans appear during the neonatal period and are characterized by small-vessel thrombosis with cutaneous and subcutaneous necrosis. Estimates of the incidence of mild congenital protein S deficiency are between 1 in 500 individuals. Severe protein S deficiency is rare, and its prevalence in the general population remains unknown due to difficulty in diagnosing the condition.

Protein S deficiency rarely occurs in healthy people without VTE. In a study on healthy blood donors, the prevalence of the familial form of protein S deficiency was found to be 0.03 to 0.13%.

Studies reporting on the clinical significance of the association between protein S levels and VTE risk suggest lowering the cutoff of protein S levels required for the diagnosis. This would, in turn, change the prevalence of the disease.

Protein S deficiency is rare in the healthy population. In a study of 3788 persons, the prevalence of familial protein S deficiency was 0.03 to 0.13%.

**Race**

Protein S deficiency is 5-10 times more common in Japanese populations than in whites. The prevalence of protein S deficiency is 0.48%-0.63% in the general Japanese population and 12.7% in patients with thrombosis.

**Sex**

Men have a higher level of protein S antigen.

**Age**

The age of onset of thrombosis varies by heterozygous versus homozygous state. Heterozygous protein S deficiency causes thrombosis in persons younger than 40 to 45 years of age. The rare homozygous patients have onset in early infancy.