Many M. pneumoniae infections are asymptomatic. Patient symptoms are typically more significant than objective findings on physical exam. Disease onset is gradual, and patients can initially complain of headaches, malaise, and low-grade fever. A nagging cough is usually the most prominent respiratory feature. Chest soreness from coughing is common. Wheezing can also occur. Other respiratory symptoms include pharyngitis, rhinorrhea, and ear pain. Pleural effusion occurs in 15% to 20% of patients who develop pneumonia and may predict increased morbidity and mortality.  Most cases of pneumonia are mild and self-limited. However, a more fulminant course can occur. Extrapulmonary features may help suggest the diagnosis and include hemolysis, skin rash, joint pain, gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, and heart disease. These occur in less than 5% to 10% of patients. Hemolysis occurs due to IgM antibodies producing a cold agglutinin reaction. Cardiac involvement includes conduction abnormalities on ECG, congestive heart failure, and chest pain.

Physical examination findings are often minimal. Chest auscultation can be normal even if pneumonia is present. Scattered rales, wheezes can present later in the course of the disease. Sinus tenderness and mild erythema of the posterior pharynx may also be found on physical examination. A mild erythematous maculopapular or vesicular rash may also be found. Bullous myringitis, the presence of vesicles or bulls on the tympanic membrane, can be seen in some cases.