Much of the prolonged physical impairments of Post Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS) arise from ICU-acquired muscle weakness (ICUAW), defined as a diffuse symmetrical decrease in skeletal muscle strength for which other causes have been excluded. The clinical manifestations of ICUAW may include difficulty in ventilator weaning, impairments in speaking or swallowing, and generalized weakness of the limbs. ICUAW is further subdivided into muscle deconditioning, critical illness polyneuropathy (CIP), and critical illness myopathy (CIM), the latter two of which may coexist as critical illness neuromyopathy (CINM).

Mechanical ventilation results in rapid wasting of the respiratory musculature due to automatic unloading, with diaphragmatic thinning evident on CT scan in as little as two days.

In addition to skeletal muscle atrophy from disuse, inflammatory mediators, electrolyte imbalances, endocrine dysfunction, and poor nutritional status also frequently contribute to the myopathy of ICUAW by impairing protein synthesis and promoting proteolysis.

PICS also includes impairments in mental health function, including depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). These psychiatric sequelae are perhaps not surprising, given that the experience of being an ICU patient is often isolating, frightening, and dehumanizing. Repetitive exposure to physical pain and discomfort is also frequent, as is a general feeling of disorientation and confusion that arises from prolonged sedation or delirium. Risk factors for the development of mental health problems following an ICU stay include a personal history of psychiatric illness, female gender, and younger age. Exposure to sedative agents during the ICU stay, and limited recall of the ICU experience also increases the risk of subsequent mental health impairments. At the same time, the emergence of intrusive traumatic memories and nightmares during hospitalization may herald problems that persist post-discharge.

The experience of being a family member of an ICU patient is increasingly recognized as a significant psychological stressor that can trigger subsequent mental health problems, referred to as PICS-f.  Risk factors for family members to develop PICS-f include female gender, younger age, lower educational level, and previous history of mental health disorders. Spouses of ICU patients are particularly at risk as are the unmarried parents of critically ill children. However, overall the family members of pediatric ICU patients compared to adults are less likely to develop the syndrome.