Competency-based medical education (CBME) has become mainstream in medical education and assessment for the next generation of clinicians.

A conceptual framework for clinician assessment has been developed and seeks to address the issues of competence and performance in clinical settings. The seven-level outcomes framework works progressively through participation (level 1) through the evaluation of the impact of changes in actual practice. Additionally, this framework can aid in the development of new CME assessment tools that are in agreement with the industry-wide paradigm shift in continuing professional development. The framework for CME developed is fully described by Moore et al. 2009, and is briefly outlined here

- Level 1: Participation in CME determined through attendance records.

- Level 2: Learner satisfaction determined through questionnaires following the CME activity.

- Level 3: The level of declarative knowledge or procedural learning assessed by pre and post-test (objective) or self-reporting of knowledge gained (subjective).

- Level 4: Competence determined through observation (objective) or self-reporting.

- Level 5: The degree to which the participants performed learned skills in practice can be assessed objectively by observation of performance in a patient care setting or through patient chart studies.

- Level 6: The degree to which the health status of patients improves as a result of CME can be assessed through chart studies and administrative databases.

- Level 7: The effect of CME on public and community health can be assessed through epidemiological data or community surveys.

This framework was specifically developed to aid CME developers in assessing clinician competence, performance, and patient health status in an actual healthcare setting.