Alendronate is a bisphosphonate. Binding to hydroxyapatite crystals present in bone downregulates osteoclast-mediated bone reabsorption and decreases bone matrix breakdown. Both of these mechanisms contribute to regulating mineral reabsorption and turnover. Alendronate differs from other bone-modifying supplements as it suppresses bone formation but does not modify bone mineral accrual in endocortical or intracortical bone.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- 0.64% bioavailability in fasting women, 0.59% bioavailability in fasting men; bioavailability is reduced by up to 60% with food

- Half-life: approximately 10 years in bone (terminal)

- Excretion: Urine 50%, feces (unabsorbed drug)

Kendler D. et al. examined transitioning from denosumab treatment to alendronate treatment regarding its effects on bone mineral density.

Mok C. et al. conducted a study to examine the effects of denosumab or alendronate treatment on bone mineral density in patients receiving long-term prednisolone treatment.

Brown J. et al. examined the effects of romosozumab vs. alendronate on lumbar spine bone mass and bone strength characteristics in postmenopausal wone with osteoporosis.

Martini C. et al. examined the in vitro effects of alendronate on adipocytes of 3T3-L1 fibroblasts, lipid characteristics and oxidative stress in mature adipocytes, and macrophage inflammatory response.

Ito E. et al. studied the effects of alendronate on the bone mineral density of pregnant or lactating female mice.

Zameer S. et al. researched mice exposed to d-galactose and aluminum chloride, which causes neuropathologies and cognitive decline resembling Alzheimer disease.