Treatment for lumbosacral facet syndrome usually includes a multidisciplinary approach. If the diagnosis is uncertain, consideration is given to performing diagnostic medial branch blocks.

**Nonoperative Treatment**

Nonoperative management includes oral medications such as NSAIDs, acetaminophen, and oral steroids during acute flares. Additionally, weight loss and physical therapy have demonstrated successful outcomes.

**Minimally Invasive Treatment**

Because no concrete clinical features or diagnostic imaging studies can definitively determine if a facet joint is painful or not, medial branch nerve blocks serve as the only true diagnosis of the facet joint as the etiology of a patient's low back pain. At least 80% pain reduction and the ability to perform previously painful movements following medial branch block is considered a definitive diagnosis for facet-induced low back pain.

A study by Cohen et al. demonstrated a success rate of lumbar facet joint radiofrequency ablation patients of 39% after a single block and 64% after two blocks.

Following a successful medial branch block, patients may proceed with neurolysis of the medial branches. Because of the dual nerve supply of a given facet joint, radiofrequency probes should be placed at two subsequent levels. Radiofrequency (RF) and cryoneurolysis (CN) are the two most commonly used techniques. In both of these techniques, before injecting local anesthetics and thermal lesions, an electrical stimulation monitoring should be performed to ensure safety in performing the thermal denervation. While ablation may be helpful in facetogenic pain treatment, it should be noted that it does not allow for definite pain relief as the destroyed nerve will eventually regenerate, causing possible pain recurrence.

In such cases, the procedure may be repeated. A prospective study by Dreyfuss et al. demonstrated that 60% of patients could expect at least a 90% pain reduction, while 87% could expect at least a 60% reduction lasting 12 months.

Intraarticular facet joint corticosteroid injections represent another minimally invasive treatment avenue. With the injection of inflammatory mediators into and around a degenerative facet joint, short to intermediate-term pain relief is often seen. It should, however, be noted that discrepancies persist in the literature regarding the efficacy of steroids for facet joint pain.

For the above minimally invasive techniques, imaging guidance has been shown to both increase the technical and clinical efficacy of the procedure and reduce potential complications. Common complications of all facet joint procedures include bleeding, infection, and vasovagal syncope.

**Surgical Treatment**

- Indications for surgical intervention include: 

- Symptoms refractory to nonoperative modalities (e.g., 3 to 6-month trial) 
- Large associated synovial facet cyst correlating with clinical exam and presentation

- Laminectomy with decompression is the classic first-line treatment for symptomatic, intraspinal synovial cysts
- The literature also supports the utilization of facetectomy, decompression, and instrumented fusion (as opposed to a simple "lami decompression")