The Nursing Professional Development (NPD): Scope and Standards of Practice outline seven roles for NPD practitioners, which are: learning facilitator, change agent, mentor, leader, champion for scientific inquiry, advocate for NPD specialty, and partner for practice transitions. The standards also outline competencies for leadership in standard 12, which states, “the nursing professional development practitioner leads within the interprofessional practice and learning environments and the profession. p. 98. It should be noted that although NPD practitioners may not hold formal leadership positions within their organization, they are always leaders, and leadership competencies exist across all disciplines.

The standards differentiate competencies for the NPD practitioner and NPD specialist. The NPD practitioner has a minimum of a baccalaureate degree, or an international equivalent, in nursing without NPD certification OR a graduate-level prepared nurse without NPD certification. The NPD specialist is a nurse trained at the graduate level in nursing or a related field and certified in NPD who develops tools, theories, skills, and knowledge to advance the practice of the NPD specialty. If the graduate degree is in a related field, the baccalaureate degree must be in nursing. Both the NPD practitioner and the NPD specialist can function in a leadership role.

A couple of examples of the differences between practitioner and specialist competencies are provided to differentiate the two roles. NPD practitioners support a culture of innovation, inquiry, and reflective learning where the specialist advances a culture of innovation, organizational learning, and continuous professional development. The NPD practitioner acts as a change agent in the interprofessional practice and learning environment where the specialist leads change initiatives. The complete list of competencies for both the practitioner and specialist roles can be found in the standards.

The Institute of Medicine’s (IOM) report, The Future of Nursing: Leading Change, Advancing Health, supported education programs for leadership development to prepare nurse leaders at all levels with the leadership acumen to transform the healthcare system. Specific recommendations relating to leadership included: recommendation 2 – expand opportunities for nurses to lead and diffuse collaborative improvement efforts and recommendation 7 – prepare and enable nurses to lead change to advance health. Nurses, nursing education programs, and nursing associations should prepare the nursing workforce to assume leadership positions across all levels. Decision-makers should ensure that leadership positions are available to and filled by nurses.

The importance of ongoing professional development, interprofessional education, collaborative practice, and outcome-based practice was outlined by Dickerson.