Acutely the rash will be intensely pruritic with erythematous papules and excoriations. As the person continues to itch and rub the skin, the skin starts to thicken and on physical exam, there may be lichenification (thickening of the skin with exaggeration of the typical skin markings due to scratching or rubbing).

The distribution of the rash seen in atopic dermatitis will vary depending on the age of the person. Infants tend to have widely distributed, dry, scaly and erythematous patches with small excoriations. They also tend to have involvement of their face, especially the cheeks. As the child ages, the rash becomes more localized. Areas affected will include the extensors surfaces such as the wrists, elbows, ankles, and knees. School-aged children tend to follow the pattern that is seen in adults. This pattern includes the involvement of the flexural surfaces usually affecting the anti-cubital and popliteal fosse.

Other physical exam findings besides the appearance of a rash may indicate a person has eczema. Examination of the face may reveal Dennie-Morgan lines. These are crease-like wrinkles just below the lower eyelid. This exam finding can be seen in up to 25% of patients with eczema. People with eczema may have co-existing pityriasis alba and have hypopigmented patches or fine scaling plaques more commonly seen on the face. On examination of the hands, there may be an increased number and depth of skin lines known as hyperlinear palms. People that have eczema and allergic rhinitis may have a transverse crease formed across their nose. This line is referred to as the "allergic salute" and is caused by habitually rubbing the nose in an upward manner.