A high degree of clinical suspicion is required based on history and physical exam findings to diagnose HVS. During history taking, it is important to note any current or past hematological disorders as well as any family history of such conditions. The clinical triad of mucosal or skin bleeding, neurological deficits, and visual disturbances suggests HVS; however, a variety of end-organ damages can also be observed as the initial presenting symptom.

Bleeding is the most common manifestation and typically arises from impaired platelet function resulting in oozing mucosal surfaces like epistaxis, bleeding gums, or gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. Neurological findings can include a headache, neuropathic syndromes, generalized stupor, coma, dizziness, ataxia, hearing impairment, seizures, and stroke syndromes. These neurological manifestations are due to decreased blood flow to the central nervous system and deposition of paraproteins within the myelin sheath of peripheral nerves. Retinopathy and visual derangements such as blurred vision or double vision arise because of microvascular changes such as thrombosis or hemorrhage. The classic finding of "sausage link" or "boxcar" engorgement of retinal veins can be seen on the fundoscopic exam as well as papilledema, flame-shaped hemorrhages, or exudates. The eye examination is an important part of the physical exam because it can enable prompt diagnosis and treatment in the appropriate clinical setting. Less commonly seen are cardiopulmonary symptoms such as high output cardiac failure, shortness of breath, valvular dysfunction, or myocardial infarction. HVS can also cause acute kidney injury, likely resulting from a relative hypoperfusion state.