The scope of this section will be primarily limited to hand-held manual US machines using pulse wave Doppler mode. To understand the techniques of the US, some terminology and physics principles used in the creation of images and Doppler interrogation must be discussed. Brightness mode (B-mode) is the most common and versatile of the US modes. Images are displayed after transmitting and receiving a spectrum of US frequencies through a specific path aggregated and weighted by time factor and amplitude. The image is displayed as a function of brightness, with structures that are closer and/or producing stronger reflections appearing brighter.

The Doppler effect refers to the acoustic frequency changes emitted by a moving object concerning a stationary receiver. As the object moves toward the receiver, the wavelength emitted/reflected in front of the object compress. As the object moves away from the receiver, the wavelength behind the object expands. This change in wavelength results in a subsequent change in frequency and is known as the Doppler shift. Of note, the Doppler shift's magnitude is directly related to the velocity of the moving object.

Pulsed wave Doppler, also known as duplex Doppler, is the most commonly used modality for interrogating vascular structures. It is a combination of B-mode and Doppler interrogation. The B-mode is utilized to produce the overall grayscale images. Doppler frequency analysis is performed at a specific depth and for intermittent/pulsed time range. This mode provides information regarding the anatomic appearance and flow dynamics of the interrogated vessel.

Imaging optimization is crucial in US and even more important for the evaluation of vascular structures. When utilizing the US, the performing provider must ensure the machine's technical parameters are set appropriately—including wall filter, gain, power, and even probe selection. During the exam, the focal zones should be within 1-2 cm of the desired interrogation. Once Doppler interrogation is initiated, it is necessary to maintain an angle less than 60 degrees, given that the principle of the Doppler effect involves a cosine function. In clinical practice, the Doppler angle is less important when evaluating peripheral veins versus peripheral arteries and only scrutinized if there is a concern for venous insufficiency or certain vascular grafts. This is because most clinical questions regarding peripheral venous pathology are related to venous obstruction or thrombosis.

Various publications from the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM) and other national institutions related to US imaging suggest evaluating the peripheral veins for deep venous thrombus, thromboembolic disease, and venous insufficiency take place from the lateral approach, concerning the expected course of the vasculature.

Of note, the AIUM recommends evaluation of the veins from the level of the inguinal ligament to the ankle for lower extremity DVTs. Still, this practice is not entirely embraced across medical facilities. Regardless of the institution, examination with gray-scale, CDI, SDI, and compression at the common femoral, superficial femoral, deep femoral, and popliteal veins is performed. Given the prevalence of pathology and anatomic variations, images demonstrating the common femoral vein and great saphenous vein confluence and the proximal deep femoral vein adjacent to the proximal superficial femoral vein must be obtained. If needed, the posterior tibial, peroneal, and anterior tibial veins may also be interrogated. In instances where venous reflux is suspected, images of baseline and provocative maneuvers should be recorded as well as reflux times in seconds or milliseconds.

The majority of venous mapping is generally performed in preparation for surgical intervention, and consultation with the ordering provider, vascular surgery, and/or interventional radiology may be warranted. This exam is not commonly performed at smaller institutions and is less common in clinical practice. Venous mapping is performed slightly differently from peripheral venous US and is generally limited to superficial veins within a specific area of interest. Additionally, augmentation devices such as tourniquets are occasionally used.

According to published AIUM standards, mandatory demographic and site labels should be clearly displayed on the image. Regions of the evaluated vessels are generally labeled and an indication regarding compression or no compression during evaluation. The Doppler angle, if applicable, should be recorded on the image. If the site is outside the standard protocol, targeted sonographic evaluation should be performed. Additionally, if pathology such as thrombus, malformations, non-vascular etiologies, and aberrant anatomy is present, further evaluation to document the size and extent of the region involved is warranted.