Treatment often focuses on treating the underlying chronic disease associated with centralized pain. Treatment of a comorbid condition associated with centralized pain is beneficial in relieving a patient's pain.

Nonpharmacological interventions, including cognitive-behavioral therapy, are also the primary treatment for patients with centralized pain. A holistic approach is necessary for the treatment of centralized pain. The underlying disease can often be a structural, immunologic, or inflammatory component.

Self-directed or therapist-directed physical therapy (PT) techniques can be used, including traction, massage, ultrasonographic therapy, hot or cold applications, positioning, stretching exercises, and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). Female patients with chronic pelvic pain syndrome can benefit from myofascial physical therapy (MPT) as it leads to hypertonicity relief, improvement in endogenous inhibitory system functionality, reduction in sensitivity to experimental pain, and psychological benefits.

Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TEN) is mainly used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. Electrodes are applied over or near the area of pain, keeping the dipole parallel to major nerve trunks. However, its most common side effect is hypersensitivity, and it should be avoided during pregnancy, near the carotid sinus, and in patients with demand-type pacemakers.

Motor cortex stimulation (MCS) and deep brain stimulation (DBS) are effective treatment modalities for patients with refractory pain, centralized pain, and peripheral neuropathy.

Occupational therapy (OT) is beneficial for patients with chronic pain, especially regional chronic pain syndrome, as it enables them to be more active and helps with their physical symptoms.

Pharmacological therapies recommended for central pain syndrome include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), and anticonvulsants. There is strong evidence for using TCAs such as amitriptyline, SNRIs such as duloxetine or venlafaxine, and anticonvulsants pregabalin and gabapentin. In addition, there is moderate evidence for using tramadol or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) and weak evidence for using S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe).