Prostaglandin synthesis occurs in the cell from arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid, a 20-carbon molecule, gets metabolized to leukotrienes (LT) by lipoxygenases or converted to cyclic endoperoxides by cyclooxygenases. The cyclic endoperoxides are metabolized to prostaglandin (PG) F2 alpha by prostaglandin synthase and reductase and to thromboxanes by thromboxane synthase.

Prostaglandin, thromboxane, and leukotriene are called eicosanoids. Various receptors exist for eicosanoids, including DP (prostaglandin D), EP (prostaglandin E), FP (prostaglandin F), IP (prostaglandin I or prostacyclin receptor), and TP (prostaglandin T). FP receptor has 2 variants- type A (full-length variant) and type B (spliced variant). Both FP receptors act as G-protein coupled receptors. FP receptors express in multiple ocular tissues, including ciliary smooth muscles.

Latanoprost is a prostaglandin F2-alpha analog (FP receptor agonist) that increases the uveoscleral outflow of the aqueous. Other prostaglandin F2 alpha analogs with the same mechanism of action are travoprost and tafluprost. The proposed mechanisms include

- Relaxation of ciliary smooth muscles

- Cytoskeletal alteration leads to change in the shape of cells

- Remodeling of the extracellular matrix of the uveoscleral pathway by increased matrix metalloproteinases 

- PG F 2alpha and latanoprost were noted to reduce collagen I, III, and 4, hyaluronans, fibronectin, and laminin; and increase matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 3 and plasmin in cultured ciliary smooth muscles.
- In the animal model, researchers noted that topical PGF2 alpha reduces the expression of TIGR (trabecular meshwork inducible glucocorticoid response gene) or MYOC (myocilin).

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Absorption: Latanoprost is absorbed through the cornea. The isopropyl ester of latanoprost gets hydrolyzed by the cornea to the acid, which is the biologically active form. Studies in men indicate that the peak concentration in the aqueous humor is reached about two hours after topical administration. The maximum drug concentration in the aqueous humor is achieved 2 hours after topical use of the drop. The drug starts reducing IOP after 3 to 4 hours of administration, and the maximum IOP lowering effect is seen 8 to 12 hours after use. The IOP lowering effect lasts for more than 24 hours, allowing once-daily dosage.

- Distribution: The distribution volume in humans is 0.16 ± 0.02 L/kg. The solubility of latanoprost, travoprost, and unoprostone improves by adding isopropyl ester to the carboxyl-terminal of PG F 2 alpha. The addition of a phenyl ring to the omega chain of PG F 2 alpha in the prostaglandin analogs (latanoprost, travoprost, bimatoprost) improves selectivity for the FP receptor. In animal studies, topical PG in high doses showed an initial IOP rise with a subsequent prolonged period (15 to 20 hours) of IOP reduction. A high dose may also disrupt the blood-aqueous barrier and cause conjunctival hyperemia. On the other hand, low-dose topical PG causes prolonged IOP reduction only.

- Metabolism: Latanoprost is an isopropyl ester prodrug. Esterases hydrolyze the prodrug in the cornea to the biologically active acid. The liver metabolizes the latanoprost reaching the systemic circulation to the 1,2-dinor and 1,2,3,4-tetranor by fatty acid β-oxidation.

- Excretion: Latanoprost elimination from human plasma is rapid (t1/2 = 17 min) after intravenous and topical administration. Systemic clearance is 7 mL/min/kg. Following hepatic β-oxidation, the metabolites are mainly eliminated via the kidneys. Approximately 88% and 98% of the given dose are recovered in the urine after topical and IV dosing, respectively.

- In animal studies, topical PG in high doses showed an initial IOP rise with a subsequent prolonged period (15 to 20 hours) of IOP reduction. A high dose may also disrupt the blood-aqueous barrier and cause conjunctival hyperemia. On the other hand, low-dose topical PG causes prolonged IOP reduction only.