LS is well tolerated by patients for a long time because the blood is shunted through ASD to the Right Atrium. Symptoms of pulmonary venous hypertension, for example, hemoptysis, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and orthopnea are less frequent due to LA decompression. However, these symptoms are more common in patients with small ASD. The symptoms like palpitation and fatigability appear early in patients with LS due to the increased left to right shunt and decreased systemic cardiac output.

Presence of both ASD and MS, modify each other’s signs on physical examination. Since the LA and RA function as a common chamber in a non-restrictive ASD, jugular venous pressure (JVP) is raised without congestive heart failure, and ‘a’ waves in JVP are prominent in the absence of PAH. The pulse may be low volume because of reduced left ventricle stroke volume. The precordial examination may reveal a prominent left parasternal heave and a systolic thrill over the left upper parasternal area in patients with LS with a large ASD in comparison to an uncomplicated ASD because MS augments left to right shunt. The apex may be diffuse if the dilated RV occupies the apex instead of the left ventricle. The characteristic signs of MS on auscultation like loud first heart sound, opening snap, and a mid-diastolic rumbling murmur, are difficult to appreciate in patients with LS and may be missed. This is because the gradient across the mitral valve is not high because of LA decompression through ASD. Secondly, since the RV is enlarged and occupies the apex, the signs of LV inflow disease are less audible. On the contrary, the signs of large ASD like a fixed and wide split second heart sound and ejection mid-systolic murmur over the left upper parasternal region are more prominent. Holosystolic murmur due to tricuspid regurgitation (as a result of dilated RV) may be heard at the left parasternal area and may get transmitted to the apex as the RV is dilated. Increased intensity of this murmur with inspiration (Carvallo’s sign) differentiates this murmur from the murmur of MR.