Each type of amputation has clinical significance in functional ability, aesthetics and prostheses management. The following discussion highlights the most commonly seen clinical scenarios for each level of amputation.

Forequarter: When possible, this amputation should occur at the lateral margin on the sternocleidomastoid insertion to preserve the contour of the neck.

Transhumeral: Length should be preserved as much as possible for improved shoulder range of motion and prosthesis use. A minimum of 5 to 7 cm of the humerus should be retained for proper prosthesis fit. Further, there should be minimal periosteal stripping to prevent the occurrence of bony spurs, and rough edges require removal. Generally, the anterior and posterior fascia over the flexor and extensor muscle groups are sutured together to cover the end of the humerus. Biceps and triceps myoplasty preserves the strength of prosthetic control and myoelectric signals.

Elbow disarticulation: This amputation is preferred over transhumeral amputations because the humeral rotation is still preserved. For children, it is most suitable to preserve the epiphysis of the humerus in the residual limb to allow for growth and avoid revision. The posterior muscle flap is made to be longer than the anterior so that it can be wrapped and cushioned at the end of the humerus.

Transradial: It is crucial to preserve the length of the residual limb as much as possible to allow for improved pronation, supination, and prosthetic fit. For instance, a very short amputation allows for zero degrees of rotation, short allows 0 to 60 degrees, the medium allows 60 to 100 degrees, and long allows for 100 to 120 degrees. A minimum of 5 cm of the forearm preservation is needed for prosthetic fit and to allow platform weight bearing in patients with lower extremity disability. In some instances, the biceps tendon gets transferred to the ulna and tension of the muscle must be carefully calibrated to avoid elbow flexion contractures.

Wrist: Additionally, the radial and ulnar styloid are resected to minimize bony protrusions and make prosthetic use comfortable. Of note, the radio-ulnar joint is preserved to allow for more forearm rotation.

Hand: Removal of specific sets of phalanges can have various effects. Radial amputation is the removal of the first and second proximal phalanges onward which can compromise pinch grasp. Thumb amputation is functionally compromising due to loss of palmar grip, side to side and tip to tip pinch. In patients with thumb loss, they can learn alternative grasps with the remaining digits.