First-generation antihistamines have several indications that primarily include nausea and vomiting secondary to motion sickness and vertigo but are useful secondarily for allergic rhinitis, insomnia, allergic reactions, parkinsonism, and antitussive.

**Diphenhydramine**

Nasal allergies, allergic dermatosis, anaphylaxis in combination with epinephrine, insomnia, prevention of motion sickness, antiemetic, management of parkinsonian symptoms including extrapyramidal symptoms

Off-label: Oral mucositis

**Meclizine**

Motion sickness and vertigo

**Promethazine**

Allergic conditions, antitussive, motion sickness, surgical analgesic/hypnotic, sedation

Off-label: Nausea and vomiting associated with pregnancy

**Doxylamine Succinate**

Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy

During pregnancy, up to 10% of patients will require pharmacotherapy to treat their nausea and vomiting. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists have recommended a combination of oral vitamin B6 and doxylamine succinate as a first-line treatment after conservative measures have failed, including the BRAT diet. Doxylamine succinate is an antihistamine and has a similar mechanism of action as other antihistamines. This combination has been studied in over 6000 patients and controls and shows no evidence of teratogenicity, and randomized controlled clinical trials showed a 70% reduction in nausea and vomiting. Doxylamine succinate is the only FDA Pregnancy Category A medication approved for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. For breakthrough nausea and vomiting, diphenhydramine and promethazine can be additional therapeutic agents. Analysis of over 200,000 females, antihistamines have shown no congenital disabilities and no serious maternal or fetal outcomes.

It should be noted antihistamines such as diphenhydramine and dimenhydrinate carry a similar efficacy in reducing postoperative nausea and vomiting as dexamethasone and droperidol.

Gan had a randomized controlled clinical trial that tested two groups' responses to antiemetics after undergoing gynecological laparoscopic surgery. One group took promethazine only, and the second group received a combination of granisetron and promethazine. The clinical trials tested for the total response rate, the incidence of nausea, vomiting, use of rescue antiemetics, nausea severity, activity level, and patient satisfaction. The overall response rate was higher in the combination group, and maximum nausea was lower in the combination group. Gan's study showed the combination of both granisetron and promethazine is more effective in postoperative nausea and vomiting and post-discharge nausea and vomiting.