The parathyroid glands are four glands located posterior to the thyroid, with a normal weight ranging from 30 to 50 mg. The two superior parathyroid glands are derived from the fourth pharyngeal pouch and are classically located posterior to the plane of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Their location is more consistent than the inferior parathyroid glands. The two inferior parathyroid glands are derived from the third pharyngeal pouch as well as thymus; they are classically located inferior to the thyroid and anterior to the plane of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, but sometimes can be located in very aberrant locations in the lower neck, in the parenchyma of the thyroid gland or thymus remnant, in the carotid sheath, the retro-esophageal space, or the mediastinum. There can also exist true ectopic glands, including supra-numerary glands. These may also be located in the carotid sheath, paraesophageal or retro-esophageal space, or intrathyroidal or mediastinal positions.

The four parathyroid glands are supplied by the inferior thyroid artery from the thyrocervical trunk. The superior parathyroid glands may be supplied by the superior thyroid artery in 20% of cases, or more commonly by an anastomotic branch between the inferior thyroid and the superior thyroid artery.

Parathyroid glands regulate calcium by secreting parathyroid hormone (PTH). When the serum calcium level decreases, the chief cells in the parathyroid release PTH. In the kidney, PTH increases calcium reabsorption in the loop of Henle (as well as in the distal tubule and collecting duct), excretion of phosphate, and promotes 25-hydroxy vitamin D converting to active 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D3. PTH stimulates osteoclast activity in the bone, releases calcium into the blood, and elevates serum calcium levels. In the intestine, activated Vitamin D increases the absorption of calcium.

Hyperparathyroidism is a disorder with excessive production of PTH due to the overactivity of the parathyroid gland(s). Primary hyperparathyroidism results from autonomous hypersecretion of PTH from the abnormal parathyroid gland. The majority of patients with primary hyperparathyroidism have a single enlarged parathyroid gland, usually an adenoma, though hypercellular parathyroid is also possible. In up to 10% of patients with primary hyperparathyroidism, there will be two abnormal glands. Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1, type 2A, or parathyroid carcinoma can cause primary hyperparathyroidism in rare cases. The high calcium level due to hypersecretion of PTH can lead to neuromuscular symptoms, osteoporosis and bone loss, and kidney stones.

Secondary hyperparathyroidism is due to high PTH levels from the physiological response to hypocalcemia. Vitamin D deficiency and chronic renal failure are the most common causes of secondary hyperparathyroidism.

Tertiary hyperparathyroidism occurs in patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism from chronic renal failure and persistent secretion of PTH after renal transplant.