All drug-related reactions, including drug-induced hepatic injury, pose a real threat to society and have the potential to lead to significant morbidity or mortality if not appropriately identified and managed.  Open and effective interprofessional communication is essential among all medical team members.  Proper management begins in the primary care office or emergency department, with physicians maintaining broad differentials and a high index of suspicion through clinical gestalt and information gained from a thorough history and physical exam.  Appropriate investigative tests then need to be ordered and properly interpreted to identify possible drug reactions explaining a patient’s presenting symptoms. In the case of drug-induced hepatic injury secondary to antimicrobial use, a patient will likely present with liver injury days to weeks after completing a course of antimicrobials, and a direct correlation may not be straightforward.  If there is suspicion for drug-induced hepatic injury, identifying and discontinuing the offending agent is the primary goal of treatment.

In summary, proactive instead of reactive methods are always more valuable. Proper antimicrobial stewardship can decrease unnecessary use of antimicrobials, reduce the incidence of drug-related adverse effects, and limit the rate of antimicrobial resistance. This stewardship is but one aspect of amoxicillin-clavulanate management by an interprofessional team. Information sharing between emergency medicine and primary care physicians can further help with the early identification of suspected adverse reactions and improve appropriate antimicrobial selection for individuals who must undergo treatment. The pharmacist can weigh in by checking dose and duration, providing antibiogram data, and checking for drug interactions that may interfere with therapy. Nursing can administer the medication, counsel the patient on proper administration, and monitor for adverse events and therapeutic effectiveness. When a severe adverse reaction has occurred, the early involvement of a specialist can limit the severity of the disease and increase the chance of a complete and uneventful recovery. All these exemplify an interprofessional team approach that improves the odds of optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]