**Adults**

**Vitamin D Deficiency/Insufficiency**

The optimum level of Vitamin D remains controversial. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) defines it as over 20 ng/mL, whereas others define it as over 30 ng/mL or a range between 25 to 80 ng/mL.

**Vitamin D Insufficiency in Healthy Adults (Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level of 20 to 30 ng per mL/50 to 75 nmol per L)**

Oral supplements of 1000 to 2000 units once daily. Serum vitamin D levels could be reassessed in 3 months.

**Vitamin D Deficiency in Healthy Adults (Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level of less than 20 ng per mL/50 nmol per L)**

Dosing with 2000 units once daily with a 3-month vitamin D serum level reassessment. If the target level has not been reached, 2000 units once daily or 50000 units once weekly for 6 to 8 weeks.

****Maintenance dosing for both vitamin D deficiency and insufficiency is very patient-specific and depends on the target level and other comorbidities that may affect its metabolism and absorption.

**Vitamin D Deficiency/Insufficiency in Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) Patients**

The current recommendation indicates treating vitamin D deficiency/insufficiency in CKD patients without severe hyperparathyroidism, similarly to the general population. Regular blood tests to monitor vitamin D, calcium, phosphate serum levels are advised. On the other hand, CKD patients with severely elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) are recommended to receive calcitriol or vitamin D analogs rather than cholecalciferol.

**Hypoparathyroidism**

Calcium supplements, combined with active vitamin D, such as alfacalcidol and calcitriol, are recommended for hypoparathyroidism. Cholecalciferol or ergocalciferol are also options.

**Osteoporosis Prevention**

Oral dosage is 800 to 1000 units daily for adults greater than or equal to 50 years old.

**Pediatrics**

**Rickets Prevention**

- Breastfed infants: Oral 400 units daily starting from a few days of age until 12 months of age when the infant gets weaned to greater than or equal to 1000 mL daily vitamin D-fortified formula or whole milk

- Formula-fed infants: oral 400 units daily for infants ingesting less than 1000 mL daily vitamin D-fortified formula

**Rickets Treatment**

- Infants: oral 2000 units daily for three months

- Children: oral 3000 to 6000 units daily for three months

- Adolescents: oral 6000 units daily

The maintenance dosage of oral 400 to 600 units daily is also a recommendation.

**Vitamin D Deficiency in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis**

- Infants: oral 400 to 500 units daily

- Children 10 years and under: oral 800 to 1000 units daily

- Children over10 years: oral 800 to 2000 units daily