The most common technique for cricoid pressure involves at least a 2 person team. As one individual intubates the patient, the other performs the cricoid pressure maneuver.

The patient is classically placed in a supine position with the neck extended. Alternatively, to facilitate the view of the glottis, the patient may have his or her lower cervical spine flexed with the upper cervical spine extended in the “sniffing position.” The benefit of neck extension, as observed by Sellick, is that vomitus is directed away from the airway.

The practitioner who is performing the maneuver will often stand on the right side of the patient. The practitioner will use anatomical landmarks, including the thyroid cartilage and cricothyroid membrane, to identify the cricoid ring. Once identified, the practitioner may use the dominant hand or whichever hand is most able to apply appropriate pressure without impeding the team member's function performing the intubation. The thumb will remain on the patient’s right side of the cricoid ring, with the second digit placed on the contralateral side of the cricoid ring. The practitioner may place the third digit on the same side as the second digit if this is found to be more comfortable. While the patient is awake, a 10 N or 1 kg pressure is appropriate until induction is complete. Once the patient is unconscious, approximately 30 N or 3 kg will be applied in a posterior direction to the cricoid ring. The constant pressure should be maintained until the endotracheal tube is appropriately placed with the cuff inflated to protect the airway. When applying cricoid pressure in pediatric patients, the pressure should be decreased, considering the increased deformability of soft structures.

A double-handed maneuver may be implemented when there is a concern for cervical spine instability. In such situations, the practitioner will use his or her free hand to support the posterior cervical spine while providing cricoid pressure.

It is generally recommended that gastric tubes are used before intubation in patients who have been identified as having a full stomach. Sellick initially believed that cricoid pressure would be ineffective while a gastric tube was in place. This concern was unsubstantiated as subsequent studies have demonstrated that the tube deviates to the side of the esophagus with occlusion possible.

Cricoid pressure should not be confused with a technique commonly referred to as “BURP” (backward, upward, rightward, pressure on the thyroid cartilage), used to aid in the visualization of the glottis during intubation.