**Which type of mental health disorder is associated with an increased risk of suicide?**

Accumulated data reveal that many types of mental health disorders have been associated with an increased risk of suicide, and they include the following:

- Major depression

- Schizophrenia

- Substance abuse

- Alcoholism

- Post-traumatic stress disorder

- Bipolar disorder

- Personality disorders

- Emotional stress

**Medications and Suicides**

Several medications have been linked to suicidal behavior, which has prompted the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to require a black box warning on several prescription medications, including analgesics, anticonvulsants, and antidepressants.

- Antidepressants: Several studies have shown a link between antidepressant use in childhood and teenagers to self-destructive behavior. Such an association has also been reported in adults. Thus, clinicians should be very vigilant in monitoring these patients after starting therapy.

- Anticonvulsants: Reports of suicidal behavior after initiating anticonvulsant therapy have persisted for over 2 decades. Drugs like lamotrigine, gabapentin, tiagabine, and oxcarbazepine have been linked to an increased risk for self-harm or even violent death.

- Analgesics: The analgesic tramadol has also been associated with a risk of self-harm. In 2010, the FDA added a warning to the label that the drug has the potential of causing self-harm.

- Smoking cessation medications: One of the newer anti-smoking drugs, varenicline, is also known to be associated with self-injurious behaviors and is not recommended as first-line therapy for people who want to quit smoking and have a history of mental illness.

- Glucocorticoids and anabolic steroids: It has been known for many years that both glucocorticoids and a number of anabolic steroids can induce rage and self-destructive behavior. Many professional wrestlers have committed suicide over the past 3 decades, and it is believed that this is because of anabolic steroid use.

- Individuals with bipolar disorder are at very high risk for suicidal behavior, especially females who had the onset of symptoms early in life. Several studies have shown that individuals with bipolar disorders have a high rate of attempted suicides. Besides the manic phase and impulsive behavior, these individuals can also develop severe depression that must also be considered a risk for suicide. Other comorbid factors that increase the risk of suicide in bipolar individuals include the presence of anxiety disorder and a family history of suicide. Fortunately, many international studies have shown that lithium is known to possess anti-suicidal effects in bipolar disorder. The only problem is that lithium has a very low therapeutic index, and its use has to be closely monitored. Compliance with lithium therapy is also a major issue among bipolar patients.

- Patients with schizophrenia are also at very high risk for suicide. Often these individuals experience delusions and auditory hallucinations commanding them to kill themselves. Sometimes these individuals may also become depressed because of the medications or their illness. Sometimes schizophrenia leads to severe paranoia and fear that leads one to self-harm. Finally, substance abuse, including alcohol, is common in many people with schizophrenia and may contribute to the high risk of suicide. Several studies show that the use of atypical antipsychotics in schizophrenia is associated with a decrease in suicide attempts in schizophrenia. The evidence favoring clozapine is strongest, which is, in fact, the only medication approved by the FDA for preventing suicides in these patients.

- OCD and anxiety disorders: Generalized anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD) can generate symptoms that may make suicide possible. Individuals with phobias can develop severe symptoms like feeling scared, frightened, or terrorized. Others may feel severe panic, anxiety, or a sense of doom. Many patients with phobics often are not able to control their behavior and may become incapacitated. Studies in college students have shown an association between OCD and suicide. The risk of suicide in OCD is increased in an individual with a substance use disorder or a comorbid personality disorder. Protective factors include female gender, educated parents, and having a comorbid anxiety disorder.

- Post-traumatic stress disorders (PTSD) can also increase the risk of suicide. Many of these survivors of physical, emotional, and sexual abuse suffer from nightmares and flashbacks. Veterans of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have been known to have very high rates of PTSD, with many struggling to maintain normality in everyday life. These individuals have recorded extremely high rates of suicides. Today, most veterans are screened for PTSD, and early adjustment to normal life is necessary to prevent the risk of self-harm.

- Substance abuse is known to lead to self-destructive behavior. An individual who abuses illicit agents or prescription medications can develop depression and suicidal behavior. Others may develop depression during the withdrawal period and respond by killing themselves. The latest data from the Drug Abuse Warning Network reveals that drug-related suicide attempts have increased fourfold in the past decade, averaging about 220,000 visits to the emergency room a year. Similarly, individuals who abuse alcohol or drugs may end up losing their job, spouse, and home and may respond to this situation by committing suicide.

- Even individuals in a drug recovery program are at risk for self-harm, especially those with chronic pain, those with access to a firearm and other street drugs. Many street drugs have been known to affect behavior and lead to poor psychological functioning. Suicide rates are often high in individuals who use lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and methamphetamine.

- Dementia and delirium often lead to memory loss, delusions, hallucinations, disorientation, and poor judgment. These symptoms frequently lead to self-harm. Many dementia patients feel that they have lost control of their minds and end up killing themselves.

- Traumatic brain injury has been associated with an increased risk of suicide. Studies in military personnel with head injuries have noted the presence of depression, PTSD, and a high risk of suicide. Repeated bouts of head injury are also associated with an even higher risk of suicide.

- Bulimia is known to be linked to a higher risk of suicide. Predisposing factors include the use of stimulants, loneliness, childhood abuse, family history of mental disorders, and difficulty interacting with people in general. Some experts believe that both a family history of suicide and genetic factors may also be high-risk factors for suicide in bulimics. Thus, when evaluating bulimics, one should try and uncover a family history of suicide

- Toxoplasma infection: A large Danish study in women revealed a relationship between Toxoplasma infection and self-injury. Women who had toxoplasma infection were observed to have a high risk of self-harm than women with no serological evidence of Toxoplasma infection.

- Chronic and or physical illness: A very common reason for suicide worldwide is when individuals have a chronic disease or a severe physical illness that has incapacitated them. For example, a significant number of patients with end-stage kidney disease commit suicide. Other chronic disorders that increase the risk of suicide include chronic obstructive lung disease, dementia, cancer, quadriplegia, heart failure, multiple sclerosis, and severe burns to the body. A more recent study indicates that patients with fibromyalgia and migraine also have a higher risk of suicide, and the risk is further increased in the presence of depression.

- Loss of a loved one: In some cases, acute life events may trigger suicidal behavior. This may be due to the loss of a spouse, divorce, end of an interpersonal relationship, loss of a pet, or even loss of employment. Acute loss can be agonizing and traumatic, and some people are just not able to cope with it.

- Financial instability: In the United States, financial loss or economic instability is a common cause of suicide. Over the past decade, many reports have surfaced of people who have killed not only themselves by their entire families because of financial strain. Some have lived their lives beyond their means and find no way out of the financial mess. Others may have been involved in financial fraud, and they seek suicide as a means to get out of being sentenced. Suicides due to financial loss are more common in adult men than in women. However, simply being poor or born into poverty does not increase the risk of suicide.

**Epidemiology**

**Age-Related Demographics
**

The risk of suicide varies by gender, age, ethnicity, and race. Suicide is known to occur in people of all ages, including high school students, but the highest rate of suicide is known to occur in seniors older than age 75.

- Overall, the highest risk for suicide is in men over the age of 65.

- White males over the age of 85 have a very high rate of suicide.

- Suicide is the third leading cause of death in adolescents and teens between ages 15 to 24.

- Men have a much higher rate of suicide completion than women.

- Women tend to have a much higher rate of attempts.

- Seventy-five percent of all suicides are seen in white males.

- In men, suicide risk is highest for those between ages 50 to 85 (30 deaths per 100,000).

- In women, the suicide risk is highest between ages 60 to 65 (5 to 7 deaths per 100,000).

- Among ethnic groups, the highest risk of suicide is in Alaskan natives, American Indians, and non-Hispanic whites. While the highest risk of suicide among Alaskan natives is in adolescents, in non-white Hispanics, the risk of suicide continues to increase with advancing age.

- In the United States, the highest suicide rates are among whites, followed by American Indians and Alaskan natives. Suicide rates are much lower in African Americans, Asians, and Pacific Islanders.

**Occupation-Related Demographics**

Professions associated with a high rate of suicide include law enforcement and public safety officers (physicians, firefighters). These professionals often work long, irregular hours, witness all types of injuries, have exposure to guns or potent drugs, which places them at high risk for suicide. Many of these professionals use alcohol, and often the trigger is a divorce. Physicians have a particularly high rate of divorce because of job-related stress and the reluctance to seek help.

One study revealed that medical residents frequently have a high rate of suicidal ideations but often do not seek help. Over the past 3 decades, suicides among military personnel have also been steadily increasing.

**Seasonal Variances in Suicide
**

Suicides also tend to have seasonal variability, with the majority occurring during spring. The month of May is particularly notorious for having the most suicides. The general belief is that the long winter usually dampens the mood, and with the arrival of spring, some depressed people who remain depressed end their lives.

Despite the belief that year-end holidays are a frequent period of suicide, data do not support that notion. Studies show that the end-of-year holidays are usually associated with the lowest rate of suicides.

**Relationship Between Suicides and Birthdays**

Some people do commit suicide on their birthday. These individuals are usually males between ages 25 to 54, and irrespective of mental health history, they are known to commit suicide on their birthday. These suicides usually cannot be prevented as most males do not show up at the doctor’s office on their birthday.

**Suicide in Pregnancy**

Even though postpartum depression is commonly reported in women, the actual rates of suicide are rare. Suicide during pregnancy is even rarer. In any case, pregnant and postpartum females should be screened for depression.

**Ways of Committing Suicide**

Suicide is committed in many ways, with firearms accounting for nearly 51% of cases. Other causes include using medications, jumping off buildings, hanging, jumping in front of a train, or drowning. In the United States, close to 50% of all suicides are completed with a gun. About 56% of men kill themselves with a gun, whereas only 30% of females use a gun for suicide. Other means of suicide in the United States include suffocation and poisoning.

**Availability of Firearms**

In the United States, the most common method of committing suicide is the use of firearms. Men are many more times likely to use a firearm compared to women. Furthermore, the risk of suicide with a firearm in men increases when the depressed individual also uses alcohol. Hence, when evaluating these individuals for suicide risk, one should determine if they own a firearm. All healthcare workers should be aware of the state statutes on possession of firearms and mental illness. Many states ban the possession of firearms by individuals with mental illness, but recent shootings in the United States indicate that many mentally ill patients continue to have access to firearms.