# Continuing Education Activity

FDA-approved usage of morphine sulfate includes moderate to severe pain that may be acute or chronic. Most commonly used in pain management, morphine provides major relief to patients afflicted with pain. Clinical situations that benefit greatly by medicating with morphine include management of palliative/end-of-life care, active cancer treatment, and vaso-occlusive pain during sickle cell crisis. Morphine also has off-label uses for painful conditions. This activity outlines the indications, mechanism of action, methods of administration, important adverse effects, contraindications, monitoring, and toxicity of morphine, so providers can direct patient therapy to optimal outcomes when pain relief is needed.

**Objectives:**
- Review the mechanism of action of morphine.
- Identify the approved and off-label indications for using morphine.
- Explain the contraindications and adverse events associated with morphine.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to properly use morphine to improve patient outcomes in the varied scenarios where it can be effective.

# Indications

FDA-approved usage of morphine sulfate includes moderate to severe pain that may be acute or chronic. Most commonly used in pain management, morphine provides significant relief to patients afflicted with pain.

Patients that are actively having acute coronary syndrome are often given morphine in the emergency setting before going to the cath lab. Morphine to relieve pain during a myocardial infarction (MI) has been in use since the early 1900s. In 2005, an observational study raised some concerns, but there are very few effective alternatives. Morphine is a potent opioid; it decreases pain, which in turn leads to a decrease in the activation of the autonomic nervous system. These are desirable effects when a patient is having an MI. Additionally, morphine has hemodynamic side effects that can be beneficial during an MI.

Morphine can decrease heart rate, blood pressure, and venous return. Morphine can also stimulate local histamine-mediated processes.

# Mechanism of Action

Morphine is considered the classic opioid analgesic with which other painkillers are compared. Like other medications in this class, morphine has an affinity for delta, kappa, and mu-opioid receptors.

# Administration

Morphine administration can occur through various vehicles. Its administration is most often via the following routes: orally (PO), intravenously (IV), epidural, and intrathecal. Oral formulations are available in both immediate and extended-release for the treatment of acute and chronic pain. Pain that is more severe and not well controlled may be manageable with single or continuous doses of IV, epidural, and intrathecal formulations.

# Adverse Effects

Among the more common unwanted effects of morphine use is constipation. This effect occurs via stimulation of mu-opioid receptors on the myenteric plexus, which in turn inhibits gastric emptying and reduces peristalsis. Other common side effects include central nervous system depression, nausea, vomiting, and urinary retention. Respiratory depression is among the more serious adverse reactions with opiate use that is especially important to monitor in the postoperative patient population.

# Contraindications

Morphine is an extremely beneficial medication when used appropriately. However, in certain situations, this medication may be strongly contraindicated. Extreme caution is necessary with severe respiratory depression and asthma exacerbation cases since morphine can further decrease the respiratory drive. Additionally, morphine should be avoided in cases of previous hypersensitivity reaction and immediately discontinued in the presence of an active reaction.

# Monitoring

The efficacy and therapeutic index of morphine are assessable with a combination of subjective and objective findings. Controlling pain, which is usually the first symptom evaluated in patients, is the ultimate goal of morphine use. Other essential parameters requiring monitoring include mental status, blood pressure, respiratory drive, and misuse/overuse.

# Toxicity

Morphine can potentially be a lethal medication when not used properly.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Ordering and administering morphine requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists.

- Ordering the drug

- Monitoring the patient for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression

- Administering the drug

- Consulting with the pharmacist about the use of morphine with other medications that can cause respiratory depression.

- Consulting with a specialist if an overdose or allergic reaction occurs.

- Consulting with the radiology if a patient has received morphine prior to imaging

- Consulting with the cardiologist if using morphine in a STEMI