Implantation failure can be caused by 1) issues related to embryo development and/or aneuploidy, 2) reduced or absent endometrial receptivity, and 3) embryo-endometrial asynchrony.

As described above, embryo maturation and endometrial development co-occur independently. In ART cycles, these two processes can diverge, resulting in an asynchronous window of implantation. Ovarian hyperstimulation leads to supraphysiological levels of estrogen and progesterone, which alter gene expression and hormone receptor presence, triggering rapid transformation to a secretory endometrium.

A large 2013 meta-analysis demonstrated that the progesterone level at which the phenomena occurs can be as low as 0.8-1.1 ng/ml and that higher progesterone levels on the day of ovulation trigger were associated with a greater reduction in pregnancy. Additionally, in a 2018 threshold analysis by Hill et al., progesterone of 2.0 ng/ml on the day of the trigger was associated with a 20% absolute reduction in a live birth in fresh cycles. They also reported that high progesterone levels on the day of ovulation trigger were positively associated with younger age, higher gonadotropin dosing, higher estrogen (E2) values during stimulation, and higher follicle count >14mm.

Endometrial receptivity can be further impaired by an imbalance of steroid hormones by way of progesterone resistance and estrogen dominance.

Estrogen dominance results in increased cell proliferation, inflammation, and angiogenesis, exacerbating the non-receptive endometrial state. In studies of endometriosis, a condition defined by excess estrogen and progesterone resistance, it has been shown that the resulting inflammation of the endometrium is associated with an overexpression of p450 aromatase, which changes the dynamic of progesterone-to-estrogen activity. The overexpression of aromatase has been associated with poor IVF outcomes.

Endometrial receptivity continues to be a very active area of research. The contributing factors to endometrial receptivity have not all been recognized and continue to be investigated.