A kidney biopsy is the gold standard in confirming the diagnosis. It is used either exclusively or in combination with antibody assay, depending on the ease of availability. Antibody assay is replacing biopsy mostly due to the temporal relationship between proteinuria and circulating anti-PLA2R antibodies. It is a non-invasive method to monitor disease progression and outcomes. Since clinical disease lags behind immunological outcomes, antibody assay is an excellent biomarker for clinical management. Nevertheless, the following renal biopsy findings specific for MN should be noted:

- Light microscopy: Diffuse capillary and glomerular basement thickening. These might be absent in earlier stages of MN.

- Immunofluorescence: Granular pseudo-linear IgG4 deposits are present all along the glomerular capillary wall.

- Silver stain: Spikes (represent staining of basement membrane between the deposits)

- Electron Microscopy: Effaced podocytes. Ehrenreich and Churg classification based on the appearance of electron-dense deposits:
- Stage 1: Small, sparse, electron-dense deposits on the epithelial side of GBM
- Stage 2: Larger deposits causing GBM thickening, along with foot process effacement giving the characteristic “spike and dome” appearance
- Stage 3: Stage 2 plus intramembranous coarse granular deposits with “neomembrane” formation
- Stage 4: Irregular thickening, dissolution of deposits (holes), and sclerosis of GBM

- Variants of MN with crescents have also been found.

- Chronic MN may show tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and nephrosclerosis on biopsy.

- Excessive protein reabsorption can lead to the deposition of hyaline droplets in the proximal convoluted tubules as seen in light microscopy.