Differential access to healthcare is an important contributor to breast cancer disparities in the United States. Access to care varies from neighborhood to neighborhood, in part due to historical patterns of segregation and structural racism. It also varies from city to city because of systems-based factors such as state policy decisions, differential Medicaid coverage and re-enrollment requirements, and funding of social programs.

Extensive research has established that regular breast cancer screening can detect tumors at an earlier stage and result in improved survival and better prognosis. Yet minority women are more likely to have longer intervals between screening mammograms, which contributes to the higher rate of late-stage diagnosis within Black and Hispanic populations.

Screening guidelines do not uniformly take into account the differences in age at the time of diagnosis seen between racial groups. One study found that approximately 23% of non-Hispanic White women and 37.5% of Black women with breast cancer presented under the age of 50 years.

Beginning treatment in a timely fashion after an abnormal screening test is critical to obtaining optimal outcomes. Delays in follow-up after an abnormal mammogram can lead to larger tumors with more lymph node involvement, and subsequently, poorer outcomes. Timeliness and adequacy of follow-up vary independently by socioeconomic status, health system characteristics, and race. On average, Black women have longer intervals from an abnormal mammogram to diagnosis than non-Hispanic White women, even among those with similar insurance status. Specifically, 20% of Black women had intervals to diagnosis greater than 60 days compared to only 12% of non-Hispanic White women. Similar delays in initiation of treatment after diagnosis are seen among minority women. Multiple studies show that Black and Hispanic patients more frequently have significant delays in initiating chemotherapy.

Only 69% of Black women start treatment within 30 days of diagnosis compared to 82% of non-Hispanic White women, according to one analysis.

Not only do many minority women face longer intervals before initiating treatment, but they are at risk of receiving inferior care in a multitude of ways. Differences in the quality of care often stem from the institutions where minority patients seek care. Minority women are more likely to receive treatment at hospitals without a National Cancer Institute (NCI) comprehensive cancer center designation, which equates to slower adoption of innovative therapies, lower rates of sentinel lymph node biopsies, and less access to morbidity-sparing surgical procedures and breast reconstruction. The racial discrepancies seen in the receipt and timeliness of adjuvant radiation were largely influenced by the type of facility at which a patient received surgery and/or the distance to a radiation care center. Black women are more likely to receive reduced-intensity adjuvant regimens and under-dosing of chemotherapy due to inappropriate “capping” of doses for overweight patients. They are less likely to receive newer targeted therapies and more likely to undergo non-standard chemotherapy in combination with the HER2-targeted agents when compared to non-Hispanic White women within the Medicare program. Even at comprehensive cancer centers, Black women are less likely to complete a full course of adjuvant trastuzumab, suggesting that better insurance or access to renowned facilities is not enough to eliminate the racial disparities in breast cancer.

The significant decline in breast cancer mortality is, in part, due to the advent of endocrine therapy targeted at hormone-dependent tumors. Compared to Non-Hispanic White women, though, Black women with ER/PR positive breast cancer were less likely to have been recommended for or to have been started on endocrine therapy.