Factors affecting image quality.

- Beam energy and kVp-The X-ray beam energy is an energy spectrum utilized in the formation of an image. It is directly proportional to the atomic number of the anode target, peak kilovoltage (kVp) of the X-ray generator, and amount of filtration in the beam.

- Tube current-exposure time product (mAs) -Tube current determines the total photons impinging the patient to form an image. mAs is the product of tube current in milliamperes and exposure time in seconds. There is a linear relationship between mAs and patient dose. An increase in mAs leads to an increase in patient dose and reduction in noise. For a given exam, appropriate mAs should be selected to optimize the balance between noise and dose depending upon the clinical need. Exposure time can affect spatial resolution as long exposure times can increase the chances of patient motion leading to image blur.

- Acquisition geometry-Image acquisition geometric factors affecting image quality include a source to image receptor distance, orientation, the amount of magnification, and size of the focal spot. The changes in source to image receptor distance result in variations in relative magnifications of anatomic structures in the image.

- Magnification-An increase in the air gap or patient to image receptor distance leads to an increase in magnification and a decrease in scatter radiation, resulting in improved image contrast and noise.

- The focal spot size-The size of the X-ray tube focal spot is inversely related to the spatial resolution. A decrease in focal spot size leads to improved spatial resolution.

- Detector performance- The detector performance depends upon the resolution of the detector, detector element size, and SNR performance of the detector. Smaller the detector element size, the higher is the resolution. In an ideal scenario, the detector element size should be smaller than the smallest region of interest. The modulation transfer function (MTF) is the primary measure of detector resolution and not the detector element size.  A detector that maintains MTF value at greater spatial frequencies has a better resolution.

- Collimation- Collimation is defined as the confinement of the spatial extent of an X-ray beam that impinges upon the region of interest in the patient and detector. Effective collimation causes a decrease in scattered radiation that reaches the detector.

- Anti-scatter grid- Anti-scatter grid improves image quality by decreasing the scattered radiation. However, it can also negatively affect image quality by attenuating the primary X-ray beam.

- Image processing- After digital image acquisition, artificial adjustment of the contrast can be achieved using post-processing techniques to improve the visual perception, including histogram equalization, edge enhancement, grayscale processing, and noise reduction.