Preoperative assessment should be comprehensive, and a multidisciplinary approach may be beneficial depending on the severity of a patient’s symptoms. Caregivers are a crucial source of information for obtaining an adequate history. Medications for seizures, spasticity, and GERD should be continued perioperatively. Preoperative anxiety should be carefully assessed, and premedication with an anxiolytic may be administered if indicated. Establishing intravenous access can be difficult due to dehydration, chronic spasticity, and lack of patient cooperation. Topical application of a eutectic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA) cream may be helpful for the uncooperative patient, and an additional assistant may be required. Inhalational induction followed by post-induction vascular access can be a reasonable option if clinically indicated. Ultrasound guidance can be a valuable tool if persistent difficulty is encountered.

When positioning patients with cerebral palsy, great care should be taken to prevent dislocations and pressure sores.

Assessment of pain postoperatively can be especially difficult in the setting of intellectual disability, poor communication skills, and residual effects of anesthetic agents, and subjective indicators such as groaning, grimacing, and irritability can be difficult to interpret. The presence of a caregiver in the post-anesthesia care unit can help interpret the patient’s manifested emotions and be a familiar, calming presence for the patient. Regional anesthetic techniques are commonly utilized in these patients and can effectively provide prolonged postoperative analgesia. It is recommended to use a multimodal opioid-sparing regimen involving nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, acetaminophen, and anti-spasmodic and anti-neuropathic agents.

Patients with neurodevelopmental disabilities are nearly twice as likely to experience respiratory depression compared to patients without such disabilities.