There are two main varieties of cystitis cystica changes that usually coexist, though one of them may predominate:

**Cystitis Cystica**

The urothelium becomes invaginated into the lamina propria forming Von Brunn nests and subsequently developing into cystically dilated vesicles. In some cases, it may be difficult to differentiate cystitis cystica and florid von Brunn nest proliferation from the nested variant of urothelial carcinoma.

Such differentiation can be critical as the nested variant of urothelial carcinoma is an aggressive malignancy. The finding of mutations in the TERT promoter has been proposed as a good method to distinguish a potentially dangerous nested urothelial carcinoma and its benign imitators.

**Cystitis Glandularis**

When the urothelium lining of the cysts exhibits glandular metaplasia. It is divided into two subtypes:

- Typical cystitis glandularis (CG): lined by simple mucinous cells.

- Cystitis glandularis intestinal-type (CGIT): lined by intestinal metaplastic cells in addition to goblet cells= and may produce mucin.

Cystitis glandularis intestinal-type is of clinical significance because, when extensive, it can mimic well-differentiated adenocarcinoma morphologically and histopathologically. Furthermore, it may exhibit a malignant potential.

The key discriminating element between cystitis glandularis intestinal-type and well-differentiated adenocarcinoma is the invasion of muscularis propria, which is seen in the latter.

Traditionally, cystitis glandularis have been considered potentially pre-malignant, although a number of more recent, long-term studies have shown no such association.

There does not appear to be any histological difference between those cases causing ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis and those that don't.

**Nephrogenic Adenoma**

Nephrogenic adenomas tend to appear after an injury to the urothelium. Generally described cystoscopically as polypoid, papillary, velvety, or fungating bladder lesions, grossly resembling a bladder malignancy. It tends to form most often in the trigone and bladder neck areas.

Nephrogenic adenoma has multiple histological types and may show mixed patterns.

- General architecture can be clear cell, oncocytic, flat or fibro-myxoidal

- Clear cells present only rarely

- Solid areas are usually seen only occasionally

- Histological types include cystic, microcystic, papillary, tubular, or signet ring-like

- Papillary, cystic, and microcystic patterns are the most common

- Pseudo-infiltrative growth pattern may occur that closely mimics urothelial carcinoma

- Tubules are lined by eosinophilic cuboidal or hobnail cells

- Hyaline rim surrounds the tubules

- No mitotic activity but nuclear atypia is possible

- Muscularis propria is only involved focally

The most common histological presentation is small, hollow tubules, somewhat similar to mesonephric tubules. They are usually lined with a single layer of eosinophilic cuboidal or hobnail cells.

In difficult cases, the combined expression of napsin A, EMA, PAX-2, and PAX-8 with a negative p63 has been suggested to help distinguish nephrogenic adenoma from a malignancy.