Injury to the superior gluteal nerve can be due to hip dislocation, hip fractures, hip arthroplasty, and intramuscular injection into the buttocks. There are various etiologies of hip pain, such as arthritis, tendonitis, bursitis, and fractures. Surgical management of osteoarthritis of the hip joint has evolved in the past several years. With new surgical reconstructive techniques, the splitting and reflection forward of the anterior aspect of the gluteus medius and vastus lateralis is carried out as a single sheet which is subsequently reattached to the greater trochanter. However, these types of procedures are not without with complications, such as damage to neurovascular structures and infections.

Furthermore, abduction weakness and limping are common complications of closed antegrade insertion of femoral nails and are most likely caused by iatrogenic injury to the superior gluteal nerve and gluteus medius itself. However, by increasing the degree of hip flexion and adduction during insertion of a femoral nail, the injury risk to the superior gluteal nerve and gluteus medius is lowered.

The gluteal region is also a common location used for the administration of drugs, particularly when the rapid action of the drug is required or if the drug is not viable via the intestinal route. The injection should be administered in the superolateral quadrant of the buttock to avoid the branches of the superior gluteal nerve as well as the sciatic nerve, typically located in the lower quadrants of the buttock.