Laboratory testing often reveals anemia of chronic disease and thrombocytosis. Neutropenia may be present if Felty syndrome is present (rare). RF is present in 80-90% of patients with RA, with a sensitivity of 69% and a specificity of 85%. ACPA is present in 70-80% of patients, with a sensitivity of 67% and a specificity of 95%.

Therefore, when a patient presents with inflammatory arthritis, serological studies should be positive. In patients who are asymptomatic or those that have arthralgias, a positive RF and especially CCP predicts the onset of clinical RA.

Synovial fluid examination usually reveals a leukocyte count between 1500 to 25,000/cubic mm and is predominantly polymorphonuclear cells. Cell counts higher than 25000/cubic mm are rare and can be seen with very active disease; however, they warrant workup to rule out underlying infection. The synovial fluid in RA will also reveal low C3 and C4 levels despite elevated serum levels.

With advanced disease, joint involvement on plain radiographs will reveal periarticular osteopenia, joint space narrowing, and bony erosions (marginal). Erosions of cartilage and bone are considered pathognomonic findings for RA, although not absolutely specific. However, these findings are consistent with advanced disease.

Due to the varied clinical presentation and lack of universal pathognomonic testing for RA, diagnosing the disease can be challenging early in the course of the disease. Traditionally the presence of at least four of the following criteria for at least six weeks would classify the patient as having RA. These criteria were: morning stiffness, arthritis of three or more joints, arthritis of the hands, symmetric arthritis, elevated acute phase reactants, elevated rheumatoid factor, and radiologic evidence of RA. These criteria separated inflammatory from non-inflammatory arthritis but were not very specific for RA. It was also not sensitive to early-stage RA, which was a significant drawback.

**2010 ACR/EULAR Classification Criteria for RA**

- Number and size of involved joints
- 2 to 10 large joints = 1 point (shoulders, elbows, hips, knees, and ankles)
- 1 to 3 small joints = 2 points (metacarpophalangeal joints, proximal interphalangeal joints, second through fifth metatarsophalangeal joints, thumb interphalangeal joints, and wrists)
- 4 to 10 small joints = 3 points
- Greater than 10 joints (including at least 1 small joint) = 5 points

- Serological testing for rheumatoid factor or anti-citrullinated peptide/protein antibody
- Low positive = 2 points
- High positive = 3 points

- Elevated acute phase reactant (erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR] or C-reactive protein [CRP]) = 1 point

- Symptom duration of at least six weeks = 1 point

A total score greater than or equal to 6 classifies the patient as having RA. Note that these are classification and diagnostic criteria, so their primary purpose is being used in clinical studies of patients with RA, including clinical trials. It is important to note that joint involvement refers to any swollen or tender joint on examination. Imaging studies may also be used to determine the presence of synovitis/joint involvement. The 2010 ACR/EALAR criteria excluded distal interphalangeal joints, first carpometacarpal joints, and first metatarsophalangeal joints from this criteria. Also, these criteria may only be applied to those patients where the joint involvement is not better explained by other inflammatory diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus or psoriasis. Specific testing must be obtained to rule out these diseases. The new criteria were noted to better predict the probability of RA, have the same sensitivity as the previous criteria for the diagnosis of RA and have a higher specificity as well as a higher negative predictive value.