Cannabis is considered by the Food and Drug Administration as a Schedule I drug. (Other examples of Schedule I drugs include heroin and peyote.) It has no accepted medical purpose at the federal level and has a high potential for abuse. Most authorities disagree with this designation. Commonly prescribed drugs like opiates and stimulants are Schedule II drugs, meaning they have a high risk of abuse but are medically useful.

Nevertheless, cannabis use has increased with the state-directed legislature turning the tide against federal regulation. State legalization of marijuana has increased cultivation demand, selective breeding for more potent strains, and competition in the marijuana dispensary industry. Expanding the use and legislation for the legalization of marijuana are propagated by potential health benefits and the absence of health concerns that are not well substantiated.

Cannabis abuse is a term describing the continued use of cannabis despite impairment in psychological, physical, or social functioning. It is an outdated medical definition formerly used in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR), which divided substance use from substance dependence. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM–5) has revised the terms of cannabis use disorder defined by nine pathological patterns classified under impaired control, social impairment, risky behavior, or physiological adaptation. This activity will focus on cannabis misuse and related components – states of intoxication and withdrawal and cannabis use disorder.