There is no single accepted definition for hyperemesis gravidarum. However, it generally refers to extreme cases of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. It is a clinical diagnosis. The criteria for diagnosis include vomiting that causes significant dehydration (as evidenced by ketonuria or electrolyte abnormalities) and weight loss (the most commonly cited marker for this is the loss of at least five percent of the patient’s pre-pregnancy weight) in the setting of pregnancy without any other underlying pathological cause for vomiting. Significant abdominal tenderness, pelvic tenderness, or vaginal bleeding should prompt a workup for alternative diagnoses.

The evaluation should include urinalysis to check for ketonuria and specific gravity, in addition to a complete blood count and electrolyte evaluation. An elevation in hemoglobin or hematocrit may be due to hemoconcentration in the setting of dehydration. Significant dehydration may result in acute kidney injury as evidenced by elevated serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and reduced glomerular filtration. Potassium, calcium, magnesium, sodium, and bicarbonate may be affected by prolonged bouts of vomiting and reduced oral intake of fluids. Thyroid tests, lipase, and liver function testing may also be completed to evaluate for alternate diagnoses.

Radiographic studies may be appropriate to rule out alternate diagnoses. Obstetrical ultrasounds may be considered to rule out multiple gestations, ectopic pregnancy, and gestational trophoblastic disease, depending on the patient’s history and prior obstetrical evaluations. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used to assess alternative diagnoses, such as appendicitis.