Acute candidal vulvovaginitis is treated with antifungal agents. Since most cases of candidal vulvovaginitis are secondary to C. albicans species, and since C. albicans does not have significant resistance to azole antifungals, these are the agents of choice for this disease. Antifungals may be taken orally as a single dose (fluconazole 150 mg) or can be applied intravaginally in a single day or 3-day regimens that are available over the counter. In patients with uncomplicated disease (those without immunosuppression or pregnancy who do not have recurrent candidal vulvovaginitis) either therapy is equally efficacious. Therefore, treatment decision may be made based on cost, patient preference, and drug interactions. If patients do not respond to standard therapy, cultures may be warranted to look for other species of candida, which are often resistant to azoles.

Patients with complicated candidal vulvovaginitis, for example those patients who are .immunosuppressed, require longer therapy. Typically, therapy includes intravaginal azole therapy for at least 1 week, or oral treatment with fluconazole 150 mg (renally adjusted for CrCl <50 ml/min) once every 3 days for three doses. Patients with recurrent candidal vulvovaginitis may benefit from suppressive therapy with weekly oral fluconazole for 6 months. Pregnant patients should not be given oral antifungals. In these patients, a 7-day course of intravaginal therapy is appropriate. Fluconazole is considered safe in breastfeeding women.

There is inadequate evidence to recommend intravaginal or oral yogurt therapy, intravaginal garlic, or douching.