World Health Organization declared a COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. SARS-CoV-2 causes COVID-19 infection. It presents as acute respiratory distress syndrome and infects all age groups. In adults, COVID-19 causes acute respiratory failure. In children, COVID-19 usually has a milder clinical course and more favorable outcome than in adults. In contrast to adults and older children, covid-19 infection is uncommon in neonates.

The low incidence of COVID-19 infection in neonates is attributed to the low availability of angiotensin-converting enzyme two receptors in the nasal epithelium, which is thought to be the principal point of access for COVID-19 in the human body. However, hyperinflammatory shock and organ failure cases were reported in neonates and older children with previous COVID-19 and positive antibodies. Following this, a different disease entity associated with COVID-19 in children was described as a multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with covid-19 (MIS-C).

This condition has also been referred to as pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome (PMIS) or pediatric inflammatory,y multisystem syndrome (PIMS). Multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with COVID-19 (MIS-C) in children is defined as persistent fever, evidence of inflammation, and signs of multiorgan dysfunction with or without confirmation of previous COVID-19 infection.

Other infectious and inflammatory causes with similar signs and symptoms must be excluded before diagnosing MIS-C. MIS-C is considered an immune sequela of COVID-19. MIS-C is typically known to occur after a latency period of 4 to 5 weeks following COVID-19 exposure. MIS-C has broad evolving symptomatology and severity, ranging from asymptomatic to a life-threatening multiorgan failure. Although rare, MISC is known to affect neonates and infants as well.