Tirzepatide is administered subcutaneously via an injection. It is not available in oral form at this time.

It is available in various dosages: 2.5 mg/0.5 mL, 5 mg/0.5 mL, 7.5 mg/0.5 mL, 10 mg/0.5 mL, 12.5 mg/0.5 mL, 15 mg/0.5 mL. Standard dosing is once weekly, with the usual initiation dose being 5 mg/0.5 mL. Prescribed doses can be increased on follow-up visits based on efficacy, as defined by hemoglobin A1C levels and body weight, and adverse effects. The primary adverse drug reactions are largely gastrointestinal related, such as abdominal discomfort and nausea, with variable severity. The patients' ability to tolerate side effects plays a significant role in the titration of tirzepatide dosing.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**According to the manufacturer's product information, no dosage adjustment of tirzepatide is suggested for patients with hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dosage adjustment of tirzepatide is suggested for patients with hepatic impairment. However, tirzepatide is associated with gastrointestinal ADRs, including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea leading to dehydration, which can cause acute kidney injury. Use with caution in patients prone to dehydration.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Available information on tirzepatide use in pregnant women is inadequate to evaluate for a drug-related risk of congenital disabilities and adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. A risk to the mother and fetus is associated with poorly controlled diabetes in pregnancy. In addition, increased incidences of external, visceral, and skeletal malformations have been observed in animal reproduction studies. Therefore, there may be risks to the fetus from exposure to tirzepatide during pregnancy.

Consequently, tirzepatide should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus. Patients of childbearing age should be prescribed tirzepatide after discussing the possible teratogenic effects. Physicians should also discuss the initiation of contraception before prescribing tirzepatide. In addition, the efficacy of oral hormonal contraception declines while on tirzepatide therapy.

There should be shared decision-making on possibly changing the method of contraception to a non-oral route or utilizing barrier contraception for at least four weeks after initiation of tirzepatide therapy.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**There is no information on tirzepatide in animal or human milk or its effects on the breastfed infant. Therefore, clinicians should consider the developmental and health benefits of breastfeeding, the mother's clinical need for tirzepatide, and potential adverse impacts on the breastfed infant from tirzepatide.

Tirzepatide is a large molecule with high molecular weight. Accordingly, the milk concentration is likely to be less, and absorption is unlikely because it is presumably partially destroyed in the infant's gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, until more clinical data become available, tirzepatide should be used cautiously during breastfeeding, especially in newborn or preterm infants.