The differential diagnosis for BSS starts with considering a wide variety of bleeding disorders, including factor deficiencies. Mucocutaneous bleeding, coupled with large platelets and thrombocytopenia, points towards a platelet disorder. The presence of large platelets or thrombocytopenia on peripheral smear review is NOT a feature of hemophilia.

**Immune Thrombocytopenia**

Many patients with BSS are diagnosed with immune thrombocytopenia due to similar presentations. Features which may help in differentiating BSS from ITP are:

- Presence of family history of ITP

- Failure to respond to first-line treatment like intravenous immunoglobulin and steroids

- Typical findings for BSS on light aggregation studies and flow cytometry

Despite this, many patients mistakenly diagnosed with ITP end up receiving splenectomy before being diagnosed with BSS.

**Von-Willebrand Disease (vWD)**

The patients with type IIB vWD has the closest clinical phenotype with BSS. Due to the increased affinity of large multimers with platelets, the platelets are cleared rapidly, leading to thrombocytopenia. The platelets are also large in type IIB vWD. However, the platelets express an increased aggregation in response to ristocetin. In comparison, patients with BSS always have low to absent aggregation of platelets in response to ristocetin.

**Other Inherited Disorders in the Differential Diagnosis of BSS**

- May-Hegglin abnormality

- Myosin-Heavy chain 9 (MYH-9) disorders

- Grey Platelet syndrome-lack of intra-platelet granules and confirmed by electron microscopy.

- Paris Trousseau Platelet disorder (PTPD) - deletion of the terminal end of the long arm of chromosome 11 that includes band 11q24.1, 11q terminal deletion disorder.

- DiGeorge syndrome (DGS); velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS, or Shprintzen syndrome);

- Mediterranean macrothrombocytopenia

Rare cases of autoantibody to GPIb complex have been described, which are called Pseudo-BSS.