All immunoglobulin molecules have a common structural framework characterized by two identical small polypeptide chains (light chains) and two identical large polypeptide chains (heavy chains). The Fc region of the antibody is comprised solely of the two heavy chains and is responsible for binding to cellular receptors. The Fab region of the antibody is where antigen recognition and binding occur and is made up of two heavy chains continuous with the Fc region and two light chains. These chains also have variable and constant regions. At the antigen binding sites, both polypeptide chains contain variable regions whose amino acid sequences can be altered for affinity maturation to occur for a given antigen. The variable heavy and light chains are organized into layers of antiparallel B-pleated sheets, allowing the antigen to bind between these three-dimensional immunoglobulin folds. The rest of the polypeptide regions are known as constant regions, and they are held together by strong dipeptide bonds to stabilize the two chains.

Some antibodies, like IgM, can have five duplicates of the structure above to form a pentamer capable of binding up to ten antigens. However, IgE is a monomer composed of two epsilon-heavy chains and two light chains, thus capable of binding a total of two antigens, which occurs through the variable regions of the light and heavy chains that create unique antigen-specific binding sites. The C-terminal regions of the heavy chains are composed of four C-epsilon dimers, C-epsilon 1-4.