The differential diagnosis of Foster Kennedy syndrome include:

- Frontal lobe parenchyma tumors

- Meningioma (e.g., olfactory, frontal, sphenoid wing)

- Pseudo-FKS

- Non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION)

- Optic nerve hypoplasia

- Optic neuritis

- Vitamin B12 deficiency

Tumors that affect the frontal lobe are included in the differential diagnosis of FKS, especially those affecting brain structure in the anterior cranial fossa. Tumors of the brain meninges, i.e., those involving the olfactory, frontal lobe, and sphenoid wing, need to be considered. These tumors can occur without ocular complications and would therefore not qualify as FKS.

Pseudo-FKS is the most common differential diagnosis of FKS; simplifying its definition, one can say pseudo-FKS is FKS without a tumor.

NAION is the second highest cause of optic neuropathy. It is a condition of non-inflammatory ischemia of the 1mm region of the optic disc typically due to the reduction in blood flow through the posterior ciliary artery, which supplies the optic nerve head (anterior part of the optic nerve). It has been suggested to be caused by embolism. It can also be caused by a nocturnal drop in perfusion pressure.

Optic nerve hypoplasia is a congenital condition in which the optic nerve does not develop fully, thus giving the classic small and pale appearance of the optic nerve. There are cases where optic nerve hypoplasia is seen together with NAION.

Optic neuritis is the inflammation of the optic nerve and is called optic papillitis when it involves the optic nerve head. It is called neuro-retinitis when it involves the optic nerve head and the macula. It is termed retrobulbar neuritis when it involves the posterior part of the nerve.

Papilledema is a sign of a pathologic condition in the eye presenting as an elevation of the optic nerve head. It results from a sustained increase in the intracranial pressure with varying degrees of blurred optic disc margin and reduction.

Vitamin B12 deficiency can also result in progressive optic neuropathy, masquerading as FKS. This condition is, however, reversible with appropriate supplements.