Patients with ocular cicatricial pemphigoid experience a bilateral, chronic conjunctivitis that has remissions and exacerbations. Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid is often misdiagnosed and delayed due to the insidious onset and nonspecific signs and symptoms in the early stages of the disease. In the beginning, patients experience ocular redness, tearing, burning, light sensitivity, and foreign body sensation; these presentations are similar to dry eye syndrome and many other anterior segment inflammatory conditions. There is minimal to no discharge present, which helps determine infectious versus non-infection causes. As the disease progresses, the signs become pathognomic for ocular cicatricial pemphigoid, most notably with the development of a symblepharon, which is an adhesion between the palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva.

Early on in the disease, the conjunctiva exhibits the following signs: diffuse hyperemia, papillary reaction, dry eye syndrome, and keratoconjunctivitis sicca due to the destruction of goblet cells. Intermediate stages of the disease are notable for subconjunctival fibrosis and shortening of the inferior fornix. This is most often found when patients are diagnosed. Later on, as the disease progresses, the symblephara develop and there is flattening of the plica and keratinization of the caruncle.

Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid affects the cornea, and the beginning stages include punctate epithelial erosions, exposure keratitis, epithelial defects, peripheral infiltrates, ulcers, and vascularization. Worsening of the condition results in limbal stem cell failure leading to keratinization and conjunctivalization. Corneal opacification is possible late in the disease.

The eyelids are also affected throughout the disease process, with the first signs including blepharitis, trichiasis, and entropion due to subepithelial scarring and keratinization of the eyelid margin. Patients with end-stage ocular cicatricial pemphigoid may develop ankyloblepharon, which refers to the fusion of the upper and lower eyelids.