The management of HIV patients is best with an interprofessional team that includes clinicians (MDs and DOs), mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), infectious specialists, pharmacists (including infectious disease specialty pharmacists who focus on antiretroviral treatment), and infectious disease nurses. The pharmacist should verify the chosen regimen, check for drug interactions, verify dosing, and assumes responsibility for patient counseling. Nursing can make an initial assessment of treatment effectiveness and, particularly, patient compliance. Nursing also must participate in patient education because improper compliance can lead to disastrous therapeutic failure. All healthcare team members must press the point of compliance when they have the opportunity, and any concerns about the regimen or compliance require communication with the treating physician. All interprofessional team members bear responsibility for patient monitoring, especially for compliance, and must record any concerns in the patient's medical record and reach out to the appropriate team member(s) immediately to take corrective action; this open communication is crucial to the success of  HAART.

Overwhelming data shows that HAART can improve survival and reduce the risk of opportunistic infections. Thus, healthcare workers need to understand these medications because of their effectiveness and the potential adverse effects. A consultation with an infectious disease expert is recommended when any doubts exist regarding HAART. Infectious diseases clinicians and other healthcare professionals ensure adults and children with HIV receive safe and effective therapy. ID specialists and healthcare professionals are integral to formulating domestic and global infectious diseases policies to improve public health.

Only with a complete "all in," collaborative interprofessional team approach can ART have its best chance for therapeutic success while minimizing adverse events. [Level 5]