The most frequent serious adverse events associated with the administration of tPA are related to bleeding.

Bleeding associated with alteplase therapy can be divided into two broad categories. Internal bleeding includes intracranial bleeding (0.4% to 15.4%), retroperitoneal bleeding (less than 1%), gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding (5%), genitourinary bleeding (4%), and respiratory bleeding. Superficial or surface bleeding is observed mainly at invaded or disturbed sites such as venous cutdowns, arterial punctures, and recent surgical intervention sites. Less serious spontaneous bleeding includes ecchymosis (1%), gingival bleeding (less than 1%), and epistaxis (less than 1%). In clinical studies of adult patients with acute ischemic stroke (n = 624), a higher incidence of intracranial bleeding, especially symptomatic intracranial bleeding, was seen in patients receiving alteplase compared to placebo (total intracranial bleeding 15.4% versus 6.4%, p < 0.01; symptomatic intracranial bleeding 8% versus 1.3%, p < 0.01). However, there was no increase in the incidence of 90-day mortality or severe disability in patients receiving alteplase. Studies indicate that the incidence of intracranial bleeding is dose-related, with the greatest percentage occurring at a dosage of 150 mg (1.3%) compared to 100 mg (0.4%). Rates of adverse events, including bleeding, correlate to the total exposure of tPA.

Cardiac dysrhythmias may occur when tPA is administered for NSTEMI and is related to the re-establishment of tissue perfusion rather than drug exposure.

Allergic reactions, including anaphylactic-type reactions, are possible following exposure to tPA. Various sources of tPA have varying levels of antigenicity. See “streptokinase” for further discussion. The rapid conversion of plasminogen to plasmin signals a complement cascade leading to mast cell degranulation and subsequent anaphylactic reaction.