Prognosis depends on the involved organ system and the stage of the disease. Patients with MALToma usually have a good prognosis with a median survival of more than ten years. A prognostic score, called the "MALT-IPI," is used to predict the risk of progression of the disease. It has three prognostic factors, including age greater than or equal to 70 years, serum lactate dehydrogenase level over the upper limit of normal, and stage III or IV disease.

Progression occurs in the form of histologic transformation to high-grade lymphoma. Histologic transformation is more likely in those with more than four nodal sites involved, elevated LDH, and failure to achieve a complete remission after initial treatment. Patients with histologic transformation have a worse prognosis and lower five-year survival rates. The prognosis also depends on the grade of the tumor, with long-term survival possible for patients with low-grade tumors. However, the cure is more difficult in patients with MALTomas in advanced stages. Disease-free survival for MALToma is estimated to be approximately 77 to 80 percent. From studies involving patients with marginal zone lymphomas, we have found that a five-year survival rate for stage I is around 80 percent, stage II about 75 percent, stage III approximated to be more than 50 percent, and stage IV approximately 65 percent. These figures show that more people with stage IV disease survive for five years or more compared to people with stage III disease. This difference could be because several other factors (not just stage) play a part in a person’s outcome. For example, the treatments people have and specific features of their lymphoma also influence survival.