The management of norovirus infection involves treating the patient’s symptoms and mitigating the risk of a norovirus outbreak. The primary clinical focus should be on the patient’s hydration status with an emphasis on infection control to prevent the spread of disease to healthcare workers and patient contacts. The mainstay of treatment is oral rehydration therapy. The World Health Organization and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend oral rehydration solutions with electrolytes and glucose. Oral rehydration solutions are preferred over sports drinks and juices for pediatric patients because the latter contain a high carbohydrate and osmotic load that may exacerbate diarrhea. Patients with intractable vomiting or severe dehydration require intravenous hydration and, possibly, hospital admission. Antibiotics generally are not indicated unless there is a concern for bacterial infection. Anti-motility agents have been beneficial in adults, and antiemetics may provide symptomatic relief. Studies support the use of ondansetron in vomiting children, but anti-motility agents are not recommended in pediatric patients. Infection control is a priority in preventing norovirus outbreaks. While efforts at vaccine development are underway, hand hygiene, surface cleaning, and prevention of body fluid exposure are the mainstays of infection control. Norovirus vaccine development remains a priority for both the perceived public health benefits as well as the economic benefits. There has been difficulty developing a vaccine because of the complex nature of norovirus, human immune responses, difficulty culturing the virus, and limited animal models for vaccine testing. A number of vaccines are currently in pre-clinical development, and one has completed Phase II adult clinical trials. Due to viral evolution, development efforts have focused on multivalent vaccines which are similar to influenza vaccines.