The use of thiazolidinediones in the management of T2DM requires an interprofessional healthcare team. These agents can help with glycemic control and insulin resistance in patients with functional pancreatic beta-cells. Though they are not first-line agents, they can act synergistically with other oral agents and insulin. They modify gene transcription to increase adiponectin and insulin sensitivity, lower plasma glucose by increasing glucose utilization, decrease plasma fatty acids by increasing fatty acid oxidation, decrease serum triglycerides, and decrease visceral fat. Early use of TZDs in the course of the disease may benefit the pancreas, but there are many long-term dose and duration dependant adverse effects that limit their use. Such effects may include heart failure,  weight gain, and bone density loss.

When properly prescribed and carefully monitored, they can effectively reduce fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c levels in some patients by increasing insulin sensitivity. These adverse effects are why a pharmacist consult may be necessary to verify the dosing regimen, check for interactions, and perform medication reconciliation. To receive maximum benefit from TZDs, patient body weight, liver function, plasma glucose, and HbA1c levels need monitoring at follow-up visits; these are functions that a diabetes nurse educator can perform and keep the prescriber informed regarding progress. In addition to being used as adjunctive therapy for diabetes, they have a place in patients with steatohepatitis since they reduce liver fat in clinical trials. With an appropriate interprofessional team approach to thiazolidinedione therapy, patient outcomes for type 2 diabetes can improve with minimal adverse events. [Level 5]