The major blood vessels of the neck are confined within the carotid sheath. These are the common carotid artery, the internal carotid artery, and the internal jugular vein.

The right common carotid artery originates from the brachiocephalic artery, while the left common carotid artery originates directly from the aortic arch. The common carotid bifurcates into the internal carotid and external carotid arteries at the level of the superior portion of the thyroid cartilage. The external carotid artery exits the carotid sheath and supplies the superficial aspect of the face and parts of the neck. It gives off the superior thyroid artery, lingual artery, facial artery, and occipital artery. The internal carotid artery continues into the temporal bone through the carotid canal and joins the circle of Willis to supply the ophthalmic artery, anterior cerebral artery, and the middle cerebral artery.

The internal jugular vein is continuous with the sigmoid sinus and exits the skull via the jugular foramen. It descends within the carotid sheath and receives drainage from the facial, lingual, and superior and middle thyroid veins. It eventually anastomoses with the subclavian vein to form the brachiocephalic vein.

Blood from the face and scalp drains into the external jugular vein, which travels down the sternocleidomastoid border and drains into the subclavian vein. The anterior jugular veins also anastomose with the external jugular vein, with anastomotic variances discussed in other StatPearls article topics for each vein.

Many lymph nodes exist in the neck, with the majority located along the course of the internal jugular vein. The lateral neck lymph nodes exist in anterior and posterior chains on each side of the neck, lateral to and closely associated with the internal jugular veins. These drain the vast majority of structures in the head and neck. The deep central neck is drained by lymph node chains contiguous with the mediastinal lymph nodes, responsible for draining the thyroid and peri-thyroid area and cervical trachea. There is also a retropharyngeal nodal plexus that drains the nasopharynx and skull base. The supraclavicular lymph nodes are located just above the clavicle. **Virchow's node,**a left suprascapular lymph node, lies near the junction of the thoracic duct and the left subclavian vein, where the lymph from most of the body drains into the systemic circulation. Therefore, tumor embolization from abdominal (gastric cancer) and pelvic regions (ovarian cancer) may cause enlargement of Virchow's node (sentinel node).