Inverse ratio ventilation (IRV) is an alternative strategy for mechanical ventilation that reverses the classical inspiratory/expiratory scheme. This is achieved by modifying the inspiratory to expiratory (I:E) ratio, typically to increase oxygenation by increasing the mean airway pressure (MAP). Discussion of IRV requires an understanding of basic ventilator management which can be reviewed in a separate article. Here we discuss additional terms necessary for the utilization of IRV.

**I:E Ratio**

The I:E ratio denotes the proportions of each breath cycle devoted to the inspiratory and expiratory phases. The duration of each phase will depend on this ratio in conjunction with the overall respiratory rate. The total time of a respiratory cycle is determined by dividing 60 seconds by the respiratory rate. Inspiratory time and expiratory time are then determined by portioning the respiratory cycle based on the set ratio. For instance, a patient with a respiratory rate of 10 breaths per minute will have a breath cycle lasting 6 seconds. A typical I:E ratio for most situations would be 1:2. If we apply this ratio to the patient above, the 6-second breath cycle will break down to 2 seconds of inspiration and 4 seconds of expiration. Changing the I:E ratio to 1:3 will result in 1.5 seconds of inspiration and 4.5 seconds of expiration. Thus, changing the I:E ratio from 1:2 to 1:3 results in less inspiratory time and more expiratory time for the same length of the breath cycle.

Standard Pressure Control ventilation modes typically use I:E ratio of 1:2 or as high as 1:3 or 1:4 in specific populations. In these cases, the expiratory phase is set longer than the inspiratory phase mimics normal physiology. Inverse Ratio Ventilation instead uses I:E ratios of 2:1, 3:1, 4:1, and so on, sometimes as high as 10:1, with inspiratory times that exceed expiratory times.

**Mean Airway Pressure**

Mean Airway Pressure (referred to as MAP in this article) is the pressure measured at the airway's opening, averaged over the complete respiratory cycle. The primary determinants of MAP are PEEP, inspiratory pressure, and time spent on each phase. In standard mechanical ventilation, MAP can be estimated by assuming that the pressure at the airway is approximately equal to the PEEP during expiration and roughly equivalent to the Inspiratory pressure during inspiration. MAP can then be calculated by multiplying the fraction of a cycle spent on inspiration by the inspiratory pressure and adding this to the fraction of a cycle spent on expiration multiplied by the PEEP.

For instance, in a patient mechanically ventilated using a PEEP of 5, inspiratory pressure of 20, and I:E ratio of 1:2. The patient will have a base pressure at the airway of 5, but for one-third of a respiratory cycle (I:E ratio of 1:2 means that one-third of the cycle is spent on inspiration), this will increase to 20. We then calculate 5 x 2/3 + 20 x 1/3 = 10.

MAP correlates with mean alveolar pressure and thus transpulmonary pressure. Though multiple factors are involved, increased transpulmonary pressure increases gas exchange, notionally improving oxygenation. The primary purpose of IRV is to increase mean airway pressure by increasing the time spent on the higher pressure portion of the cycle. This allows the increase of MAP while minimizing the risk for pulmonary injury relative to other aggressive oxygenation strategies. Increasing the time spent at the higher pressure portion of the cycle allows MAP elevation without increasing the pressure. A higher MAP results in a higher transpulmonary pressure, which improves gas exchange and arterial oxygenation.