Issues inherent to the application of laboratory tube collection include, but are not limited, to the following:

- Problems with the evacuated tube system (ETS): Multiple blood collection will be difficult, especially when the vacutainer used is already damaged or malfunctioning.

- Problems with the collection tube: The tubes may also be damaged. For instance, the vacuum inside the tube could be lost when it is uncapped. On the other hand, an anticoagulant may not be present in some tubes during packaging, which will mean incorrectly using serum instead of plasma for testing.

- Inadequately trained personnel: The laboratory staff should have training in laboratory tube collection. The order of draw is made easy with color-coding, but it can still lead to an incorrect collection if the phlebotomist does not follow the order of draw because of inadequate training.

- Contamination: If the tubes become contaminated from the beginning, during, or after the collection, these will yield incorrect and unreliable results. For example, the sterility of the cap of blood culture tubes must be ensured and should not be in contact with any potential source of contamination. Another way of contamination is when the anticoagulant from a tube can be transferred to another tube when it sticks with the needle of the vacutainer.

- Lack of research studies on laboratory tube collection: While the CLSI made the recommendations for the proper sequence of tubes, additional studies are needed to reveal the actual amount of variability if improper order of collection occurs. Future studies can reveal underlying concepts to the laboratory tube collection process itself, which can help develop future standards on laboratory science practice in healthcare. Medical laboratory scientists working not only in the clinical laboratories but also in research and the academe should give adequate attention to laboratory tube collection as it is given less priority nowadays despite its clinical implications.