The differential diagnosis for progressive vision loss is complex.  Retinitis pigmentosa is a clinical diagnosis that may be confirmed by the presence of bilateral eye involvement with night vision disturbance and gradual loss of peripheral vision. Physical findings on fundoscopic examination reveal bone spicule pigmentation, with vascular narrowing and optic disc pallor.  It should also be noted that there are variants of RP with significant differences in physical findings.  Retinitis Punctata Albescens (RPA) frequently presents as night blindness in childhood.  On direct fundoscopic examination, findings include less prominent (or even absent) disc pallor, less pronounced vascular narrowing, and bony spicules are rare or absent altogether.  Instead, there are small white spots covering the majority of the fundus in RPA. Awareness of such variants is necessary to avoid excluding RP and its subclasses from the differential.

Other diseases may mimic the early findings, and careful evaluation must be undertaken to make the correct diagnosis. One possible mimic is cone/rod dystrophy. This progressive retinopathy can be differentiated from RP by the onset of dyschromatopsia before nyctalopia, as the cone photoreceptors are affected rather than the rods. Another consideration for nyctalopia in childhood is Congenital Stationary Night Blindness (CSNB).  The impairment in low light vision is present at birth and, unlike RP, is generally non-progressive.

Chorioretinal infections, such as syphilis, CMV, or even Lyme disease, may produce symptoms suggestive of RP. A careful history will usually help identify these possibilities, and laboratory testing for confirmation will be indicated.

Vision loss can be a result of multiple other diseases, including sarcoidosis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Systemic involvement, in addition to vision loss, should prompt a thorough assessment of these and other inflammatory processes. Vitamin A deficiency and trauma should also be considered.