**Primary Hyperparathyroidism**

Parathyroidectomy is indicated for all patients with symptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism.

**Indications of Parathyroidectomy in Asymptomatic Hyperparathyroidism**

- Age younger than 50 years, serum calcium level >1 mg/dL above the normal limit

- Urinary calcium excretion > 400 mg per 24 hours (10 mmol per day)

- Creatinine clearance was reduced by more than 30 percent compared with age-matched persons

- Bone density (lumbar spine, hip, or forearm) that is > 2.5 standard deviations below peak bone mass (T score -2.5)

- Medical surveillance is not desirable or possible

- Surgery requested by the patient

A recent study revealed normocalcemic and hypercalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism had similarly increased cardiovascular risk factors. Parathyroidectomy ameliorated the increased cardiovascular risk factors in both normocalcemic and hypercalcemic PHPT.

**Secondary Hyperparathyroidism**

Patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism are usually managed medically. Parathyroidectomy is indicated in refractory hyperparathyroidism with hypercalcemia or hyperphosphatemia, or severe symptoms. About 15% of patients will need parathyroidectomy for medically refractory secondary hyperparathyroidism after 5 to 10 years on dialysis.

**Tertiary Hyperparathyroidism**

Tertiary hyperparathyroidism with symptomatic hypercalcemia is the main indication for parathyroidectomy. Surgical treatment for tertiary HPT has higher cure rates than medical therapy.

Parathyroidectomy is indicated if the hyperparathyroidism is a suspicion of parathyroid carcinoma, especially with significantly elevated calcium or PTH levels (which can be in the thousands of ng/mL), painful large neck mass, or inhomogeneous mass on imaging.

Other indications of parathyroidectomy include parathyroid cyst and parathyroid hypercalcemic crisis (severe hypercalcemia and central nervous system dysfunction).