Portal hypertension is a disease that arises when blood flow through the liver is compromised, and blood pressures in the portal vein rise. This disease has many complications that result from increased pressure, including esophageal varices, ascites, and hepatorenal syndrome, which contribute to the high morbidity and mortality often seen in this condition.

Additionally, if a patient is under consideration for partial liver resection, portions of the portal vein can be embolized to enable hypertrophy of the remaining liver segments that still receive flow from other segments of the portal venous system. In a majority of patients, portal vein embolization results in adequate liver hypertrophy to allow surgery to proceed. However, should the portal vein embolization result in insufficient hypertrophy of the remaining liver segments, hepatic vein embolization may be an option to augment the effects of portal vein embolization.

Another clinical consideration aforementioned is portal vein thrombosis, which can be pathologically acquired, as seen in cirrhosis, malignancy, liver tumors, and patients with a certain JAK2 mutation. Portal vein thrombosis can present with varied symptoms, including abdominal pain, ischemic hepatitis, liver failure, and/or small intestine infarction. Patients generally receive treatment with anticoagulant medication. This treatment can incur further complications by the accompanying coagulopathy often seen in these patients. The surgeon may consider a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure in patients who do not improve or continue to worsen despite anticoagulation.