It is vital to understand the physiology of continence to understand the pathophysiology of incontinence. The anatomical structures which help to maintain control of bowel function are the following:

- Rectum as a stool reservoir and can hold up to 300 ml volume without any increase in pressure. Beyond this limit, an urge to defecate occurs. The rectum is connected with the anus which is a 3 cm to 4 cm hollow muscular tube which at rest lies at a 90-degree angle from the rectum. During defecation, this angle becomes obtuse, about 110 to 130 degrees allowing for the passage of stool.

- Internal anal sphincter which is innervated by an enteric nervous system is responsible for 80% to 85% of anal canal resting tone. The anorectal inhibitory reflex allows for the internal sphincter to relax allowing anal sensory receptors to sense rectal contents. This helps to differentiate solid or liquid stool from gas.

- External anal sphincter, innervated by pudendal nerve, contracts and maintains continence during a sudden increase in intraabdominal pressure such as during coughing or lifting.

- Puborectalis muscle forms a sling around the anorectal junction and maintains the anorectal angle which maintains the anatomical barrier against the discharge of stool.

To maintain fecal continence, there is a complex interplay of several organ systems and nerves. As the fecal mass presents to the rectum, this causes distension. The sensation of rectal distension is transmitted by the parasympathetic nerves (S2-S4), which induces relaxation of the rectoanal inhibitor reflex and contraction of the rectoanal contractile reflex. The rectal lining has a rich supply of nerve endings that can sample if the mass is liquid or solid. It is believed that abnormal sampling and lowered anorectal sensation most likely contribute to fecal incontinence in many individuals. Any pathology that interferes with these processes like trauma, stroke, vaginal delivery or paralysis can result in fecal incontinence.