The knee is made up of 3 separate compartments:

- Medial tibiofemoral joint

- Lateral tibiofemoral joint

- Patellofemoral joint

The knee is typically described as a hinged joint; however, there are more complex and subtle motion and dynamic considerations. Physiologically, the knee also undergoes axial rotation and femoral "rollback" in deeper degrees of flexion. Additionally, terminal rotatory motion, known as the "screw home mechanism," occurs as the tibia externally rotates when the knee goes into terminal extension. The lateral tibial plateau is convex and sits more proximal than the medial tibial plateau, concave. The medial femoral condyle is larger than the lateral side. 60% of the force through the knee joint occurs on the medial tibial plateau. Thus, the medial tibial plateau is of more dense bone, and this is also why the more common wear pattern seen in osteoarthritis occurs on the medial side.

Numerous ligaments act on the knee to provide stability of the joint, including:

- Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)

- Important for axial rotation as well as preventing anterior translation of the tibia on the femur

- Posterior cruciate ligament (PCL)

- Important to prevent posterior translation of the tibia on the femur and allow for femoral rollback.

- Lateral collateral ligament (LCL)

- Varus restraint and is typically attenuated in significant varus deformity

- Medial collateral ligament (MCL)

- Valgus restraint and is typically attenuated in significant valgus deformity.

-  Posterolateral corner (PLC)

- The primary stabilizer of external tibial rotation

**Mechanical Alignment******

The distal femur is in approximately 9 degrees of anatomic valgus relative to the joint line, while the proximal tibia in 3 degrees of anatomic varus relative to the joint line.

The typical patellar Q angle is between 13 degrees and 19 degrees, with an increased Q angle increases the risk of patellar maltracking and dislocation.