It is of paramount importance to know about the cryotherapy machine, the various silicon buckles, and the suture material used during SB surgery.

1. Chorioretinal adhesion, for the treatment of retinal break(s), can be achieved with either diathermy, cryotherapy, or laser photocoagulation.

i) **Diathermy**: Heat is generated by delivering a current via sclera at a frequency of 13.56 MHz. However, it cannot be used on the intact sclera as this can cause scleral shrinkage and necrosis. As scleral dissection is needed before applying diathermy, it is used with scleral implants.

ii) **Laser photocoagulation**can produce chorioretinal adhesions only in the presence of close contact between the NSR and the RPE. It is therefore used for treating retinal breaks in the attached retina only.

iii) **Cryotherapy**is the best modality for treating retinal break(s) during SB surgery. It is based on theJoule-Thompson principle, which states there is a sudden temperature drop when a gas is allowed to expand through a narrow aperture. This sudden temperature drop is used to produce chorioretinal adhesions. The intracellular water freezes to form intracellular crystals during the freezing phase, which causes mechanical injury. During the thawing phase, water and electrolytes get separated and cause a change in the intracellular pH, leading to the rupture of the cell membranes. The most commonly used gas for cryotherapy is nitrous oxide. It achieves a temperature of -89 degrees C when used at 600 psi pressure.

The cryotherapy machine consists of the following:

- Cryoprobe. The pressurized gas is made to expand through a small aperture near the tip of the probe. This expansion causes a sudden fall in the temperature, thus leading to the cryo effect. The tip of the probe is used to indent the sclera. The cryoprobe can be either straight or curved.

- A pedal to activate the cryoprobe

- The panel has sites for attaching the input and output tubings for the cryoprobe and a gauge to display the pressure that is built inside the cryoprobe

- Nitrous oxide cylinder, which is blue in color

The surgeon should always ensure that the cryoprobe is working and adequate pressure is being built before starting surgery.

2. The buckles used to produce scleral indent can be placed either on the intact sclera (exoplants) or inside a partial-thickness scleral tunnel made after scleral dissection (implants). As scleral implants are now of purely historical interest, we will describe only the exoplants.

The exoplants used currently are made of modified, cross-linked polydimethylsiloxane. The material offers multiple advantages, including water insolubility, low toxicity, high elasticity, and biological inactivity (neither supporting bacterial growth nor carcinogenic). The silicone explants can be either solid or spongy in consistency. The sponge explants contain closed air cells within their substance.

The exoplants can be classified into four types:

i) **Bands and strips**: They are used for encircling the eyeball all around, thus supporting the vitreous base. The most commonly used bands include band numbers 240 and 42. The 240 band is flat on both sides and measures 2.5mm in width and 0.6mm in height. The 42 band has one side flat (shiny looking) and the other side convex (dull looking) and measures 4.0mm in width and 1.25mm in height. While suturing, care must be taken that the flat side is placed towards the sclera.

ii) **Implants and Wedges**: They need scleral dissection for implantation and are rarely used now.

iii) **Tires**: They are used as a circumferential segmental buckle to support the break(s). The radius of curvature of these tires is similar to that of the globe. One of their sides has a groove that measures 2.5 mm. It is provided for fixing the 240 band for simultaneous 360-degree encirclage. The other side of these tires can be either convex or concave. The convex ones are used to manage RRD secondary to retinal dialysis as the convex curvature supports the vitreous base. The most commonly used tire is number 286, measuring 7.0 mm in width. The concave ones can further be of two types, i.e., symmetrical and asymmetrical. The symmetrical tires have their groove in the center and are used to manage RRD secondary to lattice(s) and atrophic hole(s). The most commonly used symmetrical tire is number 277, which measures 7.0mm in width. On the contrary, the groove in asymmetrical tires does not pass through the center. They are used to manage RRD secondary to horse-shoe tears (HST). The most commonly used asymmetrical tire is number 276, measuring 7.0mm in width. They are placed such that the slender side is positioned anteriorly under the muscle insertion while the hefty side is positioned posteriorly. This arrangement ensures that the anterior slender side of the tire doesn’t budge against the muscles, thus reducing the chances of anterior segment ischemia, while the posterior, hefty side supports the break(s).

iv) **Sponges**: Currently, they are mainly used as radial buckles to support posterior break(s). However, they can also be used as circumferential buckles. They are cylindrical in shape and need to be cut lengthwise into two halves with equal thickness, and the convex side is placed towards the globe to produce a high indentation. As the air cells get exposed to the surface after the sponge is cut, they can absorb fluid and harbor bacteria, which in turn can cause infection.

**3. Sutures**: The most commonly used suture for SB procedure is a 5.0 polybutylate-coated, braided, polyester suture with a 3/8 circle spatulated needle. The flat top and bottom of the needle ensuring that it dissects the lamellar structure of the sclera while passing. Half circle needle can be used to place sutures in the extreme posterior sclera.