All Ultrasound (US) devices used for cTTEs should include software to perform the basics of 2D imaging, M-mode, color flow Doppler, and spectral Doppler.

US probes are used to transmit mechanical longitudinal electrical waves through a medium. This is done by transmitting an electrical current via alternating potential differences amongst electrodes encompassing piezoelectrical crystals. Once electrically stimulated, these crystals will produce sound waves. The sound waves will propagate through the medium at velocities dependent on the material's density. Waves will return to the crystals, at which point the waves will be converted back into an electrical signal and converted into images. Such images are the basis of two-dimensional echocardiography.

US probes are utilized in the same methodology as above to produce doppler images. A color Doppler image varies by color depending on the direction of a moving medium. If an object moves away from the probe, it will produce a longer wavelength, interpreted as a blue color. If an object is moving toward the probe, it will produce a smaller wavelength, interpreted as a red color. A spectral doppler encompasses a pulse and continuous wave Doppler, which varies from color doppler by calculating the mean and peak gradients. This is illustrated along with a graph for the simplicity of comparison. A tissue Doppler can be done via pulse or color mode. It is used to produce peak myocardial velocities.

Diagnostic ultrasounds produce low-frequency currents ranging from 2.5 to 14 MHz. Thus, producing a radiation-free modality safe to use in children, infants, and fetuses. Multiple probes are available, which vary by frequency. To grasp the significance of high vs. low-frequency probes, one must recall the inverse relationship between wavelength and frequency. The higher frequency probes are ideal for small infants, providing the clinician with a smaller wavelength allowing one to obtain a higher resolution image of superficial structures.