# Continuing Education Activity

Familial hypercholesterolemia is a group of inherited genetic defects that lead to the severe elevation of serum cholesterol concentrations. Clinically familial hypercholesterolemia is diagnosed by a high serum level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and genetically is characterized into two subgroups: (1) autosomal dominant (AD), (2) codominant transmission with 90% or higher penetrance. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of familial hypercholesterolemia and highlights the interprofessional team's role in evaluating and treating patients with this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of familial hypercholesterolemia.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of familial hypercholesterolemia.
- Review the treatment options available for familial hypercholesterolemia.
- Describe the interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to optimize the treatment of familial hypercholesterolemia and improve its outcomes.

# Introduction

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a group of inherited genetic defects that lead to the severe elevation of serum cholesterol concentrations. Clinically familial hypercholesterolemia is diagnosed by a high serum level of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and genetically is characterized into two subgroups: (1) autosomal dominant (AD), (2) codominant transmission with 90% or higher penetrance.

# Etiology

The three main known genetic mutations in familial hypercholesterolemia are classified as defects in the LDL receptor (most common), apolipoprotein B  (ApoB), or proprotein convertase subtilisin/Kexin type 9 (PCSK9). Each of these three mutations leads to impairment of LDL receptors and a reduction in uptake of LDL cholesterol and subsequently causes high LDL cholesterol concentration.STAP1) was also reported to cause familial hypercholesterolemia.

# Epidemiology

The study by De Ferranti et al. has estimated that familial hypercholesterolemia occurs in about 1 in 250 individuals older than 20-year-old in the United States. The most common age prevalence was from 60 to 69 years old, while the least common age prevalence was 20 to 29 years old. Also, familial hypercholesterolemia had a similar prevalence between men and women but was more common in the obese or black race.

**Race**

Finnish, Afrikaner, Lebanese, Ashkenazi Jewish, or French Canadian origins have a higher prevalence of FH.

**Sex**

The inheritance pattern is the same for males and females because the gene for FH is on chromosome 19.

**Age**

A defective LDL receptor is present at birth, but the longer patients live with extremely elevated LDLc levels, the higher their risk of CAD.

# Pathophysiology

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) transports the majority of plasma cholesterol and binding to the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) cell membrane through two ligands on LDL, apolipoprotein B-100 (apoB-100) and apoE. The complex of LDL and LDLR enters the cells, then LDL is released, and LDLR recycles to the cell membrane.

The liver secretes the proprotein PCSK9 that extracellularly binds to LDLR and inhibits the recycling of LDLR to the cell membrane. Therefore, PCSK9 leads to a decrease in LDLR and increases serum LDL.

**LDL Receptor Genetic Defects**

The impairment of LDLR results in decreased LDL clearance from the plasma and an elevation of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C ), which causes increased uptake of oxidase LDL or other modifications by macrophages and resulting in foam cell formation.

- Class 1 – Null, due to defect in the synthesis of LDLR

- Class 2 – Transport defective, in which impairment in the transport of LDLR from the endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi in the cells.

- Class 3 – Binding defect, in which ability dysfunction of LDLR to bind with LDL.

- Class 4 – Internalization defect, in which the LDL receptors do not cluster in the clathrin-coated pits, so minimizing LDL internalization by the hepatocyte.

- Class 5 - Recycling defect, in which LDLR is not recycling to the cell membrane.

**Familial Defective Apolipoprotein B-100**

This disorder is related to a defect in the apoB-100 ligand on the LDL. Therefore, it reduces the LDL clearance from plasma and subsequently causes a high level of serum LDL.

**Mutations in the PCSK9 Gene**

Mutations that cause increased activity of PCSK9 lead to increased degradation of the LDL receptor and subsequently elevation of plasma LDL. However, mutations that inactivate PCSK9 cause lower plasma LDL levels and reduce coronary heart disease (CHD).

# History and Physical

**Homozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia**

These patients have symptoms of ischemic heart disease, peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, or aortic stenosis. Patients may have tendonitis or arthralgia and a history of unusual skin lesions. Survival beyond 30 years of age is difficult unless treated with unusual methods.

**Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia**

These patients have severe hypercholesterolemia since childhood. Symptoms of ischemic heart disease are common, especially if other cardiovascular risk factors are present. Symptoms of recurrent Achilles tendonitis or arthritic complaints may be present.

**Family History**

Careful family history is essential for the assessment and diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia. Family history of premature coronary artery disease or high cholesterol in first-degree relatives (younger than 60 years in women and 55 years in men among first-degree relatives) are red flags.

**Physical Examination**

Usually, abnormal physical examinations are related to depositions of cholesterol in the eye or skin. It can happen at an early age with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.

# Evaluation

**Screening for Familial Hypercholesterolemia**

Screening for familial hypercholesterolemia should occur in people age 2 years and older if the patient has a family history of hypercholesterolemia or premature CHD.

**Suspicious for Familial Hypercholesterolemia**

- In people 20 years old or younger: if untreated fasting serum LDL cholesterol levels are 160 mg/dL and higher or non-HDL cholesterol levels are 190 mg/dL and higher

- In adults older than 20 years: if fasting LDL cholesterol levels are 190 mg/dL and higher or non-HDL cholesterol is 220 mg/dL and higher.

- FH in the family member or total cholesterol greater than 240 mg/dL in either parent.

- Tendon xanthomas at any age, corneal arcus senilis in a patient younger than 45 years of age, and yellow-orange xanthelasma tuberous or xanthomas in a patient aged 20 to 25 years.

**Genetic Tests or Clinical Criteria/Diagnostic Criteria for Heterozygous FH (HeFH) and Homozygous FH(HoFH)**

- Heterozygous FH (HeFH): The two most commonly used criteria for evaluating and diagnosing FH are the Dutch lipid clinic criteria and the Simon Broome criteria.

- Homozygous FH (HoFH): Clinically, HoFH is diagnosed based on untreated LDL-C plasma level greater than 500 mg/dL (more than 13 mmol/L) or treated LDL-C plasma concentration equal to or greater than 300 mg/dL (more than 8 mmol/L), and the presence of tendon xanthoma or cutaneous manifestation before the age of 10 years or both parents has consistent criteria for HeFH based on the untreated elevation of LDL-C levels.

**Cascade Screening**

Cascade screening is defined as evaluation and screening that involves family members of the patient with FH.

**Radiology**

Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of the heart and aorta is recommended annually in patients with homozygous FH. Radiographic imaging of the Achilles tendon helps accurately measure Achilles tendon xanthomas.

**Biopsy**

If a skin lesion or the diagnosis of heterozygous FH is unclear, a biopsy of the skin lesion can be performed. Both xanthelasmas and the xanthomas of FH contain accumulations of cholesterol.

# Treatment / Management

**Approach to Therapy**

All patients with familial hypercholesterolemia and their families should receive education regarding lifestyle management. This includes a healthy diet, quitting smoking, and physical therapy/activity. Dietitians or nutritionists should advise patients and family members to reduce the amount of food with high cholesterol and encourage them to lose weight.

**Drug Therapies**

Statins are the standard therapy for familial hypercholesterolemia. All guidelines recommend statins as first-line drugs for patients with FH, with a goal of reaching maximally tolerated doses.

**Treatment Guidelines for Homozygous FH**

European Atherosclerosis Society (EAS) guidelines for the screening and treatment of homozygous FH are summarized as follows:

- Treatment of homozygous FH involves a combination of lifestyle changes, statin therapy (first approach), and lipoprotein apheresis for severe cases

- LDL apheresis should begin as early as age 5 years

- For homozygous FH patients, the LDL cholesterol targets are less than 100 mg/dL for adults, less than 70 mg/dL for adults with clinical cardiovascular disease (CVD), and less than 135 mg/dL for children

- Other novel agents for LDL cholesterol lowering (eg, lomitapide with or without apheresis) can be considered as adjunctive treatments for patients who do not achieve the recommended LDL cholesterol targets and remain at high cardiovascular risk.

**Treatment Guidelines for Heterozygous FH**

In patients with heterozygous FH, lifestyle modification is unlikely to result in acceptable LDLc levels; therefore, cholesterol-lowering medication is necessary. EAS consensus statement for screening and treatment of heterozygous FH includes the following recommendations:

- An LDL target of less than 135 mg/dL for children with FH

- An LDL target of less than 100 mg/dL for adults with FH

- An LDL target of less than 70 mg/dL for adults with known CHD or diabetes

- Lifestyle modifications include a diet that severely limits saturated fats, trans fats, and cholesterol

- Desirable weight should be attained

- Significant weight loss should improve all lipid parameters (LDLc, HDLc, triglycerides)

- Aerobic and toning exercises improve blood lipid levels if performed for longer than 30 minutes, 4 or more days per week

**Familial Hypercholesterolemia and Pregnancy**

Women with familial hypercholesterolemia planning to conceive should discontinue all lipid-lowering agents, including statins, ezetimibe, and PCSK9 inhibitors. Cardiovascular risk assessment is recommended before conception. Lipoprotein apheresis may be used if necessary.

**Surgical Care**

- Liver transplantation for homozygous FH because a new liver provides functional LDL receptors and causes dramatic decreases in LDLc levels

- Portacaval anastomosis for homozygous FHT

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnoses of familial hypercholesterolemia include but are not limited to the following:

- Sitosterolemia - an autosomal recessive disorder leading to hyperabsorption of plant sterols from the intestine and elevation of plant sterol concentrations in tissues

- Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis - an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a defective block in bile acid synthesis enzyme leading to the deposition of cholestanol and cholesterol ocular, neurological, vascular, and musculoskeletal

- Polygenic hypercholesterolemia

- Familial combined hyperlipidemia

- Hyperapobetalipoproteinemia

- Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia (type 3 hyperlipoproteinemia)

# Prognosis

The risk of coronary heart disease before the use of statin in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia was very high.

# Complications

Familial hypercholesterolemia can lead to serious complications. These include:

- Stable coronary artery disease

- Fatal and non-fatal myocardial infarctions

- Congestive heart failure

- Cerebrovascular accidents

- Aortic stenosis

- Peripheral arterial disease

- Cardiovascular death

# Consultations

Consultation with certified dietitians/nutritionists should support implementing a healthy diet for the patient and their whole family. Refer to the lipid specialist or familial hypercholesterolemia clinic recommendations whenever, despite maximally tolerated statins, LDL cholesterol is still above goal.

- Primary care providers

- Cardiologists

- Endocrinologists

- Lipid specialists

- Dietitians

- Pharmacists

- Nurses

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia should be educated about a healthy lifestyle, quitting smoking, and taking measures to avoid being overweight. A healthy lifestyle should include reducing food and beverages with high cholesterol, trans fat content, and saturated fat. Also, patients should consider foods resulting in a decrease in cholesterol, such as plant stanols and sterols.

Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia should also receive education regarding their risk of CV disease. Patients should learn about controlling all modifiable risk factors for CV disease and treatment strategies for familial hypercholesterolemia once a diagnosis is made. All first-degree relatives of patients with FH should be counseled about the importance of screening.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Familial hypercholesterolemia is a common cause of premature cardiovascular events in children and adults.

- Various diagnostic criteria of familial hypercholesterolemia are available online and can help direct further workup.

- Heterozygous FH is underrecognized and commonly treated sub-optimally.

- Screening of first-degree relatives of patients with FH is essential in the primary prevention of CV events.

- Referral to a lipid specialist can help optimize the control of LDL hypercholesterolemia in patients with FH.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Optimal screening and diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia are paramount in the prevention of premature cardiovascular events. Management of patients with familial hypercholesterolemia requires an interprofessional approach, including primary care providers, cardiologists, endocrinologists, lipid specialists, dietitians, pharmacists, and nursing care, to improve outcomes. An extensive discussion of treatment strategies should be done at diagnosis. A close follow-up to observe the response to treatment and development of side effects from lipid-lowering agents is essential in optimizing care.