The definition of dementia has been updated in the DSM-5 criteria. It is actually no longer termed Dementia but is now called Major Neurocognitive Disorder (MND). However, due to the common use of the term dementia in society and medical literature, it will be referred to as both Dementia and Major Neurocognitive Disorder in this article. It is worth noting the limitations of using the term dementia, including its common association exclusively with older patients, and that it is often used synonymously with Alzheimer disease. Major neurocognitive disorder can affect younger individuals and does not always imply Alzheimer disease as the etiology of cognitive decline. Major neurocognitive disorder is characterized by a significant decline in at least one of the domains of cognition which include executive function, complex attention, language, learning, memory, perceptual-motor, or social cognition. The decline represents a change from a patient's prior level of cognitive ability, is persistent and progressive over time, and is not associated exclusively with an episode of delirium. In addition to the cognitive decline, there must also be a decline in the patient's ability to function and perform everyday tasks. The everyday function of a patient is often evaluated in terms of the ability to perform IADLs (Instrumental Activities of Daily Living), such as managing finances or medications, or, if more severe, ADLs (Activities of Daily Living), such as grooming or feeding oneself.