There are a number of methods to monitor neuromuscular blockade following administration of atracurium. Clinical signs are often used to attempt to determine the depth of neuromuscular blockade, as well as a reversal. These could include eye-opening, sustained handgrip, leg lift, or sustained head lift for greater than 5 seconds. Unfortunately, these are not accurate determinants of the presence or absence of residual neuromuscular blockade.  Nerve stimulation is a method frequently used for monitoring neuromuscular blockade intraoperatively.  ECG electrodes are applied at either the ulnar, facial or tibial nerve. Then a train of four stimulation is applied. Four stimuli are applied at the chosen nerve at a frequency of 2 Hz, provoking a twitch response.  When atracurium or another non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent is given, there is a reduction in the amplitude of the evoked responses, the final twitch of the train of 4 sequences (T4) is affected first, then the third (T3), followed by the second (T2), then the first (T1). This sequential decrease in twitch height is known as fade. Lack of response in 3 of 4 twitches indicates 90 to 95% blockade.

As the intensity of the neuromuscular blockade increases, the twitches began to disappear in the same sequence as fade occurs. As neuromuscular blockade is reversed, the reverse order is true, with T1 being the first to reappear. The ratio of twitch intensity when comparing T4 to T1 is an important value; a ratio of 0.9 indicates sufficient neuromuscular blockade reversal.