Nintedanib has been reported to have the following side effects in clinical studies:

- Gastrointestinal-related side effects were most common, including nausea (31%), vomiting (23%), diarrhea (76%), abdominal pain (10%), and decreased appetite (10%).

- Hepatic impairment was commonly seen with elevation in liver enzymes.

- Endocrinological - decreased weight (7%)

- Respiratory - nasopharyngitis (7%), cough (14%), upper respiratory tract infection (14%)

- Nervous system - headache (12%), fatigue (14%)

- Dermatological - dermal ulcer (16%)

- Genitourinary - urinary tract infection (12%)

The majority of diarrheal events were classified as mild to moderate and occurred mainly within the first three months of therapy. Patient education and supportive treatment such as adequate hydration, antidiarrheals, and antiemetics should be provided when appropriate. A dose reduction or treatment interruption should be considered in patients with persistent gastrointestinal symptoms despite being on supportive treatment, or treatment should be discontinued.

Post-marketing adverse events that have been reported include gastrointestinal perforation, proteinuria, and pancreatitis. In several clinical trials, nintedanib was also found to be associated with an increased risk of bleeding, likely secondary to VEGFR inhibition. Although severe bleeding and arterial thromboembolic events such as myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke were rare, bleeding events with serious and fatal outcomes have been reported in the post-marketing surveillance of the drug.

The inhibition of VEGFR and its downstream signaling pathways were also associated with renal dysfunction, including proteinuria and hypertension. Several cases of proteinuria and thrombotic microangiopathy have been described in the literature related to the chronic use of nintedanib.