History cannot differentiate anteroseptal myocardial infarction from other forms of MI. Symptoms are thus similar to any other MI. The classic symptoms of MI are substernal chest tightness (with or without radiation to the jaw, neck, left shoulder, or inner aspect of the left arm) associated with shortness of breath, nausea, and diaphoresis. Patients may also less commonly have nausea, epigastric pain, unexplained generalized fatigue, or syncope. Unexplained new-onset or increased exertional dyspnea is the most common anginal equivalent. In women and elderly patients, MI may sometimes present with atypical symptoms, although the frequency of typical presentation is more common. Patients with diabetes may have a silent presentation, which means that the patients may not experience any significant symptoms of MI. When it comes to a patient with a known history of known coronary artery disease or previous angina, chest pain symptoms require careful evaluation with a high degree of suspicion as these patients represent a cohort with a high pretest probability. The clinician should perform a careful inquiry of symptoms including the location of the pain, onset, characteristics, radiation, timing, severity, and aggravating and relieving factors. Correlation of symptoms with prior MI presentation (if any present) is also beneficial.

Any new onset of cardiovascular symptoms in patients with established coronary artery disease or coronary artery disease equivalent should require careful evaluation with high suspicion for possible MI.

A thorough physical examination should include the assessment of heart rate, rhythm, blood pressure in both arms, auscultation of the cardiac areas for heart sounds, gallop sounds, pericardial rubs, and murmurs. The physical examination in patients with MI can be normal or may have some abnormal findings as indicated below.

- Inspection: Inspect the precordium for apical impulse, neck for any venous distension, and dependent areas for edema. The patient may have signs of heart failure such as edema. The presence of signs of heart failure should expedite the diagnostic assessment and treatment of this condition.

- Palpation: Pulse rate and rhythm, blood pressure in both arms, heaves. An unequal pulse volume and palpable systolic BP difference of greater than or equal to 15 mmHg between both arms suggest aortic dissection.

- Auscultation: Precordium on four cardiac areas for acute onset gallops, murmurs, or rubs. Acute ischemia may cause an S4, a paradoxical S2 heart sound splitting, or a new systolic murmur at the mitral area which may occur due to mitral regurgitation resulting from papillary muscle dysfunction. S3 may be present when there is decompensated heart failure. These signs are however non-specific as they may occur without an MI. The presence of a precordial rub may help identify acute pericarditis and may help exclude acute MI. A pleural friction rub may be audible in pneumonitis and/or pleuritis and may support a non-MI cause of chest pain.