Polytrauma management requires a well developed and standardized management system or protocol, the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS). This is a universal management system that includes combined evaluation and management of injured patients. The ATLS protocol consists of a primary survey, adjunct measures, secondary survey, and tertiary survey.

**The Primary Survey**

The objectives of the primary survey are to identify and treat immediately life-threatening conditions. Using the ABCDE approach for each patient allows for patients to be assessed systematically, and if enough team members are present, tasks are performable simultaneously. The primary survey should take place promptly and quickly.

****Airway Management (including cervical spine protection)****

Airway assessment and management is the first priority in the ATLS protocol. It should be cleared or secured before moving to the rest of the ABCDE assessment. An appropriate verbal response from a patient indicates a patent airway with adequate oxygen delivery to the lungs, and cerebral perfusion pressure to deliver blood to the brain. Simple maneuvers, including chin lift/jaw thrust, may assist airway patency. If there is evidence of neurological deficit, neck pain, or history of head injury or high-speed impact, then a cervical spine injury should be assumed. In patients who have had their cervical spine immobilized prehospital, this should be maintained until ruling out the injury.

In patients who are apnoeic or who have a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) less than 8, the airway should be secured, most commonly with orotracheal intubation is indicated. Induction of general anesthesia using a rapid sequence induction (RSI) may be useful in patients requiring airway support.

- Plan in advance, check equipment, prepare induction and maintenance anesthetic drugs needed, plan for failed intubation and surgical airway, allocate roles, and know where rescue equipment is stored.

- Prepare suction equipment and check equipment required to provide positive pressure ventilation.

- Preoxygenate the patient with 100% oxygen.

- Apply pressure over the cricoid cartilage.

- Administer induction, followed by muscle relaxant medications.

- Intubate the trachea using an appropriately sized cuffed oral endotracheal tube (ET)

- Inflate the cuff and confirm tube placement through auscultation of the chest and end-tidal CO2 monitoring.

- Connect the ET to the ventilator.

If the trachea cannot be intubated, then alternative routes for delivering oxygen to the lungs must be sought. Patients with upper airway obstruction where an endotracheal tube cannot be passed through the vocal cords will require a surgical airway such as a cricothyroidotomy or tracheostomy.

Surgical cricothyroidotomy involves a skin incision over and through the cricothyroid membrane to directly visualize the trachea and insert an endotracheal tube. Both needle and surgical cricothyroidotomy should only be performed by users who are familiar with the technique required for their success.

****Breathing and Ventilation****

Breathing and air entry are then assessed by auscultating the breathing sounds and observing chest movement. Several serious chest injuries, like hemothorax or pneumothorax, can be identified by this physical exam only. Other injuries may need further assessment or imaging.

All clothes should be removed, and a note of the patient’s respiratory rate, work of breathing, tracheal placement, and chest symmetry should be noted. The chest and axillae should be examined for abrasions, bruising, open wounds, and evidence of penetrating trauma. Auscultation and percussion of the chest will indicate the symmetry of ventilation and resonance. If a tension pneumothorax is suspected, needle decompression should be employed by inserting a wide-bore needle into the second intercostal space in the midclavicular line on the affected side.

There are critical conditions that necessitate immediate management. If these conditions remain untreated, or if there is a significant delay in the treatment,  they will result in hypoxia, hypovolaemia, and reduced cardiac output and possible death. Thoracic conditions that are immediately life-threatening include:

- Tension pneumothorax

- Flail chest

- Massive hemothorax

- Open chest wound

- Cardiac tamponade

****Circulation****

Bleeding is a common and potentially severe consequence of polytrauma. The most likely cause of shock in trauma patients is a hypovolaemic shock due to bleeding. Clinical signs of hypovolaemic shock include tachycardia, prolonged capillary refill, cool peripheries, a drop in pulse pressure, increased respiratory rate, and a drop in conscious level. A decrease in systolic pressure in some patients may not become apparent before they have lost up to 30% of their blood volume. The clinical presentation of hypovolemic shock follows the four classes of shock ( Class I, II, III, and IV).

In patients presenting with hemorrhagic shock, access to the vascular system (usually venous access) must be obtained, and appropriate volume replacement initiated.  Following intravenous access, blood should be drawn for cross-matching and the necessary blood tests. Patients should be connected to continuous ECG monitoring, non-invasive blood pressure monitoring set to an appropriate interval, so that response to resuscitation is measurable. If the patient has had significant blood loss, non-invasive blood pressure measurement may not be recordable, in which case palpation of central pulses can help identify if there is any cardiac output.

Volume resuscitation usually starts with a bolus of crystalloid fluids. If the patient does not appropriately respond to this initial fluid replacement, or the patient has suffered major injuries, then blood should be urgently considered. Evidence suggests that a ratio of 1:1:1 for packed red cells, fresh frozen plasma, and platelets may provide the greatest survival advantage.

Control the source of bleeding is essential. Efforts of identifying the bleeding source should be concomitant with the volume resuscitation. External bleeding sources are usually easier to identify and control. Scalp laceration and open long bone fractures are common causes of eternal fractures. Internal bleeding sources are more challenging to identify and control. The thorax, abdomen, or pelvis may all be sources of bleeding that the clinician cannot see. Appropriate examination and Imaging such as chest x-ray and focussed assessment with sonography (FAST) will assist in the diagnosis of hemorrhage. The clinical pelvic stability assessment may be performed once; further attempts may dislodge clot from an active bleeding point. A pelvic splint can be used to tamponade bleeding due to pelvic fractures. Definite treatment by an orthopedic surgeon should follow. Severe uncontrolled hemorrhage can drive the lethal triad in trauma patients of hypothermia, coagulopathy, and acidosis.

**Hemorrhage Control**

External hemorrhage control requires pressure on the bleeding source.

****Disability****

Proper and complete neurologic function assessment is an essential component of polytrauma patients. A normal initial exam is critical to document, so consequent deterioration can be identified and properly managed. The assessment of neurological function includes central and peripheral deficits or injuries. Glasgow coma scale, pupils' status/reaction, and the peripheral neurologic exam are parts of the assessment. In patients suspected of neurological injury, it is crucial that patients are not subjected to uncontrolled movement, and should be immobilized on a spinal board with appropriate cervical spine precautions.

****Exposure/ Environment****

The patient should have had clothing removed to access the thorax and abdomen for assessment. Remaining clothing should be removed to allow for further examination. Patients should be actively warmed or covered with blankets to minimize heat loss to prevent hypothermia.

**Key points**

- Trauma teams are necessary for the successful management of trauma patients

- Trauma patients benefit from an interprofessional team approach

- The trauma team leader should organize the trauma team to perform the primary survey quickly and systematically

- Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, and Exposure assessment should then be the next step. If the trauma team has sufficient organization, these can occur simultaneously rather than in sequence.

- Successful performance of the primary survey can quickly identify life-threatening injuries that need immediate management, and other injuries that may become life-threatening if not managed appropriately.