**Emergency Surgery**

Patients who require emergent (<6 hours) or urgent (6 to 24) surgery are not able to undergo a preoperative cardiac workup as the time lost to complete the workup could be detrimental to the overall outcome if it delays surgery.

**High-risk Patients**

Patients with a recent history of cardiac disease, uncontrolled comorbidities or recent interventions have specific guidelines set by the ACC/AHA for subsequently undergoing surgery.

**Hypertension**

When evaluating a hypertensive patient in the preoperative setting, it is imperative to assess not only the patient’s current blood pressure but their baseline pressure before surgery. This can be accomplished by obtaining a thorough history as well as looking through medical records for information on their anti-hypertensive regimen as well as the adequacy of blood pressure control. The assessment should also search for evidence of chronic or acute end-organ damage.

Continuation of antihypertensive therapy on the day of surgery is a topic of debate. Observational studies have demonstrated more frequent episodes of transient intraoperative hypotension if angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or diuretics are taken the same day of surgery. Patients who have discontinued therapy the morning of surgery have shown no major adverse outcome. If discontinued, they should restart them promptly in the post-operative period.

The major limitation in hypertensive patients is in patients with grade 3 hypertension (systolic blood pressure =180 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure =110 mmHg). In these cases, the potential benefits of delaying surgery to optimize medical therapy should be weighed against the risk of delaying the surgical procedure.

**Acute Coronary Syndrome**

Patients with recent myocardial infarction(MI) or unstable angina are at higher risk for developing a major adverse cardiac event. To reduce the risk of incurring a MACE, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) recommends waiting a minimum of 4-6 weeks after an MI before proceeding with elective surgery.

**Heart Failure**

The prevalence of heart failure (HF) in the United States is currently 5.7 million and continues to increase. Heart failure is an important predictor of a major adverse cardiac event and has a higher 30-day postoperative mortality rate (9.2 to 9.3%) when compared to those with CAD (2.9%).

**Valvular Disease**

**Aortic Stenosis**

Another key component of the cardiac risk assessment is the evaluation of patients with underlying aortic stenosis (AS). Since patients with moderate to severe aortic stenosis have been found to have double the rate of 30-day mortality and can suffer from postoperative MI 3 times more frequently than patients without AS, preoperative determination of the degree of stenosis, as well as the presence of symptoms, is critical.

Patients with severe aortic stenosis that require an urgent procedure will require invasive hemodynamic monitoring intraoperatively.

Asymptomatic patients can proceed with low to intermediate risk surgery, and invasive hemodynamic monitoring is a consideration. If the surgery is high risk, the patient should undergo evaluation for the possibility of an aortic valve replacement (AVR), or if ineligible for AVR, can proceed with invasive hemodynamic monitoring.

In symptomatic patients or those with hemodynamically significant AS, AVR should be performed prior to surgery. If patients are not a candidate for AVR or refuse, and the noncardiac surgery is essential, then there are a few options. First, the surgery could proceed under invasive hemodynamic monitoring with adjustment of the anesthetic plan to prevent a significant drop in preload to maintain adequate cardiac output.

**Mitral Stenosis**

Patients with mitral stenosis are also at increased risk for a MACE when undergoing elective noncardiac surgery.

**Aortic and Mitral Regurgitation**

Nonsignificant aortic and mitral regurgitation (AR and MR) do not correlate with an increased risk of developing a MACE in the perioperative period. Those with moderate to severe AR and MR with preserved left ventricle function can proceed with noncardiac surgery without intervention.

**Percutaneous Coronary Intervention**

Although several patients presenting for elective surgery have a history of coronary artery disease, preoperative coronary angiography with revascularization is rarely indicated.

In the event of stent placement, patients are required to comply with dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and a platelet receptor inhibitor, to prevent stent thrombosis. Discontinuing DAPT is one of the strongest risk factors when it comes to stent thrombosis and mortality.

To maximize DAPT, the 2016 ACC/AHA guidelines recommend patients treated with balloon angioplasty, a bare metal stent, or a drug-eluting stent, should postpone elective noncardiac surgery for 14 days, 30 days and 3 - 12 months, respectively.

After the appropriate timeframe, the platelet receptor inhibitor may be held perioperatively due to bleeding risk. In that case, guidelines recommend continuation of aspirin.

**Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting**

Similar to coronary angiography, patients should not prophylactically undergo coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), as there is no increase in perioperative outcomes.