# Continuing Education Activity

In a patient under intravenous sedation or general anesthesia, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) uses an electric current to create a generalized cerebral seizure. Although it is primarily utilized to treat patients with severe depression, patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, catatonia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and bipolar disorder may also benefit. This activity describes the indications, contraindications, and complications of ECT and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with mental health disorders.

**Objectives:**
- Explain how the effects of electroconvulsive therapy.
- Discuss the potential uses of electroconvulsive therapy.
- Review misinformation associated with electroconvulsive therapy.
- Describe electroconvulsive therapy, and review the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients who undergo ECT.

# Introduction

In a patient under intravenous sedation or general anesthesia, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) uses an electric current to create a generalized cerebral seizure. Although it is primarily utilized to treat patients with severe depression, patients with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, catatonia, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and bipolar disorder may also benefit. However, the practice has a stigma attached to it due to misinformation regarding procedural methodology.

# Anatomy and Physiology

There are various pathophysiologic changes in brain regions found in patients with severe depression. These include reduced activity and volumetric reductions in the dorsal areas of the frontal lobes. Areas of the ventral and orbital frontal cortex have altered processing of emotional stimuli.

# Indications

ECT is indicated in patients with treatment-resistant depression or severe major depression that impairs activities of daily living. The definition of treatment-resistant depression is depression that is unresponsive to multiple antidepressant medication trials.

# Contraindications

The resultant seizure from ECT can cause transient increases in blood pressure, myocardial oxygen consumption, heart rate, and intracranial pressure. Care is necessary for patients with cardiovascular, pulmonary, or central nervous system compromise. A pheochromocytoma and elevated intracranial pressure with mass effect are absolute contraindications to ECT. Relative contraindications include elevated intracranial pressure without mass effect, cardiovascular conduction defects, high-risk pregnancies, aortic and cerebral aneurysms.

# Equipment

ECT treatment and recovery areas should include the standard American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) monitors. A stethoscope, blood pressure monitor, electrocardiography (EKG) monitor, pulse oximeter, suction apparatus, and an oxygen delivery system should be present. Anesthetic induction supplies and medication should be available along with ventilatory and resuscitation equipment. A nasal cannula or face mask to provide supplemental oxygen, bag valve mask, nerve stimulator to assess neuromuscular blockade, electromyograph (EMG), electroencephalography (EEG) leads, and multiple blood pressure cuffs should be available.

# Personnel

ECT is administered by a team that typically includes an anesthesiologist, a psychiatrist and a nurse.

# Preparation

A complete history and physical examination may expose significant risk factors including cardiac ischemia or arrhythmia, heart failure, or intracranial pathology.

ECT utilizes general anesthesia. Anesthetic induction medications used include barbiturates such as thiopental and methohexital and nonbarbiturate agents such as propofol and etomidate. Seizure-induced by ECT should last longer than 30 seconds. Methohexital is the most commonly used induction agent due to its quick onset, effectiveness, low cost, and minimal effect on seizure duration. Propofol and thiopental have been shown to reduce seizure duration. Etomidate has correlations with myoclonus and increased seizure duration.

# Technique or Treatment

ECT is commonly performed in a dedicated suite, a post-anesthesia care unit, or an ambulatory surgery site, most frequently on an outpatient basis. Patients with severe debilitation including substantial medical or psychiatric illness may start on an inpatient basis and transition to an outpatient basis as needed. Patients should be appropriately nil per os (NPO) for the procedure, which includes no light meal for six hours, no full-fat meal for eight hours, and no clear liquids for two hours before anesthesia.

Vital signs, including blood oxygen saturation, ECG and EEG activity are recorded continuously. EMG is recorded on the right foot to measure the motor component of seizure activity. A nerve stimulator is utilized to monitor succinylcholine, a depolarizing muscle relaxant used to reduce tonic-clonic contractions during the procedure. As an alternative to EMG, a blood pressure cuff is inflated on the patient’s ankle to prevent succinylcholine from entering the foot, allowing a visual monitor of seizure activity with measurement of tonic-clonic contractions. Following intravenous induction, a bite block is placed to protect the patient’s tongue and teeth. The beginning and termination of a cerebral seizure is monitored via EEG, recorded from right and left frontal and mastoid positions. Seizure induction is via two electrodes placed bitemporally or a right unilateral electrode; both of which allow electrical current to pass into the scalp.

The ECT stimulus is either a brief pulse (0.5 to 2.0 milliseconds) or ultra-brief pulse (less than 0.5 milliseconds) waveform. While the brief pulse is considered standard, the ultra-brief is considered more tolerable.

As with any other procedure, the goal of the anesthesiologist during ECT is to facilitate a safe and pain-free experience for the patient.

Once the patient is rendered unconscious, administration of a muscle relaxant follows, along with bag valve mask ventilation with 100 percent oxygen. A nerve stimulator is utilized to determine the adequacy of muscle relaxation along with the clinical assessment of plantar reflexes and fasciculations in the calves and left foot. An inflated blood pressure cuff prevents muscle relaxant from entering the right foot. Muscle relaxants do not prevent masseter muscle contraction from the electrical pulse, requiring placement of a bite block for lingual and tooth protection.

Although most therapeutic ECT seizures last from 15 to 70 seconds, EEG recording lasts about 25 percent longer than the motor seizure.

In pregnant patients receiving ECT,

# Complications

Bilateral or bitemporal ECT causes more cognitive impairment than unilateral ECT, although this effect is transient. A meta-analysis of 1415 depressed patients treated with ECT revealed that global cognition, verbal memory, and autobiographical memory were worse with bilateral treatment three days after treatment.

According to the American Psychiatric Association, patients receiving ECT are at higher risk if they show evidence of unstable or severe cardiovascular disease, a space-occupying intracranial lesion with evidence of elevated intracranial pressure, history of an acute cerebral hemorrhage or stroke, an unstable vascular aneurysm, severe pulmonary disease, or qualify as American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Class 4 or 5.

Physiologically, during the tonic phase of the seizure, a 15- to 20-second parasympathetic discharge occurs, which can lead to bradyarrhythmias including premature atrial and ventricular contractions, atrioventricular block, and asystole. Patients with subconvulsive seizures are at higher risk for asystole.

Although patients with cardiac disease at baseline are at higher risk following treatment, ejection fraction can decrease following ECT in healthy patients as well.

# Clinical Significance

ECT is a relatively safe and low-risk procedure that is helpful in the treatment of depression, suicidality, severe psychosis, food refusal secondary to depression, and catatonia. It requires interprofessional care coordination among anesthesiologists, psychiatrists, and nurses. Most patients require several sessions to see a durable effect. The stigma associated with ECT is largely due to the lack of anesthesia with early treatments resulting in significant injury and severe memory loss.  The antidepressant effect is seen relatively quickly and may last up to a few years. Overall, the mortality rate is very low with ECT administered in a controlled setting, but it continues to cause mild memory loss in the long term. ECT is commonly utilized in pregnant patients and the elderly due to the avoidance of psychotropic medication side effects. Although its mechanism of action is multifactorial, ECT causes changes in cerebral blood flow and regional metabolism.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Today ECT is now frequently used to treat a variety of mental health disorders besides depression. The procedure is relatively safe, and does work. However, the delivery of ECT requires an interprofessional team that includes a nurse, anesthesiologist, psychiatrist and a neurologist. The benefits of ECT are seen after several sessions and the results are durable. The key is to educate the patient and family about ECT because the procedure has been associated with many false and illogical beliefs. The antidepressant effect is seen relatively quickly and may last up to a few years. Overall, the mortality rate is very low with ECT administered in a controlled setting, but it continues to cause mild memory loss in the long term. ECT is commonly utilized in pregnant patients and the elderly due to the avoidance of psychotropic medication side effects. Although its mechanism of action is multifactorial, ECT causes changes in cerebral blood flow and regional metabolism. Most patients who undergo ECT have a beneficial response without any adverse sequelae.