There are various modes of management for a patient with a reentrant arrhythmia. Assessment of the patient's hemodynamic status is the first step of management, which determines the mode of treatment. For all patients with hemodynamically unstable reentrant tachycardia, electrical cardioversion is the first choice of management, irrespective of the origin of the arrhythmia. Advanced cardiac life support should be initiated immediately if the patient presents with cardiac arrest.

Vagal maneuvers are recommended as the first choice treatment for hemodynamically stable patients with reentrant supraventricular tachycardia (SVTs). The recommended vagal maneuvers are the Valsalva maneuver and carotid artery massage. The Valsalva maneuver is performed by instructing the patient to forcefully exhale against a closed glottis. An alternate technique is performed by exhaling against a closed glottis followed by a passive leg raise at a 45-degree angle.

Adenosine is a good treatment option in a patient where the AV node is the origin of arrhythmia; however, it can be catastrophic in a patient with a circuit formed by an accessory pathway. If adenosine is given to a patient with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, the AV node will be blocked by the medications. However, the accessory pathway will remain uninhibited, which can lead to ventricular fibrillation and possible cardiac arrest.

After initial management, all patients with AVNRT and AVRT should be referred to an electrophysiologist for catheter ablation. Catheter ablation for AVNRT/AVRT is a very safe procedure in the contemporary era, and it has a very high success and very low recurrence. In AVNRT, the cure rate is above 95%, with complications below 1%. In WPW, the success rate is above 90%, with a complication rate of less than 5%.

The acute treatment of hemodynamically stable patients with a reentrant ventricular arrhythmia includes intravenous procainamide, amiodarone, or sotalol, while electrical cardioversion is recommended for hemodynamically unstable patients. Beta-blockers and long-term antiarrhythmic drugs can be considered in patients with recurrent arrhythmias.