Anatomy and landmarks will depend on the different types of blocks that can be made:

**Paravertebral Block**

First discovered by Hugo Sellheim from Leipzig in 1905 and described by Lawen (1911) and Kappis (1919), but did not have much success until the late 1970s, thanks to the efforts of Eason and Wyatt who reevaluated thoracic paravertebral block (TPVB) and showed its beneficial effect on reducing postoperative pain.

The paravertebral space is delimited anterolaterally by the parietal pleura, posteriorly by the costotransverse ligament, medially by the vertebrae and intervertebral foramina, and inferior and superior by the ribs. In this space, we perceive the division of the vertebral root, which emerges from the intervertebral foramen to give dorsal and ventral branches. The sympathetic chain lies in the same plane, in front of the intercostal nerve, and communicates with it via the rami communicates. **Fig 1**

Local anesthetic injection along the thoracic vertebra near where the spinal nerves emerge from the intervertebral foramen will cause unilateral, segmental, somatic, and sympathetic anesthesia, including the posterior ramus in multiple thoracic dermatomes.

**Intercostal Nerve Block**

First described in the Die Lokalanastesie manual by Braun in 1907, today, it is used in thoracic and abdominal surgery to manage acute and chronic pain.

The thoracic nerves T1 to T12, after they emerge from the respective intervertebral foramina, give rise to the following rami: **Fig 2**

- The anterior communicates rami, which passes anteriorly to the sympathetic ganglion and chain.

- The posterior cutaneous rami, responsible for the innervation of the skin and muscles of the paravertebral region

- The ventral ramus: gives rise to intercostal nerves.

Each intercostal nerve exists in a neurovascular bundle with an intercostal artery and vein; the nerve remains inferior to the two blood vessels—their paths in the thorax pass between the parietal pleura and the internal and external intercostal muscles. Near the midaxillary line, the nerves divide into a dorsal and ventral branch.

T1 and T2 support the innervation of the upper limbs and upper thorax, T3 to T6 cover the thorax, T7 to T11 supply the lower thorax and abdomen, and T12 the anterior gluteal region.

The injection of local anesthetic into the subcostal groove spreads distally and proximally to block the intercostal nerves' ipsilateral sensory and motor fibers.

**Erector Spinae Plane Block**

First described by Forero m et al.****It concerns the paraspinal interfascial plane in which the infiltration applies between the erector muscle of the spine and the thoracic transverse processes.**Fig 3**

The local anesthetic ensures the blocking of the dorsal and ventral rami of the thoracic and abdominal spinal nerves. This leads us to a multi-dermatomal sensory block of the anterior, posterior, and lateral thoracic and abdominal walls.

Recent studies based on imagery highlight this diffusion of the injected local anesthetic, which passes through the connective tissues and towards the spinal nerve roots, thus allowing coverage of 3 to 4 cephalic and caudal dermatomes.

**Pectoralis Nerve Block**

The nerves involved in pectoral nerve block (PECS) I and II are the pectoral nerve, intercostal nerve 3-6, intercostobrachial nerve, and long thoracic nerve.

The Pecs I block anesthetizes both the medial and lateral pectoral nerve. It focuses on the interfacial region between the pectoralis major muscle and the pectoralis minor muscle at the level of the third rib.

The PECS II, the anatomical region concerned, is located between the pectoralis major and the pectoralis minor as for a Pecs I block, followed by infiltration between the pectoralis minor and the serratus anterior, which will block the anterior skin branches of intercostal nerves 3 to 6, intercostobrachial nerves, and the long thoracic nerve.

**Serratus Anterior Plane Blocks**

First described by Blanco et al. in 2013, the anatomical region concerned is located between the latissimus dorsi and the anterior serratus muscle, on the mid-axillary line at the level of the fifth rib, thus exerting its analgesic effects on the lateral thoracic region.