Salmeterol belongs to the group of drugs called beta-2 agonists. Beta-2 agonists are G protein-linked second messengers. The Gs protein stimulates adenylyl cyclase, which converts ATP to cAMP. Subsequently, cAMP activates protein kinase A, inhibiting myosin light chain kinase (present in smooth muscle). This cascade results in the relaxation of bronchiolar smooth muscle, bronchodilation, and increased bronchiole airflow.

In human lungs, salmeterol also inhibits mast cell mediators, including histamine, leukotrienes, and prostaglandins; this suppression leads to decreased inflammation. Bronchodilation remains the primary function of salmeterol; its anti-inflammatory properties are present to a much lesser degree.

Salmeterol’s molecular structure confers its characteristic, extended duration of action. Its elongated lipophilic side-chain facilitates repeated activation of the beta-2 receptor. The side chain binds to the so-called “exosite” adjacent to beta-2 adrenergic receptors. The active portion of the molecule is allowed to remain at the receptor site and continuously engage and disengage with the receptor.

**Metabolism**

Salmeterol is metabolized predominantly through CYP3A4, an isoform of cytochrome P450. CYP3A4 is responsible for the aliphatic oxidation of the salmeterol base. Salmeterol is extensively metabolized by hydroxylation into alpha-hydroxy-salmeterol and subsequently eliminated through the feces and urine. Salmeterol is 57.4% eliminated in the feces and 23% in the urine.

At recommended doses, systemic concentrations of salmeterol are low or undetectable. Only at very high doses is blood concentrations increased.

At a very low therapeutic dose, it is unlikely to observe any clinically relevant interactions as a consequence of co-administration of other medications metabolized through CYP3A4.