During the primary survey of the patient in hemorrhagic shock, a circulatory assessment should include the insertion of two large-bore IVs (16-18 gauge) bilaterally to facilitate the fastest administration of fluids. If this is not available, then a central venous catheter (CVC) or a standard 7 French triple lumen CVC should be placed. The reason which 2 large-bore peripheral IVs are more successful than a CVC in rapid fluid resuscitation is due to Poiseuille law which states that fluids passing through a lumen can be transfused most quickly when there is laminar flow (width and length affect velocity). This law also states that the longer the lumen through which the fluids pass, the less laminar flow there is. Therefore, two short peripheral IVs of sufficient diameter are more expedient in transfusions than one large long CVC.

Initial hemorrhagic shock resuscitation begins with the administration of IV fluids, followed by transfusion of blood products at a 1:1:1 ratio. The initial IV fluids should be a 2 L bolus of 0.9% normal saline or two 20 mL/kg boluses by patient weight. The patient is then determined to be either a responder, transient responder, or nonresponder to IV fluids based on their improvement. Typically, patients in Class 1 or 2 can be treated initially with a trial bolus of crystalloids, but patients in Class 3 or 4 should be getting blood products immediately with the first bolus of crystalloids. The amount of blood transfused depends on a variety of factors, but is specifically centered around the concept of “permissive hypotension”.  Permissive hypotension is the idea that a patient in active hemorrhagic shock should be transfused just enough blood products to retain a systolic blood pressure above 70 mmHg.  Then, after hemorrhage is controlled, the patient can be transfused to retain a systolic blood pressure above 90 mmHg.