A significant feature of the hair follicle is its relative immune privilege, this mainly established by suppression of surface molecules required for presenting autoantigens to CD8+ T lymphocytes (i.e., MHC class I) and by the generation of an inhibitory local signaling environment.

Alopecia areata is a disorder of hair follicle-cycling, where inflammatory cells attack the hair follicle matrix epithelium that is undergoing early cortical differentiation (anagen hair follicles), which are then prematurely induced into the catagen phase. However, since no destruction of hair-follicle stem cells occurs, the hair follicle retains its capacity to regenerate and continue cycling. Thereby, follicles re-enter the anagen phase normally but do not develop beyond the anagen III/IV phase.

Presumably, alopecia areata develops in a previously healthy hair follicle because its immune privilege collapses. Therefore, it could occur in a genetically predisposed person only when proinflammatory signals (i.e., IFN gamma, substance P) known to upregulate MHC class Ia in human hair-follicle epithelium expose previously unrevealed follicle-associated autoantigens to preexisting autoreactive CD8+ T cells.

Since only anagen hair follicles undergo attack, those autoantigens may generate and then be presented only during anagen.

The precise event that precipitates alopecia areata is unknown. Some triggers have been reported, most commonly emotional or physical stress, vaccines, viral infections, and drugs.