Patient history often will be highly suggestive of a lightning injury.  One should inquire what the patient was doing and where they were to elicit information that may be suggestive of other forms of trauma such as a fall from a height or being struck by objects that may not be obvious on physical exam. If history is questionable or unknown, other helpful signs include clothing that is singed, has punctate holes, appears in pieces and not fully intact, signs of melting to metal pieces of clothing, and damage to other nearby area/structures.

The initial exam should focus on the airway, breathing, and circulation with appropriate interventions should the patient not be found to be apneic or pulseless. One should be thorough in their evaluation for a pulse as vasospasm from the strike may make it difficult to palpate a pulse. Because of this phenomenon, CPR should not be initiated until one checks and is unable to palpate a central pulse. Neurologic status should also be assessed. Due to the peripheral nerve damage, which is common in lightning strikes, patients may have abnormal sensory and/or motor findings. Deficits may be “patchy” with sensory and/or motor deficits that may not correlate with each other. It is not uncommon for neurological deficits to be missed in the initial exam and not diagnosed for weeks to months following the event.  Care also should be taken as patients may have temporary autonomic damage resulting in dilated and non-reactive pupils, making this an unreliable indicator of death.  Keraunoparalysis, more common in the lower than the upper extremities, classically presents with blue, mottled, cold, and pulseless extremities along with paralysis of the affected extremities.

The skin should be carefully inspected for burns with great care given to skin folds, creases, and joints as burns are more common in these areas. Some patients may have Lichtenberg figures which are a transient "ferning" or "feathering" pattern. Though the cause is not fully understood, this finding is pathognomonic for a lightning strike and is transient and self-resolving. Assessment of hearing and tympanic membranes is necessary as is ophthalmic exam including visual acuity and funduscopic exam. Patients suffering from keraunoparalysis often will present with lack of pulse, pallor, cyanosis, and motor and/or sensory loss to the affected extremities, most common in lower extremities.

Patients should also be assessed for the trauma that may have occurred as a result of a lighting strike due to direct or blunt injury.