# Continuing Education Activity

Phalanx fractures of the hand are some of the most common fractures occurring in humans. They are often noted to be in the more common of all upper extremity fractures and present with a long list of post-injury complications regardless of treatment, most commonly in relation to finger and hand function. Nonetheless, they generally heal well with either conservative or surgical treatment. This article highlights the key points of diagnosing and treating patients with phalanx fractures of the hand by an interprofessional team.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the common presentation of a patient with phalanx fractures of the hand.
- Outline the classic physical exam findings associated with phalanx fractures of the hand.
- Review the management options available for phalanx fractures of the hand.
- Describe the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by phalanx fractures of the hand.

# Introduction

Phalanx fractures are some of the most common fractures occurring in humans.

Phalanx fractures are most often classified using a descriptive pattern noting location, angulation, and displacement. They are often divided in location to the base, shaft, or condyle of their respective phalanx.

Each thumb (first digit) contains a proximal and distal phalanx, while the index (second digit), long (third digit), ring (fourth digit), and small (fifth digit) fingers all contain a proximal, middle, and distal phalanx. The proximal and middle phalanges can be subdivided into a base, shaft, and head from proximal to distal. The heads of the middle and proximal phalanges are formed by two condyles separated by an intercondylar notch. The proximal and middle phalanges tend to have a slight palmar concavity, while the distal phalanx is relatively straight. The distal phalanx is divided into a base, shaft, and tuft and is protected dorsally by the nail plate with dense fibrous connections to the surrounding soft tissue.

The base of each proximal phalanx articulates with its respective metacarpal forming the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints. The base of the middle phalanx in digits 2 to 5 articulates with the head of the respective proximal phalanx to form the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint. The base of the distal phalanx in digits 2 to 5 articulates with the head of the respective middle phalanx to form the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint. The articulation between the head of the proximal phalanx and the base of its respective distal phalanx forms the interphalangeal (IP) joint of the thumb.

The soft tissue anatomy surrounding the phalanges is intricate with distinct flexor and extensor mechanisms that contribute to motion and overall stabilization of fracture fragments. The flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) tendon passes over the volar surface of the MCP joint, proximal phalanx, PIP joint, where it splits into two slips, and inserts on the junction of the proximal and middle one-third of the middle phalanx. The flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) tendon passes dorsal to the FDS tendon over the volar aspect of the MCP joint, proximal phalanx, PIP joint passing between the two slips of the FDS tendon, middle phalanx, DIP joint, and inserts on the base of the proximal phalanx. A complex network of vincula acts as a tether between the flexor tendons and the proximal and middle phalanges. The extensor hood is the complex expansion of the extensor tendons on the dorsal aspect of the finger. The central slip of the extensor mechanism attaches to the base of the middle phalanx dorsally while lateral bands proceed to a terminal slip, which attaches to the base of the distal phalanx. Intrinsic muscles of the hand (lumbricals and interossei) attach to the lateral bands of the extensor mechanism. Sagittal bands on each side of the finger attach the extensor hood to the volar plate and flexor tendon sheath near the PIP joint.

A single digital nerve and artery lie on both the radial and ulnar aspects of the finger slightly volar to midline with small branches and capillaries supplying the surrounding soft tissue and superficial structures.

# Etiology

Phalanx fractures of the hand are often related to blunt, penetrating, or crush trauma; however, pathologic causes such as tumor and infection cannot be overlooked.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of phalanx fractures is about 0.012% of people per year in the United States.

Hand and finger fractures are more common in male children than female across most age groups.

# Pathophysiology

Phalanx fractures of the hand are often related to blunt, penetrating, or crush trauma; however, pathologic causes such as tumor and infection cannot be overlooked.

Bending forces to the phalanx shaft tend to produce transverse fractures while torsional and angular forces produce spiral and oblique fractures. In general, crushing injuries produce significant comminution in fractures. Intra-articular fractures are often caused by axial loading but can also be caused by avulsion of tendinous insertion sites causing angular patterns.

# History and Physical

The mechanism of injury should agree with the magnitude and nature of the injury. If this is not the case, suspicion should be raised for pathologic fracture due to tumor or infection, as well as the potential for physical abuse.

Gross observation may reveal rotational or angular deformity arising from the phalangeal shaft or near any of the nearby articulations.

Palpation reveals tenderness overlying the fracture site and injured soft tissue structures. Meticulous examination of the soft tissue envelope should be performed about the hand and fingers as soft tissue injury from these mechanisms can be quite robust.

The active range of motion of the affected finger at nearby articulations is often limited secondary to pain and early swelling. Local anesthetic in the form of a hematoma or digital nerve block can help relieve pain and be beneficial to evaluate alignment, range of motion further, and strength; however, it should not be performed before a careful neurovascular exam.

Neural status can be evaluated with general sensation, two-point discrimination, and motor function. Findings may range from fully intact to any deficit, pending the soft tissue injury that occurred. Digital nerves on the radial and ulnar aspects of the finger tend to supply sensation from one half the digit; however, some overlap may occur on dorsal and volar surfaces.

Vascular status supplied by digital arteries on the radial and ulnar aspects of the finger can be examined by looking at skin coloration as well as capillary refill of the distal skin and the nail bed. In general, a finger with a single digital artery laceration will still have a brisk capillary refill, though it may be slowed with dusky skin coloration.

# Evaluation

Plain radiographs of the hand with standard anteroposterior, oblique, and lateral views are often necessary to aid in the diagnosis of most phalanx fractures.

Musculoskeletal ultrasound is an emerging modality proving useful for the diagnosis of phalanx fracture as well as associated soft tissue injury.

# Treatment / Management

The aim of treatment for phalanx fractures of the hand is to appropriately heal the fracture while avoiding complications such as stiffness and deformity, which decrease function.

Nonsurgical treatment of phalangeal fractures typically involves closed reduction if indicated, buddy taping to adjacent finger for stabilization and/or splinting versus casting for a short period of immobilization, and then progressive motion and rehabilitation.

Seymour fractures involve the physis of the distal phalanx in pediatric patients with a concomitant nail bed laceration effectively, making it an open fracture. These fractures often trap surrounding soft tissue within the fracture site

Surgical treatment is typically recommended for extra-articular fractures when they are associated with an open wound which requires irrigation and excisional debridement to prevent osteomyelitis, instability which if left would lead to deformity (including angular, rotational, and shortening) or decreased hand function, and in cases of multiple displaced hand fractures.

Open fixation methods allow for early motion by providing increased stability but require more dissection and soft tissue disruption.

Intra-articular fractures are typically treated surgically when associated with joint subluxation or dislocation and in cases in which articular step-off would lead to reduced function by having a bony block to motion or increase risk of development of post-traumatic osteoarthritis.

# Differential Diagnosis

Phalanx fractures in the adult are often not misdiagnosed when appropriate imaging is combined with the physical examination. However, a recent study showed an 8% misdiagnosis rate in pediatric patients with emergency medicine and primary care provider referral to hand surgeons.

- Pathologic fracture – Enchondromas and other underlying tumors in the hand are common and can result in pathologic fracture on initial presentation to the emergency department or office.

- Collateral ligament sprain at the MCP, PIP, or DIP joint

- Volar plate injury

- Tendon rupture or laceration

- Bone bruise

- Dislocation/subluxation of the MCP, PIP, or DIP joint

# Prognosis

Although the complication rate from surgically managed phalanx fractures is relatively high, the overall prognosis is quite good.

# Complications

A moderate to high percentage of patients undergoing surgical treatment for phalangeal fractures have complications

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Early motion is necessary following phalanx fractures to improve function. This generally begins as soon enough healing has occurred to consider the fracture stable and varies depending on operative intervention, often occurring within a few days of surgery.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Prevention of phalanx fractures and hand injuries, in general, involves limiting exposure and the use of protective equipment. Safety mechanisms should be used when able on doors to help prevent the exposure for children to door slam injuries. Safety equipment such as gloves and rules limiting the exposure of the hands to dangerous situations in sports can also provide for additional prevention.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Phalanx fractures are often initially evaluated on sidelines of sports games, training rooms nearby to practice, primary care offices, urgent cares, and emergency departments in addition to the hand surgeon or general orthopedic surgeon’s office. A large portion of phalanx fractures is ultimately treated by primary care and emergency medicine providers.

Overall, a knowledgeable multidisciplinary team is necessary to properly diagnose and treat patients with phalanx fractures to optimize outcomes. A recent study showed an 8% misdiagnosis rate from emergency medicine and primary care physician referral in pediatric hand injuries.