Rhinoplasty is an elective procedure, even in cases of significant nasal airway obstruction.  In an ethical practice with careful patient selection, complications of tip rhinoplasty surgery are primarily aesthetic or related to nasal breathing, most commonly patient dissatisfaction with or without depression, although certainly epistaxis and infection can occur in the early postoperative setting. It is essential to understand that undergoing a rhinoplasty requires a significant psychological adjustment during the recovery period.  This is due to its nature as a “type change” operation as opposed to a procedure that restores the appearance to a prior, younger state with which the patient is already familiar.

It is, therefore, a critical part of the postoperative follow-up period to manage the patient’s expectations and, in many cases counsel patience, because it can take months for a patient to get used to a new nose, even when the rhinoplasty was executed perfectly and heals well.  If the patient and surgeon mutually agree that some aspect of the outcome is suboptimal, a revision or secondary surgery can be considered. These should only take place several months to years after the initial surgery, after a time sufficient to reduce edema and accommodate the many nuances of the dynamic healing process, at least 6 to 12 months after the primary operation.

Additionally, the surgeon should have confidence that a particular operative plan has a high likelihood of improving the specific problem to be addressed. In complex secondary or tertiary cases (or beyond), it is critical to understand the limitations of the skin and soft tissue envelope. Irrevocable damage to the blood supply of the skin can lead to unacceptable skin necrosis, with life-altering consequences. A conservative approach to these cases is thus always appropriate; however, with experience and proper diligence, revision rhinoplasty can be rewarding and successful for the patient and the surgeon.