Managing patients presenting with TCH requires an interprofessional team of clinicians, including physicians, physician assistants, nurses, nurse practitioners, pharmacists, and ancillary staff. The specialists involved will vary depending on the underlying cause, but medical teams commonly include emergency medicine clinicians, neurologists, radiologists, pharmacists, critical care specialists, and neurosurgeons. The care of patients with TCH may not end in the emergency department. Effective communication during the handoff between emergency and inpatient teams is essential. Planning and coordination among teams of professionals involved in patient care are critical for favorable healthcare outcomes and require open communication channels among all team members.

While clinicians, particularly specialists, will direct the overall management course, other interprofessional team members must make significant contributions because treatment regimens vary widely based on the underlying cause. Nurses play a valuable role in coordinating activities among the various clinicians on the case, ensuring the patient is informed about the latest developments. They will also assist in evaluating the patient and providing patient counsel. If medication therapy is a central aspect of case management, pharmacists must provide patient medication counseling, coordinate with prescribing clinicians, perform medication reconciliation, report any concerns to the rest of the team, and serve as the subject matter expert for pharmacotherapy. All professionals in patient care must maintain accurate and updated notes, documenting each interaction with the patient and intervention. Current patient data are necessary and must be accessible to assist the interprofessional team in their decision-making processes. This interprofessional paradigm will result in the best patient outcomes with the fewest adverse events. [Level 5]