SLE is a systemic disorder managed by an interprofessional team. The disorder has no cure and is chronic and progressive. Another subtype of chronic LE is TLE.  Although tumid lupus erythematosus (TLE) is currently considered to be a subtype of cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE), TLE differs from the other subtypes of cutaneous lupus erythematosus in that an association with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is rare. Because of this weak association with SLE and a relative lack of serologic abnormalities in patients with TLE, some consider TLE to be an entity separate from lupus. The disorder is best managed by a dermatologist and/or rheumatologist, but the patient can be followed by the primary care provider and nurse practitioner with the assistance of a specialty trained dermatology nurse. The nurse should assist with the coordination of follow-up, patient and family education, and monitoring for untoward changes and reporting concerns to the team. A pharmacist should assist in the management of the medications required for treatment. Evaluating potential drug-drug interactions, providing patient education, and reporting to the team if any problematic events develop regarding the pharmaceutical therapy. By working as an interprofessional team, the best outcomes can be achieved.

Tumid lupus erythematosus (TLE) typically presents as annular, indurated, erythematous, edematous plaques without epidermal involvement. If any of these features are recognized, and epidermal involvement is likely, a diagnosis of DLE should be suspected. Typical locations of TLE are the face and trunk, and lesions respond well to photoprotection, topical corticosteroids, and antimalarials.