Patient with nail psoriasis is treated with either topical or systemic therapy. Other options include biologic agents, photodynamic therapy, phototherapy, intense pulsed light, and lasers treatment. The treatment options mainly depend upon the severity and extent of disease. The various other factors which need to be considered for treatment options are the age of the patient, comorbidities, profession, concomitant skin and joint involvement, impact on the quality of life, patient preference, and cost of treatment.

**Mild nail psoriasis:**

- In mild cases, where the disease is limited to one or two nails with no significant symptoms, topical therapy is the best option. Topical corticosteroids and topical vitamin D analogs are first-line while topical tacrolimus and topical tazarotene are the second-line therapy. Systemic therapy is limited to patients who did not respond to topical therapy.

**Moderate to severe nail psoriasis:**

It is considered when nail psoriasis is associated with severe nail dystrophy that usually involves more than two nails with significant functional impairment.

- First-line therapy: A biologic agent is an effective first-line treatment to treat moderate to severe psoriasis of the nail. The common biological agents use to treat nail psoriasis are Eternacept. Adalimumab .infliximab) (TNF alpha inhibitors), Ustekinumab (inhibitor of p40 subunit of IL-12/23), and Secukinumab, Ixekizumab (a monoclonal antibody inhibiting the IL-17A ligand).

This therapy is very effective, but few patients don’t prefer this option due to cost and affordability issues. These biological agents increase the risk of fungal skin infections.

- Second-line therapy: The second-line therapy for moderate to severe psoriasis includes topical therapies, (topical tacrolimus, topical tazarotene, topical calcipotriol, and potent topical corticosteroid )intralesional corticosteroids, pulsed dye LASER. Systemic therapies are  Methotrexate and apremilast.

Additional therapies need further recommendations to include oral tofacitinib, topical cyclosporine, topical indigo naturalist, oral acitretin, oral cyclosporine, and phototherapy.