The pathogenesis of myopathy in hypothyroidism is not well understood. Thyroid hormones have a significant influence on cellular metabolism, and their deficiency causes impairment of the normal functioning of the cell. Thyroxine (T4) deficiency leads to a reduced mitochondrial oxidative capacity, abnormal glycogenolysis and an insulin resistant state of the cell. This leads to selective atrophy of type 2 muscle fibers (fast-twitching type) as they are dependent on glycolysis for energy causing the slowing of muscle contraction seen clinically in patients with hypothyroidism. Muscle hypertrophy ensues as a result of this, which is believed to be a compensatory response that happens from the accumulation of glycosaminoglycans in the muscle. Increase in connective tissue and muscle fibers also contributed to this hypertrophy. There is also a decrease in muscle carnitine in patients with thyroid dysfunction causing myopathic symptoms. The muscle involvement in hypothyroidism is caused by alterations in muscle fibers from fast-twitching type 2 to slow-twitching type 1 fibers, deposition of glycosaminoglycans, poor contractility of actin-myosin units, low myosin ATPase activity and low ATP turnover in skeletal muscle.

It has been noted that the degree of muscle weakness does not always correlate with the severity of thyroid hormone deficiency and this suggests that besides impaired muscle function, structural muscle injury might have a role in the pathogenesis of the myopathy in some cases. Muscle cell membrane permeability changes can lead to serum muscle enzyme elevations in the absence of symptoms or structural abnormalities, and reduced clearance of these enzymes can contribute to the muscle injury as well. Animal studies have shown the involvement of thyroid hormone in regulating gene expression of skeletal muscle proteins like myosin ATPase strengthening the role of thyroid hormone deficiency in the pathogenesis of hypothyroid myopathy.