Many types of pathologies, such as congenital, infectious, traumatic, neoplastic, and inflammatory, can affect calcaneus. Among these, the disorders that have priority in terms of frequency are briefly summarized below.

**Congenital disorders:**The most important congenital disorder of calcaneus is the tarsal coalition. The tarsal coalition refers to the full or partial union between at least two bones of the midfoot and hindfoot. The most commonly encountered types are the calcaneonavicular and talocalcaneal coalitions. Although rare, calcaneocuboid coalition also is among the types of tarsal coalition.

**Infectious disorders:**Calcaneal infections can occur as a result of various etiologies such as trauma, chronic pressure exposure, and postoperative wound-healing complications. Patients with diabetes are particularly prone to the development of osteomyelitis in their feet, and calcaneus is frequently affected in these cases.

**Traumatic disorders:**The calcaneus fracture, which constitutes 60% of all tarsal fractures, is the most commonly encountered bone fracture of the tarsus. It is most often detected in the third decade of life, and the falls from a height and motor vehicle accidents are the major injury mechanisms.

**Neoplastic disorders:**Approximately 3% of all osseous tumors occur in the foot and ankle. Solitary bone cysts, intraosseous lipoma, osteoid osteoma, chondroblastoma, chondrosarcoma, and Ewing sarcoma are among the lesions that tend to the calcaneus.

**Inflammatory disorders:**Bone erosions caused by retrocalcaneal bursitis and/or spontaneous rupture of the inflamed Achilles tendon are detectable at the posterior aspect of the calcaneus in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. And in cases of seronegative arthritis, bone erosions at the attachment site of the plantar aponeurosis along the plantar surface of the calcaneus may occur. Tophi in the adjacent soft tissues may cause pressure bone erosions at the calcanei of patients with gout (5). Sever's disease or calcaneal apophysitis is another inflammatory disorder that is characterized by the inflammation of the growth plate of the heels of growing children.