Treatment strategies for PTLD are different from the management of lymphoproliferative disorders in immunocompetent patients. The mainstay of the management strategy includes the reduction of immunosuppression, surgical excision of the localized lesion, radiation therapy, rituximab monotherapy, immunochemotherapy, chemotherapy, stem-cell transplantation, and immunotherapy.

**Reduction of Immunosuppression**

The initial management of PTLD is to reduce immunosuppression to restore cellular immunity without compromising allograft function. Reduction of the immunosuppression strategy should include at least 50% reduction calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine or tacrolimus) and discontinuation of antimetabolic agents such as azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil (MMF).

**Rituximab**

Rituximab is a monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody. It is a standard of care in patients that do not respond adequately to reduced Immunosuppression. Rituximab can be administered as a single agent after the reduction of immunosuppression medications or in combination with chemotherapy (concurrently or sequentially). In the PTLD-1 study, the complete treatment response rate was around 25% after standard induction plus four courses of rituximab every 21 days. The primary side effects of rituximab include infusion reactions and increased risk of infections due to neutropenia. Also increased risk of hepatitis B reactivation in patients with positive hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) or hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc) should be kept in mind.

**Chemoimmunotherapy**

Chemotherapy is indicated in patients who have not had an adequate response to reduced immunosuppression and rituximab. It is usually administered in combination with rituximab for patients with CD20+ PTLD.  R-CHOP (rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) is commonly used in chemotherapy regimen for most patients with PTLD.

**Radiation Therapy**

Radiation therapy is used for patients with localized disease and those with central nervous system (CNS) involvement either alone or in combination.

**Adoptive Immunotherapy**

Adoptive Immunotherapy uses EBV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (EBV-CTLs) or donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI) to induce a robust EBV-specific cellular immune response in patients with EBV-associated PTLD.  However, adoptive immunotherapy is associated with a high risk of developing acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD).