Interprofessional and multidisciplinary teamwork is necessary to rapidly recognize and treat patients with acute stroke and deliver effective care during recovery and rehabilitation. Guidelines for ischemic stroke, ICH, and SAH recommend interprofessional healthcare teams for prehospital and hospital care to improve outcomes. Additionally, rehabilitation services delivered by a multidisciplinary team during and after hospitalization are essential to achieving functional recovery and patient independence in patients who have suffered an acute stroke.

The prehospital team typically includes Emergency Medical Services (EMS) and paramedic personnel, often supported by emergency department (ED) clinicians. A stroke clinician, a stroke specialist nurse working with ED personnel, and a radiologist/neuroradiologist-led imaging team are necessary team members during the hyperacute phase (first 72 hours post-stroke).

A stroke clinician and a stroke specialist nurse commonly attend the ED when alerted by a Code: Stroke call. Stroke survivors should be admitted directly to stroke inpatient units from the ED and remain there throughout the inpatient stay to reduce mortality and increase patient independence.

Due to its proven benefits, rehabilitation is recommended as soon as possible.

Stroke coordinators may be part of the interprofessional team, working with the broader stroke team, stroke survivors, and their families from hospital admission to discharge. Along with other team members, they may assist in secondary stroke prevention education.

Early supported discharge (ESD) for stroke refers to an interprofessional team intervention that facilitates hospital discharge and delivery of stroke-specialized home rehabilitation. Worldwide, stroke care guidelines recommend ESD services provide treatment in the home beginning within 24 hours of hospital discharge as part of evidence-based stroke care.

The interprofessional care model, utilizing open communication channels among all care team members, will help drive optimal patient outcomes for patients with acute stroke. [Level 5]