The identification and management of congenital toxoplasmosis continue to be very challenging. Early treatment is the cornerstone of improved morbidity. This condition is best managed by an interprofessional group of medical professionals that include a neonatologist, neurologist, Infectious disease specialist, ophthalmologist, developmental pediatrician, primary care pediatrician, and a care coordinator.

The key is prevention, and this requires an interprofessional approach. The pregnant female requires education on washing hands after touching meat products and not consuming under cooked or raw meat. Also, all fruits and vegetables require thorough washing. The female should avoid contact with cat litter and fecal material. Educational reinforcement should come from the nurses, pharmacists, obstetrician, and the primary care giver at every clinic visit. Only through such an approach can the morbidity of congenital toxoplasmosis be reduced.

Given the lack of a solid pharmaceutical approach to treatment, the pharmacist should monitor the regimen closely, checking dosing and agent selection, and performing medication reconciliation, informing the team should they encounter any issues. Nurses will be best positioned to monitor for adverse events or evaluate the effectiveness of treatment. Only through an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines, patients achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]