Techniques involved in each route of medication administration are different, and some of the essential points are summarized as follows:

**Intravenous Route**

A tourniquet may be used over the intended site for the intravenous medication to make the vein more visible and easier to access. However, the tourniquet must be removed before injecting the drug to prevent extravasation. Ultrasound guidance is often used in central lines or peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) lines for medication administration.

**Intramuscular Route**

Intramuscular injection should be done at a perpendicular angle as it has been shown to be the most effective method for patient comfort, safety, and medication efficacy.

**Subcutaneous Route**

A subcutaneous route requires minimal skills and training, and patients can often quickly learn to inject medications into themselves. It is recommended that instead of using the same site, patients rotate the sites of injection to avoid complications such as lipohypertrophy that can cause incomplete medication absorption.

**Rectal Route**

It is recommended to have the patient lie on the left side with the right knee bent towards the chest, as this position enables the medication to flow into the rectum and subsequently to the sigmoid colon by gravity. Separate the buttocks with the non-dominant gloved hand and gently insert the medicine 2 to 4 cm into the rectum using the dominant hand's gloved index finger. A lubricant may be used for the patient's comfort. If administering a laxative suppository, the patient will need a bedpan or commode or be placed close to the toilet. The patient is recommended to remain on the side for 5 to 10 minutes unless otherwise specified by the medication's directions.

**Vaginal Route**

Position the patient onto their back with legs bent and feet resting flat on the bed. A lubricant can be used to reduce friction against the vaginal mucosa as the medication is administered. Gently separate labial folds with the non-dominant gloved hand while with the dominant gloved index finger, insert the lubricated suppository to about 8-10 cm along the posterior vaginal wall.

**Inhaled Route**

Each inhaler has instructions from the manufacturer. For metered-dose inhalers, some of the essential techniques include: shaking the inhaler vigorously for a few seconds before each puff; inhaling through the mouth, not the nose, when breathing in the medication; keeping the tongue under the mouthpiece to avoid blocking the mouthpiece; taking a slow deep breath as the medication canister is pressed and holding the breath for 5 to 10 seconds and then exhaling. Cleaning the inhaler regularly is recommended to prevent a buildup of medications. Spacers or chambers can help patients inhale the aerosol and help decrease the deposition of the drug in the mouth or throat.