# Continuing Education Activity

There are multiple compression neuropathies of the upper extremity. Some neuropathies, like carpal tunnel, are quite common; others like posterior interosseous nerve (PIN) syndrome are not. Knowledge of the anatomy and function of each nerve is essential to diagnose which nerve and compression site is involved correctly. The posterior interosseous nerve is a branch of the radial nerve, which comes off the posterior cord of the brachial plexus. The posterior interosseous nerve supplies motor innervation to the posterior forearm. The terminal branch of the posterior interosseous nerve travels distally into the floor of the 4th dorsal compartment of the wrist to innervate the dorsal wrist capsule. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of posterior interosseous nerve syndrome and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of injury and pathophysiology of posterior interosseous nerve syndrome.
- Outline the evaluation and examination techniques necessary to properly diagnose posterior interosseous nerve syndrome.
- Review the potential treatment and management options available for posterior interosseous nerve syndrome.
- Explain strategies to optimize care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by posterior interosseous nerve syndrome.

# Introduction

There are multiple compression neuropathies of the upper extremity. Some neuropathies, like carpal tunnel, are quite common; others like posterior interosseous nerve (PIN) syndrome are not.

Compression neuropathies of the radial nerve distal to the elbow include radial tunnel syndrome, posterior interosseous nerve syndrome, and Wartenberg syndrome.

# Etiology

Posterior interosseous nerve syndrome can result from trauma, space-occupying lesions like rheumatoid arthritis, brachial neuritis, and spontaneous compression.

# Epidemiology

Posterior interosseous nerve syndrome occurs more often in males than females in a 2 to 1 ratio. It also occurs about twice as often in the right arm versus the left arm.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiological basis of nerve injury depends on the severity of nerve compression. Nerve injury can subdivide into three categories: neuropraxia, axonotmesis, and neurotmesis. Neuropraxia is the mildest form and is demyelination at the site of injury.

# History and Physical

The patient may possess a history of trauma or fracture of that extremity.  Posterior interosseous nerve syndrome can be present in Monteggia fractures or radial head fracture-dislocations.

# Evaluation

The evaluation may include an electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction study (NCS).

# Treatment / Management

Treatment of posterior interosseous nerve syndrome starts with non-surgical management, which can include splinting, NSAIDs, physical therapy, activity modification.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for posterior interosseous nerve syndrome includes radial tunnel syndrome and Wartenberg syndrome.

Radial tunnel syndrome may involve the same sites of compression as posterior interosseous nerve syndrome. However, it presents with forearm pain without motor weakness. The pain usually starts in the dorsoradial forearm and may radiate down the lateral forearm to the dorsal radial hand. There may be tenderness over the mobile wad, which is often confused with lateral epicondylitis. The tenderness in radial tunnel syndrome is usually more distal than lateral epicondylitis; the maximal tenderness is approximately 3 to 5 cm distal to the lateral epicondyle.

Wartenberg syndrome, also known as "cheiralgia paresthetica," is a compression of the superficial sensory radial nerve. This nerve is usually compressed between the brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis longus tendons. Because the superficial sensory radial nerve has no motor innervation, the symptoms are purely sensory. There will be no motor weakness. Patients may present with paresthesias, numbness, or ill-defined pain over the dorsal radial aspect of the hand.

# Prognosis

Prognosis is generally good with conservative measures. If they undergo surgical treatment, the patient may continue to improve for months after surgery.

# Complications

Complications can include an incomplete decompression, continuation of symptoms, inability to return to work at their preoperative level, as well as inability to do physically demanding jobs.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Rehabilitation should start soon after decompression with an early active range of motion.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should receive counsel that non-operative management should be trialed excessively before exploring operative treatment. PIN decompression is not as successful as carpal tunnel or cubital tunnel release.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Interprofessional communication can help in the treatment and rehab for posterior interosseous nerve syndrome. It is crucial for the primary care physician, orthopedic specialty-trained nurse, emergency department physician, and the physical therapist to communicate on types of rehab needed and create clear expectations to enhance patient outcomes. (level V).