**Thrombosis Management**

In patients with a positive blood test for APLA but no prior history of thrombotic events or pregnancy-related outcomes, primary thromboprophylaxis is debatable. Patients with SLE with positive APLA are especially at higher risk of developing thrombotic events, and hydroxychloroquine is recommended in these patients, which has been shown to be thromboprotective.

In patients with a venous thrombotic event, warfarin with an INR goal of 2.0 to 3.0 is recommended for the longterm. The INR goal for patients with arterial thrombosis is debatable with a goal of 2.0 to 3.0 mostly used, while some recommend a higher goal of more than 3.0.

There are no randomized controlled trials to demonstrate the efficacy of newer anticoagulant agents, including clopidogrel, aspirin-dipyridamole, argatroban, fondaparinux, dabigatran, etc. These agents can only be used in APLS with one venous thrombotic agent if there is allergy/intolerance to warfarin. They are not recommended in APLS, where warfarin use is feasible or where there are recurrent events of venous or arterial thrombosis.

**Pregnancy Management**

All pregnant females with positive APLA should be kept under surveillance during their pregnancy to ensure the fetal well being and to avoid maternal complications. Treatment for pregnant females is aimed at reducing the risk of adverse fetal outcomes and is dictated by the clinical scenario. It must be noted that warfarin is teratogenic and shall not be used in pregnancy. Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) or unfractionated heparin both can be used; however, LMWH is preferred because of better bioavailability, longer half-life, convenient once a day dosing and lower risk of thrombocytopenia and osteoporosis.

- For pregnant females with positive APLA but no history of arterial or venous thrombosis:

- First pregnancy: No treatment is indicated
- History of single pregnancy loss at gestation less than 10 weeks: No treatment is indicated
- History of multiple pregnancy losses at gestation less than 10 weeks: Low dose aspirin in combination with prophylactic dose unfractionated heparin or LMWH throughout pregnancy. 
- History of one or more pregnancy losses at gestation more than 10 weeks: Low dose aspirin in combination with therapeutic dose unfractionated heparin or LMWH throughout pregnancy. Aspirin should be started before conception, and both aspirin and heparin/LMWH can be discontinued 6 to 12 weeks postpartum.

- For pregnant females with positive APLA and past history of arterial or venous thrombosis:

- Low dose aspirin in combination with therapeutic dose unfractionated heparin or LMWH throughout pregnancy. After delivery, these patients should be transitioned to warfarin, which should be continued lifelong with the INR goal of 2.0 to 3.0.

**Catastrophic Anti-Phospholipid Syndrome (CAPS) Management**

Early diagnosis is crucial in the management of CAPS due to the high mortality associated with it. There are no randomized controlled trials for the management of CAPS. Anticoagulation and high dose corticosteroids are used in combination with IVIG, plasmapheresis, rituximab, cyclophosphamide, or eculizumab.

**Management of Other Manifestations**

The role of anticoagulation has not been established in other non-criteria manifestations of APLS. Thrombocytopenia with platelet count more than 50,000/mm3 does not require any treatment; however, corticosteroids with or without IVIG or rituximab can be used if platelet counts are less than 50,000/mm3. Splenectomy has also been proven to be beneficial in some patients with severe refractory thrombocytopenia. Renal involvement with thrombotic microangiopathy shall be confirmed with a renal biopsy, especially in patients with concomitant SLE to rule out lupus nephritis. Anticoagulation and corticosteroids can be used for thrombotic microangiopathy. For patients with cardiac valve nodules or deformity, there is no known effective treatment. However, if there is evidence of embolism or intracardiac thrombus, anticoagulation is recommended.