The World Health Organization Classification system is described below:

- Type A

- Composed of bland spindle cells and few scattered lymphocytes
- 60% of these are in stage I 
- They tend to have good patient outcomes.
- There is an atypical variant that is hypercellular, possesses increased mitotic activity, and/or is necrotic. The presence of necrosis tends to predict an advanced stage.

- Type AB

- This is a mixture of type A and types B1 or B2.
- It is composed of intermixed or distinct components.
- 67% of these are in stage I.

- Type B1

- Composed of predominantly lymphocytes with scattered epithelial cells, not in clusters
- Also paler medullary islands with rare Hassall corpuscle-like structures
- 50% of these are in stage I

- Type B2

- Composed of mostly epithelial cells forming clusters and medullary islands may be present
- Atypia may be more present and may show anaplastic features
- 32% of these are in stage I

- Type B3

- Composed predominantly of large, polygonal cells with increased atypia and few scattered lymphocytes
- Its prognosis is worse than other thymomas but is better than thymic carcinomas.
- Only 19% of these are in stage I.

Histologic heterogeneity is common among thymomas meaning many thymomas will possess multiple subtypes of these WHO classifications and can be divided into ten percent increments. Thymomas have a lobulated architecture. The cellular lobules consist of neoplastic epithelial cells and reactive thymocytes that are intersected with fibrous bands. They are at least partially surrounded by fibrous capsules.

Thymoma subtypes A and AB have some characteristic growth patterns. They possess microcystic changes, storiform growth, staghorn-shaped vessels, rosettes, gland-like structures, or papillary growth patterns. They often show prominent plasma cell infiltrates and myoid cells (**rhabdomyomatous thymoma**).

A dilated perivascular space is seen in thymoma subtypes B1, B2, and B3. These are filled by plasma fluid and may contain a few lymphocytes, plasma cells, or foamy macrophages. In the center of these spaces, there are often small vessels with hyalinized walls. Neoplastic cells surround these spaces in palisades. Hassal corpuscles are specifically seen in subtype B1 thymomas.

Both subtype B1 and B2 thymomas are lymphocyte rich; however, they possess some important histologic differences. Subtype B1 has areas of medullary differentiation (**medullary islands**) and scattered epithelial cells without clustering (**< 3 contiguous epithelial cells**). These are often mistaken for small lymphocytic lymphomas and can be differentiated by using a keratin stain. Subtype B2 has more epithelial cells that cluster (**3+ contiguous epithelial cells**). Subtype B3 is often confused with thymic carcinoma or metastatic SCC from other sites.

Immunohistochemistry is helpful in identifying thymomas. Thymic epithelial cells are positive for keratins, epithelial membrane antigens, p63, p40, and PAX8. Thymic lymphocytes stain with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), CD1a, CD3, CD45, and CD99. Subsets of thymoma subtype A and AB stain for CD20 and rarely thyroid transcription factor (TTF-1).

Thymomas have an unusually low mutation burden. The most common mutations in thymic tumors include:

- General transcription factor I (39% to 42%)

- p53(25% to 36%)

- KIT(6-20%)

- Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (11% - also found in thymic carcinoma and B3 thymoma)

- A rare occurrence - n-ras, k-ras, cyclin D1, anaplastic lymphoma kinase, ataxia-telangiectasia mutated, ERBB4, FGFR3, SMARCB1, and STK11 genes

Histologically thymic carcinomas have a distorted architecture with various sized cell nests and even single cells in desmoplastic stromal reactions. There are often cytologic malignant and cystic changes along with certain amounts of necrosis, atypia, and mitoses. T cells found in thymic carcinomas exhibit the phenotype of mature T cells (TdT negative, CD1a negative, CD3 positive, CD4, or 8 positives). B cells and plasma cells are also seen.

There are a variety of histologic subtypes of thymic carcinoma, emphasizing the ability of the thymic epithelium to differentiate. They are summarized below:

- Squamous cell carcinoma - keratinizing or nonkeratinizing

- Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma

- Composed of malignant, large, polygonal cells
- Grow in a syncytial pattern in sheets and nests
- There is usually a dense lymphoid infiltrate
- Possesses the morphology of nasopharyngeal lymphoepithelial carcinoma
- Epstein Barr virus (EBV) may play a role in its pathogenesis
- It is highly aggressive with a poor prognosis

- Sarcomatoid carcinoma

- Possesses sarcoma-like areas
- Possesses possible heterologous components (rhabdomyoblastic or cartilaginous differentiation)
- Confirm diagnosis by identification of t(X;18) (p11.2;q11.2), SYT-SSX1, or SYT-SSX2 gene fusion

- Clear cell carcinoma

- Possesses a lobulated growth pattern
- Composed of uniform clear cells with minimal nuclear atypia, glycogen, and no mucin
- Very rare
- Has a poor prognosis due to local recurrence or metastases

- Basaloid carcinoma

- Possesses nests of polygonal and spindle cells with peripheral palisades, a high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and absence of keratinization often with cystic changes

- Mucoepidermoid carcinoma

- Composed of intermediate cells (which are polygonal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, small round nuclei, and inconspicuous nucleoli), squamous cells, and mucin-producing cells
- Defined as low or high grade
- Presence of a mastermind-like transcriptional coactivator 2 (MAML2) rearrangement is disease defining

- Adenocarcinoma

- Subtype based on histologic features (papillary, adenoid cystic carcinoma like, mucinous, and not otherwise specified)
- Occasionally has an intestinal phenotype

- Undifferentiated carcinoma

- Consists of sheets of undifferentiated cells
- Epithelial nature confirmed by immunohistochemistry

- NUT (nuclear protein of testis) carcinoma

- Rare cancer
- Very aggressive
- 51% have metastases at the time of presentation.
- The median survival is 6.7 months and is invariably fatal.
- The median age of presentation between 16 and 50 years of age
- No gender predilection
- It is a subset of squamous cell carcinoma.
- Immunostain shows a speckled nuclear expression pattern.
- 70% have a rearrangement of the NUT gene.

- A SMARCA4-deficient tumor (SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily A, member 4)

- Possess sarcomatous or carcinomatous features
- Has focal rhabdoid morphology
- Loss of BRG1 expression is diagnostic
- 83% of these tumors possess cytokeratin expression
- The median age of diagnosis is 59 years of age
- 2-year survival is worse with BRG1-retained tumors (12.5% versus 64.4%)