The esophagus, historically also spelled oesophagus, is a tubular, elongated organ of the digestive system which connects the pharynx to the stomach. The esophagus is the organ that food travels through to reach the stomach for further digestion. It follows a path that travels behind the trachea and heart, in front of the spinal column, and through the diaphragm before entering the stomach.

The esophagus is subdivided into three anatomical segments: cervical, thoracic, and abdominal. The cervical segment begins at the cricopharyngeus and terminates at the suprasternal notch. This segment lies just behind the trachea, to which it is joined via loose connective tissues. Posteriorly, prevertebral fascia connects the esophagus to the bodies of sixth through eighth cervical vertebra. The thoracic duct can be found on the left side of the sixth cervical vertebra. The carotid sheath and the lower poles of the lateral thyroid gland can be found lateral to the esophagus in the lower part of the neck. The thoracic segment lies between the vertebral column and the trachea in the superior mediastinum, extending from the suprasternal notch to the diaphragm. As the esophagus is followed distally, it passes behind the aortic arch at the level of the T4 through T5 intervertebral discs and enters the posterior mediastinum. The final segment, the abdominal segment, runs from the diaphragm to the fundus of the stomach. This segment descends and passes through the right crus of the diaphragm at the level of the tenth thoracic vertebra and into the cardia of the stomach at the eleventh thoracic vertebra level.

The organ is typically about nine to ten inches (23 to 25 cm) long in fully grown adults, with sphincters located at each of its proximal and distal extremities, a mucosa-lined lumen and connective tissue, and smooth muscle outer composition. The sphincter located anteriorly, the upper esophageal sphincter, allows for the single direction passage of food into the esophagus, and anteriorly, the lower esophageal sphincter allows for the single direction passage of food into the stomach.