The cells are observable in a viable state by growing them in culture suitable for studying them under microscopy. The term for such growth is in vitro (Latin, vitrum=glass). In such an environment, the cells continue to grow with continuous cell lines and perform functions in cohesion to the cells of the body.

Whenever the cells are isolated from their surrounding for the study, they lose their structure, function, and reveal very little of their actual living arrangement in healthy and diseased. Hence their structural integrity is maintained by taking very thin sections along with their surrounding tissue that are suitable to study under light and electron microscope. They are labeled by tracer materials so that their history of sections at different time intervals can be recalled. The sections are so thin and fragile that they require mounting on glass slides for secure handling.

For the light microscopic study, the sections require preparation by the paraffin technique. This preparation needs the following eight chronological steps:

- **Tissue sampling:**The sample tissue is obtained by surgical excision or biopsy, with the clearing of all connective tissue and undesired structures; this is done by sharp instruments so that the actual structure of the cells/tissue under consideration does not become distorted. The tissue to be studied should not be more than 1 cm. for better fixation.

- **Tissue fixation:**Once dissected out, the sample requires immediate fixing. Fixation hardens the soft tissue and prevents any postmortem changes and distortion of the cells/tissues. Formalin is the fixator used, usually for light microscopic study. Some of the advantage of fixation apart from preventing postmortem degeneration are better staining of tissue, kill all pathogenic microorganisms (safe to handle), the release of cellular hydrolytic enzymes, etc.

- **Dehydration:**This occurs by passing the fixed tissue by increasing the strengths of alcohol until it reaches absolute alcohol.

- **Clearing:**Now, one must remove the alcohol present in the tissue, which takes place by passing the tissue through successive changes of xylol to remove all the alcohol.

- **Embedding:**Tissue containing the xylol is now passed through successive changes of warm paraffin so that all the spaces in the tissue occupied previously by water and now by xylol becomes replaced with paraffin wax. Soon the tissue hardens on cooling the wax.

- **Sectioning:**The tissue is now ready for sectioning. Tissue sections are taken with an automated instrument called microtome, which gives fragile sections ranging from 1 to 9 micrometers. Light microscopy usually requires sections of a thickness of 4 to 8 micrometers. If still thinner sections are necessary, then embedding is done in plastic or epoxy resin and not paraffin wax.

- **Mounting and staining**: The thin sections are mounted on the glass slides and washed with xylol to remove the paraffin wax. Then it passed through decreasing strengths of alcohol and finally washed with water. Now the tissue on the slide is ready for staining. The dewaxed sections are stained with hematoxylin and eosin stains (H&E).