Pearls for healthcare professionals managing patients with leiomyosarcoma

- Patients diagnosed with LMS should be treated at centers that experience a high volume of such patients.

- All patient cases merit discussion at tumor boards, including surgical oncologists/orthopedic oncologists, radiation oncologists, and pathologists trained in diagnosing sarcoma, medical oncologists, and radiologists.

- Gynecologists-oncologists should manage patients with uterine LMS in collaboration with the surgical oncologists and the rest of the team listed above.

- Histologic grade, tumor depth, and tumor size are the three most important prognostic factors.

- Surgical resection with a negative margin translates into the best outcomes in terms of overall survival.

- Perioperative RT reduced the rate of local recurrence and increased local disease-free survival but has not demonstrated a benefit in distant relapse or overall survival.

- Preoperative RT is associated with fewer complications than postoperative RT, although wound complications are higher with preoperative RT. A gap of 4 to 5 weeks between surgery and RT seems to reduce wound complications with preoperative RT.

- Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has proven effective in high-risk STS/LMS of the extremity/trunk; however, the evidence is limited.

- If a decision to use neoadjuvant therapy is made, then a standard chemotherapy regimen with anthracycline and ifosfamide should be used, rather than tailoring it according to the histology.

- There is no evidence to support the regular use of adjuvant therapy; however, if a decision is made to give adjuvant therapy, then anthracycline and ifosfamide should be used.

- Anthracycline-based regimens are usually the first-line regimens for metastatic STS/LMS.

- Gemcitabine-docetaxel combination can be the first-line regimen for uterine LMS.

- Ifosfamide is less effective in patients with extra-uterine LMS compared to those with uterine LMS.

- Although the GeDDis trial did not demonstrate a difference between the two arms, doxorubicin remains the first treatment choice.

- Trabectedin is an effective treatment in LMS. In patients who respond to trabectedin, the clinician should not discontinue the drug unless the patient develops toxicity or progression of the tumor.

- Pazopanib, anlotinib, eribulin, dacarbazine, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin are effective in LMS as single agents.