The majority of dual-chamber pacemakers are programmed to allow AV sequential pacing (i.e., physiologic pacing), as this has many advantages over other pacing modes; including maintaining AV synchrony, and subsequently improving hemodynamics, reducing the risk of stroke, as well as lower incidence of pacemaker syndrome.

The way DDD programming works is that when the atrial lead senses an electrical activation in the atrium (P wave), it inhibits the pacemaker and allows for normal conduction to happen. If no P wave is sensed, the pacemaker will then pace the atrium at a set lower rate. After an atrial activation is sensed or paced, a period of AV delay starts, during which if there is no ventricular activation (R wave), the pacemaker will pace the ventricle, and this restarts the whole cycle again. It is important to note that after an R wave is either sensed (from spontaneous ventricular activation) or paced (by the device), the atrial lead cannot sense any electrical activation in the atrium for a prespecified period of time. This is called the post ventricular atrial refractory period (PVARP).

PMT results from retrograde conduction of a ventricular beat through the AV node (or if present, an accessory pathway). This typically happens when there is a premature ventricular beat that disrupts the normal cycle and separates the P wave from the QRS complex, thus serving as a triggering event for the tachycardia. When retrograde conduction of this ventricular beat takes place, the resulting earlier than normal atrial activation is sensed by the atrial lead, specifically if the atrial refractory period (PVARP) is passed. This earlier sensing of the P wave subsequently leads to ventricular activation with subsequent ventricular pacing after the set period of AV delay. If the retrograde conduction persists, a reentrant circuit will form with continuous ventricular activation.

PMT or endless loop tachycardia refers to this scenario where the antegrade limb of the reentrant tachyarrhythmia is the pacemaker, and the retrograde limb is the VA conduction through the AV node. Since the pacemaker constitutes the antegrade limb of the reentrant circuit, and each beat requires the presence of atrial sensing and ventricular pacing, the persistence of the tachyarrhythmia is dependent on the normal function of the pacemaker. The rate at which PMT happens is dependent on the AV delay and the VA conduction times. If, for example, a certain pacemaker is programmed to allow an AV delay of 160 milliseconds before pacing the ventricle, and the VA conduction time was 240 milliseconds, if PMT happens, the cycle length will be 400 milliseconds or 150 beats per minute. The rate of PMT is always equal to or less than the programmed upper tracking limit.