Treatment of nonunions should aim to achieve healing of the fracture while preserving functionality. The following are available options for the treatment of non-unions

**Nonoperative Treatment**

**Conservative treatment/weight-bearing**: In some circumstances and special patient characteristics (e.g., elderly patients not eligible for operative treatments), nonunions can be treated with weight-bearing and watchful waiting. Weight-bearing can be coupled with operative methods such as dynamization or bone excision.

**Electrical stimulator/electromagnetic fields**: Growth factors are stimulated in response to the electric and electromagnetic fields.

**Ultrasound (low-intensity pulsed ultrasound [LIPUS])**: Low sine waves will promote bone healing by increasing the osteoblastic response

**Injection of bone marrow aspirate percutaneously**

**Extracorporeal shock wave therapy:**This was reported to be as equally effective as an operative intervention for cases of stable hypertrophic nonunion

**Operative Treatments**

Septic versus aseptic non-union is the key variable when planning a surgical strategy to manage a case of tibial non-union, hence intraoperative culture should always be performed to diagnose a subclinical infection. Other variables to consider for management are patient's characteristics, the site of non-union, radiologic findings, presence, or absence of angular or rotational deformities

**Single-stage approach:**This involves surgical debridement of all non-viable tissues and bone ends, multiple cultures to be taken from the nonunion site or canal reaming followed by revision open reduction and internal fixation or exchange nailing. Antibiotic administration is tailored to culture results and sensitivities

**Staged approach:**usually indicated for septic tibial nonunion. This involves steps to control infection followed by definitive surgery.

- **Debridement:**This involves excising all infected tissues e.g sinus tracts, scars, granulation tissue, and devitalized soft tissue. Also, involves removing all loose implants and Opening the medullary canal using both flexible and rigid reamers. Multiple cultures should be taken at this stage and antibiotics tailored based on the sensitivity results.

- **Management of bone defects:**In tibial nonunion, bone defects are commonly encountered in the anterior and medial aspects with consequent varus and recurvatum deformities. This can be managed by minimal resection followed by telescoping bone. Alternatively, oblique bone ends can be constructed which is amenable to perpendicular compression. Both options achieve stability

- **Local antibiotic elution:**This can be achieved using antibiotic-impregnated cement as spacers that deliver a significant concentration of antibiotics locally. In the meantime, it blocks any dead spaces

- **Definitive Surgery:**Aims at the reconstruction of bony defects, managing limb length discrepancy, and achieving bony stability with the consequent union.

**The following are details of operative treatment options and adjuncts reported in the literature:**

**Nail dynamization and nail exchange**:****Nail Dynamization and exchange have two similar indications; comminuted fractures and absence of cortical contact after IM Nail

- Nail dynamization**-**A relatively low-cost treatment done when axial stability has been achieved and maintained. The dynamization is achieved by removing interlocking bolts distant to the fracture site facilitating compression and loading across the fracture site

- Nail exchange - Removal of the prior intramedullary nail, reaming until osseous tissue is present in the reaming flutes, and use of a nail with a larger diameter. With this, the reaming process will biologically activate the fracture site, and better axial and mechanical stability can be achieved

**Fibular Osteotomy (Partial fibulectomy)**: This procedure can be done on its own or most commonly combined with other procedures. This is mainly indicated where the tibial non-union is causing significant malalignment

**Open Reduction and Internal Fixation with plate and screws:**This is an effective procedure in managing non-union especially when intramedullary nailing is contraindicated or not technically possible. Outcomes are equivalent to other methods in terms of successful healing and incidence of complications

**Locking compression plates:**It is indicated for managing nonunion of the metaphyseal diaphyseal junction fractures, where the outcomes of exchange nailing would be doubtful. The procedure is performed along with bone grafting and without the removal of the underlying nail by gaining unicortical purchase fixation with locking head screws. It has been shown to have predictable good results

**External fixation**: Considered in complex nonunions (e.g., when internal fixation is not possible or not recommended due to infection, substantial deformity, and/or bone loss

**Bone grafting**: Traditionally, iliac crest bone graft has been used when poor vascular supply is present. This treatment option aims to provide an adequate environment for bone formation (biological factors of the diamond concept).

**Cell therapy**: The use of mesenchymal cells within the fracture gap creates a healing environment

**Amputation**: Considered when adequate functional outcomes cannot be achieved.