The technique for intubation includes pre-oxygenation, administration of rapid sequence medications, application of cricoid pressure, and in-line cervical stabilization followed by laryngoscopy (direct or indirect). It is the safest and most effective approach.

The gold standard for assessing an ET placement is direct visualization with the help of a laryngoscope. Additional ways to assure proper confirmation of endotracheal tube placement include end-tidal carbon dioxide measurement, capnography waveform, chest X-ray, ultrasound, and clinical assessment.  The American Heart Association recommends continuous waveform capnography besides clinical assessment as the most reliable method of confirming and monitoring the correct placement of an ET tube. Bedside mobile ultrasound is another resource that some emergency departments have to confirm the position of the ET tube. Many clinicians frequently use a chest X-ray to assess the placement of the ET tube. The optimum position of the ET tube is 2 centimeters above the carina. Complications of endotracheal intubation can include esophageal intubation or right mainstem intubation. When blind endotracheal intubation takes place, the tube may go down the right mainstem bronchus. One could reposition the tube if abnormal tube placement is seen in an X-ray or if a flat capnography waveform is noted and 0 mm Hg in the documented value, as 35 to 45 mm Hg is the expected normal range for appropriate endotracheal tube placement. Clinically, abnormal tube placement can be diagnosed with absent breath sounds on the left chest if right mainstem intubation has occurred, and no breath sounds will be heard bilaterally if abnormal esophageal intubation has occurred. Additionally, with esophageal intubation, air may be auscultated in the mid epigastric region upon ventilation administration. Lastly, low oxygen saturation will be noted. Once appropriate confirmation of the endotracheal tube is noted, it is essential to secure the ETT properly to assure it is not dislodged. Then continuous monitoring with waveform capnography and pulse oxygen monitor is performed.

Pediatric Intensive care specialists prefer to use a cuffed endotracheal tube instead of an uncuffed endotracheal tube to prevent air-leak.

**Airway Management in Traumatic Patients**

Trauma is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, especially for people aged 15 to 50. Trauma is the second-most common single cause of death, representing 8% of all deaths. The World Health Organization estimates that traumatic injuries from traffic accidents, drowning, poisoning, falls, burns, and violence kill over five million people worldwide annually, with millions more suffering from the consequences of injuries.

Rapid evacuation and transportation to a trauma center improve the outcome of severely injured patients. Prehospital intubation is controversial in the EMS literature. The medical director of an EMS service will dictate the clinical context in which he/she will allow a paramedic to intubate in the field.  The EMS service monitors and transports these patients quickly and safely to the nearest trauma facility.

**Surgical Airway**

The age of the child is the only absolute contraindication to surgical cricothyroidotomy. The exact age at which they can safely perform a surgical cricothyrotomy is controversial and not well defined. Various sources list lower age limits ranging from 5 to 12 years, and Pediatric Advanced Life Support defines the pediatric airway as age 1 to 8 years.