Sulfasalazine is indicated for the treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis in children and adults and ulcerative colitis. It also has off-label uses in treating patients with ankylosing spondylitis, mild to moderately active Crohn's disease, psoriasis, and psoriatic arthritis.

**FDA-approved Indications**

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

The FDA approved sulfasalazine for the treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. It is cheap, easy to administer, and lacks teratogenicity compared to other disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. There is currently no cure for rheumatoid arthritis. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications and corticosteroids are most frequently used to relieve pain and stiffness. However, they do not moderate disease progression. Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs can decrease or delay disease progression. Sulfasalazine has been in use for decades as a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug.

Sulfasalazine is indicated for patients with rheumatoid arthritis who have not responded adequately with salicylates or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Clinical trials have proven that sulfasalazine was associated with a significant reduction in disease activities, whether used alone or in combination. In the American College of Rheumatology 2015, sulfasalazine is part of the non-biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs for use in the management of rheumatoid arthritis patients with low to moderate or even high disease activity.

**Polyarticular Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis**

Although sulfasalazine has been used for more than four decades to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis, the first multicenter, double-blind, and randomized controlled trial of patients with active juvenile idiopathic arthritis conducted in 1998. This study has shown that sulfasalazine is effective in the treatment of this condition. Although treatment withdrawal due to adverse events was more frequent in the sulfasalazine treated group, sulfasalazine still rated as safe as those events were transients or reversible upon treatment cessation.

**Ulcerative Colitis**

Sulfasalazine was initially used for patients with rheumatoid arthritis, but further study discovered that it has some role in treating patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Sulfasalazine is FDA-approved for ulcerative colitis but not FDA-approved for Crohn disease. Two randomized controlled trials have shown that sulfasalazine was more effective than a placebo for the induction and maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis. The current ulcerative colitis guideline suggests using sulfasalazine in patients who are in remission and already on sulfasalazine or patients that have dominant arthritic symptoms.

**Non-FDA Approved (off-label) Indications**

**Ankylosing Spondylitis**

Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors are the favored therapeutic agents for the treatment of ankylosing spondylitis. Sulfasalazine is used off-label for a patient who has persistent peripheral arthritis, but a tumor necrosis factor inhibitors are contraindicated.

**Crohn's Disease**

Sulfasalazine may serve as an alternative option for patients with mild Crohn disease based on a meta-analysis of 19 randomized controlled trials where sulfasalazine was superior to placebo in inducing remission.

**Psoriatic Arthritis**

Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory disease with signs and symptoms in the skin and joints. Although the first-line of treatments for mild disease is a topical agent, systemic therapy is indicated for some patients with more severe disease. Monoclonal antibody biologics such as TNF-alpha blockers are useful agents for treatment. However, they should be administered by injection, and have serious adverse effects. Newly developed drugs such as tofacitinib (Janus kinase inhibitor) and apremilast (inhibitor of phosphodiesterase-4) are small molecules that can be given orally. Also, disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs such as methotrexate and sulfasalazine may be administered orally. The role of sulfasalazine in psoriatic arthritis is limited based on current evidence that it only gives benefit for the joint and skin disease and is less effective and tolerated than other commonly used agents such as methotrexate and leflunomide.