The sensory homunculus does not contain nerves. But the sensory impulses from the body's sensory receptors such as the free nerve endings, Meissner corpuscles, Pacinian corpuscles, Merkel disc, and Ruffini corpuscles are processed in the thalamus and sent to the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe. In contrast, the sensory of the face follows the distribution of the trigeminal nerve (CN V).

**Sensory Receptors and Senses**

- Free nerve endings - pain and temperature

- Meissner corpuscles - fine/light touch and position sense

- Pacinian corpuscles - vibration and pressure

- Merkel discs - pressure, deep static touch, and position sense

- Ruffini corpuscles - pressure, slippage of objects along the surface of the skin, and joint angle change

**Spinal Cord Tract**

The free nerve endings are responsible for sensing pain and temperature. The sensation of pain and temperature gets transmitted to the brain via the spinothalamic tract in the spinal cord, while transmissions from the Meissner corpuscles, Pacinian corpuscles, Merkel disc, and Ruffini corpuscles sensations travel to the brain via the dorsal column in the spinal cord. Once these tracts arrive in the brain, they synapse in the ventral posterolateral nucleus of the thalamus. Finally, the thalamus will send the impulse to the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe (sensory cortex).

The sensory receptors on the face will send impulses toward the brain following the distribution of the trigeminal nerve. The impulses from the face will synapse in the ventral posteromedial nucleus of the thalamus. Finally, these impulses will get transmitted to the sensory cortex in the brain.