Patient counseling and informed consent are integral parts of any procedure. However, the emergency conditions under which this procedure is usually performed generally preclude the discussion of risks, benefits, and complications with the patient or family. Ideally, these discussions should be held with patients with predicted difficult airways before airway management is required.

Often the most significant barriers to a surgical airway are cognitive. The emergent cricothyrotomy is no more complicated than placing a chest tube or other routine emergency procedures. However, the terms "failed airway" and "cannot intubate, cannot oxygenate" may be correlated with personal failure in the physician's mind, leading to an unacceptable delay in the decision to cut the neck. Regular practice on simulators or cadavers is necessary to become familiar with the technique will help to reduce the anxiety associated with the procedure when it becomes clinically required. Before any intubation, especially a potential "difficult airway," a physician should go through a difficult airway algorithm, reducing both the anxiety and difficulty of the final step in that pathway, the emergent cricothyrotomy. The airway plan should be verbalized out loud to healthcare team members, from intubation medications to the stops following a failed intubation attempt. The physician should identify critical neck anatomy and landmarks in case a cricothyrotomy becomes necessary. Finally, all equipment should be readily available at the bedside.