The diagnosis is usually made by clinical inspection and identification of the classic morphology of the lesions. Although a biopsy is not mandatory, it is useful to rule out differential diagnoses.

Capillary fragility can be assessed by the Hess’s or Rumpel-Leede test, also called a tourniquet test. For this test, the pressure is applied to the forearm with a blood pressure cuff inflated between systolic and diastolic blood pressure for 5 to 10 minutes. After removing the cuff, fifteen or more petechiae in a 5 cm diameter area indicates capillary fragility. It occurs due to poor platelet function.

Dermoscopy is a diagnostic tool to examine the skin using a special magnifying lens. In SD it shows coppery-red pigmentation as the most common finding in 97%, followed by red globules in 75%, then red dots (69%), brown dots (53%), reticular network (34%), red patch (34%), brown globules (26%), and linear vessels (22%).

No laboratory abnormalities are associated with SD although a complete blood count and peripheral blood smear are necessary to exclude infection and thrombocytopenia, coagulation screening helps to exclude other possible causes of purpura; other recommended tests are bleeding time, platelet aggregation function, ANA, RF, anti-HBsAg antibody and anti-HCV antibody.

Skin biopsy: Histopathology shows perivascular T-cell lymphocytic infiltrate around superficial small blood vessels, extravasation of red blood cells with marked hemosiderin deposition in macrophage in the superficial dermis.