A fundamental principle in the prevention and treatment of Uhthoff's phenomena is to be familiar with the antecedent factors that can result in elevation of core body temperature, and their corresponding impact on the patient's neurological functioning and safety. Patients should be counseled about the stimulating effects of taking hot showers or baths regarding reducing appendicular and core muscle strength leading to profound weakness and thereby placing them in grave danger of drowning. Also, they should be cautioned against sauna, exposure to the sun when the outside temperature is greater than 30 C, hydrotherapy with water at high temperatures, short-wave radiotherapy, and paraffin application. Patients should be advised about performing an exercise during early morning and late evening hours when the temperature is cooler.

Uhthoff phenomenon fully resolves following variable periods of rest (generally ranging from minutes to an hour), and under circumstances where heat stressors are removed, or active cooling measures are applied. Simple and convenient strategies such as taking cold showers, application of ice packs, use of regional cooling devices, and cold beverages can also be tried for heat sensitivity. Cooling garments have been shown to improve neurological function (motor performance and visual acuity) and perceived subjective benefits (feeling less fatigued) in MS patients with Uhthoff's phenomenon.

Reports show that oral administration of 4-aminopyridine reduces the worsening of the visual impairment after an increase in body temperature in MS patients.