When evaluating a patient with paraphimosis, a pertinent history is important. This history should include any recent penile catheterizations, instrumentation, cleaning, or other procedures.

Typical paraphimosis symptoms include erythema, pain, and swelling of foreskin and glans due to the constricting ring of the phimotic foreskin. It may sometimes be described by patients as "penile swelling" and may be relatively painless. Clinicians are cautioned to be suspicious of any telephone description of "penile swelling" as potentially being a paraphimosis that requires immediate treatment and not to dismiss such descriptions as harmless without actually visualizing the lesion. Sometimes a photo sent from the patient's smartphone may be enough to settle the issue.

The history usually makes the diagnosis, but if not, it will be obvious on direct physical examination. The physical exam should focus on the penis, foreskin, and urethral catheter (if present). A pink color to the glans indicates reasonably good blood supply, whereas a dark, dusky, pale, bluish or black color implies possible ischemia or even necrosis.

If a Foley catheter is in place, it's recommended to review the reason why the catheter was needed and whether any difficulties were encountered in placing it, prior to its removal. While removing the Foley will almost certainly aid in reducing the paraphimosis, in some circumstances it may prove to be impossible to replace the catheter and now the caregiver is faced with a new problem. Most of the time, removal of the Foley is not necessary to successfully reduce the paraphimosis.