**Fentanyl**should not be used if there is a known allergy to opiates. Concomitant use of fentanyl with a cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitor may result in increased fentanyl plasma concentrations. Patients who recently had a P450 3A4 inducer discontinued may have increased concentrations of plasma fentanyl.

**Midazolam**should not be used if there is a known allergy to benzodiazepines. It can reduce blood pressure, so it is not recommended in the setting of shock.

**Etomidate**should not be used in the setting of sepsis or adrenal insufficiency. It is extensively metabolized in the liver, so caution should be used when administering etomidate to patients with hepatic disease. It should not be used if there is a known allergy to the drug.

**Ketamine**should not be used if there is a known allergy to the drug or in patients a history of psychosis.

**Rocuronium**should not be used if there is a known allergy to the drug. Caution should be used in patients with neuromuscular disease, malnutrition or hepatic impairment.

**Succinylcholine**is contraindicated in patients with a personal or family history of malignant hyperthermia and patients with skeletal myopathies like muscular dystrophy. In the acute phase of injury following major burns, multiple trauma, extensive denervation of skeletal muscle or upper motor neuron injury succinylcholine can cause severe hyperkalemia which may result in cardiac arrest, making it contraindicated in these clinical settings. It should not be used in patients with a known allergy to the drug.