In type I hypersensitivity reactions after a previous sensitization, the immunoglobulin (Ig) E is produced and binds to Fc receptors on mast cells and basophils. On encountering the allergen, it triggers cross-linking of mast-cell cytophilic IgE, causing the activation of mast cells and their degranulation of mediators that cause an allergic reaction. The mediators that participate in this type of hypersensitivity reaction include histamine and lipid mediators such as PAF, LTC4, and PGD2 that cause vascular leak, bronchoconstriction, inflammation, and intestinal hypermotility. Enzymes (e.g., tryptase causes tissue damage) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) causes inflammation. Eosinophils release cationic granule proteins, e.g., major basic protein (causes death of host cells and parasites) and enzymes (e.g., eosinophil peroxidase, which participates in tissue remodeling).

In type II hypersensitivity reactions, antibodies against basement membranes produce nephritis in Goodpasture's syndrome. Myasthenia gravis and Lambert-Eaton syndrome are caused by antibodies that reduce the amount of acetylcholine at motor endplates, and autoantibodies to an intercellular adhesion molecule causes pemphigus.

In type III hypersensitivity reactions, immune-complex deposition (ICD) causes autoimmune diseases, which are often a complication. As the disease progresses, further accumulation of immune complexes occurs, and when the body becomes overloaded, the complexes are deposited in the tissues and cause inflammation as the mononuclear phagocytes, erythrocytes, and complement system fail to remove immune complexes from the blood.