LPS biogenesis employs the process of assembly at the bacterial inner membrane and subsequent translocation to the bacterial cell surface. The hydrophobic Lipid A part of the molecule is an acylated β-1‘-6-linked glucosamine disaccharide, which forms the outer leaflet of the outer membrane. These glucosamines are acylated at the 2, 3, 2’ and 3’ positions and phosphorylated at the 1 and 4’ positions, which typically gives a Hexa-acylated feature to the mature Lipid A. Hexacylated, bisphosphorylated lipid A as seen in E. coli and Salmonella is highly immunogenic than other forms of lipid A. Secondly, the core oligosaccharide is a non-repeating polymer linked to lipid A through the glucosamine moiety. It is inherently composed of 3-deoxy-D-manno-oct-2-ulosonic acid (Kdo) residues, various hexoses, and heptoses. In some bacterial strains, the sugars become substituted with phosphates, phosphoethanolamine, etc.Neisseria, that do not synthesize O-antigen.

The overall structure of the LPS is conserved. However, considerable structural differences lead to variations at the species and strain level. These variations are the basis of altered host immune response. Nonetheless, the host immune system has evolved to recognize LPS as a pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) and respond to it. The production of LPS and phospholipids are shared at the point of the common precursor, β-hydroxymyristate-ACP.  FabZ utilizes the substrate in the phospholipid pathway and LpxA in the LPS biosynthetic pathway. Hence LPS has to be regulated so that proper balance remains in the synthesis of lipid and thus the development of inner and outer bacterial membranes. Since LpxC facilitated the first committed step in LPS biosynthesis, it is the control point for the pathway.