Several topical and systemic antifungal therapy options and regimens are available. When possible, topical therapy is preferred for tinea manuum due to the risk of drug interactions and side effects of the oral treatments.

- There is no difference in cure rates among allylamines (terbinafine, naftifine), imidazoles (clotrimazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole), or other antifungals, such as butenafine and ciclopirox olamine.

- Regimens last 4 to 6 weeks, except for newer options like luliconazole and econazole (Ecoza, Spectazole), which usually require about 2 to 4 weeks of treatment.

- In addition, the anti-inflammatory effects (e.g., bifonazole) and the antibacterial properties [e.g., clotrimazole (gram-positive and gram-negative cocci) and isoconazole (gram-positive bacteria, including MRSA)] of several topical antifungals give specific value when choosing the agent.

- Indications for systemic antifungals in tinea manuum include a co-infection of the nails, the involvement of two or more body areas, including the “two-foot, one-hand syndrome,” immunosuppression, recurrence of the infection, and topical therapy failure.

- The use of corticosteroids is controversial; however, they can be beneficial in severely inflamed cases to reduce pruritus or burning sensations and, in some patients, to secure treatment adherence. When used, corticosteroid treatment should be administered with the antifungal therapy simultaneously, but it should be limited to only the first week of antifungal treatment.