**Basal Cortical Rhythms**

**Terminology and Definitions of Basal Cortical Rhythms**

Rhythm is a term used in electrophysiology to describe continuous, repetitive, EEG activity that occurs without interruption. Alpha rhythm is a descriptive term where alpha refers to the mature normal frequency that falls in alpha range 8 to 13 per second.

Mu is the 12th letter of the Greek letters, transliterated as "m," and it stands for “rolandic” rhythm. It was called “precentral alpha rhythm,” “rolandic alpha,”, “central alpha,” and “somatosensory alpha rhythm” referring to its cortical origin. Other names include “alphoid activity” and “arcade rhythm” and “comb rhythm” derived from its morphology.

Wickets spikes were first described by Reiher and Lebel.

**Morphology**

Alpha rhythm usually archiform (sinusoidal) or rounded with a negative-sharp component and a positive-round component.

Mu rhythm (rhythm en arceau) – pertains to an archiform waveforms with sharp positive and rounded positive components. The amplitude is comparable to PBR; <50 microV. Frequency 7-12 Hz. It is bilateral, usually asymmetric and asynchronous with shifting side.

Wickets rhythm has a monomorphic archiform waves with surface negative polarity reaching 60-210 microV in amplitude. It usually occurs in runs of 6-11 Hz.

**Reactivity**

The Alpha rhythm can be temporarily blocked, or attenuated by sustained eye-opening and/or mental activity (also called Berger’s effect)

Mu rhythm is present in waking and disappears in drowsiness similar to PBR. It has been described during REM sleep as well; this is in contrast to the Alpha rhythm.

Wickets rhythm can be seen during wakefulness and sleep. It is best seen during drowsiness and light sleep.

**Cortical Generator**

Alpha rhythm (PBR) is a cortical rhythm with genetically determined morphology. The exact generator remains uncertain but multiple brain regions seem to be involved including occipital lobes and thalamic pacemakers.

Mu rhythm is perceived as a cortical idling rhythm of the somatosensory cortex via thalamocortical projections. It was recorded from the ventroposterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus. It has two components: an alpha component that represents the post-rolandic sensory cortex, and a supraharmonic beta originates from the pre-rolandic motor region.

Wickets rhythm is seen over the temporal region; however, the exact generator is uncertain. Wickets are suspected to represent normal fragmented Third rhythm.

**Theta range rhythms**

1. Ciganek or Third rhythm

This theta rhythm (usually between 4-7 Hz) is mostly seen in the vertex and midline regions during drowsiness.   It can be differentiated from the mu rhythm by inconsistent reactivity to thinking about moving or actually moving the contralateral limb.

2. Rhythmic mid-temporal theta of drowsiness (RMTD)

Also known as "psychomotor variant", this rhythm has a notched or flat-topped appearance

**Beta rhythm**

Ranging between 13-30 Hz, beta activity is frequently seen in the awake state in adults in children. It is most prominent in the frontal and central leads and is usually symmetric, and of low amplitude (10-20 microvolts). Beta activity resolves in deeper stages of sleep.