The main modality used to diagnose and evaluate tricuspid regurgitation is Doppler echocardiography. It is used to precisely contemplate regurgitant blood flow and its flow velocity and accurately measure the systolic pressure in the right ventricle

**Echocardiographic Findings
**

- Tricuspid valve motion may be normal or abnormal. Characteristic primary valvular abnormalities include Ebstein anomaly, leaflet prolapse, flail leaflet, endocarditis, carcinoid heart disease, and rheumatic valve disease.

- The dilated right atrium and right ventricle in the presence of moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation

- The tricuspid annulus is often dilated.

- The paradoxical interventricular septal movement that reflects the increased volume within the right ventricle (diastolic overload)

- Right ventricle function that may be hyperdynamic, normal, or reduced, thus reflecting the underlying cause of tricuspid regurgitation and the degree of RV compensation.

- Other abnormalities may be seen when the tricuspid regurgitation are due to pulmonary hypertension secondary to a left-sided cardiac abnormality.

- The peak regurgitant flow velocity across the tricuspid valve is measured which helps in estimating the right ventricular and pulmonary arterial systolic pressure. The modified Bernoulli equation is used to convert it to a pressure gradient following which the gradient is added to an estimate of the right atrial pressure. Thus the extent of pulmonary hypertension can be estimated.

**Additional Te
sts
**

Chest Radiography: The following findings are noted:

- Marked cardiomegaly: in severe tricuspid regurgitation

- Pleural effusions and ascites with diaphragmatic elevation

- Pulmonary arterial and venous hypertension common

Serum Chemistry: Abnormal liver function test, hyperbilirubinemia secondary to hepatic congestion may be noted.

Electrocardiography: Nonspecific ST and T waves in the right precordial leads reflecting right ventricular dysfunction seen. If pulmonary hypertension causes tricuspid regurgitation, the ECG may show right axis deviation indicating RV hypertrophy and tall R waves in V1 to V2. In severe pulmonary hypertension, right atrial hypertrophy and "P-pulmonale" may also be present.

Cardiac Catheterization: Elevated end-diastolic pressures in the right atrium and right ventricle are noted.