Eosinophilic granuloma (EG) is a multi-system disease with a diverse presentation. It can involve a single bone or multiple bones, and the clinical presentation varies with the involved bone and surrounding structures. Other than bones, less commonly involved organs include skin, pituitary gland, liver, spleen, and lungs. The clinical features, according to involved structures, are as follows:

- Pain and swelling in the region of involved bone is the most common presenting symptom

- Pathological fracture of the involved bone

- Vertebral involvement may present with back pain, stiffness, and change in posture (kyphotic posture). More extensive lesions can cause neurological deficits.

- Temporal bone involvement may present with ear canal mass, postauricular swelling, ear discharge, and hearing loss. Children presenting with symptoms of otitis media not responding to appropriate antibiotics should raise suspicion for EG.

- Periorbital lesions may present with periorbital edema, redness, fever, and proptosis (mimicking cellulitis), which shows no improvement with antibiotics.

- Jaw involvement may present with jaw mass, pain, and loose teeth.

- Lesions involving the skull may present with headache, increased thirst, and increase urination (diabetes insipidus).

- Lesions involving lung may be asymptomatic or present with non-productive cough, weight loss, dyspnea, chest pain, fatigue, and spontaneous pneumothorax.

**Physical Findings:**

- Tenderness to palpation of the affected region, normal/restricted range of motion of the spine in case of lesions involving vertebral bones. The mass may be firm and immobile.

- Limping can be seen in lesions involving the pelvis and lower extremities long bones.

- Conductive or sensorineural hearing loss.

- Neurological examinations may show neurological deficits in case of extensive spine involvement.

- Abdominal examinations may show hepatosplenomegaly, and lymph node may be enlarged in case of multi-system involvement.

- Chest auscultation may be abnormal in the pulmonary EG.