Bourgault et al. classified the etiology of renal infarction into four different groups in their retrospective study conducted between 1989 to 2011. In the study, the mean age of patients was highest in the cardiac group (65 ± 15 years) compared to other groups.

The causes of renal infarction were grouped into the following categories (i) cardioembolic origin, (ii) associated with renal artery injury, (iii) associated with hypercoagulability disorders, and (iv) idiopathic.

The most common cause of renal infarcts from a comprehensive metanalysis of the literature is cardioembolic disease which was responsible for 45.4% of the reported cases.

Other cardiac causes include thrombo-emboli originating from the heart due to rheumatic mitral stenosis, myocardial infarction, prosthetic valve endocarditis, and infective endocarditis developing on valvular vegetations. Renal infarction can also occur from an embolus originating from an atrial myxoma or the apex of the left ventricle. Arterial causes of renal infarction include a thrombus originating from the aorta or renal artery in conditions such as atherosclerosis and an aortic dissection extending into the renal artery. Aneurysms of the thoracic or suprarenal abdominal aorta can increase the risk of renal infarctions by favoring the development of thrombi.

Renal infarction can occur from a blunt abdominal injury leading to dissection or occlusion of the renal artery. Other causes of renal infarction include connective tissue disorders such as fibromuscular dysplasia, Marfan syndrome, Ehler-Danlos syndrome, and vasculitis disorders like polyarteritis nodosa.

Fibromuscular dysplasia usually occurs in patients younger than age 50 without any known cardiovascular risk factors. Renal infarctions can happen due to thrombus formation in the post-stenotic, dilated portion of the artery. It usually manifests initially as hypertension.

Coagulation disorders like protein C and protein S deficiency, hyperhomocysteinemia, lupus anticoagulant, polycythemia vera, Factor V Leiden mutation, prothrombin II gene mutation, and antithrombin III deficiency can also lead to renal infarction. Idiopathic causes include all patients in whom a complete cardiac workup and coagulation panels have failed to reveal a cause of renal infarction and account for about 28.7% of cases (27 out of 94 patients), as described by Bourgault.

Renal infarction may also be seen in women using oral contraceptives or associated with covid 19 infection, malignancy, sickle cell disease, anabolic steroid abuse, and cocaine use.

Coronary angiography is the most common procedure producing an embolic atherosclerotic plaque resulting in a renal infarction. It is responsible for about 80% of the iatrogenic cases from angiography.

A brachial angiographic approach is less risky than iliofemoral access as the aorta has the most atherosclerotic plaques susceptible to possible embolization.

Cholesterol crystal embolization of the renal artery is iatrogenic in 70% of cases, usually from the manipulation of larger arteries.

**Summary**

- Cardiac problems, particularly atrial fibrillation, are the most common cause of renal infarcts, with a median age of 65.

- Renal artery injury and a hypercoagulable state are the next most common causes of renal infarction, where the median age is 43 and 63 years, respectively.

- Angiography, angioplasty, cardiovascular surgery, anticoagulation, and thrombolytic therapy are common causes of renal artery atheroembolism.

- About 20% to 30% of cases remain idiopathic, with a median age of about 50.