One of the main maternal concerns is not having enough breastmilk. Since breast milk is indispensable to a newborn, physicians should be able to investigate milk supply difficulties. Signs include low weight gain, dry mucous membranes of the baby, weak cry, infrequent hard stools, and decreased urine output.

Breastfeeding Jaundice: It usually occurs in the first week of life, due to the infant not receiving sufficient milk. This causes increased enterohepatic circulation and decreased elimination of bilirubin from the body resulting in jaundice. It is commonly caused by difficulty breastfeeding, improper latching, or other reasons that might interfere with breastfeeding. Signs of dehydration are normally present. Treatment includes continued breastfeeding, increased frequency of feeds, and counseling by a lactation consultant. Spontaneous resolution usually occurs in the third week of life.

Breastmilk Jaundice: It starts on 3-5 days after birth, peaking at 2 weeks of age. lasting several weeks after birth. High levels of beta-glucuronidase in breast milk deconjugate intestinal bilirubin and increased enterohepatic circulation. Weight gain is adequate and examination is usually unremarkable. Spontaneous resolution usually occurs by 12 weeks of life and treatment is generally not required.

Milk/Soy Induced Colitis: It is a hypersensitive gastrointestinal disorder to allergens present in breast milk, which presents at 2-8 weeks of age with regurgitation or vomiting, painless bloody stools. Eczema may be present as well. It is not IgE-mediated with concomitant soy milk reaction in 30% of infants. Risk factors for this condition include a family history of allergy, eczema or asthma. Treatement involves the elimination of milk and soy from maternal diet. Spontaneous resolution occurs by 1 year.