# Introduction

The blood supply of the external nose and the nasal cavity is derived from anastomosing terminal branches of the internal and external carotid artery systems. The blood supply of the external nose is provided primarily by the facial artery, particularly along the lateral aspect and in the lower one-third, with the anterior lateral nasal artery supplying the majority of blood flow to the nasal tip.

# Structure and Function

Both the anterior and posterior lateral nasal arteries are distal branches of the external carotid arteries, each measuring approximately 2 mm in diameter, with the anterior artery being slightly larger than the posterior.

The posterior lateral nasal artery is a branch of the sphenopalatine artery, itself a branch of the internal maxillary division of the external carotid artery, that arises along with the posterior septal artery at a bifurcation that occurs just prior to the arteries' entrance into the nasal cavity via the sphenopalatine foramen.

# Embryology

During the fourth and fifth weeks of embryological development, the aortic arches begin to form in parallel with the branchial arches and then ultimately develop into the arteries of the face, neck, and chest. The third aortic arch develops into the common carotid artery, which will branch into the external and internal carotid arteries.

# Nerves

The anterior and posterior-lateral nasal arteries anastomose along the lateral walls of the nasal cavity with the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries, helping to perfuse the anterior and posterior ethmoidal nerves, which are terminal branches of the nasociliary nerve, itself a branch of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V).

# Muscles

The anterior lateral nasal artery perfuses the intrinsic muscles of the nose, the transverse, and alar portions of the nasalis muscle, also known as the compressor naris and the dilator naris muscles. It also feeds the nearby muscles of the medial midface, specifically the levator labii superioris alaeque nasi muscle and potentially the levator labii superioris muscle as well.

# Physiologic Variants

The branching pattern of the facial artery in the area of the nasofacial junction is variable. In the majority of individuals, the lateral nasal artery arises at the bifurcation of the facial artery that also gives off the superior labial artery, just superior to the oral commissure. In some cases, however, the lateral nasal artery may branch directly from the superior labial artery instead of the facial artery. If the lateral nasal artery is a branch of the superior labial artery, it will ascend the face until it reaches the ala. At the ala, the lateral nasal artery will then ascend the nose and turn medially towards the tip and give off the angular artery to continue its ascent along the nasofacial junction.

# Surgical Considerations

As mentioned, the blood supply to the external nose is complicated and redundant, which permits reliable healing and infection resistance even after extensive trauma or surgical intervention. The anterior lateral nasal arteries represent the primary perfusion to the tip of the nose, and without their contribution to blood flow, division of the columellar artery during open rhinoplasty would likely lead to more healing complications.

Internally, the posterior and anterior lateral nasal arteries comprise the major blood supply to the inferior turbinate. The inferior turbinate, in addition to serving a major role in warmth, humidification, and regulation of nasal airflow, also provides a significant amount of soft tissue that is available for use in regional flap reconstruction. The inferior turbinate can be raised as an anteriorly-based flap, perfused by the anterior lateral nasal artery, and inset to repair nasal septal perforations, nasal cavity mucosal defects, and skull base defects.

# Clinical Significance

The anterior and posterior-lateral nasal arteries are branches of the external carotid system, and between them, significant portions of both the external nose and the nasal cavity are perfused. The excellent collateral circulation of the nose permits rapid healing and infection resistance, as well as the flexibility to manipulate tissue extensively for reconstructive purposes.