**Prevention:**

Hand hygiene is the most important aspect of infection control and prevention of healthcare-associated infection (HAI). Pathogenic microorganisms that are transiently on the healthcare worker are readily removed with routine hand hygiene and limit the risk of transmission to the patient. Hand hygiene also prevents colonization and infection in the healthcare worker and the contamination of the environment. The World Health Organization has identified five moments in which hand hygiene should always be practiced:

- Before touching a patient

- Before any clean or aseptic procedure

- After exposure to body fluid

- After touching a patient

- After touching patient surroundings

Alcohol-based hand sanitizers are preferred over soap and water washing except when hands are visibly soiled, contact with body fluids after using the toilet, or there is exposure to spore-forming pathogens such as C. difficile.

Standard precautions should be practiced to protect healthcare workers. This includes the use of personal protective equipment such as gloves, gowns, masks, and eye protection to protect from blood and body fluids. Transmission based precautions should be used to prevent airborne, droplet, and contact transmission. A fit-tested N-95 respirator should be worn and patient placement in an isolated negative pressure room to prevent airborne transmission. Surgical masks and physical distancing are precautions to prevent droplet transmission. Patient placement in a single room and healthcare worker gown and gloves are worn to avoid contact transmission of MDRO and C. difficile. Aseptic techniques should be practiced for invasive procedures and surgery.

Environmental contamination is a potential source of pathogens that may be transmitted through contact. One study found that hospital water taps, door handles, and working surfaces had the highest number of microbes.

Estimates are that 20 to 25% of hospital waste was high potential to cause HAI, and care should be given to ensure appropriate handling and disposal.

Antimicrobial stewardship involves monitoring appropriate antimicrobial use and antibiotic resistance and implementing antibiotic control policies. Millions of antibiotic prescriptions are prescribed to patients each year during office visits, but it is estimated that approximately 50% of these are not necessary.

**Patient Education**

Patients should be informed about the potential risk of developing HAI when receiving care. Healthcare workers should assess the patient's risk factors for developing a specific infection and identify and address ways to limit modifiable risk factors. Patients with modifiable risk factors should be educated on ways that they can reduce their risk of developing HAI. For example, smoking habits, cleaning, and not shaving the area before a surgical procedure can reduce SSI. Providers should be careful and cautious with the use of devices and the need for invasive interventions. Patients should be educated on appropriate antibiotic use and indications to prevent potential antibiotic misuse.