Anatomical consideration of these manipulative techniques deserves attention before addressing the technical specifics. The lumbar spine includes five vertebral segments and their corresponding nerve roots that exit below the corresponding vertebra. For example, the L3 never root exits through the foramen between L3 and L4.

This anatomy is relevant when targeting a particular adjustment to a specific patient complaint. If a patient reports pain that radiates down a specified dermatome, one could conceivably tailor therapy toward that region based on the innervation and corresponding spinal segments. Likewise, osteopathic physicians are trained to target somatic dysfunctions that could be contributing to other ailments based on those dermatomes.

The inherent mechanics native to the lumbar spine also warrant attention. The lumbar spine contributes a large percentage of side-bending, rotation, and flexion ability of the axial skeleton. As such, the options for manipulation are more varied than other, more restricted regions of the spine. This articulation is made possible by several synovial joints that compose much of the surface of the lumbar vertebrae. King among these articulations is the intervertebral disc, which is a fibrocartilaginous structure that sits between vertebrae.

Other, smaller articulations include the zygapophyseal joints (facet joints). These synovial joints sit two on the superior surface, and two on each inferior surface of the vertebrae. The superior facets are oriented with the articulating surface posterior and medial and interface with the corresponding articular surface of the adjoining vertebrae. This arrangement leads to the majority of the vertebral motion to be in flexion and extension compared to rotation or side-bending.