**Medical Management**

The primary step in the management of aortic arch aneurysm is to administer medical therapy directed towards the control of risk factors for atherosclerosis, to slow the rate of expansion, and to lower the likelihood of development of the complications, including dissection or rupture.

2010 AHA guidelines on medical treatment of patients with thoracic aortic disease recommend that stringent control of hypertension, the optimization of lipid profile, smoking cessation, and other atherosclerosis risk-reduction measures should be instituted for patients with small aneurysms as well as for patients who are not considered to be surgical candidates (Class 1 recommendation, level of evidence: C).

Other important strategies of conservative treatment include patient education regarding the signs and symptoms indicating the development of complications, serial imaging of aneurysm to evaluate for expansion; screening for aneurysms at other locations including non-contagious aortic segments, and counseling for those suspected of having an associated genetic disorder.

Guidelines on surveillance imaging suggest that for isolated aortic arch aneurysms less than 4.0 cm in diameter, it is reasonable to re-image using CT or MRI, at 12-month intervals, to detect enlargement of the aneurysm (class of recommendation: 2a, level of evidence: C). Whereas for patients with isolated aortic arch aneurysms of 4.0 cm or greater in diameter, it is reasonable to re-image using computed tomographic imaging or magnetic resonance imaging, at 6-month intervals. (Class of recommendation: 2a, level of evidence: C).

**Surgical Management**

Surgical intervention for the aneurysms of aortic arch raises a particular concern due to higher rates of mortality, need for creating a bloodless field with circulatory arrest as well as challenges in maintaining perfusion to the head, neck, and upper extremities.

**Criteria for the Candidacy of Operative Management**

The 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of aortic diseases recommend that surgery should be considered in patients who have an isolated arch aneurysm with a maximal diameter of more than 5.5 cm (class of recommendation: 2b, level of evidence: C). Aortic arch repair may be considered in patients with aortic arch aneurysm who are already going to have surgery of an adjacent aneurysm located in the ascending or descending aorta (class of recommendation: 2b, level of evidence: C).

Advancements in open surgical techniques, safer anesthetic practices, and improvised methods of maintaining cerebral perfusion have revamped the most widely used conventional open repair procedure. The newer endovascular and hybrid modalities have also started to emerge. These newer technologies have made surgical treatment possible even for a larger spectrum of patients, including those at high risk and with multiple comorbidities. Each of these techniques has its own merits and demerits, and the choice is tailored considering peri-operative risks, comorbidities, and anatomy of the lesion.

According to the 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/ SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and management of patients with thoracic aortic disease, class 2a recommendations for open surgical repair of asymptomatic patients with aortic arch aneurysms are:

- For thoracic aortic aneurysms also involving the proximal aortic arch, partial replacement of the arch together with the repair of the ascending aorta using right subclavian/axillary artery inflow and hypothermic circulatory arrest is reasonable. (level of evidence: B)

- Replacement of the entire arch is reasonable for acute dissections when the arch is aneurysmal, or there is excessive aortic arch destruction and leakage. (level of evidence: B)

- Replacement of the entire aortic arch is reasonable for aneurysms of the whole arch, for chronic dissection when the arch is dilated, and for distal arch aneurysms that also involve the proximal descending thoracic aorta, usually with the elephant trunk procedure. (level of evidence: B)

Open arch replacement usually employs the use of a classical two-staged elephant trunk (ET) or a frozen elephant trunk (FET) procedure wherein the first stage is an open repair of the ascending aorta and aortic arch along with the placement of the trunk followed by a second stage completion surgery which involves the intervention of the descending aorta via either open or the endovascular approach using thoracic endovascular stent graft (TEVAR). Deployment of TEVAR is done in a retrograde fashion in the setting of ET, whereas ante-grade deployment through a reconstructed transverse arch is achieved in a FET procedure. Island patch reconstruction or branch graft is often used to anastomose supra-aortic branches, and brain protection during the surgery is provided by a deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (HCA) or with newer strategies including antegrade and retrograde cerebral perfusion.

Hybrid procedure renders a less invasive intervention and also often obviates the need for hypothermic circulatory arrest (HCA) and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) hence making the surgical treatment of aneurysms acceptable to a larger subset of a patient population with comorbid conditions who otherwise would not tolerate the technical demands of open repair under HCA. As described above, TEVAR can be integrated with conventional open repair as a safe alternative to open thoracotomy to complete distal aneurysm repair or is combined with open debranching of cerebral vessels.

Supra-aortic arch debranching involves bypass to all three arch branches from the ascending aorta followed by TEVAR, including the arch.

With increasing competence in endovascular procedures, total endovascular repair surgeries of the aortic arch with the use of advanced generations of branched or fenestrated endografts or with chimney technique have been tried at some centers with technical success and low-perioperative morbidity and mortality; however, randomized multicenter trials and data on long term effectiveness and durability are still lacking.