Restoring blood flow in a timely fashion is the most effective intervention to salvage ischemic brain tissue. The use of intravenous (IV) thrombolytic to restore blood flow using recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator or rt-PA, also known as alteplase, is well established in the literature through major clinical trials and has remained unchanged in recent years. Patients treated with IV alteplase within 3 to 4.5-hours from stroke onset generally see significant improvement. The decision to administer alteplase is based on certain inclusion and exclusion criteria. Trials have recommended the expansion of treatment with IV alteplase to patients with mild but disabling stroke.

The current AHA/ASA 2018 guidelines provide a grade-A recommendation against the use of anticoagulation in AIS, regardless of the extent of stenosis.

The guidelines also recommend further clinical trials and suggest a lack of well-established data for the use of direct thrombin inhibitors and factor Xa inhibitors, including argatroban, dabigatran, etc., as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy to alteplase in AIS.

Furthermore, the use of prophylaxis anticoagulation, such as unfractionated heparin (UFH) or LMWH, in immobile patients with AIS is also controversial. Meta-analysis data suggests that prophylactic doses of anticoagulation did not significantly affect functional status or mortality. Although there were statistically significant reductions in symptomatic pulmonary embolisms (OR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.49–0.98) and deep vein thrombosis (DVTs) (OR, 0.21; 95% CI, 0.15–0.29), there was a significant increase in symptomatic intracranial (OR, 1.68; 95% CI, 1.11–2.55) and extracranial (OR, 1.65; 95% CI, 1.0–2.75) hemorrhage. There was a suggestion that if patients are at increased risk of VTE, it may be more beneficial to treat prophylactically, specifically with LMWH once daily vs. UFH. However, there has yet to be the identification of such subgroups.

Although the use of anticoagulation is controversial in AIS, the use of oral anticoagulation (OAC) is currently strongly recommended as first-line therapy for the prevention of primary and secondary strokes in patients with atrial fibrillation. Patients with atrial fibrillation with moderate to high risk of thromboembolic events may benefit from long-term anticoagulation. Most studies have shown that using direct thrombin and factor Xa inhibitors, such as apixaban and rivaroxaban, may have less risk of intracranial hemorrhage than patients on warfarin. The risk versus benefit for assessing anticoagulation for patients with atrial fibrillation can be calculated using validated calculations, such as CHA2DS2-VASc for stroke risk and HAS-BLED for bleeding risk. Although these tools do not have high predictive ability, they can still help establish an individualized clinical plan considering risks versus benefits. The recommendation is to initiate OAC if the CHA2DS2-VASc stratification score is greater than or equal to 2.

The appropriate time to initiate or reinitiate anticoagulation in a patient that received IV alteplase for AIS is individualized based on risk factors. The guidelines agree that this area remains controversial, and the risk of conversion to intracranial hemorrhage within 24-hours post tPA therapy remains unclear.