Interdisciplinary management of malignant pleural effusion is an essential component of the comprehensive management of advanced cancer patients. Management of medical issues in advanced cancer may play an important role in improving the patient's survival along with a significant impact on quality of life. Dyspnea is one of the key symptoms that have been shown to have a substantial impact on the advanced cancer patient's quality of life.

It is pertinent to treat correctable causes of breathlessness before proceeding to pharmacological measures that function by decreasing the patient's perception of discomfort (due to breathlessness). The degree of aggressiveness of treatment is a contentious but important region that requires family participation. Therapeutic interventions for the management of malignant pleural effusion may be delivered by Medical oncologists, Respiratory medicine physicians, Surgical oncologists, and Palliative medicine experts.

Management of Pleural effusion in the advanced cancer patient at the end of life is a challenge that demands a relook a the conventional role of a palliative medicine consult. The advanced cancer patient with a unique set of physical (medical and surgical), psychological, social, and spiritual issues presents a unique challenge for inpatient admission in the palliative medicine ward. The European Society of Medical Oncology has proposed using the term patient-centered care to encompass both palliative and supportive care provision. Their definition of the patient-centered approach includes Assessment, monitoring, and interventions, management of cancer-related symptoms, along with management of anti-cancer treatment-related complications. These guidelines remain the only official set of guidelines that acknowledge the role of the supportive and palliative medicine expert in the management of this medical condition directly.