HM toxicity is worldwide. However, the incidence and magnitude of the toxicities of individual HMs vary with the geographical location, natural soil content, habits, customs, location of industries, regulatory measures to contain pollution, healthcare facilities to detect HM toxicity, and individual factors like nutritional status, and genetics.

When an HM is released into the air, water, or soil, it can be absorbed by plants, crops, consumed by cattle and fish, and finally, end up in humans to complete the food chain.

Industrial and workplace exposure can result in HM toxicity by inhalation, ingestion, or skin contact.

The World Health Organization(WHO) has listed ten major pollutants, four of which are HMs.

Groundwater contaminated with HMs can be consumed by humans and result in chronic HM toxicity. An example is a high level of arsenic in the groundwater in Bengal, India, and neighboring Bangladesh, where the concentration of arsenic in the water is far above permissible limits.

Time and again, there have been reports of HM toxicity occurring in epidemic proportions; this has been the result of a rather careless release of toxic industrial effluents into the air, soil, sea, and waterways.

Hunter-Russell syndrome occurred in a seed-packing factory in England due to the inhalation of methyl mercury, which was sprayed as an insecticide.

Industrial release of methyl mercury into rivers and seawater resulted in poisoning and deaths in Japan, infamously known as Minamata disease.

Another Japanese example is the accumulation of Cd in bones with resultant pains and fractures, the so-called "Itai-Itai (it hurts-it hurts) disease."

An epidemic of mercury poisoning occurred in Iraq, where grains sprayed with insecticide were consumed.

A well-known case is that of groundwater contamination with chromium VI in California by a Gas Company that released its waste into the region's groundwater.

Epidemiological studies have shown the association of HM exposure and chronic disease like diabetes, kidney disease, degenerative neurological conditions, skin ailments, respiratory diseases, cardiovascular disease as well as cancer.