Initial management consists of non-operative management. Conservative management is successful only in one-third of the cases.

**Non-Operative Treatment**

The goal of conservative therapy is to alleviate the discomfort associated with the coalition. Patients with mild to moderate symptoms may respond well to shoe modifications. Medial arch supports and custom molded orthotics that can help control motion or prevent motion of the painful subtalar joint and reduce the medial-lateral hindfoot force can be used to minimize pain.

Pain-relieving measures include anti-inflammatory medications, and injection of steroids into the coalition site can combine with complete immobilization in a below-knee cast. In severe pain, six weeks of complete immobilization may be justified with symptomatic relief obtained in roughly 30% of patients. The patient can recommence activities if symptoms resolve with conservative measures. Symptoms often subside when the facet ossifies, especially if the heel is in a neutral position.

If conservative measures fail, the patient should undergo re-evaluation for surgical intervention. The surgical procedure is necessary when the (1) pain is not relieved and (2) if the non-operative management fails to resolve the recurrent ankle sprains.

**Operative Measures**

**1. Resection of the coalition**is the treatment of choice if the patient is less than 16 years of age. The results are less predictable than the resection of calcaneonavicular coalitions. Resection site is usually interposed by fat or wax to prevent a recurrence. If there is a mild hindfoot deformity, a sinus tarsi implant is an option, or a corrective calcaneal lengthening or medial calcaneal shift osteotomy is used to correct the foot deformity.

According to Wilde et al., there are three criteria for the resection to be successful.

- Area of the middle facet relative to the posterior facet should be less than 50%

- The posterior facet should have wide and thick cartilage, and there should be no degenerative changes

- The hindfoot valgus should be less than 16 degrees

A recent review article by Mubarak and Murphy advocated the restoration of hindfoot motion regardless of the size of the coalition

**2. Subtalar fusion**is necessary if the area of the talonavicular coalition is greater than the 50%

**3. Triple fusion**(subtalar fusion with talonavicular and calcaneocuboid fusion) is in order in a previously failed resection, associated degeneration in the Choparts joints (calcaneocuboid and talonavicular joints)