Systemic mastocytosis involves different organ systems due to the release of vasoactive mediators.

- Episodic mediator release and anaphylaxis — Acute release of mast cell mediators can result in episodes of vasodilation, hypotension, flushing, pruritus, syncope, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, and headache.

- Anaphylaxis is observable in both cutaneous mastocytosis and systemic mastocytosis. Symptoms typically include flushing, syncope, gastrointestinal symptoms, and vascular collapse. Urticaria and angioedema occur less frequently.

- Gastrointestinal complaints — Gastrointestinal dysfunction caused by the release of mast cell mediators is an observation in systemic mastocytosis.

- Neuropsychiatric symptoms — Neuropsychiatric manifestations, including depression, mood changes, lack of concentration, short memory span, increased somnolence, irritability, as well as emotional instability, are commonly witnessed in adult patients with mastocytosis.

- Musculoskeletal symptoms — Diffuse musculoskeletal pain of the long bones and a pain syndrome resembling fibromyalgia may appear in patients with systemic mastocytosis.

- Osteopenia and osteoporosis — A subset of patients with systemic mastocytosis appears to be at increased risk of developing osteopenia and osteoporosis.

- The most common hematologic abnormality is mild-to-moderate anemia, which occurs in up to 50 percent of patients.

- Peptic ulcer disease, malabsorption, steatorrhea, and liver enlargement commonly present when mast cell infiltration occurs in the intestine or the liver in aggressive systemic mastocytosis (ASM).

- Lymphoid tissues and spleen — The lymph nodes and spleen commonly have infiltrates in all types of systemic mastocytosis.

- Central and peripheral lymphadenopathy occurs in 20 to 60 percent of patients with indolent systemic mastocytosis (ISM) and a higher proportion in those with systemic mastocytosis with an associated hematologic neoplasm (SM-AHN), ASM, and mast cell leukemia (MCL).

- Splenomegaly can present in 50 percent of patients with ISM and over 70 percent of those with SM-AHN, ASM, and MCL.