The preoperative evaluation focuses on the suspected diagnosis. Personal factors (smoking, pre-existing comorbidities), performance status evaluation, clinical examination, blood test, imaging, bronchoscopy, and cardiac risk evaluation are the cornerstone of the initial assessment. In lung cancer, preoperative staging protocol must take place. Highlights are positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT) and invasive mediastinal staging (IMS).

With a defined diagnosis with an established need for lobectomy, a preoperative assessment for a thoracic surgery patient is necessary. The ACCP, BTS (British Thoracic Society), and ERS/ESTS (European Respiratory Society/European Society of Thoracic Surgery) have proposed different preoperative assessment criteria. Highlights are mortality risk and respiratory function.

**Mortality Risk**

Thoracoscope, ESTS model, VA (veterans affair) model, ACS-NSQIP (The ACS National Surgical Quality Improvement Program) scales have been recommended to stratify the risk of mortality and morbidity in thoracic surgery patients.

**Respiratory Function**

Essential tools for respiratory function evaluation are spirometry, DLCO (diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide), V/Q (ventilation/perfusion), scintigraphy scan, cardiopulmonary exercise test, low technology exercise tests, and arterial blood gas. Respiratory function assessment is crucial in determining whether the patient will tolerate lung resection. ERS/ESTS and ACCP guidelines have been performed algorithms for this purpose. BTS (British Thoracic Society) guidelines recommend absolute preoperative FEV1 of 1.5 L, and ACCP suggests greater than 60% (DLCO or FEV1) of the percentage of predicted postoperative values without high cardiac risk to perform lobectomy.

**Anesthesia Lung Isolation**

Double-lumen endotracheal tubes and bronchial blockers are the standards of care in anatomical lung resections because these devices facilitate hilar dissection.