The classic presentation of cholesteatoma is painless otorrhea. Hearing loss is a common symptom of cholesteatoma. In the presence of ossicular damage, the hearing loss is often permanent and severe. Other symptoms include dizziness.

History and physical exam are both crucial in the timely diagnosis of acquired cholesteatoma. In addition to the fundamental history of present illness questions, providers should ask appropriate questions in basic patient-friendly terms and document the patient’s responses. Some common questions would include: when did you first notice you had an ear problem, was it one side or both sides, have you been diagnosed with ear infections, have you received antibiotics by mouth or ear drops, if so which kinds of antibiotics? Recurrent infections or chronic drainage should raise suspicions. A review of systems questions includes subjective hearing loss, tinnitus, otorrhea, otalgia, ear pressure, and vertigo. Have you seen other doctors for this problem and have you had any imaging studies, if so where were they performed. It is often helpful to review the imaging before seeing the patient; this can assist in identifying the appropriate questions to ask. Patients often present complaining of foul-smelling discharge, hearing loss, and pain that has lasted for months to years.

The physical exam should include a full head and neck exam including inspection of the head, eyes, nose, oral cavity, oropharynx, neck and most importantly ears. Physical examination of the ear requires patience and practice, and children often need to be intentionally positioned by sitting on their parent's laps. Cholesteatomas are largely a visible diagnosis, and to visualize the middle ear cholesteatoma, providers must develop otoscopic examination skills. A microscope may also be useful. Collections of white keratinaceous debris can often be seen in the posterosuperior tympanic membrane quadrant.