Staphylococcal folliculitis - most simple cases of staph folliculitis with few pustules will resolve spontaneously within a few days. However, for more extensive disease, topical antibiotics can be an option. First-line agents typically include topical mupirocin and clindamycin. Should these prove ineffective or should the patient present with deeper folliculitis such as furunculosis and carbunculosis or more extensive involvement of the skin, then oral antibiotics such as cephalexin and dicloxacillin are options.

Gram-negative folliculitis - Much in the same way as staph folliculitis, simple cases will generally resolve spontaneously after 7 to 10 days with good skin hygiene. In certain cases where this is seen secondary to prolonged antibiotic use, oral antibiotic treatment that covers for pseudomonas are possible choices including ampicillin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and ciprofloxacin all being first-line agents.

Pityrosporum Folliculitis - systemic therapy with oral antifungal agents, is often the treatment of choice for this condition. Although topical antifungals are an option, the belief is that systemic therapy can’t eliminate the Malassezia fungus deeper within the follicle than can topical therapies. Itraconazole and fluconazole are the two treatments of choice for this condition. Although there is more evidence for the effectiveness of itraconazole for treating this condition, fluconazole is often the treatment of choice secondary to its better side effect profile.

Viral folliculitis - folliculitis secondary to infection with herpes simplex virus may receive treatment in the same way as a normal outbreak of herpes with oral acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir. In the same way, folliculitis secondary to molluscum contagiosum infection may be treated the same as an outbreak of molluscum with either curettage or cryotherapy. Cantharidin is a topical agent that can be used to treat molluscum folliculitis. However, this drug is not available in the United States.

Demodex Folliculitis – anti-parasitic agents, are the treatment of choice for this particular brand of folliculitis. Treatments such as topical permethrin as well as oral ivermectin and oral metronidazole are therapeutic options. One study found that dual therapy with oral ivermectin/oral metronidazole could be more effective than monotherapy of either drug alone. Although, topical permethrin 5% cream is usually the initial treatment of choice.

Eosinophilic folliculitis - in general, the first-line treatment for this condition is antiretroviral therapy to treat the patient’s underlying HIV. In the vast majority of patients, treatment of the underlying HIV which show improvement or even resolution of this condition. Although some patients may have a flare of this condition during the first six months after ART initiation. In these cases, patients may be treated with optional therapies for a few weeks to months which include topical corticosteroids, antihistamines, phototherapy, and even itraconazole or isotretinoin.