Both the Babinski and Chaddock reflex test the integrity of the CST. When a lesion occurs anywhere along this CST, the examiner may obtain a positive reflex

Infants have an incompletely myelinated CST, so a positive Babinski or Chaddock reflex in the absence of other neurological deficits is considered benign up to 2 years of age

In comatose patients, one may see a triple flexion response. In this case, one observes dorsiflexion of the big toe, the fanning of the other toes, dorsiflexion of the foot, as well as knee and hip flexion. This represents profound dysfunction of the CST, with the spread of the reflex to the L3 and L2 myotomes. Care must be made to distinguish this from a withdrawal response. The triple flexion response is very stereotyped whereas the withdrawal response varies with each stimulation.

The advantage of Chaddock reflex over the Babinski reflex is that it may minimize withdrawal due to plantar stimulation. Because the CST has a long course, the presence or absence of these reflexes is useful in determining the health of the central nervous system.

Alternative methods for eliciting this response have been developed. In each case, the examiner watches for an upward deviation of the big toe and fanning of the other toes. Below are some of the alternative methods:

- Gordon sign: The examiner squeezes the calf muscle.

- Oppenheim sign: The examiner, applying pressure to the medial side of the tibia.

- Stransky sign: The examiner vigorously abducting and suddenly releasing the little toe.

- Schaeffer sign: The examiner squeezes the Achilles tendon.

- Moniz sign: The examiner applies pressure to plantarflex the ankle.

- Gonda sign: The examiner flexes and suddenly releases the fourth toe.

- Throckmorton reflex: The examiner percusses over the metatarsophalangeal joint of the big toe.

- Bing sign: The examiner applies multiple pinpricks on the dorsum of the foot.

- Cornell sign: The examiner scratches along the inner side of the extensor hallucis longus tendon.