Treatment for tarantula bites or stings from their urticating hairs is mostly conservative and supportive.

**Skin**

Pain can be treated with ice and analgesics. If the exposure occurred on a limb, elevating the limb can sometimes help. Itching can be treated with topical steroids, systemic antihistamines, or a combination of the two. Removal of urticating hairs using tape has been reported to reduce pruritus. Multiple applications of the tape can sometimes be necessary. Perform local wound care, and be sure to provide tetanus prophylaxis if necessary. Envenomations should be monitored for signs of secondary infection, but antibiotics are not routinely recommended for tarantula bites or hair exposure.

**Respiratory**

Respiratory complaints should be treated with systemic antihistamines, bronchodilators, and corticosteroids. If symptoms progress to becoming severe, early airway management and pulmonary consultation are prudent.

**Ocular**

An application of an eye shield can help prevent the patient from inadvertently rubbing the affected eye, which can worsen the damage. Ocular involvement, whether suspected or confirmed by slit lamp, should prompt an ophthalmology consultation as early removal of urticating hairs can reduce long-term complications, including ophthalmia nodosa. Topical steroids have been shown to reduce symptoms and aid in the resorption of hair without complication.

**Systemic**

In the rare case of anaphylaxis, treat as recommended for anaphylaxis of any etiologies.