Abandonment is considered a breach of duty and is defined as unilateral termination of the physician-patient relationship without providing adequate notice for the patient to obtain substitute medical care. The patient-physician relationship must have been established for abandonment to occur. This patient-physician relationship becomes established when a physician affirmatively acts in a patient’s care through the patient's diagnosis and/or treatment. This relationship is also established if the physician agrees to diagnose and/or treat the patient. A physician-patient relationship is often created when the “professional services of a physician are rendered to and accepted by another person for the purposes of medical or surgical treatment,” which was further established by the Cygan v. Kaleida Health court case in 2008.

There are certain circumstances in which a patient-physician relationship may be implied.

- When a physician provides acute care in an emergency setting or provides care at the request of the patient’s regular physician.

- When a physician provides medical care for a prisoner under a court order or a physician provides the court-initiated treatment.

- When a physician examines a patient in the context of an independent medical examination.

Furthermore, there is a court case in 2015 where Pizzo-Juliano vs. Southside Hospital upheld that a physician-patient relationship can be implied between an on-call physician and patients whom the on-call physician has never once met in the past. In this particular case, a two-year-old boy was bit by a dog and was brought to the Southside Hospital emergency room. At this time, the hospital's on-call plastic surgeon was not available. The on-call plastic surgeon determined that a physician assistant would suture the young boy's facial laceration. This procedure led to the patient's facial scarring, pain, and suffering, and subsequently, this patient sued the plastic surgeon for malpractice. The plastic surgeon stated that a physician-patient relationship was not established because he never examined or treated him before.

To avoid these implied relationships, at initial evaluation, a physician can provide a written statement to the patient stating that the initial visit does not guarantee entry into the physician's practice. The written statement may state that the visit is only for evaluation purposes and does not establish a physician-patient relationship. Additionally, when a physician works in limited examination settings such as at community exercising events, at health fairs, or on websites (providing informal health advice), a physician can provide a disclaimer that an examination or the information provided does not establish a physician-patient relationship.