The prevalence of ocular manifestations in patients with COVID-19 ranges from 2% to 32%.

**Conjunctiva**

Patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 can present with acute conjunctivitis symptoms, including eye redness, ocular irritation, eye soreness, foreign body sensation, tearing, mucoid discharge, eyelid swelling, congestion and chemosis. These symptoms have more commonly affected patients with severe systemic symptoms of COVID-19, though they can rarely present as an initial manifestation of the disease.

Examination findings include those consistent with mild follicular conjunctivitis, including unilateral or bilateral bulbar conjunctiva injection, follicular reaction of the palpebral conjunctiva, watery discharge, and mild eyelid edema. Bilateral chemosis alone may represent third-spacing in a critically ill patient rather than a true ocular manifestation of the virus. A case report published by Cheema et al. described the first case of keratoconjunctivitis as the presenting manifestation of COVID-19 in North America.

Navel et al. observed a case of severe hemorrhagic conjunctivitis and pseudomembrane formation in a patient with onset 19 days after the beginning of systemic symptoms and 11 days after admission to the intensive care unit.

We saw a 46-year-old male with mild respiratory symptoms and a positive nasopharyngeal test for COVID-19. Five days after the positive test, he developed a hemorrhagic bilateral conjunctivitis with pseudomembrane formation and chemosis. The left eye had been removed some years previously for melanoma. The conjunctival of the socket showed the same hemorrhagic conjunctivitis with chemosis and pseudomembrane formation. He was treated empirically with topical antibiotics and his symptoms resolved in four weeks. He did not develop any other symptoms of COVID-19.

It should be noted that in pediatric patients, COVID-19 has been strongly associated with the Kawasaki-like illness known as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C). While there have been several ocular manifestations reported in this syndrome (papilledema, iritis, keratitis), the most common ocular manifestation has been conjunctivitis.

**Sclera/Episclera**

There have been at least two reported cases of episcleritis onset in the setting of COVID-19 infection. Otaif et al. described a 29-year-old male with unilateral episcleritis as the initial presenting symptom of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and Mangana et al. observed nodular episcleritis in a 31-year-old female.

Feizi et al. reported two cases of anterior scleritis in patients with COVID-19.

**Anterior Chamber**

Beyond the ocular surface, acute anterior uveitis has also been reported both in isolation and in association with COVID-19 related multi-system inflammatory disease.

**Retina and Choroid**

Posterior segment diseases have also been suspected to be associated with COVID-19 infection. These have varied between vascular, inflammatory, and neuronal etiologies. Both ACE-2 and TMPRSS2 are highly expressed in the human retina, and a recent case series of 3 patients discovered S and N COVID-19 proteins by immunofluorescence microscopy within retinal vascular endothelial cells, presumably containing viral particles.

Both central retinal vein and artery occlusions have been reported in patients without classic systemic vascular risk factors. The hypothesized mechanism includes a complement-induced prothrombic and inflammatory state induced by the virus resulting in endothelial damage and microangiopathic injury. A striking example was reported by Walinjkar et al. with a central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) in a 17-year-old female with COVID-19.

Acute macular neuroretinopathy (AMN) and paracentral acute middle maculopathy (PAMM), conditions in which there is ischemia to the deep retinal capillary plexus, have also been observed with COVID, marked by hyperreflective changes at the level of the outer plexiform and inner nuclear layers.

There have been two published case reports on Purtscher-like retinopathy observed in patients with COVID-19. Bottini et al. described a 59-year-old male who presented with multiple bilateral cotton wool spots localized to the posterior pole after a month-long hospitalization for COVID-19 pneumonia associated with multiorgan failure and severe coagulopathy.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed subclinical hyperreflective lesions at the level of the inner plexiform and ganglion cell layers in 12 adults examined after systemic disease onset; cotton wool spots and microhemorrhages were found on dilated fundus examinations in 4 of these patients.

Various forms of posterior uveitis have been observed following either acute COVID-19 infection or the COVID vaccine. Souza et al. reported a case of unilateral multifocal choroiditis, though it is noted that the temporal relationship of the viral infection could be attributed to chance alone.

Immune dysregulation due to COVID-19 may contribute to the reactivation of latent herpervirus leading to acute retinal necrosis. This has been reported in two consecutive patients by Soni et al.

Animal model studies have also shown the involvement of the retina with retinal vasculitis

**Optic Nerve**

A wide variety of neuro-ophthalmologic manifestations have also been found in association with COVID-19, mostly related to demyelinating disease. While the mechanism of these manifestations is unknown, hypotheses include direct neuronal invasion, endothelial cell dysfunction leading to ischemia and coagulopathy, or a widespread inflammatory "cytokine storm" induced by the virus.

A case of multiple sclerosis following COVID-19 infection was reported by Palao et al. in a 24-year-old patient who presented with right optic neuritis; MRI demonstrated right optic nerve inflammation and supratentorial periventricular demyelinating lesions.

Ophthalmologists may also be called to evaluate for papilledema in SARS-CoV-2 infected patients, as there have been cases of elevated intracranial pressure, both due to widespread inflammation and dural venous sinus thrombosis.

**Extraocular Motility, Cranial Nerves**

Cranial nerve III, IV, and VI palsies associated with COVID-19 have been reported in the literature within a few days of fever and cough onset, most without remarkable radiological features.

Ocular myasthenia gravis has been described as a post-infectious sequela of COVID-19, with authors proposing that antibodies directed against SARS-CoV-2 proteins may cross-react with acetylcholine receptors and similar components at the neuromuscular junction.

**Pupils**

Pupillary changes have also been observed. Several groups have described patients with mydriasis and cholinergic super-sensitivity, indicative of tonic pupils and post-ganglionic parasympathetic pupillary nerve fiber damage.

**Nystagmus**

Oscillopsia has been reported in several cases of COVID-19 with neurologic involvement. Malayala described a 20-year-old woman who presented with intractable vertigo, nausea, and vomiting with a presumed diagnosis of viral-induced vestibular neuritis secondary to COVID-19.

**Visual Cortex**

Perhaps the most devastating neuro-ophthalmic complication of severe COVID-19 infection is acute stroke affecting the posterior visual pathways. The incidence of stroke in these patients has been found to be 7.6 times higher than that of patients with influenza and has been occurring in a far younger than average patient population without classic vascular risk factors.

**Orbit and Ocular Adnexa**

While oculoplastic and orbital manifestations of COVID-19 are uncommon, there is growing evidence to link inflammatory and infectious orbital disease to the virus. There have been two reported cases of sinusitis, orbital cellulitis, and intracranial abnormalities in adolescents with COVID-19.Streptococcus constellatus and Peptonipihilus indolicus, bacteria normally absent in the orbit or upper respiratory mucosa.

There have been a growing number of reports of acute invasive fungal rhino-orbital mucormycosis co-infection with COVID-19. These opportunistic pathogens thrive in the hypoxic respiratory environment induced by SARS-CoV-2, as well as an immunocompromised state induced by high-dose steroids and immunosuppressive therapies. In patients with poorly controlled diabetes, particularly those with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), the risk is further increased.

There have also been reports of MRI-proven orbital myositis in two separate COVID-19 patients in the absence of concomitant bacterial infection.

Similar processes have been proposed by Diaz et al., who reported a case of acute dacryoadenitis in a 22-year-old male with positive SARS-CoV-2 antibodies who developed partial ophthalmoplegia.

**Lacrimal System**

Epiphora has been described as an initial finding in patients with COVID-19.

**Manifestations in Newborn Infants**

There have been recent data to support frequent ocular manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection in newborn infants. In a study by Perez-Chimal et al. in Mexico, 15 infants were identified with positive RT-PCR nasopharyngeal swabs. All of these newborns exhibited ocular manifestations, most commonly periorbital edema (100%), followed by chemosis and hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (73%) and ciliary injection (53%). Unique findings included 6 infants (40%) with corneal edema, 1 with rubeosis and posterior synechiae, and posterior segment manifestations including retinopathy of prematurity in 3 (20%) infants.