Argatroban is a synthetic compound based on the structure of L- arginine. It is a direct thrombin inhibitor that binds reversibly to the active site of thrombin and inhibits its downstream action. In contrast, indirect thrombin inhibitors like heparin exert their anticoagulant effect via activation of antithrombin.

Thrombin (clotting factor IIa) is a serine protease that has a central role in coagulation. It is the final enzyme in the coagulation cascade that, upon activation from prothrombin, converts fibrinogen to fibrin, activates procoagulant factors V, VIII, XI, and XIII, and activates platelets.

Univalent DTIs like argatroban and melagatran bind only at the active site of thrombin, whereas bivalent DTI like hirudin and bivalirudin bind to two sites of thrombin: the active site and exosite I, a positively charged region in the thrombin molecule, which is also a recognition site for many physiologic substrates like fibrinogen, protein C, factor V and thrombomodulin (thrombin receptor in endothelial cells).

Unlike heparin, which acts only on soluble thrombin, argatroban acts on both soluble and clot-bound thrombin because of its low molecular weight. It shows linear pharmacokinetic properties after starting an intravenous infusion. The drug concentration and anticoagulant effects attain steady-state levels 1 to 3 hours after the start of infusion. Since it acts on the final step of coagulation, most of the parameters of coagulation, e.g., partial thromboplastin time (PTT), activated clotting time (ACT), prothrombin time (PT), the international normalized ratio(INR), and thrombin time (TT) are prolonged rapidly and in a dose-dependent manner. The elimination half-life of argatroban is 39 to 51 minutes. This short half-life is desirable, given the risk of potential bleeding and lack of a specific antidote. Anticoagulant effects gradually decline and reach the pretreatment level within 2 to 4 hours after stopping the infusion. However, in patients with impaired hepatic function, it may take 6 to 20 hours for its effects to wear off.

Argatroban is metabolized primarily by hydroxylation and aromatization via cytochrome P450 enzymes and excreted mainly via feces. However, significant drug interactions have not occurred with CYP3A4/5 inhibitors like erythromycin, digoxin, and acetaminophen.

Often in patients with HIT, long-term anticoagulation with oral warfarin is needed. When transitioning from argatroban to warfarin, INR may be elevated due to the additive effects of both drugs. In the absence of clear guidelines, the supratherapeutic level of INR>5 during such transition and overlap has no association with increased risk of bleeding.