A definitive procedure is defined as one aimed at providing long-term relief from symptoms associated with pleural effusion.

**Thoracentesis**

Incidence of recurrence after a single procedure has been identified as 4.2 days, with a rate of recurrence approaching 98 percent 30 days within the period of completion of the procedure. A thoracentesis does not aim to prevent fluid re-accumulation or allow continued drainage. Thoracentesis confirms the presence of fluid, but can also be used to confirm lung re-expansion following pleural fluid drainage.

Tension pneumothorax which may also be associated with hemodynamic compromise, may also be seen with the performance of thoracentesis in those receiving positive pressure ventilation.

**Anatomical Localization**

The normal site for the aspiration of pleural fluid is the seventh intercostal space in the posterior axillary line (near the tip of the scapula).

**Procedure**

While adults may undergo the procedure in the upright, seated, or lateral position, pediatric patients may be held in the burping position by an assistant.

The depth of insertion where access to the fluid is first obtained should be noted, and an over-the-needle catheter is inserted for atraumatic removal of the fluid. Attachment of a three-way stopcock along with tubing may facilitate the drainage of large volumes of fluid.

Large volume thoracentesis has been defined as the removal of more than one liter of pleural fluid.

Repeat thoracentesis has been advocated in patients with a slower accumulation of fluid, expected to have resolution with systemic therapies, advanced disease, poor performance status, and limited life expectancy. Patients undergoing systemic treatment for the underlying malignancy, which might be thought to prevent the re-accumulation of fluid (such as those with small cell lung cancer, lymphoma, or EGFR mutated adenocarcinoma), may also be potential candidates for undergoing repeated thoracentesis.

A delay in performing pleurodesis may also be associated with extensive disease (signifying an increased pleural tumor burden), which might decrease the effectiveness of pleurodesis, and development of a trapped lung, which might act as a contraindication to pleurodesis.

While there is consensus that volumes in excess of 1.5 liters are associated with the development of re-expansion pulmonary edema, some groups advocate the removal of 1200 to 1800 ml of pleural fluid safely within a single setting.

**Complications**

While pneumothorax remains a real concern, the development of pain, shortness of breath, and vasovagal syncope have also been noted

**Re-expansion Pulmonary Edema**

Pinault, in 1853, was the first to describe the occurrence of edema following thoracentesis.

Among measures that have been shown to prevent the development of this phenomenon, avoidance of the application of negative intrapleural pressures and prevention of lung collapse for prolonged periods has been afforded foremost importance.

Untreated pulmonary edema may be associated with a poorer outcome and has been estimated to be potentially lethal in 20 percent of cases.

Patchy ground-glass opacities, consolidation, interlobar septal thickening, and intralobular interstitial thickening have been described on high-resolution computed tomography of the chest.

**Chemical Pleurodesis**

Lucius Splengler, in 1901 was the first to perform chemical pleurodesis, which involves obliteration of the pleural space with the creation of an artificial symphysis between the visceral and parietal pleura. Inflammatory reaction within the pleural space leads to the activation of the coagulation cascade with the formation of fibrogenic cytokines that promotes the development of pleurodesis by the formation of collagen.

Active pleurodesis can be achieved with the creation of a direct injury to the pleura with mechanical or physical methods such as mechanical injury or abrasion to the pleura during video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery or the formation of intrapleural adhesions with the use of chemical agents such as talc, bleomycin, povidone-iodine, and Corynebacterium parvum. Antibiotics (Tetracycline, doxycycline, erythromycin, minocycline) as well as antiseptics (silver nitrate, iodopovidine), chemotherapeutic agents (mitomycin, bleomycin, cytarabine, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone), microorganisms (Corynebacterium parvum, Streptococcus pyogenes (OK432), and autologous blood have been used for performing chemical pleurodesis. Both pleural catheters, as well as medical thoracoscopy, have been used to introduce sclerosing agents into the pleural cavity. Life expectancy and patient factors play a crucial role in determining acceptability to the procedure.

Two major contraindications to pleurodesis include the presence of a non-re-expanded or trapped lung and loculated pleural effusion. The type of cancer, the extent of pleural involvement, and the type of sclerosant used for pleurodesis determine the degree of effectiveness of pleurodesis.

**Procedure Details**

Pleurodesis can be performed through a 28-32 French gauge chest tube or a pigtail catheter in a premedicated patient (provided adequate analgesia).

Specific risks of bleeding, pain, procedure failure rates (approaching 20 percent) should be explained to the patient.

Flushing of the catheter with normal saline should be performed after the installation of the slurry.

Respiratory rate, temperature, pain intensity, pulse rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure, and characteristics of the fluid drained should be monitored. A post-procedure chest radiograph should be performed to rule out pneumothorax and confirm the eradication of pleural fluid. Drain or catheter may be removed after 24 to 48 hours of sclerosant administration and following confirmation of a normal chest radiograph, decrease in the amount of pleural fluid drainage to less than 100 ml, and absence of air leak.

Patients in the recently concluded TAPPS trial were discharged following a pleurodesis procedure (talc slurry or thoracoscopic talc insufflation) when the total pleural fluid drain output was lesser than 250 ml per day.

Efficacy of pleurodesis has been defined as complete response with an absence of pleural fluid re-accumulation, partial with residual pleural fluid or fluid re-accumulation which remained asymptomatic and did not require a repeat drainage procedure, and failure where additional procedures have been required, up to six months (follow up period depends upon the patient's survival).

Contraindications to the performance of talc pleurodesis in recurrent pleural effusion may include pregnancy, previous intrapleural procedures or history of irradiation to the hemithorax, changes in systemic therapy in the previous two months, chylous or bilateral pleural effusions.

Medical grade talc has been shown to activate pleural mesothelial cells to produce significantly higher levels of basic fibroblast growth factor.

Risk factors for a failed pleurodesis include a history of prior irradiation and a chest tube in place for more than ten days.

No differences between the two procedures of talc installation (thoracoscopy guided Tac insufflation and bedside chest drain associated Talc slurry) with respect to the primary outcome indicator of Pleurodesis failure post 90 days of randomization have been reported in the recently concluded TAPPS trial.

**Indwelling Pleural Catheter**

Placement of indwelling pleural catheters is considered a safe and efficient method for drainage of pleural effusions in those with smaller or loculated recurrent pleural collections.

Bertolaccini et al. point out the lower rate of complications and advocate early implantation of indwelling pleural catheters to repeated needle thoracentesis.

**Comparison of Various Modalities of Treatment**

According to the results of a meta-analysis performed by Sivakumar et al., comparing patient-related outcomes with thoracoscopic talc insufflation, talc slurry, and indwelling pleural catheters, all procedures were shown to have a comparable effect upon the improvement in health-related quality of life parameters over the course of 12 weeks.

Successful outpatient rapid pleurodesis has been demonstrated using thoracoscopy and talc slurry with the insertion of a tunneled pleural catheter in the same setting.et al. was also able to demonstrate the efficacy of the indwelling pleural catheter as a cost-effective treatment method.et al.

The results of the ongoing SWIFT trial are expected to provide further insight into the efficacy and safety profile of drug-eluting pleural catheters. The sclerosant used in these trials consists of a slow-release coating of silver nitrate.

This network meta-analysis supports the use of Bedside graded talc as the sclerosant of choice, given the years of experience with the use of this modality.

**Special Scenarios**

**Trapped Lung**

Trapped lung is used to describe an advanced state of lung pathology in a patient with a history of malignant pleural effusion, which is characterized by the absence of the lung to fully expand, the failure of the visceral pleura to appose to the parietal pleura with the persistence of a residual hollow cavity.

Trapped lung may result from pleural thickening, which limits the movement of the visceral pleura, which may precede the development of a fibrinous exudate around the lung.

The radiological finding of pneumothorax ex vacuo, which has been characterized by the failure of the lung to expand after drainage of pleural fluid, might represent a manifestation of trapped lung. Thoracic ultrasonography might be useful in differentiating between pleural thickening, pleural fluid, and consolidation.

All cases of non-expandable lung do not meet the criteria for a trapped lung.

Pleural fluid elastance is measured by the decrease in pleural fluid pressures in cm of water after removing 500 ml of fluid by thoracentesis.

**Persistent Air Leaks**

The possibility of developing pneumothorax after ultrasound-guided thoracentesis is small (3 to 4 percent) but significant.

Wait and watch/ expectant management - The American College of Chest Physicians has advised a period of conservative management for four days, during which the fistulous communication is expected to close on its own.

**Septated Pleural Effusion**

Fibrin-rich effusion fluids can lead to the development of pockets within the effusion.et al.

There is a need to differentiate septations from vascularized adhesions which might develop when fibrinous septations become infiltrated with fibroblasts and undergo organization with the laying down of collagen fibrils.

Significant adhesions may represent a potential cause of failure to drain an effusion effectively.

TIME 3 trial demonstrated no clinically significant improvement in dyspnea or time to pleurodesis failure rates over one year with intrapleural streptokinase instillation in non-draining malignant septated pleural effusions.

Another concern with the use of fibrinolytics remains the possibility of hemorrhage into the pleural fluid, which has been attributed to the presence of friable vessels within the hemorrhagic fluid due to neo-angiogenesis.

**Malignant Eosinophilic Pleural Effusion**

MEPE has been defined by the presence of more than 10 percent of eosinophils in the differential white blood cell count in the first thoracentesis, and the presence of exudative effusion along with histological confirmation of malignancy.

The formation of MEPE involves two steps, accumulation and migration.

Though cancer-directed therapies have been shown to control pleural fluid formation in Small cell lung cancer, strategies that positively impact survival are yet to be developed.

**Hemorrhagic Malignant Pleural Effusion**

This occurs with a frequency of 47 to 50 percent. HMPE is usually characterized by the presence of a pronounced degree of dyspnea, higher incidence of chest pain, deterioration in general physical condition, co-occurrence with large effusion, and thickening with parietal pleural effusion.

**Palliative Symptom Directed Management of Dyspnea in Advanced Cancer**

Dyspnea has been defined as a subjective experience of breathing discomfort that consists of qualitatively distinct sensations that vary in intensity.

The feeling of breathlessness in advanced cancer has been explained by a mismatch between afferent sensory information sent by the afferent receptors and the Respiratory motor command from the cortex and brainstem.

Patient-reported outcomes are considered the gold standard in the assessment of breathlessness.

Management of chronic breathlessness syndrome usually requires specialist palliative medicine input. Palliative interventions, which may include pharmacological and non-pharmacological management, are provided through a series of visits across many settings.

Supplemental oxygen (Palliative oxygen therapy) is indicated in patients with chronic severe hypoxemia (partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) less than 7.3kPa, corresponding to a SpO2 >88%).

The use of non-invasive ventilation may improve both oxygenation and hypoventilation and support chest wall muscles.

**Caregiver Distress**

A substantial body of data demonstrates that carers of someone suffering from chronic breathlessness experience profound anxiety, isolation, exhaustion, and poor sleep.

The phenomenon of compassion fatigue (Burnout and secondary traumatic stress) in healthcare professionals involved in caring for patients with terminal life-limiting illnesses also needs to be recognized.