Depression in old age is the result of a large number of factors. These include biological, psychological, social, spiritual, and personality factors.

Biological factors—The neurotransmitter, which is typically associated with depression, is serotonin. The misregulation of other neurohormonal pathways also accompanies depression, for example, the adrenocorticotrophic hormone (pituitary)/cortisol (adrenal gland) pathway. Norepinephrine and dopamine systems may also be misregulated.

Genetic susceptibility is less likely in the elderly suffering from depression as compared to early-onset depression though genetic markers like E4 allele of apolipoprotein E and C677T mutation in MTHFR (methylene tetrahydrofuran reductase) enzyme have presented in some patients with late-onset depression.

Psychological and Social factors— Research has found that people who are emotionally abused and neglected during their childhood are more prone to developing depression later in their lifetime. Depressed elderly are also more likely to get affected by negative life events as compared to their healthy counterparts due to cognitive distortions. Inactivity in old age also contributes to depression. People in old age are bound to stay home after retirement. They are less involved in outdoor activities, which eventually leads to the narrowing of their social network, resulting in depression. This scenario also adds to the development of metabolic syndrome, leading to increased cortisol and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal dysregulation, another major reason for the development of depression.

Spiritual and Personality factors— Older people who practice and believe in religion are less susceptible to developing depression. Personality traits play an important role in early-onset depression, although researchers have found that people with anxious-avoidant and dependent personality disorders are more prone to develop depression later in their life especially when they lose the support of the significant other in an adverse life event.