An integrated care approach by interprofessional health care professionals is needed to ensure optimal care to patients with myoclonic epilepsy of infancy. The primary care providers, including primary care pediatricians and nurse practitioners, should have a high index of suspicion to identify patients with MEI early and rule out other forms of myoclonic epilepsy, thereby avoiding unnecessary work-up.

The patient with MEI should have structured long-term follow-up with the primary care clinicians and neurologist even after the seizure remits due to the risk of seizure recurrence in adulthood and neuropsychiatric deficits. Nurses and nurse practitioners can educate parents or caretakers on seizure safety precautions, the need for frequent follow-up, and ASD compliance. In addition, the pharmacists can educate the family on the importance of compliance and possible adverse effects of medications and communicate these findings to the primary care physicians if they occur. Pharmacists also play a role in long-term follow-up care, including drug level monitoring, weaning AED, and assessing drug-drug interactions. Nurses can answer patient questions, serve as a liaison to the clinician, and review dosing and medication administration.

Social workers help in identifying and rectifying the social barriers to optimal health care and inform the providers. Psychologists can evaluate and address cognitive and learning disabilities and appropriate strategies, including individualized education programs in school (IEP).

In summary, the treatment and management of patients with myoclonic epilepsy of infancy involve an interprofessional team that includes specialists, clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, other allied health providers, and the patient's parents, all collaborating to achieve optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]