Galeazzi injuries are associated with very high morbidity and are best managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes an orthopedic surgeon, emergency department physician, therapist, orthopedic nurse and the radiologist. Galeazzi fractures are easily missed, particularly the DRUJ dislocation, as they can be difficult to identify on radiographs. When patients present with forearm and elbow fractures, an orthopedic consult should be made.

The complexity of Galeazzi fractures leads to a variety of outcomes. It is estimated that the overall complication rates of Galeazzi fractures are close to 40%. Children usually fare better than their adult counterparts. As time passes without the correct identified diagnosis, the more difficult it becomes to manage the injury, and the patient is more likely to have significant morbidity.

Forearm midshaft fractures have malunion or nonunion occurring in approximately 2% to 10% of cases, which is higher than the average forearm fracture nonunion rate (2%). Other notable complications include acute compartment syndrome (pre- and post-surgical), radioulnar synostosis (1% to 6%), elbow stiffness from protracted immobilization (adults), myositis ossificans, ulnohumeral osteoarthritis, and wound infections (0% to 3%).

Muscle-tendon entrapment may occur with significant injuries. The extensor carpi ulnaris, extensor digiti minimi, and flexor pollicis longus tendons are the most common to become entrapped with Galeazzi fractures. They can make reduction difficult and may require surgical repair to avoid chronic instability.

Branches of the radial nerve are the most common neurovascular structures to get injured. This is usually due to laceration of the radial sensory nerves during a volar surgical approach. The most common associated motor deficit is from injury to the posterior interosseous nerve, which can get damaged during a dorsal surgical approach. Transient injury to the anterior osseous nerve branch of the median nerve has been reported. Ulnar nerve injuries are rare. Nerve injuries rarely require treatment, and the majority of patients have complete resolution of symptoms in 9 to 12 weeks.