Extraction of dental roots requires many of the same surgical instruments in conventional exodontia. The typical surgical setup usually includes a combination of the following:

- Elevators

- Luxators

- Forceps

- Root tip picks

- Retractors

- Curets

- Dental explorers

- Dental mirrors

- Scissors

- Scalpels

- Hemostats

- Periodontal Probes

- Rongeurs

- Bone files

- Local anesthetic needles and syringes

- Irrigation needles and syringes

- Local anesthetic

- Sterile gauze

- Sutures

- Surgical handpiece

- Surgical bur

- Sterile saline

- Sterile water

- Bite block

Optimal lighting is critical in dental surgery, especially when extracting roots. The operatory and the surgical site should be well-lit for adequate visualization during the procedure. Though not required, many dentists and surgeons prefer to wear some form of magnification, such as surgical loupes.

In addition, surgical headlamps are often worn and can improve the operator's field visibility during surgery. Every surgical team member must don proper personal protective equipment (PPE) and ensure the patient has been adequately prepped and draped. Over the years, various adjuncts to the traditional exodontia armamentarium have been developed to facilitate root extraction. Depending on the technique employed when extracting root segments, one can use endodontic files, periotomes, luxators, a vertical extraction system, and Piezosurgery to facilitate extraction.

Appropriate instrumentation best facilitates predictable outcomes in oral surgery. This is particularly true when extracting retained roots.