**Supportive Treatment of Cardiac Involvement**

**Management of Heart Failure**

Dietary sodium restriction and diuretic use are essential to maintain euvolemia in ATTR-CM patients. Achieving and maintaining euvolemia is often challenging in these patients due to the small LV cavity and autonomic dysfunction. Loop diuretics with higher oral bioavailability (e.g., torsemide and bumetanide) are often preferred in combination with aldosterone receptor blockers. Beta-blockers and ACE, ARBs, or angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors (ARNi) therapies are usually not well tolerated because of ensuing hypotension due to the reasons mentioned above. With the progression of ATTR-CM and reduction of LV cavity size, stroke volume and cardiac output reduce, resulting in a reduction in renal perfusion, causing the cardio-renal syndrome.

**Management of Arrhythmias**

ATTR-CM patients have a narrow scope of heart rate variability. Extreme tachycardia and bradycardia are poorly tolerated due to the small LV cavity, high-grade diastolic dysfunction, and low stroke volume. Similarly, atrial contraction (often called "atrial kick") is crucial in ventricular filling. Therefore rhythm control is the preferred strategy for managing atrial fibrillation. Rhythm control can be achieved by antiarrhythmics or by catheter ablation. Amiodarone is the preferred agent when using antiarrhythmics due to its better safety profile when dealing with cardiomyopathy and some clinical data demonstrating its safety in ATTR-CM.

A significant percentage of ATTR-CM patients develop conduction system disease, eventually requiring permanent pacemaker support.

**Therapies Targeting Transthyretin**

At present, three major pharmacological strategies are being studied for specifically targeting ATTR-CM.

Patisiran

Inotersen

Tafamidis

Diflusinal

Doxycycline and tauroursodeoxycholic acid (used in combination)

The first two strategies described in the table above have a few pharmacological agents approved for clinical use by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The third strategy of using doxycycline with tauroursodeoxycholic acid is still being evaluated in clinical trials.

Patisiran (Onpattro)

&

Inotersen (Tegsedi)

- Not presently FDA approved for use in ATTR-CM.

- FDA approved for hATTR polyneuropathy (with or without cardiomyopathy)

Tafamidis (Vyndamax)

&

Tafamidis meglumine (Vyndaqel)

**Tafamidis**

Tafamidis and tafamidis meglumine got FDA approval for treatment of ATTR-CM in May 2019.  Tafamidis selectively bind to the thyroxine-binding sites of TTR. It stabilized the tetrameric form and slowed dissociating into monomers, reducing amyloid formation.

Tafamidis has demonstrated a reduction in all-cause mortality and cardiovascular hospitalization in both hATTR-CM and wATTR-CM patients with heart failure of NYHA functional Classes I and II. Its treatment has been shown to reduce the decline in functional capacity (six-minute walk test) and quality of life (Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire). Functional improvement was seen in approximately 6 months, and mortality reduction took nearly two years.

Tafamidis has demonstrated a reduction in all-cause mortality and cardiovascular hospitalization in both hATTR-CM and wATTR-CM patients with heart failure of NYHA functional Classes I and II. In addition, its treatment has been shown to reduce the decline in functional capacity (six-minute walk test) and quality of life (Kansas city cardiomyopathy questionnaire). In approximately six months, functional improvement was seen, and mortality reduction took nearly two years.

FDA-approved dose for tafamidis is 61 mg orally once daily, and for tafamidis, meglumine is 80mg orally once daily.

Tafamidis is well tolerated. In the ATTR-ACT trial, 441 patients with ATTR-CM were randomly assigned tafamidis 80mg, 20mg, and placebo in a 2:1:2 ratio. Patients were followed for 30 months. The rate of adverse events was similar in the treatment and placebo groups.

**Organ Transplantation**

A liver transplant can remove mutant TTR from circulation. It has previously been used to treat hATTR but cannot be used for wATTR.