The kidneys are the most common abdominal organ affected by systemic lymphoma according to several studies. Renal involvement is most common with B-cell lymphoma, and the majority are intermediate or high-grade lymphomas including Burkitt and histiocytic varieties. Gross macroscopy reveals fleshy or firm yellow, tan, or gray tumors that are 1 to 20 cm. The pathogenesis of primary renal lymphoma is dubious as the normal kidney does not have any lymphoid tissue. Puente Duanay hypothesized that pre-existing inflammatory processes recruit lymphoid cells into renal parenchyma and an untimely oncogenic event takes place to complete the multistep process of oncogenesis. The renal capsule is rich in lymphatics, and it has been suggested that the tumor penetrates the parenchyma from the capsule, subcapsular tissue, or the renal sinus with subsequent invasion of the renal parenchyma. Tumor proliferation initiates in the interstitium and the adjacent nephrons and collecting ducts, and blood vessels act as a framework for tumor growth. An infiltrative growth pattern results in preservation of the parenchymal structures and renal contour. Consequently, detection of renal involvement becomes difficult and can easily be missed on histopathology. As lymphomatous tumors enlarge, the surrounding renal parenchyma is compressed and displaced causing the formation of solitary or more commonly multiple nodular masses. Uneven infiltrative growth can result in extension beyond the renal capsule into the perinephric space, mimicking primary renal neoplasms. Continued growth may ultimately cause replacement of the whole renal parenchymal architecture.