**Cryptorchidism:**

One of the most common neonatal malformations is an undescended testicle. It occurs in about 2-4% of male neonates. Given the numerous associated complications of cryptorchidism, those patients with failure of the testes to spontaneously descend require a surgical repair called orchiopexy. The traditional approach of the orchiopexy is by making an inguinal incision. Given the numerous structures that can suffer injury through this incision, a trans scrotal approach was introduced. The advantages of this effective technique include uncomplicated dissection, better wound healing, and shorter operation time. The disadvantages of this approach include wound infections, testicular hypotrophy, hydrocele, and hernias.

**Testicular Torsion:**

Testicular torsion is a vascular emergency defined as a rotation of the spermatic cord that causes strangulation of the testicular artery, which leads to loss of blood supply to the testicle. This pathology requires a prompt surgical approach. A defect in embryologic development of the tunica vaginalis is mainly responsible for testicular torsion. Patients with testicular torsion may present with acute pain, nausea, and vomiting. Testicular torsion should be approached urgently, given that after the first 24 hours of the loss of blood supply, the tissue can suffer necrosis. Once the tissue is necrotic, there is very little likelihood of saving the testis.

**Hematocele:**

Hematocele is a blood collection in the scrotum that can be associated with a traumatic injury or a surgical procedure. It can be diagnosed using a scrotal ultrasound. This blood collection usually self resolves, but in rare cases, it may develop calcifications, which are extra-testicular lesions palpated on physical exams.