As a result of the incidental and usually benign nature of multiple biliary duct hamartomas, no evaluation is necessary for the diagnosis. However, while most patients will have normal lab results, some can present with mild elevations in liver function tests, specifically aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT). Patients should have a baseline CA 19-9 level drawn, which can be slightly elevated with multiple biliary duct hamartomas. Some patients have seen hyperbilirubinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and increased C-reactive protein.

Typically these lesions are found initially on ultrasound or computed tomography (CT) done for a different reason. On ultrasound, these lesions appear as multiple hyper and hypoechoic areas within the liver with comet-tail artifacts. On CT, they appear as multiple, nodular, irregular cystic liver lesions with low attenuation and no enhancement with intravenous contrast injection. The most sensitive imaging modality is magnetic resonance imaging or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRI/MRCP), which shows multiple T1 hypointense and T2 hyperintense diffuse cystic liver lesions of variable sizes 0.1 cm to 1.5 cm which do not communicate with the biliary tree and do not enhance with intravenous gadolinium injection.

The most specific finding on MRCP for biliary duct hamartomas is mural nodules, which are endocytic polypoid projections due to conjunctive septa that are isointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images. The presence of mural nodules can help diagnose multiple biliary duct hamartomas with accuracy and help avoid misdiagnosis.