**Osteoporosis**

This is a common disorder of bone remodeling which is characterized by low bone mass and structural deterioration of bone. It causes bone fragility and increased vulnerability to fractures. There are two types of osteoporosis:

**Primary Osteoporosis:**

**Type I**(Postmenopausal Osteoporosis)

- **Cause:**a decline in estrogen levels associated with menopause.

- **Pathophysiology:**estrogen deficiency causes an increase in osteoclast activity by increasing RANKL and M-CSF expression and inhibiting osteoclast apoptosis by reducing FasL expression by preosteoclasts.

**Type II**(Age-Related Osteoporosis or Senile Osteoporosis)

- **Cause:**age-related and centered on osteoblasts (bone formation) [in addition to bone resorption in postmenopausal women].

- **Pathophysiology:**decreased bone formation in men and women is caused by changes in reactive oxygen species (ROS), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), and PTH levels associated with aging.

**Glucocorticoid-induced Osteoporosis (Secondary Osteoporosis)******

- **Cause:**glucocorticoids are immunomodulatory drugs that are used to treat a variety of autoimmune disorders and inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. Bone loss and increased risk of fractures are among the common side effects of glucocorticoid treatment.

- **Pathophysiology:**glucocorticoids inhibit differentiation of osteoprogenitors into osteoblasts and promote their differentiation into adipocytes (fat cells). They also increase osteoblast apoptosis and impair their functions. Additionally, glucocorticoids target mature osteoclasts to prolong their life span which worsens the imbalance between bone formation and bone resorption in favor of bone resorption.