Warm-blood cardioplegia was introduced in 1977 by Buckberg et.al.

Retrograde warm blood cardioplegia is particularly beneficial in the setting of normothermic cardioplegia.

Hypothermia can have many harmful effects at the cellular level. These include impaired enzymatic activity, cell membrane instability, impaired glucose utilization, impaired adenosine triphosphate (ATP) generation and utilization, impaired tissue oxygen uptake, and impaired osmotic homeostasis. Proponents of warm blood cardioplegia believe that the use of blood as a cardioplegia solution component is physiologic and provides better buffering, tonicity, and rheology compared to the crystalloids. Also, blood can carry and deliver oxygen more efficiently than crystalloids. Finally, it is believed that the antioxidant effects of blood can help lower ischemic injury and limit the reperfusion injury once the aortic cross-clamp is removed.

Established strategies of intraoperative myocardial protection include:

- Chemically induced cardiac arrest in diastole, most often by hyperkalemic solution administered through antegrade or retrograde techniques

- Hypothermia to decrease myocardial oxygen demand with the optimal temperature between 12 degrees C and 28 degrees C

- Minimizing myocardial edema by monitoring the pressure of cardioplegia infusion and administering a moderately hyperosmolar solution

- Buffering the ischemia-induced acidosis using THAM (tromethamine solution), bicarbonate, histidine-imidazole, or blood buffers

- Avoiding hyperoxia to minimize reperfusion injury

- Avoiding extreme swings in intracellular calcium

- Avoiding hyperglycemia and hyperthermia

The warm blood cardioplegia technique is a promising strategy in the ever-expanding field of myocardial protection. Continous WBC provides variable protection against ischemia by eliminating hypothermic myocardial ischemia and reperfusion injury. Disadvantages include inadequate visualization, increased cardioplegic requirements, and increased risks of neurological complications. Other consequences of normothermic cardiopulmonary bypass using the WBC technique include complement activation, increased use of pressor agents to counteract vasodilation, and increased fluid requirements. Current evidence does not suggest unequivocal adoption of the WBC technique. The WBC technique does appear to offer some benefit in acutely ischemic hearts; however, routine use of continuous warm blood cardioplegia cannot be recommended at this time.