The setting and clinical presentation will dictate the type of medication prescribed, the dosing, and the route of administration. A careful review of the symptoms and past medical history, allergies, and prior exposure to/uses of these medications will lead to a better outcome for the patient.

**Serotonin-receptor antagonists:**Ondansetron, granisetron, dolasetron, palonosetron. The mechanism of action is to block serotonin from interacting with the 5-HT3 receptor. Of these, ondansetron and granisetron are the most frequently encountered. Intravenous (IV) and oral (PO) preparations are available. Side effects include headache, dizziness, and constipation. The most worrisome side effect is QTc-prolongation, and clinicians should avoid these medications in patients with known prolonged QTc.

**Glucocorticoids:**The mechanism of action is not clearly understood. Possible mechanisms are changes in the blood-brain barrier and decrease the synthesis of prostaglandin messengers. Dexamethasone has been the topic of extensive study in chemotherapy and the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting literature. Side effects are mild when used short-term and include insomnia, excitation, and mood changes. PO and IV formulations are available.

**Anticholinergics:**Scopolamine is the most commonly encountered medication in this class. It works by antagonizing the M1 muscarinic receptor. It is predominantly used to treat motion sickness or prophylactically in the perioperative setting. Side effects are typically mild but include dry mouth, vision changes, or drowsiness. The administration is transdermal.

**Neurokinin receptor antagonists:**Aprepitant (PO) and fosaprepitant (IV) highlight this class of medications that involve antagonism of the NK-1 receptor, preventing the release of substance-P, which is an inducer of vomiting. As with many medications, side effects include headaches and dizziness, but published case reports note significant hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis and anaphylactic shock.

**Dopamine receptor antagonists:**Phenothiazines antagonize the D2 receptor, most notably in the area postrema in the brain. Prochlorperazine and chlorpromazine are examples of this class of medication. IV, PO, and rectal (PR) formulations are available. Side effects include dizziness, headache, and extrapyramidal symptoms, including dystonia and tardive dyskinesia.

**Butyrophenones:**These agents also work to antagonize the D2 receptor. Droperidol and Haloperidol have proven to be very efficacious anti-emetics, but due to their side effect profiles, they have fallen out of favor in many environments. Intramuscular (IM) and IV are effective routes of administration. In addition to more typical side effect profiles, these medications can cause dose-dependent QTc prolongation and require caution in those with known or suspected QTc prolongation.

**Benzamides:**Agents in this drug class antagonize the D2 receptor at low doses but also antagonizes the 5-HT3 receptor at higher doses. Metoclopramide is the most common medicine in this class and is typically used as a pro-motility agent to reduce nausea and vomiting. PO and IV formulations are available. This medication can cross the blood-brain barrier. As with other dopamine antagonists, this medication can cause dystonia, tardive dyskinesia, and akathisia. An FDA “Boxed” warning cautions against repeated and long-term use as it can cause irreversible tardive dyskinesia.

**Cannabinoid therapy:**This is relatively new and somewhat controversial. Nabilone and dronabinol have been studied and show some benefit, though significant side-effects such as vertigo, hypotension, and dysphoria have limited their use in some populations. IV and PO formulations are available.

**Antihistamines:**These drugs act to antagonize the histamine (H1, H2) receptors.  Diphenhydramine, meclizine, promethazine are common medications in this class. They are widely available, generally well-tolerated, and PO, IV, IM, PR formulations are available. Sedation is a widely reported, common side effect.