Penetrating trauma represents both military and civilian incidents; however, the underlying mechanisms of each vary notably. Civilian penetrating trauma mostly consists of stab and low-velocity projectile wounds, whereas military trauma is often high-velocity or blast-associated. Consideration of the mechanism of injury and the associated forces guide decision making in the evaluation and management of penetrating wounds to the groin.

In the military setting, peripheral and vascular trauma has increased in prevalence with advances in body armor. As the vital structures of the head, torso, and abdomen are increasingly protected, extremity trauma with vascular involvement has become more common. Vascular injury rates have increased 5-fold since the World Wars and now represent 12% of battlefield wounds; 60% of vascular injuries involve major/proximal vessels. During the recent conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, blast/explosive injuries account for 73% of vascular injuries, with the rest secondary to gunshots.

Penetrating trauma remains a considerable civilian threat in the United States, with over 435,000 patients admitted from 2007-2014; this does not include patients pronounced deceased before arrival at a trauma center. The primary mechanism of injury was split equally between gunshot wounds and stab wounds.

Notably, high profile civilian mass shootings have increased in incidence and severity in recent years. Perpetrators in these events tend to use high-velocity firearms, and comparisons have been drawn to wartime injuries. However, as compared to the combat injuries described above, there is a difference in overall and fatal wounding patterns with more frequent head, torso, and abdominal wounds seen as a result of civilian mass shootings; most of these injuries are nonsurvivable (93%).