Nevus anemicus presents as congenital hypopigmented patches with a well-defined border. They are asymptomatic and typically seen on the upper trunk, although they have also reported on the face and extremities. The distribution of hair, formation of sweat, and skin sensation are unaffected by nevus anemicus. Lesions have an average diameter of 5 cm to 10 cm but may be large enough to span significant portions of the trunk and are thus called "giant nevus anemicus" in such instances. Lesions may have islands of sparing of normal skin within the lesion or satellite hypopigmented macules around the lesion. Other lesional morphologies include linear lesions or coalescing macules resembling a cluster of grapes.

The history and physical exam are paramount in the diagnosis of nevus anemicus since there are no characteristic histopathologic findings. The onset of the lesion is also important since nevus anemicus is a congenital lesion often present at birth while other hypopigmented or depigmented lesions such as vitiligo often develop later in life. Nevus anemicus lesional skin characteristically does not create reactive erythema in response to heat, cold, or trauma. This can be examined by vigorously rubbing the lesion and surrounding skin or by applying ice or heat, which will accentuate the lesion by causing reactive erythema in the surrounding skin while the nevus anemicus lesion maintains a persistent pallor. Diascopy can be performed by pressing a glass slide on the border of the lesion, which will cause the lesion border to blend with the normal surrounding skin