The nerves arising from the lumbar plexus from superior to inferior are iliohypogastric, ilioinguinal, genitofemoral, lateral femoral cutaneous, femoral nerve, obturator, and nerve to the lumbosacral trunk.

The iliohypogastric nerve is created from spinal levels T12 and L1.  It has motor innervation to the internal oblique muscle and the transverse abdominal muscles.  Its sensory inputs are to the lateral gluteal area.

The ilioinguinal nerve derives from a branch of the L1 spinal nerve.  It provides sensory inputs to the anterior superior and medial parts of the thigh.  In males, the distal portions of the nerve become the anterior scrotal nerve that inputs sensory fibers to the root of the penis and the superior part of the scrotum.  In females, the distal portions of the nerve are the anterior labial nerves that help to provide sensory inputs to the skin covering the mons pubis and the labia majora.  It also provides some motor inputs to the internal oblique muscle and the transverse abdominal muscles.

The genitofemoral nerves arise from the superior aspects of L1 and L2 spinal nerves.  The nerve separates into the genital and the femoral branch.  The genital branch supplies the cremaster muscle and scrotal skin in men and supplies sensory to the mons pubis and the labia majora in women.  The genitofemoral nerve's femoral branch provides sensory innervation the anterior, superior area of the thigh.

The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve comes from the L2 and L3 spinal nerves.  It serves the singular function of supplying sensory innervation to much of the lateral portion of the thigh.

The femoral nerve ranks as the largest nerve that arises from the lumbar plexus.  It is created from lumbar spinal nerves L2, L3, and L4.  Its principal function is to supply motor and sensory innervation to the anterior compartment of the thigh. The nerve exits the plexus and enters the femoral triangle, passing just lateral to the femoral artery.  The nerve has four major branches: muscular (motor), cutaneous, articular, and vascular.  The motor branch supplies the muscles quadriceps femoris, sartorius, and articularis genu. The cutaneous branch is the primary sensory supply to the anterior thigh. A portion of the cutaneous branch become the saphenous nerve, which provides sensation the skin overlying the patella, and portions of the medial and anterior aspects of the distal lower extremity. The articular branch plays an essential role in the proprioceptive sensation of the knee. The vascular branch supplies the femoral artery and its smaller branches.

The obturator nerve arises from L2, L3, and L4 spinal nerves.  It provides the primary motor supply to the medial (adductor) muscle compartment of the thigh. These muscles include external obturator, adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, gracilis, and pectineus. It also has a sensory component that supplies the medial thigh that is inferior to the area supplied by the ilioinguinal nerve.