**Laboratory Evaluation**

Trauma patients with the appropriate mechanism of injury that are seen in the trauma bay should receive a standard set of laboratory tests. This may include but is not limited to a comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood count, coagulation parameters, and lactate level. In addition, liver function tests may be abnormal, although this may not be seen until several hours to days after injury.

**Radiologic Evaluation**

Radiologic assessment can also begin in the trauma bay with a focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) exam. The FAST exam is used to identify the presence of blood in the abdominal cavity or pericardial sac. It does not identify the degree of organ injury. The FAST exam is highly operator dependent, and its sensitivity and specificity ranged from 63% to 100% and 95% to 100%. It can guide management in the trauma bay and help clinicians decide if patients with liver injuries should proceed directly to the operating room.

Patients who have responded to resuscitation and are hemodynamically stable in the trauma bay can have further imaging to help guide treatment. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast has become almost routine in the hemodynamically stable abdominal trauma patient. It is the best modality for identifying hepatic injuries. CT allows for the identification of hepatic injury and grading of severity. It also allows the clinician to identify other abdominal injuries and quantify hemoperitoneum. Administering IV contrast with CT scan allows for identification of patients with active extravasation of blood as evidenced by a blush on the CT from the liver. This may help the clinician decide if the patient may benefit from angiographic embolization or surgical intervention. The trauma surgeon must correlate radiologic findings with a clinical presentation to guide management and take into account hemodynamic instability or peritoneal signs.

While magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) does not have a role in the acutely injured trauma patient because of its time-consuming nature, it may play a role in patients where bile duct injury or leak is suspected.

**Injury Grading**

Radiologic findings are used to grade the degree of liver injury as defined by the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) Hepatic Injury Scale. While a grade of liver injury does not necessarily define treatment, higher grade injuries have higher mortality and are at greater risk of failing non-operative management.