- Monitoring and recording vital signs.

- Assess the Glasgow Coma Scale and pay special attention to the motor response, immediately inform the on-duty doctor if it falls.

- Assess the patient's mental status and provide psychological support if the patient is conscious.

- Elevate the head of the bed to 30 degrees with a straight neck for venous drainage from the brain.

- Ensure the patient has an IV line for fluids and medications.

- Administer antibiotics as prescribed.

- Offer oxygenation if the saturation level is low.

- Administer mannitol, as prescribed, if the intracranial pressure is high.

- Administer phenytoin, as prescribed, if the patient is having seizures.

- Apply side rails as a patient safety measure as the patient may fall down while having seizures.

- Check pupils size and responsiveness to light (think elevated intracranial pressure)

- Assess hearing power in both ears.

- Check labs (meningitis may cause SIADH)

- Check renal and liver function tests.

- Check cerebrospinal fluid lab results.

- Change position every 2-hourly  to prevent bedsore if the patient is bedridden and apply air mattress and thromboembolic deterrent stockings as needed)

- Provide limb physio and chest physio to prevent the complications associated with immobility.

- Never forget to measure random blood sugar before lumbar puncture while sending CSF for a glucose test.

- A proper diet chart to provide adequate calories required for the body.

- Put a nasogastric tube and start feeding for the unconscious patients, as instructed

- Monitor intake and output.

- Provide comfort measures.