A thorough description of the harvest and transfer of various muscle and myocutaneous flaps is beyond the scope of this section. However, for each area of the body and the necessary components for reconstruction, knowledge of local muscle and myocutaneous options and possible free tissue transfer options will guide appropriate flap selection.

If planning a free-tissue transfer, then step one involves identifying adequate recipient vessels to power the muscle or myocutaneous flap. Then, flap dissection commences.

For muscle flaps, an incision is marked out, allowing for the most significant access to the muscle body and associated vascular pedicle and deepened to the muscle body with or without the overlying fascia. Unnecessary perforators are clipped or cauterized, and muscle gets delaminated from the surrounding soft-tissue envelope. For pedicled flaps, the muscle is skeletonized to ensure a tension-free arc of rotation or turnover, and Doppler signals can be checked to confirm pedicle patency. The pedicle may not have to be visualized to allow for safe transfer. For free muscle transfer, the vascular pedicle is isolated and clipped, and microvascular anastomosis is performed expeditiously to reduce ischemic damage to the muscle. The muscle is inset, and donor site hemostasis is achieved before closure. Drains and quilting sutures to help limit seromas are prudent maneuvers after removal of bulky muscles that may lead to large seroma cavities, most notoriously latissimus dorsi donor sites.

For myocutaneous flaps, the desired skin island is marked out, and the incision can be extended to facilitate flap dissection. Designing a skin island within the known flap angiosomes will minimize ischemia of the portions of the flap furthest from the vascular pedicle. Great care is necessary to avoid undermining the skin island as damage to muscular or fascial perforators will lead to skin necrosis. Otherwise, once at the muscle layer, dissection proceeds as described previously for muscle flaps. While primary closure of the donor site minimizes morbidity, adjacent tissue transfer or skin grafting of the donor site may be necessary if utilizing a sizeable myocutaneous flap.

The decision to re-innervate muscle for free-tissue transfer depends on the reconstructive goal. Often pedicled muscle or myocutaneous flaps, the sacrifice of the nerve may prevent unwanted animation and lead to long-term atrophy allowing for better contour. In instances where just a portion of the muscle is needed to fashion a flap, e.g., a vertical rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap or partial superior latissimus muscle, care is undertaken to preserve the remaining muscle blood supply to minimize donor site morbidity.