The presentation of nocardiosis is variable and depends greatly on the organ systems involved in the infection.

**Primary Cutaneous Nocardiosis**

This form of nocardiosis presents in the form of skin and skin structure infections. History typically involves a known traumatic event with breaking the skin in a “dirty” environment. Patients will present with complaints of an erythematous, a tender, warm, swollen area around the traumatic site that appears similar to simple cellulitis. They may complain of tender nodules or abscesses in the vicinity. Purulent drainage may be present as well. In more progressed cases, suppurative necrosis formation occurs. Clinically, this form of infection is indistinguishable from other bacterial pathologies.

**Lymphocutaneous Nocardiosis**

Presents similarly to primary cutaneous nocardiosis with the addition of ascending regional lymphadenopathy. Lymph nodes may ulcerate to have weeping necrotic or purulent drainage in severe cases.

**Pulmonary Nocardiosis**

May present as either an acute infection, a subacute infection, or a chronic infection. Pulmonary nocardiosis is clinically determined with the findings of inflammatory bronchial mass or pneumonia with fever, productive cough, dyspnea, or chest pain. Pulmonary disease may be complicated by cavitation, abscess formation, pleural effusion, or empyema.

**Disseminated Disease**

Deep abscesses are possible to form at any disseminated site. Signs and symptoms in these scenarios are tailored to the location of the abscess.  Non-central nervous system (CNS) findings will at a minimum typically include fever. Dissemination to the CNS will additionally show signs of slow growth mass lesion effect with neurological signs such as numbness or muscular weakness representative of the region of the brain or spinal cord impacted. Signs of meningitis such as headache, stiff neck, or altered mental status may be present as well.