**Ischemic Strokes Involving the Internal Capsule**

The internal capsule is prone to cerebrovascular accidents because the perforating arteries that supply the region are predisposed to occlusion or rupture due to their small diameter. Ischemic strokes secondary to blockage of the perforating arteries are known as lacunar strokes. The mechanisms of lacunar strokes include lipohyalinosis of perforating blood vessels, atherosclerosis of the large trunk vessels that supply perforators, and embolic occlusion of the perforating arteries.

Lacunar strokes primarily affect the deep structures of the brain, such as the putamen, caudate nucleus, thalamus, and internal capsule. Depending on the location of a lesion, the symptoms of lacunar strokes will require differentiation from cortical strokes. These deep strokes usually have an absence of cortical deficits such as seizures, aphasia, agnosia, and dysgraphia. Other cortical deficits include apraxia, alexia, and amnesia. The progression of symptoms of lacunar strokes are abrupt in onset and evolve within minutes.

Pure motor strokes have a characteristic presentation of contralateral hemiparesis that affects the face, arm, and leg in equal parts. Ataxic hemiparesis presents with a combination of ataxia and weakness on the same side of the body. These stroke syndromes can include secondary lesions of the posterior limb of the internal capsule. Clumsy-hand dysarthria presents with difficulty articulating speech and weakness in the hands and results from damage to the anterior limb of the internal capsule or genu.

Due to the blood supply of the internal capsule, infarctions of different portions of the internal capsule have varied clinical presentations. The deficits secondary to infarctions of the internal capsule correlate with the fiber tracts found in each limb. The anterior limb of the internal capsule contains frontopontine fibers and anterior thalamic radiation fibers. Lesions of the anterior limb can manifest as confusion, impaired attention, agitation, and dysarthria. The genu contains corticobulbar tract fibers. Lesions of the genu can cause face and tongue weakness in addition to dysarthria. The posterior limb contains fibers of the pyramidal and extrapyramidal tracts. It also contains fibers of posterior thalamic radiations.

As previously stated, lesions of the anterior half of the posterior limb can cause pure motor hemiparesis contralateral to the location of the lesion. Damage to the posterior third of the posterior limb can lead to contralateral hemisensory deficits. The retrolenticular segment of the internal capsule largely contains fibers of the optic radiations. Infarctions of this portion can lead to homonymous hemianopia, superior quadrantanopia, or inferior quadrantanopia. Finally, the sublenticular segment contains fibers of the auditory radiations. Lesions of the sublenticular limb can create auditory deficits. In general, the internal capsule is an important white matter structure that contains fiber tracts coordinating major cognitive, motor, and sensory pathways. Understanding the diverse blood supply of the internal capsule and the function of each limb is important for characterizing internal capsule lesions.

**Hemorrhagic Strokes Involving the Internal Capsule**

Severe hemorrhage involving the internal capsule, subcortical connections between the cerebral cortex, and other subcortical nuclei may be damaged. Moreover, some of the nuclei themselves may be destroyed. The interruption of other descending tracts from these subcortical centers would produce the following clinical signs as mentioned above: (a) severe paralysis on the opposite side of the body; (b) spasticity of the paralyzed muscles; (c) exaggerated deep muscle reflexes on the opposite side of the body to the lesion (clonus may be demonstrated); and (d) clasp knife reaction, which may be felt In the paralyzed muscles.