HPV testing provides a reliable prediction of disease incidence and progression and allows considerably longer screening intervals after a negative HPV molecular test than after a negative cytology test. In the ARTISTIC cohort of 24,496 women with 10-year follow-up, about three-quarters of the HPV+ with normal cytology cleared their infections within about 3 years. Their risk of developing a CIN3 lesion within this time frame is considered very low (1.5%). The cumulative risk of developing CIN3 in women with type-specific persistent infections is six times higher than in new infection cases.

The diagnosis of AGC includes the following differential diagnosis:

- Inflammation

- Metaplasia

- Radiation changes

- Arias-Stella reaction

- Microglandular hyperplasia

- Oral contraceptives

- Intrauterine device

- Endocervical adenocarcinoma

- Endometrial adenocarcinoma

- Squamous intraepithelial lesion

**Prognosis**

Though the management of patients with SCC and endocervical adenocarcinoma is similar, the Kaplan- Meier survival analysis showed worse outcomes in patients with adenocarcinoma.

The prognosis of endometrial adenocarcinoma is mainly based on the stage of the disease. The international federation of obstetrics and gynecology (FIGO) has developed a grading system. Grade 1 tumors exhibit predominantly glandular morphology with <5% solid growth. Squamous differentiation is absent. Grade 2 tumors have solid growth between 6- 50%, and Grade 3 shows solid growth >50%. Higher myometrial invasion is also associated with a worse prognosis.

**Complications**

The diagnosis of Atypical glandular cells includes a wide range of clinical conditions from reactive conditions due use of IUD, prior radiation therapy, etc. to malignant neoplasms of the endocervix and the endometrium. However, rarely AGC might also represent malignant neoplasm of the ovary and the fallopian tubes. In cases that are mainly reactive, it can be considered an overcall to diagnose them as AGC, whereas the diagnosis of atypical cells arising from the ovary and the fallopian tube would lead to subsequent colposcopy and endometrial sampling and might be at risk for missing the diagnosis.

**Post-operative and Rehabilitation Care**

Patients managed with colposcopy with endometrial sampling might experience pain or discomfort. The colposcopy is an office procedure typically lasting between 10-20 minutes. There might be some bleeding. Vaginal pads may be used to catch any bleeding. Tampons, douching, and vaginal intercourse should be avoided for at least a week or as clinically indicated. This procedure is associated with low morbidity.

There might be anxiety associated with the diagnosis, procedure, and waiting for results. Appropriate counseling of patients might help reduce anxiety, and defining a clear timeline would help alleviate some of the anxiety. The risks and benefits of the procedure should be clearly explained to the patient, and complications and the rate of complications should also be explained. Brochures or pamphlets should be provided to the patient, and also appropriate websites where they can find information should be given.

**Summary**

- Cervical cancer screening is a powerful tool and has greatly impacted the outcomes of cervical cancer in women.

- Atypical glandular cells include a wide variety of conditions, which range from reactive conditions to dysplasia to carcinoma.

- AGC is the term used when the nuclear features are more worrisome than usually seen in reactive conditions, but not enough to call it malignant

- More than 50% of the women diagnosed with AGC have no pathology on colposcopy and subsequent endometrial sampling.

- In patients with “AGC, favor neoplastic,” if the colposcopy and endometrial sampling are negative, it does not exclude malignancy. A cone biopsy is the next recommended step, and it is the responsibility of the treating physician to conduct a thorough examination and diagnostic work-up

**Enhancing Health Care Team Outcomes**

Clear communication and effective management are of extreme importance. The diagnosis of AGC requires diligent examination and follow-up. The patient should be clearly explained how strict follow-up might result in better and favorable outcomes. Advocating for HPV vaccination might further decrease the diagnosis of these cancers.