Patients with parotitis complain of progressive enlargement and pain in one or both parotid glands. Bilateral parotid involvement is typical for mumps and inflammatory conditions, whereas unilateral parotid swelling, pain, and the presence of fever are more suggestive of bacterial cause. In addition, patients will complain of pain with mastication localizing to the parotid and radiating to the ear, often subsiding within 30 to 60 minutes after eating.

Symptoms include the following:

- In acute bacterial parotitis, the patient usually presents with progressive and painful swelling of the gland, and the pain aggravates with chewing.

- Acute viral parotitis (mumps) presents with pain and swelling of the gland lasting 5 to 9 days. There is moderate malaise, anorexia, and fever. Bilateral parotid involvement is a common finding.

- In HIV parotitis, the swelling of the gland is painless, and the patient is generally asymptomatic.

- In tuberculous parotitis, chronic and non-tender swelling of the unilateral gland occurs, or there is a lump within the gland. In some cases, there can be symptoms of tuberculosis.

- Sjögren syndrome is a combination of recurrent and chronic swelling of parotid glands with no apparent cause. It is frequently associated with autoimmune diseases. In most cases, discomfort is modest and related to dry mouth and eyes.

- Recurrent parotitis in childhood would lead to repeated episodes of unilateral or bilateral swelling of parotid glands in a young child.

- Sarcoidosis causes chronic, non-tender swelling of the parotid gland.

- In chronic, nonspecific parotitis, patients experience painful parotid inflammation lasting for hours to weeks with relatively asymptomatic periods.

On exam, the parotid gland typically appears enlarged, edematous, tender, indurated, and sometimes warm. When the parotid is gently massaged in a posterior to anterior direction, bacterial parotitis will exhibit purulent drainage from the Stensen duct. In contrast, small yellow crystal chunks favor an autoimmune cause.