In the 1980s, when an NDA cleared a new chemical entity, the market exclusivity provision mildly secured the production rights to the generic drug for five years. In other words, the FDA did not sanction a generic drug application for another five years from the approval date for a drug. In cases where a new drug has clinical significance, the FDA may also grant three years of exclusivity regarding the investigations. The FDA, however, used to hold the right to sanction further Abbreviated New Drug Applications (ANDAs) for other drugs. Even though the FDCA allows generic businesses to obtain regulatory approval for medications by submitting an ANDA, it was evident in the early 1980s that there were relatively few generic medications in the marketplace. The US Congress looked into the matter and discovered that it was easy for innovator businesses to make it hard for generic companies to submit ANDAs under pre-existing patent and regulatory law. The regulatory road for getting ANDAs approved was erratic and ambiguous. The Patent Term Restoration Act (PTRA) of 1984, also known as the Hatch-Waxman Act, was drafted and passed in retaliation. The PTRA, however, led to various controversies.

**Practitioner Controversy**

Firstly, the legislation enables a generic drug to differ from the parent medicine by 20% more or less in rate and endurance limit while still being considered bioequivalent. Some physicians, therefore, started believing that if a patient takes generic X for one month and then uses generic Y for the next month, there might be a 40 percent blood level differential between the two products, resulting in adverse clinical effects for the patient.

- In public pronouncements, the FDA addressed this worry by stating that the statistical approach in question would not permit such a variation.

- When evaluating data on generic medications authorized between October 1984 and September 1986, the FDA further stated that the mean variation in absorption between generic and pioneer medications was just 3.5 percent, which should not result in clinical disparities in patients.

- Nonetheless, several medicinal items are still the subject of debate.

Secondly, the statute also sparked a debate about whether physicians might prescribe a generic drug product and dispense them if the innovator drug product obtains exclusivity. For instance, when the original brand propranolol has commercial exclusivity for that application, can a pharmacist legally replace generic propranolol given for post-myocardial infarction? Since this is the use of an approved drug (the generic medicine) for an off-label reason, the basic answer to this issue is "yes."

**Manufacturer Controversy**

The PTRA has resulted in some highly contentious drug manufacturing methods. Several of these activities have existed since the act's inception. Still, they also have come to the attention of Congress and the public in recent years as a result of the current expiration or impending expiration of numerous bestselling medication patents.

One such method involves an innovator manufacturer creating an "authorized generic" variant of its brand-name product just before its patent is due for expiration or is successfully challenged by a generic competitor. Since generic and brand-name prescription drugs are alike and thus approved under the NDA, the FDA believes the innovator may do so without an ANDA, meaning the innovator manufacturer may create the generic and compete with a generic manufacturer who has submitted an ANDA with a successful paragraph IV certification. The 180-day market exclusivity is no longer as valuable to the generic producer, and the innovator company keeps some market share that they would lose in other ways.

Another point of contention is the 30-month delay in ANDA clearance after the patent holder files a patent infringement civil lawsuit against the generic firm. Many innovator producers, according to critics, sue to secure the 30-month exclusivity despite their poor legal claims. While new legislation has restricted this procedure, several vendors have piggybacked cases to allow for extended 30-month exclusivity terms.

**Generic Drug Labelling Controversy**

The PTRA stipulates that a generic medication's marking must be identical to that of the innovator drug (355(j)(2) (A)(v)), which has sparked considerable debate. For example, in Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Shalala, 91 F.3d 1493 (D.C. Cir. 1996), Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. retained exclusivity rights to an indication accepted through a supplemental application for one of its drugs products for three years.

- A generic manufacturer submitted an ANDA for a generic alternative of Bristol-Myers' product. Bristol-Myers contended that the ANDA be refused because the law demands that the generic marking be identical to that of the innovator, which cannot be due to Bristol-Myers exclusivity privilege.

- However, the court concluded that the manufacturer's view is inconsistent with other aspects of the legislation and statutory purpose. The new generic drug must be safe and effective with each use mentioned in the labeling.

- It makes no difference that the marking does not have any sign specified on the pioneer's label. But, because every time a company introduced an additional indication, the authorities barred a new generic drug product from the market for three years, the Bristol-Myers understanding emerged.

- An innovator drug product producer could theoretically file additional indications for years, effectively preventing generic contests.

Pliva, Inc., et al. v. Mensing, 131 S. Ct. 2567, a 2011 Supreme Court case, led to a vital turn in the debate over similar generic medicine labeling. In this case, the plaintiffs were damaged by a medicine's side effect. They sued the generic drug maker, claiming that the manufacturer owed them a duty to modify the labeling to indicate the known side effect. A CBE additional NDA allows a medication manufacturer to make certain adjustments, such as warnings, before FDA clearance. In a 2009 case before the United States Supreme Court, the Court said that an innovator drug's maker could have updated its labeling under the CBE supplementary NDA to reinforce its warnings and ruled for the injured plaintiff (Wyeth v. Levine, 129 S. Ct. 1187 (March 4, 2009)). However, in Pliva, the Court determined that generic medication manufacturers are prohibited from freely changing their labeling and consequently ruled against the injured plaintiff, based on the FDA's understanding of the labeling rule.