The eye forms images based on differences in the reflectance of light on external objects. Small perturbations, in contrast, are processed through a center-surround system, where surrounding background luminance is subtracted from the center signal, highlighting the local features of the central signal. This system allows for high sensitivity to light-dark contrast. Additionally, the presence of different types of cone photoreceptors in the retina, which is sensitive to varying wavelengths of light, enables contrast of refracted light, providing the basis for visualization and separation of a spectrum of colors.

Cones relay visual information through parvocellular layers to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus. Neurons in the LGN process the magnitude of contributions from opponent cone signals and continue to relay the signal to the primary visual cortex V1. The mechanisms of color perception beyond the LGN are not as well characterized. Still, fMRI studies suggest that there are additional separation and processing of both color luminance and color contrast in V1 as well as additional extrastriate visual areas.

A variety of additional complex mechanisms influences color perception. The hue, saturation, and brightness of both center and surround areas greatly influence the perception of the central color, such that the same stimulus presented on different backgrounds may be perceived as different colors entirely. Individual differences in color processing also mediate how these factors influence color perception.

Chromatic visual perception appears to be subject to a high degree of neural plasticity; this seems to be mediated by average background luminance and equilibrating average chromatic stimuli (perception of the normal background color is adjusted to yield equal contributions of opposing color axes). The capability of the visual system to adjust this equilibrium point based on different external environments enables greater color contrast.

All colors are attainable by the process of additive or subtractive mixing processes within the primary three colors.