Both medical and non-medical personal are responsible for the quality of a nuclear medicine service. Although quality can be defined in many ways, using a myriad of selected indicators definitely involves interprofessional teams. Sometimes, patients' perceptions of quality and satisfaction may not agree with some of the measurements a nuclear medicine department uses. We can even find older patients are generally more satisfied than younger ones.

Quality of service involves expertise from physicists, radio-pharmacists, nuclear medicine instrumentation, nuclear medicine technologists/radiographers, allied health professionals, nurses, and doctors. Artifacts in nuclear imaging can be identified in many ways, not just by the reporting specialist physician but also by other staff involved. Typically the reporting specialist physicians rely on staff members for updated patient and equipment information, but anybody in the imaging process can improve outcomes. For example, the person who transported the patient to the imaging department may report incontinence or that the patient is likely to cause a motion artifact if they are agitated so that adjustments might be performed for better imaging.

Compliance with guidelines and protocols and good communication between medical teams makes for the best outcomes, and being able to discern artifacts from images enables better treatment. The more relevant information provided and the better the communication between all teams will improve patient outcomes. If someone notices an anomaly and reports it to the correct staff member, corrections can be made to avoid any issues and improve patient care. Ideally, artifacts should be prevented and, if they are not, should be identified at the time of imaging or reporting.