The surgical team should pay particular attention to control and prevention of postoperative bleeding, which is most commonly experienced in the first 24-28 hours after surgery. Salient points are outlined below.

The paramedian forehead flap is especially prone to postoperative bleeding, most commonly from the proximal flap pedicle in the glabella/brow area. This is best managed as follows:

- Careful, precise electrocoagulation must be performed at the end of the procedure.

- Apply hemostatic agents such as cellulose gel mesh and/or Monsel's ferric subsulfate solution at the base of the flap.

- When dressing the surgical site, apply extra gauze or other absorbent materal near the flap base, being careful to not apply excessive pressure (avoiding stangulation of the flap)

- Have the patient return to the office in 1-2 days for dressing change. If excessive drainage is not present, the next bandage may remain in place until next visit in 5-7 days.

Cheek interpolation flaps are not as prone to heavy bleeding, but do tend to ooze in the early postoperative period.

- Thorough, but precise electrocoagulation should be administered prior to dressing the surgical site.

- Postoperative visit in 1-2 days is preferred if possible.

- Any minor bleeding may be addressed on that visit. If no significant bleeding is noted, a less bulky dressing can be applied at that time.

Postauricular transposition flaps, when they bleed, are particularly challenging due to being located in the tight quarters behind the ear, which is draped with a flap. Prevention is key to success.

- Meticulous electrocoagulation must be applied at the end of surgery. Once hemostasis has been obtained, it is often a good idea to vigorously rub the wound with gauze to "battle test" one's work. Any additional bleeding can then be treated prior to placement of the flap.

- The unsutured portion of the pedicle is wrapped with petrolatum-saturated gauze ribbon, followed by application of non-adherent surgical dressing and then fluffed gauze over the entire surgical site. Elastic adhesive bandage is then applied to run in an anterior to posterior direction, thus pulling the ear toward the head. This takes tension off the interpolation flap and also helps apply pressure to minimize risk of bleeding.

Deltopectoral flaps and waltzing flaps can bleed from the large, wide exposed pedicles

- Tubing of the pedicle minimizes exposed raw surfaces prone to bleeding.

- Meticulous hemostasis with bipolar electrocautery at the time of elevation is essential