Leptospirosis can present in two distinct clinical syndromes, icteric or anicteric.

- The anicteric syndrome is self-limited and presents with a nonspecific flu-like illness. The onset is usually sudden and can present with a headache, cough, non-pruritic rash, fever, rigors, muscle pain, anorexia, and diarrhea. This illness may last a few days before resolution of the fever.  This form of the illness is rarely fatal and represents approximately 90% of all documented cases of Leptospirosis.

- The anicteric syndrome can also have recurrence several days later, and this phase is called the immune stage during which aseptic meningitis can occur.  These patients can recover fully but may suffer from chronic, episodic headaches.

- The icteric phase of leptospirosis is classically known as Weil's disease. This is a severe infection, and the manifestations include fever, renal failure, jaundice, hemorrhage, and respiratory distress. The icteric phase may also involve the heart, CNS, and muscles. This illness is usually severe and may last weeks or months if the patient survives.

The differential diagnosis for Leptospirosis is extremely large and varies from benign processes like viral upper respiratory tract infections, other viral flu-like illnesses, to severe infections from rarer "travel" conditions including Dengue Fever, malaria, Hantavirus, hemorrhagic fevers, and typhoid fever. Also consider other more common conditions (which one would be likely to consider unless specific exposure history is known) like cholecystitis, mononucleosis, primary HIV, or if unvaccinated measles or rubella.