A consensus on the criteria for diagnosing postprandial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia after bariatric surgery is yet to be developed. Making a diagnosis can be challenging due to the variation in symptoms and the definitions of hypoglycemia.

The International Hypoglycemia Study Group considers a glucose level of <3.0 mmol/L (<54 mg/dL) to indicate clinically significant hypoglycemia.

The ASMBS recommends the following criteria for diagnosis of postprandial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia or late dumping syndrome:

- Symptoms occurring more than one year after surgery

- Normal fasting glucose and insulin levels

- Correlation of symptoms with hypoglycemia, followed by spontaneous resolution of hypoglycemia

- Positive provocative test.

Others have recommended additional criteria and specific cut-off values - the presence of hyperinsulinemia (serum insulin >50 µU/L or 300 pmol/L) concurrently with hypoglycemia (plasma glucose <50 mg/dL or 2.8 mmol/L) after a mixed meal.

Provocative tests such as the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and mixed meal tolerance test (MMTT) aid in the diagnosis. OGTT involves the administration of 75 to 100 grams of glucose followed by serial serum glucose measurements at intervals up to 120 to 240 minutes after administration. In MMTT, a standardized meal of carbohydrates, protein, and fat is administered. Glucose and insulin levels are determined during fasting and 30-minute intervals after the mixed meal.

In patients with bariatric surgery, an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) for evaluation of meal-induced hypoglycemia may not be well tolerated since hyperosmolar glucose liquid loads may provoke severe hypoglycemia and should be avoided. A mixed meal test with carbohydrates, protein, and fat may be better, but this approach remains controversial. Any provoked tests should be performed in a supervised setting with trained medical personnel equipped to deal with the situation due to the risk of a severe hypoglycemic event.

Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) is more sensitive and specific than provocative tests.

In individuals with fasting hypoglycemia, the possibility of insulinoma should be considered. Workup for insulinoma entails a 72-hour fasting test and computerized tomography (CT)/magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Invasive studies such as endoscopic ultrasound or selective arterial calcium stimulation testing may be considered if the imaging is unrevealing.

As the name implies, a 72-hour fasting test entails fasting for 72 hours (calorie-free beverages are allowed). Capillary blood samples for glucose are collected every 2 hours, and venous blood sugar samples are collected every 6 hours. Once blood sugar levels are less than 60 mg/dL, insulin, C-peptide, pro-insulin, and beta-hydroxybutyrate should also be collected.

Some clinicians consider the presence of Whipple’s triad (Measured low blood glucose with corresponding symptoms of hypoglycemia and low blood glucose and the relief of symptoms when low blood glucose is corrected) essential for diagnosis. However, since some people can have atypical symptoms of hypoglycemia or asymptomatic hypoglycemia, reliance on Whipple’s triad may miss the diagnosis in these individuals. Hence, a clinician needs to be aware of the various patterns of hypoglycemia, as this may inform the choice of diagnostic tests ordered.

It is also crucial to consider other conditions, such as insulinoma, adrenal insufficiency, liver dysfunction, and medication-induced hypoglycemia, and rule them out when indicated based on history and physical examination.

Diagnostic evaluation for differentiating etiologies of hypoglycemia is summarized in Table 1.

Table 1.