**Alterations in the Immune System**

The pathophysiological mechanisms leading to chronic fatigue syndrome are not entirely understood.

There is evidence of ongoing inflammation, as indicated by increased production of various proinflammatory interleukins, which also explains malaise and flu-like symptoms about which the patients often complain.

**Increased Oxidative Stress**

Some studies report chronic fatigue syndrome patients to have significantly increased oxidative stress, which plays a vital role in the etiopathogenesis of the disease. There is an increase in oxidative stress biomarkers like oxidized LDL and certain prostaglandins and, at the same time, a decrease in the amounts of the antioxidants like glutathione.

**Oligoadenylate Synthetase/RNase L Pathway**

The association between the onset of CFS with a viral infection has always been speculated. One of the interferon-activated antiviral pathways involves activating the 2’-5’-oligoadenylate (2-5A) synthetase/RNase L system.

**Alteration of Natural Killer (NK) Cells**

Studies have shown a lower number of CD3-CD57 white cells lymphocytes, which are a type of NK cell, whereas the levels of the cytotoxic T cells were not changed.

**B Cell Impairment**

The profile of B cell subpopulations may differ in CFS compared with controls. CFS is associated with increased production of the CD20+ CD5+ B cell phenotypes correlating with increased autoantibody production and overexpression of CD21 markers acting as receptors for some viruses.

**Immunoglobulins**

There is also an alteration in the immunoglobulin number and distribution in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. The total immunoglobulin G (IgG) level, particularly subclasses IgG1 and IgG3, is substantially lower. In contrast, there is an increase in IgA and IgM serum levels against the lipopolysaccharides of the normal gram-negative bacteria due to alterations in gut permeability.

**Autoimmunity**

Studies have also detected autoantibodies against certain neurotransmitters and neurons, leading to alterations in neurotransmitter response, sleep patterns, and neurocognition.

**Alterations in the Central Nervous System**

**Neuroinflammation and Role of Glial Cells**

The presence of proinflammatory changes causes speculation about the involvement of neuroinflammation in the pathogenesis and clinical presentation of the disease process.

**Neuronal Sensitization**

The hypothesis about neuronal sensitization proposes an exaggerated response to painful stimuli in patients with CFS due to the chemical and structural changes at the central nervous system level.

**Alterations in the Neuroendocrine System**

**Changes in Serotonin Transmission**

Central fatigue, a key symptom in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome, is hypothesized to be due to excess levels of serotonin and its metabolites in the central nervous system of these patients.

**Hypocortisolism**

It is also theorized that there are low circulating cortisol levels in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome secondary to dysfunction in the hypothalamic-pituitary axis (HPA). Cortisol is the principal hormone of the HPA and leads to the cortisol awakening response (CAR). This response is deficient in patients with CFS, leading to the post-exertional malaise.

**Genetic Predisposition**

Studies have shown an interaction between changes in the genes secondary to changes in the environment, leading to epigenetic modification. DNA methylation appears to be the most studied of these epigenetic modifications that can alter the expression of the gene concerning the environmental stimuli and lead to the development of the disease process.