**Ischemic stroke**

Ischemic stroke pathophysiology starts with inadequate blood supply to a focal area of brain tissue. The central core of tissue evolves toward death within minutes and is referred to as the area of infarction. Tissue in the surrounding area, known as the penumbra, does not die immediately and can recover with early reperfusion.

More adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is consumed than produced in the area of reduced blood flow, leading to decreased energy stores, ionic imbalance, and electrical disturbances. These ischemia-related changes cause an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO). Ultimately, the pathophysiological cascade leads to cell membrane destruction, cell lysis, and cell death by necrosis or apoptosis.

Microglia are activated almost immediately in the ischemic area and extend to the penumbra, peaking 48 to 72 hours later and lasting up to several weeks.

The culmination of the complex ischemic cascade initiated by acute stroke is the loss of neurons and supportive structures.

**Intracerebral hemorrhage**

Following the rupture of small arteries secondary to hypertensive changes, CAA, coagulopathies, and other vasculopathies, the expanding hematoma’s mass effect and perihematomal edema are the initial injury mechanisms in ICH. The increasing hematoma volume and edema cause an increase in intracranial pressure (ICP), which can then cause a decrease in cerebral perfusion and ischemic injury. Patients are also at risk for intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) and herniation.

As with ischemic stroke, subsequent proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory phases occur in ICH. Secondary mechanisms of injury, including blood-related cytotoxicity, excitotoxicity, and oxidative stress, disrupt the blood-brain barrier, potentially leading to extensive brain cell death and fatal brain edema.

**Subarachnoid hemorrhage**

A ruptured cerebral aneurysm primarily causes SAH; however, brain injury from a cerebral aneurysm can occur without a rupture. Compressive forces can damage local brain tissue and compromise the distal blood supply.

Aneurysmal rupture extravasates arterial blood into the subarachnoid space, rapidly spreading through the cerebrospinal fluid and causing increased ICP. Arterial blood can also spread to the intraventricular space and brain parenchyma.

Secondary brain injury can occur due to ICH, IVH, ICP, hydrocephalus, subdural hematoma, or delayed cerebral ischemia (DCI).