Management of patients with MEM, as well as specifically TT syndrome, varies depending on the patient’s severity of symptoms and expectations. If the patient is interested in treatment, there are various approaches to decreasing symptoms. Again, although there are no definitive guidelines as well as no definitive data regarding efficacy, there are medical and surgical approaches to decreasing symptoms. Several medications have been reportedly used for MEM with questionable efficacy, including benzodiazepines, carbamazepine, piracetam, botulinum toxin, as well as orphenadrine citrate with varying mechanisms of action. Benzodiazepines can be used to potentially decrease symptoms by targeting the anxiolytic component of the disorder as well as functioning as a muscle relaxant. Orphenadrine citrate also acts as a muscle relaxant due to its anticholinergic and antihistamine properties. Piracetam is a GABA derivative normally used to treat cortical myoclonus; however, there is extremely limited data on its use in MEM. Carbamazepine, a sodium-channel blocker, attenuates neuronal firing leading to decreased activity of their innervating muscles, which is why it is primarily used in epilepsy, primary hemifacial spasm, and trigeminal neuralgia. Another possible intervention that targets the contraction of the TT muscle is via botulinum toxin. Although the use of botulinum toxin is new to MEM, its use in non-cosmetic otolaryngology-associated disease processes like hemifacial spasm as well as laryngeal pathology such as spasmodic dysphonia is well documented. The mechanism of action of botulinum toxin is by preventing the release of acetylcholine from pre-synaptic neurons. The efficacy of botulinum toxin for MEM is still being examined due to its limited use. There has been a case report describing the use of botulinum soaked absorbable gelatin compressed sponge being applied intratympanically via a chronic tympanic membrane perforation. This particular patient was diagnosed with stapedius myoclonus by direct visualization of stapedius spasm. The patient experienced symptomatic relief for approximately 3 months, however similar to other disease processes treated with botulinum toxin, its effects were time-limited. The status of the TT was unknown, so if there was a component of TT myoclonus as well, it could not be determined if the botulinum toxin affected both middle ear muscles.

The role of surgical intervention is also more clearly defined. The most common procedure for TT syndrome as well as stapedius myoclonus is tympanotomy with TT or stapedius tenotomy. It is believed that by releasing the muscle's attachment site, it can reduce or eliminate tinnitus. A limited number of case series evaluating the role of tenotomy in MEM has been described. Bhimrao et al. reference 13 patients who underwent stapedius tenotomy, nine patients who underwent both stapedius and TT tenotomy, and one patient who underwent TT tendon sectioning. The decision to undergo single TT tenotomy was due to direct visualization of isolated TT spasms.