# Continuing Education Activity

Cataracts are the world’s leading cause of remediable blindness. While some cataracts, may be congenital, secondary to trauma, or drug-induced, most cataracts are age-related. Cataract surgery is the most effective, and currently, the only approved intervention for cataracts regardless of etiology. This activity presents the pathology of cataracts as well as the most common surgical technique, complications, and outcomes of cataract surgery.

**Objectives:**
- Review the pathogenesis of cataracts.
- Describe the various cataract surgery techniques as well as their advantages and disadvantages.
- Identify the most common and the most serious complications of cataract surgery.
- Outline the indications and contraindications of cataract surgery

# Introduction

Cataracts are the world’s leading cause of remediable blindness. While some cataracts, may be congenital, secondary to trauma, or drug-induced, most cataracts are age-related. Age-related cataracts are due to the opacification of the lens. The crystalline lens is a biconvex structure that focuses light on the retina. It is transparent with a diameter of 10 mm and an axial length of around 4 mm. The lens consists of fibers that are derived from lens epithelium, a thin surrounding capsule, and zonular fibers that allow for accommodation in conjunction with the ciliary body. With age, the lens stiffens, leading to farsightedness known as presbyopia. While one of the main functions of the lens is to focus light, it is not a passive optical element. In order to maintain transparency, the lens has a microcirculation pathway driven by sodium channels that deliver nutrients to deeper fibers through extracellular inward flow. Intracellular outward flow is maintained through gap junctions and is used to remove waste. The lens also serves as a UV filter that protects the retina. Finally, the lens acts as an oxygen sink with some of the highest concentrations of the antioxidant glutathione (GSH) in the body. Glutathione scavenges reactive oxygen species, is a co-factor for repair enzymes, and is thought to be released into the aqueous humor to be used by the avascular tissues such as the cornea and trabecular network. With age, oxidative damage can accumulate, causing an opacification of the lens.

Regardless of the etiology, the treatment is cataract surgery when the visual function is affected. Cataract has secondary complications such as glaucoma and uveitis when it is allowed to progress on its natural course. With newer and well-developed techniques, cataract surgery is one of the most successful clinical managements in medicine with direct improvements in visual acuity as well as large improvements in activities of daily living and decreased mortality. While as many as 95% of patients will have improved visual acuity, cataract surgery does have complications. The most common include posterior capsule opacification and cystoid macular edema. Rare but serious complications include endophthalmitis and retinal detachment.

Cataracts are one of the most common ophthalmic pathologies characterized by the opacification of the lens. In 2013, the United States had more than 22 million people who had cataracts.

# Anatomy and Physiology

A majority of adult cataracts are age-related with other etiologies suspected to be due to ultra-violet (UV) light exposure, smoking, diabetes, corticosteroid exposure, and other oxidizing drugs. Pediatric cataracts can be hereditary, idiopathic, or part of multisystem syndromes, metabolic disorders, or maternal infection.

Around half of congenital cataracts are genetic, and most genes are involved in lens development, including a, b, and g crystallin as well as lens cytoskeletal protein. Other causes include metabolic disorders, maternal infection, trauma, and toxic effects. Corticosteroids are associated with posterior subcapsular cataracts. Other medications that can also cause cataracts include busulfan, amiodarone, and phenothiazine.

# Indications

The type of cataract determines the initial presentation. Nuclear cataracts can present with decreased distance visual acuity, decreased ability to recognize faces and discriminate colors. Patients with nuclear cataracts can have good levels of Snellen acuity. Cortical cataracts may cause glare, difficulty reading, and light sensitivity. Patients with posterior subcapsular cataracts can present paradoxically, with poor vision in good lighting and improved vision in dim lighting. They can also have difficulty with driving during the day and reading.

According to the American Academy of Ophthalmology, the goal of diagnosis is to determine if visual complaints are due to the presence of cataracts, if a cataract is present, to understand the clinical significance, and to rule out other conditions that cause visual impairment.

The evaluation includes:

- A comprehensive history

- Visual acuity with correction

- Glare testing

- Assessing pupillary function

- Examining ocular alignment

- External examination

- Measuring intraocular pressure (IOP)

- Slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment, lens, vitreous humor

- Ophthalmoscopy of the macula, retina, and optic nerve

- Other tests that may be considered include, optical coherence tomography (OCT), to evaluate retinal or anterior segment disorder. B-scan ultrasound can be done if cataract density prevents visualization of the posterior segment.

**Differential Diagnosis**

- Glaucoma

- Diabetic Retinopathy

- Age-related macular degeneration

Glaucoma is a group of conditions that are characterized by progressive damage to the optic nerve. Although it is often associated with increased ocular pressure, the optic disc can be damaged with normal IOP. Initially, the patient is asymptomatic but eventually begins to lose both peripheral and central vision. Vision loss is permanent. The incidence is highest among black Americans.

Diabetic Retinopathy: Presents in patients with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Patients typically present complaining of fluctuating vision, floaters, photopsia, and visual loss. On exam, microaneurysms, intraretinal hemorrhages, and hard exudates in the non-proliferative type. In the proliferative type, fibrous proliferation, new blood vessels, and macular edema can be seen.

Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD): Dry AMD presents with worsening vision and more dependence on brighter lights or magnifying lenses. Scotomas, difficulty reading, or driving might be noticed.

Cataracts may occur in patients with glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, or age-related macular degeneration. Comorbidities should be managed appropriately.

Indications for surgery vary by country but generally include poor visual acuity, visual difficulties, or both due to cataracts.

# Contraindications

Contraindications to surgery include cataracts without visual impairment or medical/ophthalmic conditions that do not allow for safe surgical outcomes.

# Equipment

**Intraocular Lens (IOL):**Before intraocular lenses were used, cataractous lenses were simply removed, and the patients would then need high-power spectacles or contact lenses to attain optimal visual acuity.

Intraocular lenses (IOL) can be monofocal, multifocal, and toric. Monofocal aspheric IOLs correct for power lost by the removal of the natural lens. They are the most commonly implanted due to their low cost. Since the IOL corrects only one focal distance, glasses or contact lenses may be necessary for either distance or near vision. Note that the patient has an option to choose monovision as an outcome, where one eye has an IOL for distance vision while the other eye is for near vision. Multifocal IOLs are used to correct refractive vision errors to decrease the need for glasses. Of the multifocal lenses, bifocal diffractive lenses provide better near visual acuity than monofocal lenses. Trifocal diffractive lenses are intended to improve intermediate vision; although, current evidence of their effectiveness is inconclusive.

Before surgery, ophthalmologists take into account patient anatomy and other factors to determine the needed power of the intraocular lens.

# Preparation

The ophthalmologic evaluation includes a thorough ophthalmic history, with a focus on visual acuity as well as comorbidities, and slit-lamp examination. Several measurements of the eye are then taken, including the anterior chamber depth, to determine intraocular lens refraction.

# Technique or Treatment

**Anesthesia:**Historically, general anesthesia and retrobulbar blocks were used for intracapsular cataract surgery. However, with the advent of phacoemulsification and small incision surgeries, clinicians have since moved to local and topical anesthesia.

**Intracapsular Cataract Extraction (ICCE):**A technique that was discovered in the 18th century that involves removing the entire lens and capsule through a single incision. Due to lower complication rates with improved surgical techniques, ICCE is rarely performed.

**Manual Extracapsular Cataract Extraction:**In this technique, the lens is extracted through an incision, and the intraocular lens (IOL) is then inserted. The incision is large, usually 9 mm to 13 mm, to accommodate extraction, and sutures are necessary. However, there is an increased risk of posterior capsule opacity, age-related macular degeneration, and corneal edema when compared to phacoemulsification.

**Manual Small-incision Cataract Surgery (MSICS):**Instead of a large incision, MSICS uses a scleral tunnel that can self-seal. The much smaller external incision (6.5 mm to 7 mm) with a larger internal incision (9 mm to 11 mm) leads to a natural seal. The lens is then delivered through the V-shaped incision, and an IOL is inserted.

**Phacoemulsification:**This is a technique developed by Charles Kelman in 1967. It involves making a small incision of 2 mm to 3 mm and the insertion of an ultrasonic probe. The probe is then able to emulsify and aspirate the lens.**(Videos 1 & 2)**

**Femtosecond Assisted Laser Cataract Surgery (FLACS):**This technique, developed in 2008, uses a laser to microscopically dissect tissue, greatly reducing the risk of collateral damage.

**Refractive Lens Exchange (RLE):**RLE uses cataract surgery techniques to replace the lens of a patient with a high refractive error when laser ablative surgery is not possible or in patients with impending cataracts. In addition to cataract procedural risks, these patients are at a higher risk of retinal detachment due to cumulative risk over time. Patients with moderate to severe myopia are at even more of an increased risk for retinal detachment. Patients with severe hyperopia are more likely to develop choroidal edema. Additionally, patients are more likely to develop early age-related macular degeneration, which is thought to be due to the loss of free-radical scavenging properties with the removal of the lens.

**Postoperative Care:**Typically, patients are prescribed topical antibiotics, corticosteroids, or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drops for 1 to 4 weeks postoperatively. Patients are counseled to follow up the day after surgery, at 1 week, 1 month, and then 3 months postoperatively.

# Complications

Complications can be divided into three time periods, i.e., intraoperative, early postoperative, and late postoperative.

**Intraoperative Complications:**The most common include posterior capsule rupture (0.5% to 5.2%), intraoperative iris floppy syndrome (0.5% to 2.0%), or iris or ciliary body injury (0.6%-1.2%).

**Early Postoperative Complications:**Some of the more common complications include transient elevated intraocular pressure, cornea edema, toxic anterior segment syndrome, and endophthalmitis.

Endophthalmitis, while rare due to intracameral antibiotics, is one of the most severe complications post-cataract surgery. The increased risk of endophthalmitis is reported in patients with Diabetes mellitus, advanced age (over 80), vitreous communication, and large incision ECCE.

**Late Postoperative Complications:**Common complications that present later include posterior capsule opacification (0.3% to 28.4%), clinical cystoid macular edema, and retinal detachment (0.1% to 1.3%).

Posterior capsule opacification is the most common late complication. It can occur as many as 1 in 5 eyes in the three years following surgery with even higher rates in the following years.

Cystoid macular edema is due to leaky perifoveal capillaries secondary to the release of proinflammatory cytokines.

Increased risk of retinal detachment is reported in patients who are younger and male. Anatomical risk factors include axial length greater than 26 mm and posterior vitreous detachment.

Common complaints after surgery: even though cataract surgery greatly improves vision and quality of life, patients may continue to have subjective visual complaints. Commonly, they will include seeing shadows, halos, glare, starburst patterns around lights, and hazy vision. These symptoms are known as dysphotopsias and can be divided into positive and negative symptoms. Positive symptoms involve starbursts and haloes, while negative symptoms include shadows or dark areas. These symptoms can be caused by acrylic IOLs, and management for intolerable symptoms can include an exchange with a PMMA or silicone IOL. Risk factors for negative symptoms include small pupils, short distance to IOL, functional nasal retina, and an IOL with a high index of refraction. Treatments can include repositioning the IOL, secondary placement of IOL, and Nd:YAG laser anterior capsulotomy.

# Clinical Significance

Cataract surgery is a safe and highly effective treatment. As many as 95% of patients will have a best-corrected visual acuity of 20/40 after surgery.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Primary care physicians and providers (PCP) have an important role in identifying patients with decreased visual loss due to cataracts. With patient complaints of decline in visual functions such as difficulty reading, difficulty recognizing faces, or smaller objects such as golf balls, glare, or worsening vision at night, a PCP should suspect cataracts and do a thorough history and physical exam. If cataracts are visualized, or the PCP has a high degree of suspicion, they should refer to ophthalmology. Within surgery, ophthalmologists rely on anesthesiology, nurses, as well as scrub techs. While ophthalmology follows postoperatively for up to one year, some complications, like posterior capsule opacification, can present up to 3 years later. With these later complications, ophthalmologists rely on primary care teams to recognize these later-term complications as patients might present in their clinic.