The most likely non-diving disease process to mimic cerebral arterial gas embolism is ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke. While the diagnosis of cerebral arterial gas embolism is a clinical one, classically manifested by a loss of consciousness, altered mental status and crossed neurological deficits, it is possible that acute hemorrhagic stroke could present after a dive. Physicians uncertain of the diagnosis should consider a STAT CT of the head without contrast if hemorrhagic CVA is on the diagnosis, but this should not delay recompression by more than a few minutes. Hypoglycemia can also produce similar symptoms and is more commonly encountered, so a blood glucose level should be considered as it will not delay time to recompression. No additional advanced imaging is indicated, including MRI, unless the neurological deficit can be attributed to a single vessel lesion. While rare neurological disorders might also mimic gas embolism, they would be very unlikely to present immediately following a dive and can effectively be disregarded until a trial of recompression has occurred.

Post-dive venous gas emboli (VGE) are commonly detected in divers. If those VGE pass into the arterial circulation via right-to-left shunt, they can occlude the arterial circulation to tissues and produce ischemia-related symptoms, including severe neurological symptoms, soon after a diver surfaces. It has been suggested that arterialized venous gas emboli (VGE) are unlikely to produce the same symptom arc as arterial gas embolism related to pulmonary overinflation.