Lichen planus can display a variety of lesion types, but the most common presentation is an area of polygon-shaped, itchy, violaceous, flat-topped papules a few millimeters wide. This classic presentation is known as The Six Ps of LP: purple, polygonal, planar, pruritic papules, and plaques. The lesions have a shiny surface covered in fine white lines known as Wickham striae and are firm on palpation. They may be seen as a few individual lesions, found scattered widely, grouped in plaques, or arranged in annular, linear, or actinic (sun-exposed) patterns. The isomorphic response (i.e., Koebner phenomenon) can be seen in LP wherein new lesions arise in lines where scratching occurs, just as is seen in psoriasis. The most common areas of involvement include the flexor wrists, dorsal hands, lower back, ankles, and shins. Frequently a grayish-brown hyperpigmentation can be found after lesions resolve due to deposition of melanin in the superficial dermis.

Various subtypes of LP exist that display patterns different from the classic presentation. Hypertrophic LP is often found on the shins and ankles and is characterized by red, red-brown, or yellow-grey papules and plaques that coalesce with a thickened or verrucous surface. Ulcerative LP is found on the soles of the feet or between the toes with painful, erosive lesions that make walking difficult. Bullous LP appears most often on the legs as small to large tense blisters filled with clear or pale-yellow fluid. Lichen planus pemphigoids display features of lichen planus with the development of bullae both on top of LP lesions as well as on unaltered skin. Lichen planus pigmentosus is characterized by development of macular or papular pigmented lesions often arranged in a linear, follicular, or Blashkoid pattern. Inverse LP is analogous to inverse psoriasis in that it is found in intertriginous areas and completely loses its classic appearance. Extensive erythematous lesions with lichenification and without distinct borders are seen in the axillae, limb flexures, inguinal creases, and beneath the breasts.

Mucosal involvement affects over half of all LP patients and frequently is the sole presenting sign. It is most commonly seen in the mouth but can be found on the lips, esophagus, glans penis, vulva, or vagina. Six subtypes of oral LP exist: reticular, erosive, papular, plaque-like, atrophic, and bullous. Reticular is the most common form and presents as asymptomatic white, lacy lines often seen on the bilateral buccal mucosa. The erosive and atrophic forms are commonly associated with a burning pain exacerbated by hot or spicy foods. On the tongue or buccal mucosa, lesions can easily be mistaken for leukoplakia or candidiasis. Esophageal LP predominantly affects women and can give rise to dysphagia, strictures, and possibly squamous cell carcinoma.

When involving the glans penis, LP commonly displays an annular configuration. By contrast, in women, an erosive variant is most frequently found when LP involves the vulva or vagina, and scarring and strictures are troublesome sequelae that may occur. LP found simultaneously on the female genital and oral mucosa is termed vulvovaginal-gingival syndrome. This severe, desquamative subtype has been associated with the HLA DQB1*0201 gene in 80% of patients suggesting a genetic predilection for its development.

LP of the nails occurs in approximately 10% of patients and typically affects multiple nails without necessarily affecting the nearby skin. Thinning of the nail plate and longitudinal ridging are the first signs of disease. Continued involvement leads to scarring of the nail matrix, dorsal pterygium formation, sandpaper nails (trachonychia), and possibly complete loss of the nail plate. Some patients may display a variant of LP called twenty-nail dystrophy wherein such findings on all twenty nails are the only presenting sign of disease. This subtype is much more common in children than adults.

Lichen planus of the scalp and other hair-bearing regions is called lichen planopilaris (LPP). Small, red, follicular papules and macules appear where inflammation is present and lead to progressive scarring alopecia. LPP may appear alone or with typical LP lesions elsewhere on the body. When LPP occurs principally on the anterior scalp and eyebrows in older women it is known as frontal fibrosing alopecia. A familial variant of LPP known as Graham-Little-Piccardi-Lasseur syndrome is characterized by scarring alopecia of the scalp, typical cutaneous or mucosal LP, and non-scarring loss of pubic and axillary hairs with follicular papules.

Rather than appearing in the classic LP sites, lichenoid drug eruption frequently appears in sun-exposed areas, is symmetric, and is more generalized in distribution. Lesions look more eczematous or psoriasiform, and Whickam striae are not commonly seen. There is typically a latent period of several months to a year from initiation of a drug to an eruption of lesions, so thorough review of medication history is vital to diagnosing drug-induced LP.