The coagulation cascade entails a series of reactions between pro- and anticoagulant factors resulting in hemostasis. The intrinsic and extrinsic pathways converge with the activation of factor X (factor Xa). Activated factor V and activated factor X produce thrombin. Warfarin inhibits vitamin K-dependent synthesis of clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X and anticoagulant factors protein C and protein S.

PCC contains factors II, IX, and X, and variable amounts of factor VII concentrate with a final overall clotting factor concentration approximately 25 times higher than in normal plasma.

Direct oral anticoagulation agents have a different mechanism of action: apixaban and rivaroxaban are inhibitors of factor Xa, and dabigatran inhibits thrombin. The mechanism of action of PCC in reversing anticoagulation with DOACs remains unestablished.

For several years, FFP and vitamin K were the preferred options for reversing anticoagulation. Prothrombin complex concentrate offers several advantages over FFP, most importantly, the small volume needed to reverse anticoagulation. PCC contains significantly higher amounts of the clotting factors compared to FFP; one dose of PCC equals 8 to 16 units of FFP.

- Quick administration: The large amount of FFP takes much longer to infuse, whereas PCC can be administered over a few minutes and provides immediate reversal in life-threatening bleeding.

- Safe in heart failure: PCC can be safely administered in patients with cardiac or renal impairment who may be unable to tolerate large volumes of plasma.

- FFP requires procurement from the blood bank and thawing before administration, factors that lead to delays in administration and anticoagulation reversal.

- PCC is leukocyte-free and less likely to cause infusion reactions.

- Antibodies associated with causing transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI, defined as new acute lung injury that developed during or within 6 hours of transfusion of one or more units, not attributable to another ALI risk factor)  - a significant cause of death after transfusion) are removed from PCC during the manufacturing process; therefore, PCC is associated with minimal risk compared to FFP.

- PCC products have a lower risk of viral transmission since they undergo viral inactivation.