Educational taxonomies, including Bloom's, can be used to develop educational objectives for a curriculum, as well as identify pieces that may be missing from an existing curriculum. Bloom's taxonomies are often presented with examples of verbs corresponding to each level, which can aid in identifying where a learning objective fits in the taxonomy. The revised taxonomy can be presented in a 4x6 table with knowledge and cognitive processes axes.  In the revised taxonomy, there are four kinds of knowledge: factual, conceptual, procedural, and metacognitive. Examples of factual knowledge are knowledge of terminology and specific details.  Knowledge of classifications, categories, principles, and theories are examples of conceptual knowledge.  Knowledge of subject-specific skills and techniques are examples of procedural knowledge.  Finally, metacognitive knowledge includes knowledge about one's self and knowledge about cognition. Considering these different types of knowledge against cognitive processes can help create learning objectives that move beyond recalling factual knowledge.

Often, curricula over-emphasize the lower levels of Bloom's taxonomy and knowledge subtypes. Zheng et al. were able to apply Bloom's taxonomy to show how first-year medical school courses in biology have exam questions focused on the knowledge/comprehension/application levels of learning, whereas the MCAT had more high-level questions.

Simulation can incorporate the full breadth of educational opportunities as learners are placed into seemingly real-life scenarios. Therefore, all three learning domains of cognitive, affective, and psychomotor should be considered when designing a simulation scenario for medical education.

Taxonomies can be used to facilitate communication across institutions about learning materials. Many educational taxonomies have been created since the original Bloom's Taxonomy in 1956, and more continue to be developed.  For example, in a multi-center trial, McIvor et al. showed how creating a new taxonomy could allow a comparison of how different simulation centers executed a standardized simulation.