# Introduction

Monocytes are white blood cells that derive from the bone marrow. A monocyte is part of the innate immune response and functions to regulate cellular homeostasis, especially in the setting of infection and inflammation.

# Issues of Concern

When there is a suspected myeloid neoplasm with monocytic differentiation, it is challenging and essential to accurately classify monocytes as mature or immature. There is no definitive test to identify immature monocytes. Flow cytometry identifies molecules on the surface of such cells, known as cluster of differentiation (CD) markers. Such markers can provide information to help in estimating the approximate populations of mature and immature monocytes.

# Structure

Monocytes are the largest white blood cell, measuring between 12 to 20 µm in diameter, approximately twice the size of red blood cells.

# Function

Monocytes are a crucial component of the innate immune system.

To infiltrate the affected sites, the monocytes must first secure themselves to the endothelium and then loosely roll along the vascular surface. The monocyte then firmly adheres to the endothelium and finally passes through the endothelial cells through a process known as diapedesis. Monocytes are then able to penetrate the endothelial basement membrane and migrate to the area of inflammation.

Macrophages can further differentiate into specialized macrophages based on their location.

# Tissue Preparation

The histological characterizing of monocytes occurs in three main steps. These steps include obtaining and preparing a sample of whole blood, flow cytometry, and monocyte gating. The process of preparing the whole blood is a multistep chemical procedure that involves lysing the cells, marking the cells, and ultimately obtaining a concentrated sample for use in the study. Flow cytometry of the sample then allows for the characterizing of the monocytes depending on the markers they process. Monocyte gating is a visual means by which to organize the collected data to show the percentage of each monocyte subset.

# Histochemistry and Cytochemistry

The cluster of differentiation (CD) markers are specific molecules found on the surface of a cell that differentiates cells from one another, as well as from surrounding tissue. The CD markers are specific to the subtype of monocyte and the type of response mounted by the immune system.

# Microscopy, Light

The single bi-lobed nucleus has mature chromatin, and the cytoplasm is moderate to abundant and frequently shows irregular basophilic edges. Upon staining with non-specific esterases, the nucleus is pale violet, while the abundant cytoplasm stains pale grey to blue with numerous reddish-blue cytoplasmic granules.

# Microscopy, Electron

On electron microscopy, monocytes appear to have a single nucleus and abundant cytoplasm with scattered granules as well as organelles. Such organelles include numerous mitochondria, a Golgi apparatus, microvesicles, microtubules, and microfilaments.

# Pathophysiology

The role of monocytes is versatile and related to various types of disorders and infectious processes, and inflammation. Monocytosis and monocytopenia have been identifying factors in multiple hematologic disorders, such as leukemias and myelodysplastic syndromes.

# Clinical Significance

Monocytes are a critical component of the innate immune system. They are the source of many other vital elements of the immune system, such as macrophages and dendritic cells. Monocytes play a role in both the inflammatory and anti-inflammatory processes that take place during an immune response. Monocytes, and their abundance or lack thereof, can provide significant identifying clues for the diagnosis of several hematologic disorders and inflammatory and immune disorders.