There are multiple articles and publications providing reviews and conclusions of the research done in the field. Studies offer various tips and recommendations on many details and parts of feedback. Tips and studied aspects included institutional culture for feedback, group participation of feedback, gender variations in perception of feedback, extended effects of feedback on preparing for educators and leaders, and experiences with various itemized instruments used for feedback. All of the knowledge obtained is useful and valuable. A good part of it is directed to specialized educators and educational institutions to optimize their use of feedback concepts and tools.

**Feedback for Daily Users**

Most of the current structured educational activities and programs have feedback or debriefing as an essential part, which is for a variety of reasons. For most adult learning, training, and educational activities, learners expect to learn and perform what they learned after the course, workshop, or skills lab. Their goal is to learn the best from these activities to use what they learned in their profession. During the learning activity, they want to know their performance level and how they can improve it.

Therefore, providing feedback is a skill and practice that everyone in the education field needs it.  But, what do users in medical education need to know about feedback? What feedback style they have to use in their daily educational activities? The literature and publications are extensive to review and might sometimes be overwhelming or even confusing. Do they have to be experts in feedback? Do they have to use all the up-to-date knowledge about feedback? What are the most commonly needed knowledge and skills of feedback? What is the most important or core component of feedback, knowledge, and abilities?

To answer these questions, we have to review the current challenges in feedback practice.

**Challenges in Feedback**

There are many challenges in using feedback at multiple levels, starting from knowing, reading, and studying feedback to seeing and measuring the educational outcomes from using the feedback.

1 - Feedback underuse:

A common issue of feedback is that it often gets skipped in educational activities. This omission happens for a variety of reasons. Some of these reasons are busy clinical schedules, unplanned time or setting, unnecessary delays, undermind importance, lack of skills in providing feedback, and other reasons. Raising awareness of the importance of feedback in medical education, enhancing cultural and institutional feedback practice, regular faculty development activities, proper and advanced planning of providing feedback, the inclusion of feedback in the educational curriculum, and regular re-evaluation of the progress in enhancing the practice of feedback are among the solutions to raising the level of using feedback.

2 - Generality and brevity:

Many feedback providers use brief and general feedback. Terms like "good job," "perfect," "well-done," and other similar brief phrases have frequent use in suboptimal feedback. These terms and descriptions are inspiring and encouraging, but otherwise, have minimal feedback and educational value. Learners need to know what parts of their performance were high or low and why. They need to know how to optimize the high performance and improve the low performance with guidance and improvement efforts. Complete feedback is an essential component of education.

3 - Delayed feedback:

The feedback that is far from the time of performance time is of much less value than the immediate feedback. Depending on the type and purpose, feedback given soon after a performance is of higher educational value. It relates well to the events, contains enough and specific details, and has strong corrective influence. In a group performance and feedback, immediate debriefing has high educational value. The exception of this rule is the summative feedback given for a term training or extended courses in which enough observation and evaluation are necessary before providing meaningful feedback.

4- Misperception

This issue is one of the most challenging issues in providing feedback. Learners often misperceive their feedback and feel low when informed of their weak points, leading to avoiding feedback or justifying their performance. All efforts should be to facilitate learners' perception of feedback as an opportunity of learning, almost like one to one coaching. Offering giving feedback rather than forcing it, using dialogue rather than monologue feedback, giving the learner a leading role in their feedback, and choosing the right setting for feedback are all helpful points for the proper perception of feedback.

5 - Improper setting:

Feedback is often, unfortunately, given on the go, in the presence of others, in a rush, or when the learner is not aware and/or prepared. All of these circumstances are unfavorable settings for meaningful feedback. A busy clinical schedule with patients' care priorities often dictates such situations. It is a strong recommendation that feedback is scheduled and planned for in advance and that a debriefing time of a few minutes is done routinely after important clinical activity with an educational component.

6 - Acceptance / rejection:

Acceptance of feedback by learners is one of the most challenging and limiting factors. Learners would like to know how good their performance and find it challenging to accept weaknesses. This case is especially true when imposing the feedback on them. It becomes much easier when learners request and seek feedback themselves.