Linaclotide is a well-tolerated secretagogue and promotility drug. Its side effects are secondary to its mechanism of action. The adverse effects are usually mild and confined to the gastrointestinal tract.

The most common side effect is diarrhea.

Diarrhea often starts during the first two weeks of initiating linaclotide therapy. The frequency of severe diarrhea is higher among the patients receiving larger dosages. If severe diarrhea occurs, suspend the dose, and rehydrate the patient.

Other most common side effects are abdominal pain, flatulence, abdominal distension, the urgency of defecation, fecal incontinence, viral gastroenteritis, and headache. Vomiting and Gastroesophageal reflux disease are less common unwanted effects.

Diarrhea and abdominal pain are the most common events which require dose suspension, decrease in the dosage, or discontinuation of the linaclotide treatment.

Gastrointestinal reactions (hematochezia, nausea, and rectal hemorrhage) and various hypersensitivity reactions (anaphylaxis, angioedema, and rash (including hives or urticaria)) have been reported during post-FDA approval use of linaclotide. Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening type-I allergic reaction mediated by IgE and affects multiple systems in the body. It is an emergency condition that requires immediate treatment with intramuscular epinephrine injection. Urticaria is also a type-I hypersensitivity reaction but involves only skin and subcutaneous tissue and is responsive to oral antihistamines such as chlorpheniramine maleate.

**Overdosage**

The safety profile in 22 healthy subjects who were orally administered the single linaclotide doses of 2897 mcg was consistent with that of the overall linaclotide treated population, along with diarrhea being the most frequently reported adverse event.

**Nonclinical Toxicology (Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility)**

**Carcinogenesis**

In carcinogenicity studies performed over two years, linaclotide was not tumorigenic in mice at doses up to 6000 mcg/kg/day and in rats at doses up to 3500 mcg/kg/day. Based on 60-kg body weight, the maximum recommended dose for humans is approximately 5 mcg/kg/day. At the tested linaclotide dose levels in animals, only limited systemic exposure to parent drug or active metabolite was obtained, whereas no detectable exposure was attained in humans. Therefore, human and animal dosages cannot be directly compared for evaluating relative exposure.

**Mutagenesis**

Linaclotide was not genotoxic in the in vitro studies, including bacterial reverse mutation (Ames) assay and chromosomal aberration assay in cultured human lymphocytes of peripheral blood.

**Impairment of Fertility**

Linaclotide did not affect any reproductive function, including fertility in rats of both genders at oral dosages up to 100,000 mcg/kg/day.