Piloleiomyomas can develop sporadically or present as part of an autosomal dominant genetic syndrome. Multiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyomatosis (MCUL), also known as Reed syndrome, often occurs as a result of a heterozygous germline mutation in the gene encoding fumarate hydratase (FH), an important enzyme in the Krebs’s cycle, which assists with the conversion of fumarate to malate. When piloleiomyomas occur as a result of a genetic syndrome, they tend to occur earlier in life, with an average age of onset of lesions at 25 years old (ranges from 10 to 50 years old). The pathophysiology of the relationship between heterozygous fumarate hydratase deficiency and the production of leiomyomas remains unknown, but it is suspected that fumarate hydratase may function to some degree as a tumor suppressor.

According to an article published in JAMA Dermatology in 2005 by Alam et al., approximately 89% of patients with multiple cutaneous leiomyomas do possess a heterozygous germline mutation in fumarate hydratase (FH). Female patients with FH mutations commonly display both piloleiomyomas (85%) and symptomatic uterine fibroids (greater than 90%). Generally, the uterine leiomyomas associated with FH mutation are larger (up to 10 cm), more numerous, develop at a younger age, and more frequently require hysterectomy in comparison to non-hereditary uterine leiomyomas. However, by far, the most concerning feature of an FH mutation is the association with an aggressive variant of renal cell carcinoma (type 2 papillary renal cell carcinoma) which develops in approximately 15% of patients. Unfortunately, in this subset of patients who do indeed develop renal cell carcinoma, the malignancy tends to be metastatic at the time of diagnosis in approximately 50% of patients. Generally, the malignant renal lesions are unilateral, small, and solitary and there have been reports of metastatic disease in malignant lesions as small as 1 cm. Hereditary Leiomyomatosis with Renal Cell Carcinoma (HLRCC), is synonymous with Reed’s syndrome; and despite the fact that the title includes renal cell carcinoma, patients do not need to have RCC to be diagnosed with HLRCC.