When the ant stings, it does so with its mandible, which locks onto its prey. It arches its body and then injects venom through the stinger located on the abdomen. As it stings, it does so at an average of 7-8 stings. It rotates its body which results in a circular pattern resulting in pain and itching at the site. The venom of the fire ants is used to immobilize or kill prey for food yet has also demonstrated insecticidal, bactericidal, and fungicidal activity. The venom is 95% water-insoluble alkaloid, with the remaining 5% being an aqueous protein solution. It is the alkaloid part of the venom that causes a sterile pustule at the sting site and has cytotoxic and hemolytic properties. The protein portion contains the allergens. The reactions range from immediate localized wheal and flare responses to large, local or systemic reactions which can include anaphylaxis.

The immediate reaction to the venom is an intense burning sensation which explains the common name of the ants. When the sensation subsides after a few minutes, a dermal flare and wheal occur and papules form within two hours. Vesicles develop within four hours and by 24 hours these develop into sterile pustules. A pustule forms as a result of the venom alkaloids, but it is not allergenic.

Another response is the large local reaction, which is characterized by a reaction larger than 10 cm in diameter and associated with localized erythema and edema. They are very painful and pruritic, lasting 24 to 72 hours.

The local reactions of the fire ant sting can cause anaphylaxis, which is a response to the aqueous protein solution. Anaphylaxis usually occurs in those sensitized by a previous sting. These symptoms include flushing, generalized urticaria, angioedema, laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, or loss of consciousness.

Fire ant stings also are capable of causing serum sickness, nephrotic syndrome, seizures, worsening of pre-existing cardiopulmonary disease, and anaphylaxis.