SBME has become an integral part of pediatric training programs. It is useful not only as a training tool but as a means of formative as well as summative assessments. The methodology of curriculum development, along with simulation delivery, has been explored in various studies, and some important principles are necessary to understand to maximize learning outcomes.

Debriefing has invariably been thought of as a key tenet in simulation training and is an example of the utilization of simulation as a formative assessment tool. There is variability on how and when the debrief can occur, but should always focus on reflection with feedback delivered and a learner-centered plan to improve future performance.

Other best practice frameworks to consider when developing curricula in pediatric simulation include deliberate practice, mastery learning, and rapid cycle deliberate practice, all of which exemplify a means of summative assessment (i.e., comparing the learner performance to a benchmark and, ideally, to a minimum level of competency in a skill).

Deliberate practice provides learners with immediate feedback and coaching to allow necessary adjustments to their practice of a skill. Repetitive practice is a key component to deliberate practice and allows for multiple repetitive training/practice opportunities. This strategy has been applied in pediatrics for improved CPR performance and lumbar puncture success in pediatric residents.

Mastery learning takes deliberate practice one step further; the learners practice the skill until they have reached a competency, meaning it is performed at a mastery level without coaching.

Some novel developments in SBME include rapid cycle deliberate practice, which combines the above learning principles into one instructional design. The learner proceeds with a scenario and is interrupted frequently or “paused” to receive corrective feedback from an expert and continues or starts over the scenario in a corrected way. The learner receives many chances to achieve mastery of the skills being taught. This method has been shown in pediatric residents to improve skill acquisition in resuscitation and septic shock management but has not demonstrated long term retention compared to other modalities.

There are currently several published, expert-reviewed, simulation curricula in the field of pediatrics, notably in the fields of pediatric emergency medicine (PEM), and pediatric critical care; this includes longitudinal curricula for pediatric fellows, pediatric residents as well as emergency medicine residents.