There are multiple classification systems for dividing the mediastinum into various compartments, which are used by radiologists, surgeons, and anatomists. While clinically, the Shield system is most popular, Felson classification is more common amongst radiologists.

This classification is more inclusive and divides the mediastinum into:

- Prevascular or the anterior compartment

- Visceral or the middle compartment

- Paravertebral or the posterior compartment.

**Anterior Compartment**

This extends from the posterior surface of the sternum to the anterior aspect of the great vessels and pericardium. Contents include lymph nodes, fat, thymus, internal mammary arteries. Approximately 50% of all mediastinal masses are located in the anterior mediastinum. Most common masses include thymic tumors, lymphoma, thyroid tumors, and tumors arising from the germ cell rests such as teratomas. The thyroid tumors are usually a substernal extension of masses arising from the thyroid gland in the neck.

**Middle Compartment**

This extends from the pericardium to the anterior aspect of the thoracic spine. Contents include heart, pericardium, aorta and its branches, the vena cava, the trachea, and esophagus. The most common masses include lymphoma, metastatic lymphadenopathy. Other lesions include aneurysm of the aorta, pericardial and cardiogenic tumors, foregut inclusion cysts, esophageal and tracheal tumors.

**Posterior Compartment**

This extends from the anterior aspect of the thoracic spine to include the spine and vertebral bodies. Contents include spinal cord, thoracic spine, neurovascular bundle, sympathetic chain. Accordingly, neurogenic tumors are the most common posterior mediastinal masses. These include meningiomas, schwannomas, meningocele. Other lesions include bony metastasis and paravertebral abscess. The posterior mediastinum is also the site of extramedullary hematopoiesis, which can present as soft tissue masses.