Further clinical evaluations are guided by history and physical examination. If the clinician believes that the event is a seizure, the first question is whether it is provoked or unprovoked. Typically laboratory work, including electrolytes, is obtained. Lumbar puncture should merit consideration in patients with fever, a history of immunosuppression, or other factors suggesting possible central nervous system infection.

Neuroimaging is often obtained and is of higher yield based on historical factors or focal findings on the neurologic examination. Imaging is a recommendation whenever there is suspicion of an acute intracranial process in patients with a history of acute head trauma, history of malignancy, immunocompromise, fever, persistent headache, anticoagulation use, age older than 40 years, or focal seizure onset.

For a healthy adult patient who has returned to baseline normal neurologic status who has apparently had a first seizure, determining serum glucose and sodium is recommended. Pregnancy testing is a recommendation in women of childbearing age.

Electroencephalography (EEG) is a biomarker for epilepsy. Focal or generalized epileptiform discharges constitute the EEG hallmark of seizure activity. Frequently EEG is obtained as a risk-stratification tool for a patient with a seizure of possibility of seizures. Should the EEG show epileptiform or other abnormalities, management might change.

Persistent alteration of consciousness or continuing seizures will dictate additional testing such as neuroimaging and other serologic tests. If nonconvulsive status epilepticus is a consideration, arrangements for neurologic consultation and EEG are in order.