# Introduction

Despite the plethora of literature describing the traditional 12 pairs of cranial nerves, very little has been published on the seemingly innocuous nerve known as nervus terminalis, commonly referred to as the terminal nerve, nerve nulla (n), cranial nerve zero “0,” and cranial nerve XIII. However, this nerve has been identified in numerous invertebrate and vertebrate species, including humans, for more than a century.

Studies in adult brains and fetuses have shown its fibers and those of the vomeronasal organ independent from the olfactory nerve embryologically, as early as stages 17 and 18. In the late 1980s, it was named “cranial nerve 0” (CN0) for its position rostral to the official 12 cranial nerves. The CN0 neurons are associated with gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), suggesting a potential role in controlling human reproductive functions and behaviors. It has been speculated to play a role in the unconscious perception of special odorants influencing autonomic and reproductive hormonal systems via the ubiquitous hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG).

Researchers hypothesize that CN0 may trigger hormonal responses independently or together with other neuroanatomical circuits, such as the kisspeptin neural network. In females, these cells are mainly localized in the preoptic area and the infundibular regions of the hypothalamus, posing a riveting sexually dimorphic trait that may have significant clinical considerations. Thus, the presence of CN0 is relevant to medicine from a myriad of different clinical perspectives.

# Structure and Function

The CN0 is located on the ventral surface of the human brain. Its plexiform fibers appear to run in proximity to CNI, the olfactory nerve. CN0 rests on the anterior surface of the brain in the region of the olfactory trigone and courses anteriorly on the medial surface of the olfactory tract and bulb. Medially, it forms a plexus of fibers closely associated with the olfactory stria (medial to the anterior perforated space), from where it enters the brain independently (Figure 1). Its structural composition consists of numerous smaller strands that branch and anastomose, elaborating an elongated plexus (plexiform). Its bilateral bundle of unmyelinated nerve fibers is most evident in human fetal stages. However, it is also seen in adult brains.****Its fascicles can be seen within the subarachnoid space covering the gyri recti surface of the frontal lobe.

In humans and a wide range of other species, the physiology of reproductive hormones is under the regulatory control of the HPG axis, and GnRH plays a pivotal role. The latter is released from the hypothalamus upon the appropriate neuronal induction. Once GnRH is released from the hypothalamic neurons, it potentiates the synthesis and releases gonadotropins, a subset of hormones known as luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) from the adenohypophysis. This, in turn, regulates the production and secretion of the sex steroid hormones (e.g., estrogens, testosterone) that will ultimately command the sexual behaviors governing the biology of our reproduction.

# Embryology

Since the beginning of the 20th century, there have been many studies on the embryological origins and stages of human olfactory structures.

The specific embryological origin of CN0 remains somewhat enigmatic. While some authors have reported the origin of the nerve from the olfactory placode, from where the olfactory cells also originate, others indicate that it comes from the neural crest.

# Physiologic Variants

Although CN0 is closely positioned next to the CNI (olfactory nerve), its functionality is distinct from the classical olfactory sensory role of perceiving odorant molecules via the olfactory receptors (ORs), which belong to a superfamily of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs).

The CN0's proposed neuromodulatory role of sexual behaviors via GnRH poses an interesting connection with the hypothalamic KP neurons. While there are various elegant studies describing the human KP efferent projections, the afferents to this important hypothalamic cellular network are poorly understood.

Furthermore, during the last several decades, the idea of pheromones influencing human sexual behaviors has been a controversial topic.

Despite all these important considerations, recent studies on the VNO suggest this sexually dimorphic structure is just vestigial in adult humans, namely a remnant from our embryological differentiation stages. This suggests that although unequivocally present, this structure is not physiologically active in adult life. Accordingly, the hypothesis correlating the VNO to detecting pheromones in adult humans lacks scientific support. Alternatively, a reasonable notion may implicate the nasal mucosa nerve projections from CN0, transducing the inscrutable chemical signaling from adult human pheromones and regulating the hypothalamic GnRH secretory pulses via the KP neurons and consequentially, controlling gonadotropins and sex steroids secretions in response to the pheromones' chemical cues. However, this conceptual cascade of neuroendocrinological events is only hypothetical since the CN0 projections to the hypothalamic KP neurons are merely speculative. Considering that the VNO may lack physiological competence concerning biological pheromones detection in adults, the CN0 may be a plausible candidate for this novel physiological role independent from the VNO.

# Surgical Considerations

The location of the CN0 fibers is in close relationship to the olfactory tract. Its nerve components conglomerate into a rich plexus of fibers embedded along with the dura mater in proximity to CNI and other nerve fibers. Possibly this explains why CN0 fibers have consistently been mistaken as part of CNI during human dissections, imaging studies, and cranial surgical procedures. Furthermore, the CN0 fibers also travel through the minuscule foramina of the cribriform plate (ethmoid bone) towards the nasal cavity. The CN0 fibers then course on either side of the nasal septum and branch through the septal mucosa bilaterally. Herein, its fibers travel along the olfactory and nasopalatine nerve fibers.

The anatomical positioning of CN0 poses important clinical considerations, especially for otorhinolaryngology (ENT) surgical procedures. Given its potential neuro reproductive role, damage or lacerations to CN0 during routine ENT surgical procedures may compromise its structural integrity and potential functionality. In animal models, the laceration of the terminal nerve has been reported to cause GnRH deficiencies. However, there are no clinical studies to confirm these findings in humans.

# Clinical Significance

In addition to the surgical considerations listed above, it is imperative to acknowledge the existence of CN0 and appreciate its potential medical relevance. For instance, Kallmann syndrome (KS) is an inherited condition associated with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) and hyposmia or anosmia affecting both sexes.

# Other Issues

One persistent argument associated with this nerve is its name. There has been some debate on how to refer to it properly in scientific terminology. While some argue it should remain as the terminal nerve after its location by the lamina terminalis, others have proposed other nominations. There have been several suggestions, including CN0, CN XIII, and others.

Aside from the anatomical nomenclature issues, the reality is that CN0 can function as an important topic for medical teaching. Not only is CN0 anatomically relevant for its long history in the scientific literature, but it is also clinically relevant for its relationship to normal and abnormal development and function, as illustrated by its potential role in KS, commonly caused by a genetic mutation in the kisspeptin or GnRH signaling pathways. Embryologically, the development of CN0 occurs synchronized to the sensory structures of the olfactory system. Developmental disturbances in stages 17 and 18 have been linked to physiological abnormalities of the HPA axis, as described in KS. Also, traumatic avulsion of the olfactory network also plays a role in depression concomitant with anosmia in patients who experience sufficiently traumatic forces commonly associated with automobile collisions. Depression with anosmia has also been linked to symptoms such as reduced sexual drive and impaired recognition of emotion in others.

Medical and health sciences students will benefit from a better understanding of the basic science and clinical aspects associated with traditional cranial nerve teaching, along with the growing body of scientific evidence on CN0. Finally, CN0 is important in principle as a topic of ongoing scientific debates that shape the nature of the evidence-based practice that underpins medicine. Scientific knowledge evolves, resulting in changes to standards of practice and treatment options requiring medicine students to be "lifelong learners" for their patients' benefit.