HVS is an oncological emergency, and timely treatment can prevent life-threatening complications such as thromboembolic events, myocardial infarction, and catastrophic ischemia that result in multiple organ failure. Therapy should be based on the severity of signs and symptoms rather than the calculated degree of viscosity. Most signs and symptoms are reversible with prompt treatment. Short-term management is directed at symptom control, whereas long-term management is directed at controlling the underlying hematologic condition. The mainstays of treatment include supportive therapy, plasma exchange or plasmapheresis, and chemotherapy. Dehydration can worsen HVS, and these patients are usually dehydrated. Therefore, judicious fluid administration is advised. It is considered common practice to empirically administer 1 to 2 L of normal saline when HVS is suspected. The more definitive short-term treatment is plasmapheresis. It can promptly reverse most clinical manifestations of HVS and is usually well-tolerated and safe. Plasmapheresis can decrease serum viscosity by 20% to 30% and can be done on a daily basis until clinical resolution of symptoms.  Patients can present with concurrent anemia or acquire dilutional anemia secondary to fluid resuscitation, and it is important to note that transfusion of packed red blood cells can increase blood viscosity. Therefore, one should wait until after plasmapheresis has reduced serum viscosity before transfusing.

If prompt plasmapheresis cannot be obtained, a temporizing measure that can be performed emergently is intravenous phlebotomy. This involves phlebotomizing about 1 to 2 units of the patient's blood and concurrently replacing it with normal saline. However, this has to be performed with caution because aggressive plasma exchange can cause the elimination of clotting factors, albumin, and platelets. Phlebotomy should only be completed in the presence of severe neurological deficits like seizures or coma.

The definitive treatment of HVS involves chemotherapy for the underlying hematologic condition. Plasmapheresis does not affect the underlying disease, so chemotherapy is often started concomitantly. A hematology/oncology consultant should administer this, and it is strongly recommended to consult with this expert as soon as HVS is identified. Since exchange therapies such as plasmapheresis and leukapheresis are the mainstay of management, these patients may require transfer to a higher level of care facility.