The usual labs are not specific for Wilms tumor but need to be ordered to look for other pathologies. Routine blood work includes:

- Complete blood count to look for anemia

- Chemistry profile

- Renal function

- Urinalysis

- Coagulation studies

- Cytogenetics studies to look for 1p and 16q deletion.

Imaging studies utilized include the following:

- Renal ultrasonography (often the initial study) but is operator dependent

- Chest x-ray to look for lung metastases

- Abdominal and chest CT with sedation

- Abdominal MRI is an optional study.

Imaging is particularly important in surgical planning. Surgical risk factors include larger tumor size, contralateral tumor extension, and displacement of the great vessels, which typically result in longer surgical times, increased blood loss, and higher complications rates.

The most common site of metastases is the lungs, so chest imaging is recommended. Abdominal CT and MRI appear to be about equal in diagnosing Wilms, so either can be used. Metastases to bones are uncommon but ominous and typically develop later as a relapse or recurrence.

Recently, MRI diffusion studies have possibly made it easier to differentiate Wilms tumor from neuroblastoma, the other common abdominal malignancy in children. It was found that the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) was substantially higher for Wilms. This differentiation is critical as the treatments for these two tumors are different. It was suggested that a cutoff ADC value of greater than or equal to 0.645 × 10 - 3 mm2 per second be used with higher values suggesting Wilms and lower values indicating neuroblastoma. While useful, this will need to be confirmed with additional studies before it can be considered a reliable indicator.