It is essential to consider that any liver cell injury can cause an increase in ALT serum levels.

Viral hepatitis is liver inflammation from hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E. Acute hepatitis A, in comparison with both Hepatitis C and B, is associated with higher increases in serum ALT and AST levels, reaching the levels of 3000 to 4000 IU/L for each. The diagnosis of chronic hepatitis will have elevations in ALT levels for greater than six months.

The most efficient aminotransferase threshold for diagnosing acute liver injury lies at seven times the URL (sensitivity and specificity >95%).

The persistence of increased ALT for longer than six months after an episode of acute hepatitis is used to diagnose chronic hepatitis.

Ischemic liver injury, also known as ischemic hepatitis, occurs when there is an acute reduction in blood perfusion to the liver, leading to necrosis of hepatic centrilobular cells on histology.

Medications can account for an elevation in ALT. Paracetamol toxicity (also known as acetaminophen) has been shown in a recent study to account for almost half of the drug-induced liver injuries. In paracetamol toxicity, the levels of serum ALT are usually higher than 1,000 U/L.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) should merit consideration among the most common cause of abnormally elevated ALT levels in asymptomatic patients.

In 1957, DeRitis described in a publication the ratio between AST and ALT in the diagnosis of viral hepatitis, where ALT is usually higher than AST.