Candida albicans cause thrush when normal host immunity is disturbed. The organism may overgrow on the oral mucosa causing desquamation of epithelial cells and accumulation of keratin, bacteria,  and necrotic tissue. This debris form a pseudo-membrane, which adheres closely to the mucosa. This membrane may rarely involve extensive areas of edema, ulceration, and necrosis of underlying mucosa.

Neonates affected with thrush are usually colonized by C. albicans during passage through the affected vagina; with an active vaginal yeast infection, the chances of development of thrush in the neonate increase.

There are three major routes by which Candida reaches the bloodstream: the most frequent route is via the gastrointestinal tract mucosal barrier, others being through an intravascular catheter and from a localized infection. Candida can pass into the bloodstream in neutropenic patients as well as in intensive care unit patients. They are also a part of the normal gut microflora, and any condition that may make a person immunocompromised can lead to candidiasis in the bloodstream. Candida growth of indwelling catheters, especially central lines, can occur at either the implantation site or the hub and lead to the next infection with Candida. Bloodstream invasion is not common from a localized infection but frequent with ascending Candida urinary tract infection associated with either intrinsic obstruction or extrinsic compression.

Vulvovaginal candidiasis may be triggered by the use of local or systemic antimicrobial therapy, and it may also precipitate recurrent episodes of disease. The exact mechanism by which antibiotics cause candidal vulvovaginitis is still unknown. Hypothetically, the pathophysiology of vulvovaginitis may be due to reduction or change of normal vaginal flora, restraints of yeast colonization, and proliferation.