Initial management that is required of the emergency medicine physician includes prompt recognition and management of an ankle dislocation. As stated previously, the exam should at a minimum include a neurovascular status of the affected leg along with full-body assessment for concomitant or distracting injuries. Unless a neurovascular compromise is suspected, x-rays should be obtained to rule out other mimics including tibial fractures and/or subtalar dislocations (if a neurovascular compromise is suspected, an x-ray should not delay attempts at an immediate closed reduction). While this is occurring, it is the role of nursing to obtain IV access, administer appropriate analgesia and start preparing for conscious sedation or intra-articular hematoma block.

Closed reduction can be performed by either the emergency medicine provider, podiatry or orthopedic specialists, however, it has been shown that orthopedic surgeons have higher rates of success on the first attempt as compared to emergency physicians.

Patients should also have easy access to orthopedic follow-up and an emergency phone number to call in case of questions or concerns after being discharged from the emergency department.  Patients may have issues with their splint or issues with pain that may need to be addressed urgently and they should have easy access for these problems to be addressed.  There should also be coordination with the emergency department and orthopedic follow-up in which patients can be referred to the orthopedic specialist and be seen within one to two weeks of injury.  Some orthopedic clinics will have "fracture clinic" or "fracture appointments" which are times set aside for acutely injured patients so that, in a case of a busy orthopedic practice, these patients are not put on the same waiting list for appointments as elective patients.