The four most common histological types of epithelial ovarian cancer are serous, endometrioid, clear cell, and mucinous tumor.  They have further subtypes based on their peculiar biology and treatment responses. The uncommon subtypes are Brenner and seromucinous.

Ovarian cancer can be further classified into two subtypes- Type I or Type II tumors, the latter being a more fatal variant, thought to be caused by continuous ovarian cycles leading to inflammation and endometriosis. Type I tumor includes low-grade serous, endometrioid, clear-cell, and mucinous carcinomas, with the rare subtypes being seromucinous and Brenner tumors. Type I tumors mostly arise from atypical proliferative (borderline) tumors. Type II tumors include high-grade serous carcinoma, carcinosarcoma, and undifferentiated carcinoma, which mainly originate from serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma. Type I tumors usually present at an early stage and are low grade except for clear cell, which is considered high grade. Their proliferative activity is usually low. They are diagnosed early and carry a good prognosis. In comparison, Type II tumors are high-grade tumors and almost always of advanced stage. They have high proliferative activity with rapid and aggressive progression and a high degree of chromosomal instability compared to type I with the presence of p53 mutations in most of the cases.

Ovarian serous carcinoma is the most common subtype of ovarian carcinoma. It presents as low-grade (10% of all the serous subtype tumors) or high-grade carcinoma (90% of all the serous subtype tumors).  The low-grade subtype (LGSC) shows minimal nuclear atypia, rare mitosis, and lesser molecular abnormalities. In contrast, the high-grade subtype (HGSC) shows significant nuclear atypia and mitosis (>12 per 10 high-power fields) with more copies of molecular abnormalities as seen by cytogenetic analysis.

Ovarian endometrioid carcinomas have been postulated to be derived from endometriosis. Morphologically, their cut sections reveal cystic areas showing soft masses and bloody fluid, with less common solid areas showing extensive hemorrhage and necrosis. No major molecular markers have been studied in this subtype; however, the beta-catenin gene mutation is noted to be one of the most common molecular abnormalities. One can differentiate between the endometrioid carcinoma arising from ovaries and uterus based on the molecular studies, even though they appear quite similar morphologically. Ovarian endometrioid cancers have microsatellite instability and PTEN alterations less frequently than the ones arising from the uterine cavity.

Ovarian mucinous carcinoma (MOC) is often heterogeneous, where a mixture of elements, including benign and malignant tumors, are found in a single specimen. KRAS mutations are common in these tumors. As commonly associated with metastases from the gastrointestinal tract (GI), the intestinal subtype will show the presence of glands with architectural and cytology clinical features of adenocarcinoma; however, it may lack stromal invasion.

Ovarian clear cell carcinomas are less prevalent and account for <5% of ovarian carcinoma. Histopathologically they show cellular clearing, cystic growth pattern, and a characteristic hobnail growth pattern. Immunohistochemically, overexpression of BAX in stage I and stage II tumors is predominant, whereas anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2 is expressed more in metastatic lesions than in primary lesions.  A lower relative BCL-2/BAX ratio is found in early-stage ovarian clear cell carcinoma tumors as compared to the higher relative ratio found in metastatic lesions.

Cytokeratin-7 (CK7) shows diffuse and strong staining in all serous ovarian tumors. It is positive in 80% to 100% of mucinous ovarian tumors, and other ovarian epithelial tumors also show positivity for CK7. About 96% of ovarian adenocarcinomas were positive for CK7 compared to metastatic colorectal, which shows about a 25% positivity.