As stated above, definitive surgical repair requires the identification and measurement of several pelvic structures, including:

- Length of the common channel

- Length of the urethra

- Presence and length of a vagina

- Presence of a hemivagina or longitudinal vaginal septum

- The presence of a cervix (or multiple cervices)

- Visualization of the height of the rectum and location of the rectal fistula

The length of the common channel and urethra are critical for surgical planning (e.g., to decide whether to perform a urogenital separation or total urogenital mobilization). The 3 cm common channel is traditionally taught as the cutoff between simple and complex cloacas. The presence and length of the patient’s native vagina are necessary to determine the likelihood of needing to perform a vaginal replacement at the time of PSARVUP. Additional details of the gynecologic anatomy are necessary as any necessary gynecologic procedures (e.g., vaginal septum excision) can be performed simultaneously. This information is also necessary for long-term gynecologic counseling. Precise knowledge of the location of the rectum is necessary to correctly identify whether it is reachable from a posterior sagittal approach or if laparoscopy or laparotomy will be needed. This decision will have a significant effect on the anesthetic plan as well as the postoperative care of the patient.

No standardized imaging protocols exist at present, but endoscopy and 3D cloacagram are two useful modalities to assess the patient’s anatomy.