# Continuing Education Activity

Thoracic aortic aneurysms require a prompt diagnosis as most patients are asymptomatic until dissection or rupture of the aorta occurs, leading to worsened patient morbidity and mortality. Improving the interprofessional team’s vigilance during the patient evaluation, keeping thoracic aortic aneurysm as a differential diagnosis, and understanding the findings to look forward to during testing can lead to timely diagnosis and management.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the etiology of thoracic aortic aneurysms. 
- Summarize the evaluation findings in a patient with a thoracic aortic aneurysm.
- Review the management options available for thoracic aortic aneurysms. 
- Describe the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional teams to improve outcomes for patients presenting with thoracic aortic aneurysms.

# Introduction

The thoracic aorta consists of the aortic root, ascending aorta, aortic arch, and the descending aorta.

# Etiology

Male gender, increased age, history of hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), coronary artery disease, smoking, and previous aortic dissection are risk factors of TAA.

# Epidemiology

In the United States, about 13000 patients die because of aortic disease each year, and TAA is the 18 most common causes of death among all individuals.

# Pathophysiology

Both biochemical and mechanical factors lead to the formation of thoracic aortic aneurysms. The discrepancy between the wall structure elements, including elastin and collagen, proteoglycans, and proteolytic and inflammatory mediators (transforming growth factor-B [TGF-B]), leads to wall weakness and expansion.

# Histopathology

The ascending aorta contains three layers. The intimal layer consists of a single layer of endothelial cells. The medial layer is composed of elastin, smooth muscle cells, extracellular matrix, and collagen. An external layer of adventitial tissue is present, which also houses the nerves and vasa vasorum. In an aortic aneurysm, the elastic layer breaks up, and the smooth muscle cells become defective. In due course, a cystic appearing mucoid material replaces the contents of the medial layer, leaving behind the intima and adventitia only.

# History and Physical

Almost all patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms are asymptomatic.

# Evaluation

A contrast-enhanced CT scan is the most widely used imaging technique to diagnose thoracic aortic aneurysms. It is readily available and aids in rapid assessment of the size, extent, and location of the aneurysm. Calcifications, dissections, and mural thrombus can also be clearly visualized.

MRI provides an axial and 3-D reconstruction of the ascending aorta. Contrast-enhanced MR angiography with gadolinium allows more accurate measurements of the aorta and its branches.

Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) accurately diagnoses aortic aneurysms and dissections and is a reliable technique to measure the annulus, sinus, sinotubular junction, and ascending dimensions.

Ascending aortography can demonstrate crisp images of the aortic contour and loss of the typical “waist” of the sinotubular junction during an aneurysm evaluation, although size measurements cannot be made.

PET scans are a newer diagnostic test and can show areas that “light up,” indicating increased metabolic activity depicting inflammation, signifying impending rupture, and should warrant prophylactic surgery.

A chest x-ray may show a convex contour of the right superior mediastinum, indicating an aortic aneurysm. In the lateral chest x-ray, there would be an absence of the retrosternal airspace in cases of an ascending aortic aneurysm.

Electrocardiogram (EKG) may demonstrate changes associated with aortic insufficiency, which would show signs of strain and left ventricular hypertrophy. Patients with concomitant coronary artery disease would show ST elevation or depression.

Genetic testing can now be employed to assess for TAA. Whole-exome and genome sequencing are effective in analyzing genes associated with thoracic aortic disease. Patients with high-risk genotypes, including MYLK, ACTA2, and MYH11 mutations, can be diagnosed efficiently.

# Treatment / Management

Medical management aims at reducing stress in the aorta, which in turn prevents the growth of the aneurysm. Anti-impulse therapy is essential, and beta-blockers are the first-line drugs as they reduce stress by decreasing blood pressure and contractility.

Surgery in patients with TAA aims to prevent dissection or rupture of the aneurysm.

# Differential Diagnosis

Aortic dissection presents with severe tearing chest pain radiating to the back. It is one of the complications of TAA because of increased stress and aortic wall weakness. A tear develops in the intima leading to the creation of true and false lumens. Patients can also present with hypotension, nausea, shortness of breath with a difference in blood pressure between the right and left arm.

Thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm is an aortic rupture contained by the thin layer of adventitia. They develop following trauma or due to erosion of an atherosclerotic ulcerated plaque. Patients can present with chest pain or deficits due to embolization. CT scanning and angiography can visualize this anomaly. Surgical repair is necessary to prevent aortic rupture.

Aortic intramural hematoma is a hematoma located in the medial layer of the aorta. Usually, no intimal tears are present. They can occur because of a penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer or by thrombosis of the false lumen after a dissection. Surgical correction is required to restore the architecture of the aortic wall as the hematoma is also a precursor for aortic dissection.

# Prognosis

Each year the ascending aortic aneurysm increases in size by 1 mm while the descending aortic aneurysm grows up to 3 mm.

# Complications

Aortic dissection and rupture can happen as a result of an enlarging aortic aneurysm.

Surgical complications include bleeding, stroke, pulmonary dysfunction, myocardial dysfunction, and perioperative mortality. Patients have perioperative mortality of 28.6% during the repair of the descending aorta and 23.4% during the endovascular repair.

In an autopsy study in patients with sudden cardiac death, the TAA complications of dissection and rupture occur between 2 to 7.3%.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

An aorta is a vessel that carries oxygenated blood from the heart up to the brain and then down to the rest of the body. The part of the aorta in the thorax is called the thoracic aorta, and the part below it is called the abdominal aorta. An aneurysm of the thoracic aorta occurs when some part of the vessel is dilated compared to its original size. The ascending aortic aneurysm is the most common type and occurs at the junction between the heart and the aorta. The descending aortic aneurysm is the second most common type, and this occurs in the region of the thoracic aorta facing the legs. Most patients do not have any symptoms, but few patients can complain of pain in the chest or back, cough, or hoarseness. This is a serious condition as most patients do not have any initial symptoms and will develop severe chest pain that goes to the back when the layers of the aorta are tearing apart, which is called aortic dissection. Similar pain can also signify aortic rupture when the aortic aneurysm bursts open. These are the most likely complications of this condition. Male gender, smoking, history of uncontrolled blood pressure, and cholesterol levels are the main risk factors for the development of these aneurysms.

Patients with certain genetic diseases of the connective tissue are more likely to develop an aortic aneurysm in the ascending aorta. They should be routinely screened for the size of the aorta. If the physician suspects a thoracic aneurysm, the patient would be advised to undergo a CT scan to assess the dimensions of the aorta. If the size of the aneurysm is small, the physician will keep on monitoring it periodically. With a diagnosis of TAA, patients should not perform strenuous workouts or lift heavy weights and learn to stay calm and avoid acute emotion as this can increase blood pressure in the vessel, which can dissect or rupture the aorta. Patients who smoke should quit, and those with secondhand smoke exposure should avoid those settings. A bigger size of the aneurysm, rapidly increasing size, or patients with symptoms will need surgery to fix the problem. Patients with a family history of sudden cardiac death and TAA should get themselves evaluated. Recently genetic testing has been offered to screen family members and should be utilized to know if other members have the same disease genes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Coordination among emergency medicine, cardiology, and cardiac surgery is vital in order to follow patients with incidental findings of a thoracic aortic aneurysm. Those patients who do not require surgery urgently should be managed by primary care and cardiology to maintain adequate control of their blood pressure and lipid levels. All these specialties should coordinate as an interprofessional team. Cardiovascular nurses coordinate the care of patients and provide education. Pharmacists review medications, check for interactions, and inform patients about side effects. In cases where patients present with tearing chest pain to the emergency department, physicians should have a high suspicion for aortic dissection or rupture and should notify cardiac surgery immediately. Preliminary misdiagnosis in a health facility is serious, and around 40% hence there should be routine training on early diagnosis and management of the complications of an aortic aneurysm.