The oral formulation of cobalamin is absorbable through the intestine despite the absence of intrinsic factor of Castle. Approximately 1.2% of vitamin B12 is absorbed passively without the help of intrinsic factor. If a patient receives the oral formulation at high doses, this passive absorption is sufficient to replenish vitamin B12 deficiency. If intrinsic factor is present in an adequate amount, then oral cobalamin is absorbed with the help of intrinsic factor. When administering cobalamin parenterally, it bypasses the intestinal barrier, absorbs quickly by diffusion, and enters into the systemic circulation.

In the systemic circulation, cobalamin binds with a transporter protein termed transcobalamin II (TCII) and enters into the tissue with the receptor of transcobalamin II. Cobalamin has many cellular effects with the greatest impact on new blood cell generation and neurological function. At the cellular level, cobalamin act as a cofactor of two enzymatic reactions that involve methionine synthase and methyl- malonyl-co A mutase.

Methionine synthase helps to convert homocysteine to methionine with the help of cobalamin, where methyl-THF converts to THF as a byproduct of this reaction, which helps DNA synthesis. Methionine is an amino acid that converts into S-adenosylmethionine and participates in numerous methylation processes of cells. This methylation reaction is necessary for the synthesis of many molecules such as phospholipids, neurotransmitters, and regulation of gene expression. If cobalamin is not present in sufficient amount, megaloblastic anemia occurs by inhibiting DNA synthesis due to the folate trap. Cobalamin (vitamin B12) in the form of adenosylcobalamin acts as a cofactor for enzyme methyl- malonyl-co A mutase, which converts methyl malonyl CoA to succinyl CoA. Through this reaction, it helps to metabolize odd chain fatty acids and branch chain amino acids.