The diagnosis is made in the background of long-term exposure to one of these inhalants at high doses, in addition to radiological evidence of pulmonary fibrosis. The three major criteria are exposure to inhalants, characteristic chest X-ray, and the absence of an illness that may be mistaken for pneumoconiosis.

The symptoms of pneumoconiosis tend to be nonspecific and may overlap with other pulmonary comorbidities such as chronic bronchitis, COPD, and emphysema. A thorough occupational history should be taken, exploring both the exposure and duration to harmful inhalants. Patients may complain of shortness of breath, decreased exercise tolerance, gradual onset of a nonproductive cough, or might be asymptomatic with only an abnormal chest X-ray. In the case of coal workers’ pneumoconiosis, black-pigmented sputum may be produced.  On physical exam, tachypnea and end-inspiratory crackles may be noted. Friction rubbing or wheezing may be heard when auscultating lungs.

Pulmonary function tests may show a typical restrictive pattern with chronic airflow obstruction, reduction in forced vital capacity (FVC) but the preservation of the FEV1-to-FVC ratio. The diffusion capacity is often reduced and may precede the reduction in lung volumes. Patients’ forced vital capacity, forced expiratory volume in one second are proportionally reduced, and their forced expiratory flow is between 25% and 75% of the FVC.

There has been evidence to show that certain serum and urinary markers are elevated in pneumoconiosis. Researchers found that SMRP and fibulin-3 were elevated in subjects with pneumoconiosis and suggestive of asbestos exposure. They are hopeful that a combination of measuring serum SMRP and fibulin-3, CEA, and urinary 8-OHdG could be used to screen workers.