Preoperative history for implantation of a phakic IOL should begin with establishing realistic expectations for the procedure. A complete history of the refractive stability, comfort, and satisfaction with glasses or contact lenses, the age of first spectacle correction, any history of amblyopia or strabismus should be taken. Frequent change in the prescription of glasses needs to be evaluated in detail for conditions like keratoconus or pellucid marginal degeneration.

Patient’s Age: A young aged motivated patient who has achieved refractive stability and has less than 0.5 D of refractive change in 1 year is an ideal candidate for phakic IOL.

Pupil Size: A scotopic pupil size larger than the optical zone of the implant would lead to glare and halos, which may be severely debilitating in the postoperative period and may even demand explantation of the IOL.

A complete corneal evaluation with endothelial cell count and topography is important before planning a phakic IOL implantation.

A substantially deep anterior chamber is mandatory for a phakic IOL. Most phakic IOLs require an anterior chamber depth of at least 3 mm.

**Relative Contraindications for Phakic IOLs Include**:

- Cataract

- Chronic uveitis

- Low endothelial cell count

- Visually significant retinopathies

- Iris abnormalities

- Angle abnormalities

- Glaucoma

**Indications for FDA (Food and Drug Administration, USA) Approved Phakic IOLs**:

Visian ICL: correction of myopia from -3.0 to -15.0 D and reduction of myopia from -15.0 to -20.0 D with less than 2.5 D of astigmatism at the spectacle plane in patients aged 21 to 45 years with an anterior chamber depth of more than 3.0 mm and refractive stability within 0.5 D for one year before implantation.

Artisan/ Verisyse IOL: Correction of myopia from -5.0 to -20.0 D with less than 2.5 D of astigmatism at the spectacle plane in patients aged more than 21 years with an anterior chamber depth of more than 3.2 mm and refractive stability within 0.5 D for six months before implantation.

**Contraindications for FDA Approved Phakic IOLs**:

Visian ICL: Anterior chamber angle less than grade 2 determined by gonioscopy, pregnant or nursing females, endothelial density in the range 1900 to 3875 cells/mm^2 depending on age.

Artisan/Verisyse IOL: Any angle abnormality, iris abnormalities such as peaked pupil or elevated iris margin, pregnant or nursing females, endothelial density in the range 2000 to 3550 cells/mm^2 depending on age.