Diabetic Amyotrophy or DLRPN is an episodic, monophasic, asymmetrical neuropathy, with acute to subacute onset. The belief is that it is due to an immune-mediated, inflammatory state, resulting in vasculitis with ischemic nerve injury. This disorder may last from a few months, and up to 2 years. Although comparable to other neuropathies seen with diabetes, this disease is associated with less prolonged exposure to hyperglycemia, better glycemic control, tight glucose management, less diabetic micro/macrovascular complication (i.e., retinopathy, cardiovascular disease, etc.) development and a lower body mass index (BMI) than the average diabetic population. This information suggests a less clear association between diabetes, DLRPN, and disease severity.

Due to these findings and the negligible association between DLPRN and pre-diabetes, it may be theorized, that diabetes is a risk factor for this disease and not its primary cause. Abnormal sphingolipid metabolism has demonstrated a critical regulatory role in immunity and inflammation, which could also play a role in the pathogenic mechanism of injury.

Nerve biopsy evaluation has demonstrated degenerative changes secondary to microvasculitis with accompanying ischemia and inflammation, further ratified by CSF findings demonstrating elevated protein. These different degenerative changes due to inflammation and ischemia are presumed to be triggered by an immune response, possibly secondary to diabetes.

Neurophysiology studies (i.e., nerve conduction studies, electromyographic examination) have demonstrated a multifocal process involving: the lumbosacral plexus, nerve roots, and the peripheral nerves (peripheral denervation changes).