The most common and predominant symptoms include joint pain and swelling, usually starting insidiously over a period of weeks to months. Initial joint involvement is typically in the small joints of the hands and feet, followed by larger joints. One of the hallmarks is stiffness, particularly morning stiffness.

As discussed above, RA involves small peripheral joints, usually of the hands. The axial joints can be involved, but this is limited to the cervical spine as there are synovial joints in this part of the spine. The lumbar spine is not involved.

On physical examination, the affected joint will be painful if pressure is applied to the joint or on movement with or without joint swelling. Synovial thickening with a "boggy" feel on palpation will be noted. Joint erythema and warmth are usually absent, and wrist involvement may present with typical signs and symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome. With multiple joint involvements, reduced grip strength will be seen on physical testing. The classical physical findings of ulnar deviation, metacarpophalangeal joint subluxation, ulnar deviation, swan neck deformity, Boutonniere deformity, and the "bowstring" sign are seen in advanced chronic disease. Other findings in the later stages of RA include a reduced range of motion in the shoulders, elbows, and knees. In the feet, hallux valgus is common, as well as other toe deformities.

Rheumatoid nodules are the most common extraarticular manifestations of RA.

Interstitial lung disease (ILD) affects 5 to 16% of patients with RA and is associated RA specific autoantibodies and increased mortality.MUC5B promoter variant rs35705950 is associated with ILD in patients with RA. This gene encodes mucin 5B, and this variant is a gain of function. RA-ILD compared to unaffected controls, the odds ratio is 3.8 (95% CI 2.8-5.2), and RA-ILD compared to RA without ILD, the odds ratio is 3.1 (95% CI 1.8-5.4).

Ophthalmological manifestations include secondary Sjogren syndrome with dry eyes and also dry mouth.