Managing chronic pelvic requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a physical therapist, psychologist, pharmacist, and several clinicians in different specialties. Without proper management, the morbidity from chronic pelvic pain is high. There should be a high clinical suspicion for chronic pelvic pain in patients with a history of chronic pain or various chronic diseases.

Treatment of the primary source of pain and diagnosis of chronic pelvic pain often falls upon the primary clinician. Treatment of comorbid conditions such as irritable bowel syndrome or major depressive disorder is critical in the treatment of chronic pain. Referral to a gynecological surgeon may be required in the case of diagnostic exploratory laparotomy or elective laparoscopic hysterectomy. In some cases of chronic pelvic pain, where the bladder is the likely etiology of chronic pelvic pain, a urologist can be consulted for further evaluation. A pain medicine specialist can perform various trigger point injections into the pelvic floor muscles, nerve blocks, radiofrequency ablation technique, installation of a spinal cord stimulator, facilitate biofeedback therapy, and relaxation exercises. Depending on the severity of the patient's pain, prescription pain relievers may be necessary for adequate analgesia. A pharmacist helps coordinate care and helps aid in patient understanding of their medications, including proper usage and side effects. A physical therapist is a valuable member of the team. The therapist often aids in stretching exercises, relaxation techniques, and strengthening pelvic floor muscles. A cognitive-behavioral therapist aids in the coping and understanding of a patient's pain. The therapist may also have experience with biofeedback. Pain management nurses assist in assessing patients and provide education.

The management of chronic pelvic pain can be a lifelong condition requiring continuous treatment. Only by working as an interprofessional team can the morbidity of chronic pelvic pain be reduced. Multiple diagnostic and therapeutic treatment modalities are helpful in the management of chronic pelvic pain. [Level 5]