COVID -19 is an acute viral illness caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). SARS-CoV-2 primarily affects the respiratory system; however, it can affect other major organ systems as well. Initially, the focus of treatment was directed mainly towards hospitalized patients with COVID-19 illness. However, the clinical focus throughout the pandemic has expanded toward combatting this illness early on by reducing the viral load in patients with early disease, thus attempting to halt the disease progression. Monoclonal antibodies are considered a promising approach in managing non-hospitalized patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at high risk of developing severe illness.

**Mechanism of Action of Monoclonal Antibodies Against SARS-CoV-2**

The pathophysiology of COVID-19 is described by the entry of SARS-CoV-2, the causative virus, into the hosts' cells by binding the SARS-CoV-2 spike or S protein (S1) to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors expressed abundantly on the respiratory epithelium, such as type II alveolar epithelial cells. This viral entry is mediated by the receptor-binding domain (RBD) on the spike protein followed by priming of the spike protein (S2) by the host transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) that facilitates cell entry and subsequent viral replication.

- **Sotrovimab****(VIR-7831):**This is a potent anti-spike neutralizing monoclonal antibody that demonstratedin vitro activity against all the four VOCs Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351), Gamma(P1), and Delta (B.1.617.2). Results from a preplanned interim analysis (not yet peer-reviewed) of the multicenter, double-blind placebo-controlled Phase 3, COMET-ICE trial by Gupta et al. that evaluated the clinical efficacy and safety of sotrovimab demonstrated that one dose of sotrovimab (500 mg) reduced the risk of hospitalization or death by 85% in high-risk non-hospitalized patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 compared with those receiving placebo. Sotrovimab monotherapy was granted emergency use authorization from FDA in May 2021 for clinical use in non-hospitalized patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 who are at increased risk for developing severe disease and/or hospitalization.