**Laparoscopic vs. Open Techniques**

- Over the course of the last decade, significant advances have been made with minimally invasive techniques for the management of benign or malignant processes. In the past laparoscopic techniques were only used for diagnostic staging of pancreatic cancer. Many surgeons are now using either robotic or laparoscopic techniques to perform central, distal, or enucleation resections on the pancreas. Laparoscopic techniques offer the patient less postoperative pain, shorter hospital stay, less intraoperative blood loss, quicker return to daily activities, less postoperative ileus, and overall fewer surgical complications. Laparoscopic techniques are very complicated and should only be undertaken by surgeons with advanced training in minimally invasive surgical techniques. The surgeon must be comfortable with laparoscopic ultrasound techniques, laparoscopic staplers, controlling bleeding laparoscopically, and suturing with an intracorporeal technique.

- If the patient is scheduled for a pancreatic procedure due to a malignant lesion, the patient usually undergoes a diagnostic laparoscopy first. This is performed by the use of a Veress needle for the creation of pneumoperitoneum or by a Hasson technique for cutdown to the fascia with the placement of the trocar under direct visualization of the fascia. After the placement of an infraumbilical or supraumbilical trocar, the camera can be placed into the abdomen with direct visualization of the anatomy. Separate trocars can then be placed under direct vision with the camera. After the other 5mm working ports are placed, graspers can be used to explore the abdomen making sure there is no unseen metastatic disease noted to the peritoneum, liver, or surrounding structures. More biopsies or peritoneal washings can be taken at this time. Once no metastatic disease has been established, the laparoscopic technique can continue, or the team can convert to open for the resection or proceed in a minimally invasive fashion if this is their usual surgical technique.

**Open Techniques**

- The following will describe the usual set up for an open pancreatic surgical operation. The remaining techniques will describe the exact operative maneuvers for completing the case.

- All preoperative imaging was reviewed. Informed consent was obtained. The patient will be transferred to the operating room and placed on the operating room table in the supine position. The majority of the patients undergo a spinal block for postoperative pain control via the anesthesia team. The patient will undergo general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. Depending on patient factors, as well as surgeon and anesthesiologist's judgment and comfort level, an aline and/or central line may be placed.  A formal timeout is called verifying the correct patient, positioning, procedure to be performed, and preoperative antibiotics. The patient will receive a pre-incision antibiotic. A Foley catheter will be placed. The patient's abdomen will then be prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion from the nipples to the suprapubic region. Diagnostic laparoscopic, as previously described, is undertaken first.  If negative, then proceed with a midline incision extending from the subxiphoid region to the supraumbilical region is performed using a # 10 blade scalpel. A subcostal/Chevron incision can also be performed. Once into the abdomen, the falciform ligament should be ligated and taken down for later use if needed. After entering into the abdomen, a multitude of surgical retractors can be used, such as a Bookwalter, Omni -Tract, or Thompson retractor sets. Exploring the abdomen should again be performed to definitely rule out any metastatic disease findings by inspecting the liver, small bowel, transverse colon, mesentery, diaphragm, and peritoneum. The gastrocolic ligament should be entered near the transverse colon to open the lesser sac for visualization of the pancreas. The pancreas is then exposed to the surgical resection that is going to be performed. The exact maneuvers and techniques for the listed pancreatic surgery are listed below.

**Total Pancreatectomy**

- A total pancreatectomy requires exposure of the entire organ. The hepatic flexure is mobilized as needed to allow for a full kocherization of the duodenum extending to the aorta. This complete Kocher maneuver allows full visualization of the head of the pancreas with a direct view of the retroperitoneal attachments. The surgeon can then place their hand behind the head of the pancreas to palpate for any masses involving the superior mesenteric artery meaning that an R0 resection could not be obtained). The gastrohepatic ligament can then be dissected with full circumferential exposure of the common bile duct. The gallbladder can then be dissected from the fossa with separation from the liver bed. The cystic artery and cystic duct can then be fully dissected with clip ligation and division.

- After removal of the gallbladder from the liver bed, confirmation of a replaced or accessory right hepatic artery can be confirmed. The celiac axis can be identified with dissection of this lymph node station. The gastroduodenal artery can then be identified and clamped. The transverse mesocolon can then be examined for the middle colic vein. This can be traced to the inferior aspect of the pancreas to the location of the superior mesenteric vein. The superior mesenteric vein and portal vein confluence can then be safely dissected using a blunt right-angled instrument. After careful dissection, a Penrose drain can be placed between the dissection plane of the portal vein and superior mesenteric vein. Next, the proximal jejunum can be located 10 to 15 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz. This area can be divided using a linear GIA stapler. The mesentery can then be taken down at the bowel edge using a ligature device.

- The newly created jejunal limb can be placed into the supracolic compartment at the defect of the ligament of Treitz. The defect can be closed to prevent any internal hernia formation. The porta hepatis can then be identified with transection of the hepatic duct, just proximal to the ligated cystic duct. The portal vein and hepatic artery can be identified posteriorly. Care must be taken not to injure these structures. The gastroduodenal artery can be further dissected then ligated with the removal of the clamp. At this point, a pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy can be performed or the standard pancreaticoduodenectomy. For the pylorus-preserving technique, the second portion of the duodenum can be dissected with the division of the duodenum 3 cm distal to the pylorus. If the standard technique is to be used, the terminal branches of the right and left gastric arteries can be ligated and then divided at the antrum and body of the stomach.

- The vagus nerve should be identified, division of the antrum of the stomach can be performed just distal to the vagus nerve (typically located at the third crossing vein proximal to the pylorus). The spleen and left colon at the splenic flexure can then be further mobilized. The short gastric arteries can then be taken down using a ligature energy device. The spleen and its surrounding attachments can then be fully mobilized along with the retroperitoneal attachments of the spleen and pancreas. The dissection is then carried from the medial aspect of the pancreas toward the spleen. The beginning of the splenic artery and the confluence of the superior mesenteric vein- splenic vein junction should be identified. The splenic artery and vein can then be ligated at the origin of the arterial take off from the celiac trunk. The small draining veins from the pancreas and duodenum can then be identified and ligated as they enter the portal vein and superior mesenteric vein. The uncinate process can then be removed from the posterior attachments of the portal vein, superior mesenteric artery, and superior mesenteric vein. The venous vessels of the pancreatic head are then taken down with careful dissection and ligation. After fully dissecting out the head from the portal vein and superior mesenteric vein venous branches, attention is turned to the superior mesenteric artery.

- The superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries can then be identified, ligated, and divided. The pancreas can then be skeletonized from the superior mesenteric artery attachments. The pancreas can then be removed and passed off the table for marking of the margins and sending specimens from the bile duct, duodenal, and uncinate margins. After the margins are confirmed, reconstruction is performed. The biliary enteric anastomosis can then be created using the distal end of the jejunum. An end to side anastomosis is performed from the distal common hepatic duct to the proximal loop of the jejunum. This anastomosis is performed in one layer using interrupted 5-0 PDS suture. The ligated falciform ligament can be wrapped around the biliary anastomosis; depending on if the pylorus-preserving technique was performed or the standard technique, the proximal stomach anastomosis can be performed.

- If pylorus preservation was done, the duodenojejunostomy could be placed 20 cm distal to the newly created biliary enteric anastomosis. If the standard technique was performed, then a gastrojejunostomy can be created 20 cm distal to the hepaticojejunal anastomosis using either stapled anastomosis or hand sewn with an inner layer of 3-0 PDS and outer layer of 3-0 silk suture. The anastomosis should all then be checked for leaking. A ray-tech can be placed around the posterior aspect of the biliary anastomosis to look for bile spillage. After confirming all anastomosis are intact and open, the decision can be made to place feeding access with either a gastrostomy tube or distal feeding jejunostomy tube. Closed suction Jackson pratt drains can then be placed in the areas of the newly created anastomosis with placement on the anterior abdominal wall. They can be sutured in place with 3-0 Nylon.

**Central Pancreatectomy**

- A central pancreatectomy allows the surgeon to conserve pancreatic parenchyma if the given lesion is operable with this technique. Central pancreatectomy allows much more conservation of the pancreas with postoperative long-term diabetes outcomes, only being 11 to 12% versus 20 to 50% of distal pancreatectomy patients. The exocrine function is also maintained at a much higher rate with central pancreatectomy, with only 10% of patients requiring supplementation versus 27% of distal pancreatectomy patients. Central pancreatectomy also preserves the entire biliary anatomy and avoids splenectomy. Central pancreatectomy is not indicated for pancreatic cancer as margins that remain may harbor malignancy, and lymph node harvest is not as sufficient. Surgical intervention for central pancreatectomy is only reserved for benign or potential borderline lesions and is thus probably the least likely utilized pancreatic resection surgery. The distal pancreas must have 5 to 6 cm of remaining parenchyma.

- After the entire pancreatic neck, body, and tail are exposed, the neck of the pancreas can be mobilized. The superior splenic vessels can remain intact and do not require ligation. Several of the small vessels running on the neck of the pancreas may need to be ligated for adequate mobilization of this area. The proximal portion of the pancreas can be transected using a stapler with a reinforced staple line. As with other pancreatic transections, the distal part of the pancreas can have two stay sutures placed to help control hemostasis before the transection occurs. The gland can then be transected with a scalpel or energy device. The margins are then sent immediately to pathology to confirm a negative margin. The distal remnant pancreas can then be drained either into the stomach or into the small bowel. If a pancreaticogastrostomy is the choice for drainage, then the pancreatic body must be mobilized off the splenic vessels for better mobilization to the stomach. The pancreas must be mobilized enough for the pancreas to be delivered into the stomach. This is done by making an anterior and posterior gastrotomy. The pancreatic remnant is then placed into the stomach without any added tension to either structure. The posterior stomach can then be sewn to the pancreatic parenchyma into the capsule with either 3-0 PDS or silk suture in a simple interrupted fashion or running technique. The anterior portion of the stomach is then closed in two layers with underlying PDS suture and silk for the outer layer. A drain is then left next to the newly created anastomosis. A jejunal limb can be used for the pancreaticojejunal anastomosis for the pancreatic remnant. The jejunum can be transected 15 to 20 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz. A limb of jejunum approximately 35 to 40 cm long can be passed through the mesocolon opening to lay beside the pancreatic remnant without any tension. The distal jejunum continuity can be restored with a jejunojejunostomy anastomosis. The pancreatic duct to jejunum anastomosis can be performed with an end to side anastomosis. The anastomosis can be created in two layers; the first layer is created by sewing the jejunal serosal layer to the pancreatic capsule in a running fashion. The pancreatic duct is sewn to the jejunum by first making a small enterotomy in the jejunum. The pancreatic duct is then sewn directly to the mucosa with either 5-0 PDS or vicryl. A small feeding tube can be placed through the jejunal wall and placed inside the pancreatic duct to help aid as a stent for the duct. The anterior pancreatic to jejunum anastomosis is then completed using a running 5-0 prolene suture. A drain is left near the anastomosis and pancreatic stump. The proximal pancreas can also be anastomosed to this portion of the jejunum if the stapled edge is felt to be too thick for a secure staple line or if it is thought this area may have a pancreatic duct stricture. This allows the head of the pancreas to drain and may save the patient from developing a pancreatic fistula if the stump were to break down. This anastomosis is performed in the manner as the previously created pancreaticojejunostomy.

**Distal Pancreatectomy**

- When performing a distal pancreatectomy, the surgeon usually knows if this is being performed for a malignant process. If there is a malignant tumor of the distal pancreas, the spleen cannot be preserved. Suppose the resection is for a benign distal pancreatic lesion. The spleen can be preserved. We will discuss both techniques below.

- Distal Pancreatectomy with splenectomy - Once the pancreas has been exposed via entry into the lesser sac by dividing the gastrocolic ligament as previously discussed, the splenic flexure and colon can be further mobilized. The exposure can be from a lateral to medial approach with mobilization of the pancreas and spleen from the retroperitoneum and vasculature with transection of the pancreas, or it can be performed with a medial to lateral approach with transection of the pancreas at the confluence of the superior mesenteric vein and splenic vein and then complete the dissection laterally. Either technique can be used for distal pancreatectomy.

- The spleen can then be mobilized by taking down the splenocolic ligament to help further mobilize the splenic flexure. Gentle medial retraction can be applied to the spleen to aid in mobilization. The short gastric arteries can be ligated using an energy device, and the stomach can be further retracted superiorly and medially to the right upper quadrant. Of note, the surgeon may utilize a stapler for the division of the short gastrics near the gastroesophageal junction if there is not adequate space between the stomach and spleen to avoid the possibility of thermal injury to the stomach.  Once the entire distal pancreas and the splenic vasculature are completely visualized, pancreatic transection can be performed, ranging from the neck to the distal tail. If the transection will be performed on the neck of the pancreas, the middle colic vein is an excellent landmark for finding the superior mesenteric vein. The neck of the pancreas can then be carefully dissected from the retroperitoneal attachments, superior mesenteric vein, and splenic vein. The pancreas can then be resected using either a scalpel or a stapler device with reinforcement. If the scalpel technique is used, first place superior and inferior stay sutures on the pancreas to help aid with hemostasis. Once the pancreas is transected, the identification of the main pancreatic duct must occur. The end of the duct can then be oversewn using 3-0 silk sutures in a figure of eight technique. The remaining pancreatic parenchyma is then oversewn using several U stitches with pledgets. The splenic artery can then be ligated. Prior to ligation, the splenic artery can be temporarily clamped, and palpation of the common hepatic artery can be palpated to ensure that it has not been accidentally ligated. If pulsation is present in the hepatic artery, the splenic artery can be divided using a vascular stapler load or double ligated with a 2-0 silk or prolene suture. After splenic inflow is taken away, the spleen can be decompressed, and the remaining attachments to the splenic artery and vein from the pancreas can then be divided. The splenic vein can then be either ligated with 2-0 silk suture, or a stapler load can be fired across the vein. When ligating the splenic vein, care should be used not to leave the vein longer than needed as this can help prevent thrombosis of the splenic vein remnant. The thrombosis can migrate into the superior mesenteric vein and cause outflow issues with the possible compromise of the small bowel. The spleen can then be mobilized to the midline, and the remaining attachments are taken down. The specimens can then be passed off the operative field to be sent to pathology. The falciform ligament, which was ligated earlier, can be used to cover the ligated splenic artery stump and the distal pancreatic transection site. Hemostasis can be achieved. The decision to leave a drain is surgeon dependent.

- Distal Pancreatectomy with Spleen Preservation - Can be performed when the known distal pancreatic mass is benign. The spleen should be preserved if possible to avoid asplenia and post-splenectomy sepsis. The surgical technique to manage spleen preservation can be performed in two different manners. The Warshaw technique involves avoiding ligation of the left gastroepiploic and short gastric arteries on the initial dissection. If the Warshaw technique is chosen, the splenic artery and vein can be ligated. Splenic infarction with necrosis is one of the most common complications after performance of the Warshaw technique, but late-onset left-sided portal hypertension can also be seen as well.

- Distal Pancreatectomy with islet cell autotransplantation - Over the last 10 to 15 years, this technique has become much more commonly performed after total pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis. Total pancreatectomy removes all endocrine and exocrine function from the patient. Autotransplantation allows the patient to have an endocrine function even after the removal of the pancreas. Patient selection and decisions on who will really benefit from autotransplantation are key factors that must be discussed. Patients must undergo testing to validate adequate islet cell number and function. There are multiple contraindications to performing total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation: if the patient has an active substance abuse, pancreatic cancer, or poorly controlled psychiatric illnesses. If the patient is determined to be a candidate for total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation, the transplantation can occur during the same operative intervention. After the pancreas is removed, it is placed on the back table for preparation. The pancreas is placed into ice-cold water with antibiotic solution and the preservation solution. The gastroduodenal and splenic arteries are then injected with a preservation solution. The pancreatic duct can then be cannulated on the table with an injection of a preservation solution with a mixture of different enzymes. The gland is injected until fully distributed throughout the parenchyma. The pancreas can then be cut into small 5 mm sections. The sections can then be placed into a Ricordi digestion chamber. The chamber can then be shaken. The chamber solution can then undergo microscopy for adequate islet cell count and application of human albumin with centrifugal treatment. The specimen can then be prepared for injection into the portal vein system. To avoid any portal vein thrombosis or portal hypertensive complications, the specimen can be injected with heparin running intravenously. The goal of this treatment is to have the patient remain insulin-free. Studies have shown that up to one-third of patients remain insulin-free while another one third will have a partial function of their islet cell transplantation. The overall goal of total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation is to relieve the patient of chronic pain and to reserve their endocrine function to avoid chronic insulin use.

**Trauma-Related Pancreatectomy**

- Pancreatic injury can occur due to blunt or penetrating trauma. Surgical intervention usually depends on ductal injury and hemorrhage control in the operating room. CT imaging is of great importance for diagnosing pancreatic injuries. Patients can usually be managed non-operatively if a ductal injury can either be ruled out with MRCP or with stent placement via ERCP.

- Pancreatic organ injury scale (AAST):

- Grade 1 - Hematoma- major contusion without duct injury, parenchymal loss, or a superficial laceration without duct injury

- Grade 2 - Hematoma- major contusion of the gland without duct injury tissue loss, or a major laceration without duct injury or tissue loss.

- Grade 3 - Laceration with transection of the distal gland or parenchymal injury with duct injury

- Grade 4 - Laceration to the proximal gland to the right of the superior mesenteric vein with transection or parenchymal injury

- Grade 5 - Laceration with massive disruption of the pancreatic head

**Management**

- As with any trauma-related injury to the patient, the overall goal is to control hemorrhage and avoid further gastrointestinal spillage into the abdomen. The surgeon must have complete exposure of the entire gland. This is described above for access to the lesser sac. A full Kocher maneuver should be performed to visualize the entire pancreatic head and uncinate process. If a large hematoma is noted around the C loop of the duodenum, an ng tube can be passed post-pyloric to help guide dissection. The majority of pancreatic injuries involve minor contusions, hematomas near or on the gland, and at times lacerations to the capsule. These injuries only require hemostasis and drain placement. Repairing a capsule laceration without duct injury can lead to pseudocyst formation. Drainage of the pancreas is usually better tolerated for the patient. The drains should be left in place for at least 10 days so that fistula formation can be recognized.

- Grade 1 and 2 injuries can usually be managed with MRCP to look for ductal injury or ERCP with stent placement if duct injury is found. If a grade 1 or 2 is discovered while in the operating room, wide local drainage and hemostasis is the usual management. Grade 3 injuries are hard to differentiate from lower grade injuries. Nonoperative management of grade three injuries is controversial in the literature. Stenting has a role in management, but it is not the sole management. If the injury is found during exploratory laparotomy and there is a high probability of injury, but there is no obvious ductal involvement to the head, then wide local drainage should be the management approach. If the high probability of injury is noted to the body and tail can be treated with distal pancreatectomy.

- Grade 4 injuries to the pancreatic head and neck are some of the most challenging to manage. If the identification of the duct can not be performed in this area, wide local drainage with post-op ERCP should be performed. If the injury to the proximal neck is found, you must consider the patient's overall medical history if known. This will determine if they can tolerate an extended distal pancreatectomy with resection of more than 80% of the gland. If a large destructive injury is noted to the head, wide local drainage should be performed and resuscitation to allow time for thought for the best overall reconstruction options for the patient. Discussion with an expert in the field is recommended.

- Grade 5 injuries to the head of the gland are very tough to manage and carry heavy patient morbidity and mortality if not managed correctly. Pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple) is rarely indicated in a trauma setting. Patients in extremis in the operating room with pancreatic injuries should have damage control performed with hemorrhage control and then be taken to the surgical ICU for resuscitation. Indications for this to be performed are massive destruction of the pancreatic head, avulsion injury to the ampulla of Vater, or intrapancreatic bile duct or proximal pancreatic bile duct injury. When these injuries are found, they should be managed in a staged manner. The patient’s physiological status should be optimized prior to proceeding with a large reconstruction.

- The main goal of managing the pancreatic injury is to identify if there is a pancreatic duct injury. The duct can be either oversewn or stapled. While in the operating room, if the patient's status allows further time, feeding access should be placed at the initial laparotomy.