Treatment must be tailored to the etiology and symptoms. Viral labyrinthitis should principally be managed by hydration and bed rest in the outpatient setting. However, patients must be counseled to seek further medical help if their symptoms deteriorate or they experience any neurological disturbances (e.g., weakness/numbness, diplopia, slurred speech, and gait disturbance).

In bacterial labyrinthitis, antibiotic type and route depend on the source. Oral antibiotics are the first-line treatment for acute otitis media with an intact tympanic membrane; however, intravenous antibiotics may be necessary if the infection fails to respond. If bacterial meningitis is queried, then treat immediately with intravenous antibiotics while performing confirmatory imaging or CSF sampling.

The initial management of autoimmune labyrinthitis is corticosteroids. If patients are refractory to corticosteroid therapy, other immunomodulators may be considered, such as azathioprine, etanercept, or cyclophosphamide. These agents are often used in chronic conditions due to their reduced side effect profile compared to corticosteroids. However, this treatment should be overseen by a specialist.

While suffering from initial vertigo, patients will want to lie motionless with their eyes closed. They must attempt to mobilize as soon as possible (even if this exacerbates their vertigo), which is believed to help with vestibular compensation and prognosis.

Benzodiazepines and antihistamines can be used to treat initial vertigo. However, symptoms should not persist for longer than 72 hours. Therefore, only short courses of these medications should be prescribed as they can inhibit vestibular compensation. Antiemetics, such as prochlorperazine, should help control nausea and vomiting. Patients with sudden hearing loss should receive a course of corticosteroids and be referred to a specialist.

A small minority of patients may be left with residual tinnitus from sensorineural hearing loss. It is important to recognize the relationship between this and reactive depression and intervene early with treatments such as tinnitus re-training, tinnitus maskers, hearing aids, and/or biofeedback.

Surgical intervention is only required in a minority of cases, for example, mastoidectomy in patients with cholesteatoma or severe mastoiditis. Occasionally patients may require drainage of effusions or myringotomy in labyrinthitis secondary to otitis media.

Once the acute labyrinthitis has resolved, patients may be left with persistent vestibular symptoms, which can seriously impact their life.