**Anatomy**

The stomach is an intraperitoneal digestive organ lying between the esophagus and the first portion of the small intestine, called the duodenum.

The next division is the fundus, a rounded and often gas-filled portion of the stomach that is both superior and left of the cardia. The large, central portion of the stomach inferior to the fundus is known as the body. The fourth division is the pylorus. The pylorus connects the stomach to the duodenum, with subdivisions into the antrum, canal, and pyloric sphincter. The pyloric sphincter serves as a demarcation of the transpyloric plane at lumbar vertebrae level one.

The stomach has a greater and lesser curvature. The greater curvature is the long and convex curvature on the lateral border of the stomach. It curves towards the right as it courses mediately to the antrum. It is vascularly supplied by the short gastric arteries and the right and left gastro-omental arteries. The right gastro-omental artery is a terminal branch of the gastroduodenal artery that arises off the common hepatic artery. The left gastro-omental artery is a branch of the splenic artery derived from the celiac trunk. The lesser curvature of the stomach is shorter and concave and located on the medial surface of the stomach. The angular notch indicates the junction of the body and the pyloric region of the stomach and is the most inferior part of the lesser curvature. The lesser curvature provides attachments to the hepatogastric ligament. The vascular supply to the lesser curvature is the left gastric artery and right gastric branch of the hepatic artery. The right gastric artery comes off the common hepatic artery, derived from the celiac trunk. The left gastric artery directly comes off of the celiac trunk.

There are two sphincters of importance when relating to gastric emptying located at each orifice of the stomach, the inferior esophageal sphincter, and the pyloric sphincter.

**Pathophysiology**

The insertion of an intragastric balloon promotes the feeling of satiation and uses restriction as a mechanism for weight loss. The balloon reduces the stomach's capacity to accommodate food, resulting in a reduced caloric intake. The intragastric balloon typically occupies up to a third of the stomach cavity.

There are nervous and humoral afferent cells from the gastrointestinal tract and adipose tissue integrated within brain stem circuitry. Signals for hunger, saturation, and satiation are provided within complex brainstem circuits. Mechanical stimuli like stomach distention feed the system but are modulated via hormonal and psychological factors like the reward system. After ingestion of food, the stomach undergoes distention and signals saturation via the parasympathetic afferent fibers. By contrast, the brainstem nuclei control the pre-prandial tone and relaxation post-meal. Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated a difference between physiological distention via nutrients versus intragastric balloon distention of the stomach. The mechanic distention by the inflated balloon addresses the region of the brain in which pain processing occurs. This pain processing is part of a visceral pain neuromatrix that is downregulated with the infusion of nutrients. This processing may be part of a physiological process for the body to ensure an adequate intake of food despite experiencing gastric distention.

The processing likely explains the side effects in the first days following the placement of an intragastric balloon and satiety after food ingestion. Functional MRI studies have demonstrated that sweet liquid beverages did not lead to any significant effect on the cortical brain circuits associated with a food craving, meaning that a patient who has an increased intake of liquid calories may not have many benefits from the placement of an intragastric balloon system.

Regarding the hormonal effects on satiation and hunger, ghrelin is a hormone of discussion. Ghrelin is a 28 amino acid sequence peptide, primarily expressed in the gastric fundus and key in weight regulation. Ghrelin stimulates appetite and feeding behavior, energy homeostasis, and carbohydrate metabolism. This hormone does stimulate the release of growth hormone from the pituitary gland. The orexigenic effects of ghrelin are secondary to the binding of the hormone to the growth hormone secretagogue receptors. Ghrelin promotes both adipose depositions as well as lipogenesis.

Besides the restrictive process of the balloon and the hormonal factors, another mechanism for weight-loss post intragastric balloon insertion is gastric emptying. Scintigraphic gastric emptying time post-balloon placement at the three-month mark demonstrated a significant slowing of both solids and liquids in terms of gastric emptying time, positively correlated with weight loss. There is the question of whether the initial effects of the intragastric balloon persist during the entire time of treatment period. Subjective rating of food desires and hunger decreases shortly after the balloon's initial placement, but these alterations have demonstrated to disappear at the two-month mark post-placement.

The proposed slowing of gastric emptying is likely seen with saline or fluid-filled balloons. Once filled with fluid, the balloon sinks to the bottom, distal portion of the stomach, resulting in a longer period of both food and liquids to empty within the stomach. An increased length of gastric emptying leads to an increase in the length of satiation.

Overall, the proposed mechanisms for weight loss during the intragastric balloon treatment timeframe are likely secondary to gastric distention via the restrictive process, hormonal signaling via ghrelin, and the slowed gastric emptying time.