**Carotid-Cavernous Fistula Embolization (Superior Ophthalmic Vein Approach)**

Direct cannulation of the SOV is one important approach to the treatment of indirect carotid-cavernous sinus fistulas. The SOV approach may be considered to access these lesions when standard percutaneous coiling techniques are unsuccessful or anatomically challenging. The surgical technique is briefly described as follows.

After obtaining informed consent, the patient is brought to the angiography suite and placed in the supine position. The upper eyelid is infiltrated with a local anesthetic, and the face is prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion for oculoplastic surgery. A #15 blade is used to create a skin incision in the upper eyelid crease. A combination of blunt and sharp dissection is carried down through the orbicularis oculi muscle, and the orbital septum is incised with Westcott scissors or monopolar cautery. The pre-aponeurotic fat is dissected until an arterialized feeder vessel of the SOV is visualized, which can be followed to the main trunk of the SOV. The surgeon then bluntly isolates and exposes the SOV and enters the vessel wall with an angiocatheter. After confirming catheter location, standard endovascular techniques, including coiling and injection of liquid embolic agents, are used to obliterate the cavernous sinus. The SOV is then occluded by suture ligation or bipolar cautery unless the vein is too large and thick-walled, in which case, primary closure is necessary.

In rare cases where the traditional approaches fail, including transvenous access by way of the inferior petrosal sinus and direct cannulation of the SOV as described above, percutaneous puncture of the IOV has been shown to be a safe alternative. In this approach, percutaneous access of the IOV is achieved with the aid of ultrasound guidance or advanced imaging techniques.