There is no cure for Young syndrome, and the treatment is to control bacterial infection with antibiotics.  Inhaled albuterol and hypertonic saline may help open the blocked airway and loosen mucus in it. The precise management of the sequelae of the disease is not known, so recommendations are based on experience in treating patients with cystic fibrosis and other similar conditions. The treatment must be individualized depending upon the clinical course of a given patient.

Bronchiectasis — Clearing the secretions and reducing the microbial load with antibiotics are the mainstay of preventive therapy.  Daily chest physiotherapy is important in compensating for the diminished or absent mucociliary clearance; additionally, other airway clearance techniques available merit consideration. Antitussive and mucolytic agents are useful for cough and sputum.

Surgical intervention to remove an area of bronchiectasis is very rarely recommended due to the risks of the procedure and the possibility of developing bronchiectasis in other lung areas.

Chronic rhinosinusitis and nasal polyposis: Medical management of these conditions is by antibiotic therapy, nasal saline lavage, and intranasal glucocorticoids for nasal polyposis.

Surgical interventions for chronic sinusitis and nasal polyposis may be recommended in a subset of patients not responding to medical management.

Otitis media with effusion (OME): Chronic OME is common in children and adolescents, leading to hearing loss.

Impaired fertility: Semen analysis should be offered to the patient. In-vitro fertilization techniques, principally intracytoplasmic sperm injection, have been shown effective in this setting. Male patients with Young syndrome might present with infertility secondary to obstructive azoospermia. Followings are step-wise surgical management to address infertility in these patients.

Surgical interventions, including microsurgical reconstruction of the vas and/or epididymis or transurethral resection of the ejaculatory ducts (TURED), might be utilized. However, similar to all couples with the complaint of infertility, before performing the microsurgery in the male partner, diagnostic protocols to evaluate the female partner should not be underestimated. Fertility procedural treatment options might be well categorized into a surgical intervention to ablate the obstruction in the epididymis; **A)****Vasoepididymostomy**or**B)****Assisted reproduction procedures**, including intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Generally, the microsurgical interventions, including vasoepididymostomy to address the obstruction, are more cost-effective than IVF/ICSI. However, sperm retrieval with ICSI might be preferred over vasoepididymostomy in patients with a long-term obstructive issue.

**A) Microsurgical Reconstruction of the Reproductive Tract**

Performing microsurgical reconstruction of the reproductive tract might be considered in patients with Young syndrome as a contributing factor for genetic and or environmental causality of obstructive azoospermia. Vasoepididymostomy might be undertaken, and although the success rate to achieve pregnancy through intercourse for all-cause of congenital, infectious, postvasectomy, or idiopathic epididymal obstruction has been reported for up to 40% of couples, the specific success rate of the procedure for Young syndrome has not been well studied yet. The surgical outcome of a successful pregnancy with intercourse in Young syndrome is mainly operator-dependent in terms of the level of accuracy and delicacy of the utilized microsurgical technique.

**B) Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection**

Intracytoplasmic sperm injection is considered an adjunct to other standard in-vitro fertilization (IVF) methods in patients with Young syndrome. Other assisted reproduction procedures, including intrauterine insemination (IUI) or standard IVF, might be rarely successful in the fertilization management of Young syndrome, as the sperms retrieved via sperm retrieval techniques to proceed with intrauterine insemination (IUI) or standard IVF in these patients are hardly enough motile, however, utilizing ICSI provides fertilization rates of up to 75% per injected oocyte when surgically retrieved epididymal or testicular spermatozoa are obtained. Clinical pregnancy rates vary from almost 25 to 57%, and delivery rates are up to 75%.

**Sperm Retrieval**

Sperm retrieval for use in assistive reproductive techniques may be viewed as the pivot treatment to address obstructive azoospermia in Young syndrome or considered as an adjunct to microsurgical reconstructive procedures of vasoepididymostomy. Common methods of sperm retrieval are microsurgical epididymal sperm aspiration (MESA), percutaneous epididymal sperm aspiration (PESA), and testicular sperm extraction (TESE), and micro TESE. While open surgical testicular sperm retrieval with (TESE) or without microscopic magnification (microTESE) are preferred methods of sperm retrieval in patients with nonobstructive azoospermia, method of sperm retrieval in patients with obstructive azoospermia, including those with Young syndrome, would rarely alter the outcomes of IVF with ICSI. Thus, the route of sperm retrieval should be selected by either percutaneous or open surgery to provide the best quality sperm possible in adequate numbers. Consequently, the retrieved sperms will be utilized for immediate and/or delayed use with potential cryopreservation. Considering recent studies, evidence of direct correlation among fertilization or pregnancy rates with either immediate or delayed utilization of harvested sperms in patients with obstructive azoospermia, including Young syndrome, is lacking. On the contrary, utilizing freshly harvested sperms is highly recommended in patients with the non-obstructive causes of azoospermia. Finally, it would be more cost-effective to proceed with the cryopreserved sperms before the oocyte retrieval in the management of either obstructive or non-obstructive azoospermia. This step-wise management might preclude imposing the unnecessary risk of superovulation on the female partner with the uncertainty of a favorable sperm for conception.

-  Female patients of child-bearing age should be informed about the possibility of reduced fertility and rarely increased risk of ectopic pregnancy.