Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome is a complex, heterogeneous disease that requires a multimodal, interprofessional approach to effective management. The presentation of nonspecific and often chronic symptoms that overlap neurological, cardiovascular, and autoimmune domains makes diagnosis itself a significant challenge; therefore, initiating appropriate treatment designed to address pertinent subtypes may at times be more burdensome. Patient education is essential for establishing expectations and treatment compliance.

A recent 2016 study evaluating 33 adolescents with confirmed POTS who underwent a 3-week an interprofessional rehabilitation program consisting of physicians, physical and occupational therapists, psychologists, and nurses saw significant reductions in psychological stress and functional impairment (class IIb).

As noted above, no current class I recommendations exists for the management of POTS, although exercise rehabilitation is considered an integral aspect of treatment (class IIa). Physical rehabilitation therapists play a crucial role in this regard, and dieticians may alleviate a significant burden of creating and maintaining a cardiovascularly healthy nutritional plan. The ongoing cognitive and psychological disruption experienced by many POTS patients often necessitates establishing a trusting, long-term rapport between the patient and healthcare team, and continuous psychological evaluation and therapy have been demonstrated to improve overall outcomes. Also, pharmacist-directed medication management would impart a significant benefit especially in more serious, refractory cases.

More investigation is still necessary into the complex pathophysiology and treatment of POTS. A collaborative an interprofessional approach should be encouraged and personalized for all patients to alleviate the significant physical, psychological, and functional impairment of POTS.

Diagnosis and management of POTS require a collaborative effort from an interprofessional team, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nursing staff, and pharmacists, communicating effectively to bring about optimal patient outcomes. [Level V]