Primary concern with the high corrosiveness and toxicity of hydrofluoric acid should be through the prevention of exposure.   All individuals that use HF should be aware of the toxic properties of the agent which include information and procedures for safe handling of the acid, appropirate means of transporting and storage, management of waste containing HF, gross and fine decontaminiation procedures and medical treatment for exposure and intoxication.   Hydrofluoric acid should be exclusively used in industrial settings and laboratories that are appropriately equipped to handle the chemical, have appropriate exposure control plans in place which includes having appropriate treatment modalities on site to initiate therapy prior to transport of the exposed individual to the hospital.  Likewise, household and cleaning agents should be stored out of the reach of children.

Personal and general protectice equipment and measures should be implemented and adhered to at all times with equipment including:

- Perosnal protective equipment

- Laboratory coat
- Long pants
- Acid resistant apron
- Closed-toed shoes
- Full-face shiled in conjunction with tightly sealed goggles
- Rubber gloves made from nitrile, butyl or neoprene
- Respiratory filter device

- General protective equipment

- Handled inside of a fume hood
- Ventilation / exhaust system
- Sign "Danger, Hydrofluoric Acid Used in this Area"
- Easy access to a good supply of running water
- Safety shower and eyewash
- Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) document

- HFA Containers

- Polyethylene or Teflon
- Clearly labelled
- Securely supported and not likely to tip over
- Tightly cosed and kept in a safe place
- Away from heat and direct sunlight

- First aid kit / medication

- 2.5% calcium gluconate gel
- 1% calcium gluconate eyewash solution of 0.13% benzalkonium choloride (Zephiran Chloride)

Initial treatment for HF acid includes quick assessment, removal of contaminated clothing, as well as jewellery that could trap HF, should be immediately removed and double-bagged to prevent secondary exposure.  Decontamination with copious amounts of water, saline or solution of soap and water along with neutralization using calcium gluconate, benzalkonium chloride polyethelene glycol, magnesium oxide or Hexafluorine.

The decontaminzation and neutralzing process for hydrofluoric acid exposure is primarily through the mechanical rinsing and diluting effect of water, as a hypotonic solution.  Likewise it has no active ability to bind or chelate any chemical substance with the concerning hydrofluoric acid exposure and thefore neutralizing agents with their mechanism of actions can help reduce the necrosis from the fluoride ion.  Calcium gluconate is the primary neutralizing agent and is capable of chelating the free fluoride ions, forming insoluble salts.  Calcium gluconate should be applied multiple times to mitigate the damage from the fluoride ions.

Hexafluorine solution developed by PREVOR laboratories was designed for active washing of hydrofluoric acid splashes.   The solution has a triple effect in that it has the same rinsing and diluting properties as water, can neutralize the hydrogen ions and chelate the fluoride ions thus reducing the corrosive and cytotoxic effects of hydrofluoric acid.  Though in an experimental study by Hulten et al, there was little difference in reducing the electrolyte disturbances caused from dermal exposure of hydrofluoric acid when compared to water rinsing.

**Treatment modalities**

- Dermal exposure (initially or at the hospital)

- Most commonly used decontaminating procedure is rinsing with cold or warm running water or saline for at least 30 minutes.  Decontamination procedures using a soft brush, moving in a downward motion (from head to toe) with household dish soaps (Dawn, Palmolive) and water, with a pH value of at least 8 and should not exceed a pH value of 10.5, will help neutralize hydrofluoric acid with a low pH.   Rinsing should be thoroughly performed until the contaminant is removed.
- Primary neutralizing process for HF with with use of calcium gluconate soaking, intravenous calcium gluconate (10%), and topical use of calcium gluconate gel (2.5%).

- When used as a gel, 2.5 % calcium gluconate should be applied and rubbed into the affected area for 15 - 30 minutes and should be reapplied every 10 - 15 minutes.  The Calcium gluconate gel will turn white as the calcium binds to the fluoride ions creating Calcium fluoride (CaF).  If used as a definitive treatment, 2.5% calcium gluconate should be applied 4 to 6 times daily, for 3 to 4 days. 


- After 30 minutes, reassess the patient, and if pain persists, subcutaneous infiltration of calcium gluconate is recommended at a dose of 0.5 mL of a 5% solution per square centimeter of surface burn extending 0.5 cm beyond the margin of involved tissue. 
- With the concern for compartment syndrom, injections into the hand should be limited to 0.5 ml per phalanx with repeat injections as needed. 


- Additional topical therapy includes iced solution of benzalkonium chloride (Zephiran Chloride) concentration of (0.13%).  Side effects of use include stinging pain or allergic reaction (urticaria, pruritus, dyspnea, chest tightness, swelling of the face, lips or tongue) or Hexafluorine solution.

- Eye exposure

- HF may penetrate to internal structures.  
- Initial treatment for eye exposure includes irrigation with large amount of gently flowing cool plain water or sterile 0.9 % saline solution for 15-30 minutes. A topical ophthalmic anesthetic solution can be used to help mitigate the irritation from the hydrofluoric acid and water irrigation.
- Intermittent irrigation using a sterile 1% calcium gluconate solution via a Morgan lens for 20 minutes.
- Other treatment modalities include irrigation with Hexafluorine.

- Inhalation exposure

- In high concentrations may cause glossitis (obstruction of the airway) and acute pulmonary edema.
- Management would include artificial respiration for the patient with severe exposure. Individuals who are breathing require 100 % oxygen with a 2.5% to 3% calcium gluconate nebulized solution.
- Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation may be necessary for individuals who develop pulmonary edem.
- Treatment of severe cases includes endotracheal intubation for airway protection and a surgical airway if necessary.

Burns with concentrated HF are usually very serious, with the potential for significant complications due to fluoride toxicity.  Concentrated HF liquid or vapor may cause severe burns, metabolic imbalances, pulmonary edema, and life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias. Even moderate exposures to concentrated HF may rapidly progress to fatality if left untreated. Burns larger than 25 square inches (160 square cm) may result in serious systemic toxicity. Relief of pain is the only indication of the effectiveness of treatment. Therefore, the use of any analgesic agents is not advisable.

A person who has HF burns greater than four square inches should be admitted immediately to an intensive care unit and carefully monitored for 24 to 48 hours. Anyone who has been exposed to gaseous HF and experiences respiratory irritation also should be admitted to and monitored in an intensive care unit. Blood sampling should be taken to monitor fluoride, potassium, and calcium levels. In some cases, hemodialysis is necessary for fluoride removal and correction of hyperkalemia and recurrent hypocalcemia.