Amino acid disorders are identifiable at any age; most of them become evident during infancy or early childhood. Many inborn amino metabolism diseases occur in infancy or childhood. These disorders may include cystinuria, histidinemia, phenylketonuria (PKU), methyl-malonyl CoA mutase deficiency (MCM deficiency), albinism, and tyrosinemia. Other amino acid disorders may be encountered later in life, including homocystinuria, alkaptonuria, maple syrup urine disease (MSUD), and cystathioninuria. These disorders lead to clinical symptoms or signs of the specific amino acid disorder, which results in the deficiency or accumulation of one or more amino acids in the body's biological fluids, such as plasma or urine.

The deficiency of Phe hydroxylase causes PKU. Currently, there are more than 400 mutations have been identified in the gene related to the cause of PKU.

Albinism is a congenital disorder that is the defect of Tyr metabolism leading to a deficiency in melanin production. The characteristics of albinism are hypopigmentation by the total or partial absence of pigment in the hair, skin, and eyes. There is no cure for albinism because it is a genetic disorder.

Alkaptonuria is a rare disease with homogentisic acid oxidase defect, an enzyme in the Tyr degradation pathway. The urine specimen of the alkaptonuria patient shows some darkening on the surface after standing for fifteen minutes, which is due to homogentisate acid oxidation. And after two hours of standing, the patient's urine is entirely black. The characteristics of alkaptonuria include the accumulation of homogentisic aciduria, large joint arthritis, and the intervertebral disks of vertebrae deposit with dense black pigments.

Tyrosinemia type 1 results from a deficiency in fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase, leading to the accumulation of fumarylacetoacetate and its metabolites (especially succinylacetone) in urine, which makes cabbage-like odor. The patients show renal tubular acidosis and liver failure.

MCM deficiency is a disease due to the defect of methyl malonyl CoA mutase, which catalyzes isomerization between methyl malonyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA in the pathway.

Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is a rare autosomal recessive disease with a partial or complete defect of branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase. The enzyme can decarboxylate Leu, Ile, and Val. This deficiency leads to the accumulation of branched-chain alpha-keto acid substrates. These three amino acids cause functional abnormalities in the brain. The urine with a classic maple syrup odor is a hallmark characteristic of MSUD. MSUD patients show symptoms such as vomiting, feeding difficulties, dehydration, and severe metabolic acidosis.

In the clinic, a synthetic formula containing a limited amount of Leu, Ile, and Val is the suggested therapy for MSUD infants. MSUD (OMIM #248600) demonstrates a disturbance of the regular activity of the branched-chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKAD) complex, the second step in the catabolic trail for the branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) that includes leucine, isoleucine, and valine. MSUD can occur early in life, but late-onset MSUD is also common and include neurologic symptoms. These symptoms may include inappropriate, extreme, or erratic behavior and moods, hallucinations, oscillating hypertonia/hypotonia, ataxia, seizures, opisthotonos, and coma.

Cystathioninuria is a rare autosomal recessive metabolic disorder due to a deficiency in cystathionase. It links with the lower activity of the enzyme cystathionase. There are two types of primary cystathioninuria based on the inherited mutation of the CTH gene: vitamin B6 responsive and vitamin B6 unresponsive cystathioninuria.

Homocystinuria is an inherited disorder due to the defect of the metabolism of Met amino acid. The most common cause is the enzyme cystathionine beta-synthetase deficiency, which results in the elevation of Met and homocysteine and low levels of Cys in plasma and urine.

Histidinemia is a rare autosomal recessive inborn metabolic error due to the defect of the enzyme histidase.