The health outcomes can be improved by thorough history taking, using the questions recommended by the American Urological Association. Any neurological disorder must be ruled out by taking a proper medication review, examining the personal and family history, and performing a detailed physical examination, including a focused neurological evaluation. Patients should also receive education regarding catheter use and identifying possible complications such as urinary tract infections. The nursing and care team should be familiar with catheter placement, replacement, and potential complications. For example, it is usually recommended to keep a replacement Foley catheter of the correct French size and balloon capacity in the home in case an immediate replacement is required.

The patient and immediate family should receive appropriate training regarding intermittent catheterization and indwelling catheter care. They should also be educated regarding the need for medication compliance, follow-up examinations, potential side effects, symptoms of a urinary tract infection, and how to recognize a possible emergency condition. Those at risk for autonomic dysreflexia should receive additional education about recognizing the condition and immediate steps for treatment.

Interprofessional teamwork is crucial to successful case management. There should be proper coordination between primary care doctors, urologists, nephrologists, physical medicine, and emergency room doctors. Urology nurses counsel patients, monitor their condition and provide updated information to the interprofessional team. Pharmacists will perform medication reconciliation, verify dosing, and counsel patients on medication administration. All interprofessional team members must meticulously document their interactions and interventions with the patient so that everyone on the team has the same patient data from which to operate. All team members must also be ready to communicate any concerns to other team members, so modifications to the treatment plan can be implemented. By following the above interprofessional team measures, healthcare outcomes can be optimized. [Level 5]