Urolithiasis occurs when solutes crystallize out of urine to form stones. Urolithiasis may occur due to anatomic features leading to urinary stasis, low urine volume, dietary factors (e.g., high oxalate or high sodium), urinary tract infections, systemic acidosis, medications, or uncommonly genetic factors such as cystinuria. The most common cause of stone disease is inadequate hydration and subsequent low urine volume. The other four most common factors contributing to urinary stone formation are hypercalciuria, hyperoxaluria, hyperuricosuria, and hypocitraturia.

The four major types of renal calculi include

- Calcium stones (due to hyperparathyroidism, renal calcium leak, hyperoxaluria, hypomagnesemia, and hypocitraturia)

- Uric acid stones are associated with a pH of less than 5, a high intake of purine foods (fish, legumes, meat), or cancer. These stones may also be associated with gout.

- Struvite stones (caused by gram negative-urease positive organisms that breakdown urea into ammonia. Common organisms include pseudomonas, proteus, and klebsiella. E coli is not associated with struvite stones)

- Cystine stones are due to an intrinsic metabolic defect causing the failure of the renal tubules to reabsorb cystine, lysine, ornithine, and arginine.

Many drugs are known to cause stones and include the following:

- Atazanavir

- Indinavir

- Triamterene

- Guaifenesin

- Overuse of silicate

- Sulfonamide

There also appears to be a genetic association to renal calculi. In some families, there may be mutations that cause a defect in the renal tubular handling of calcium and other substrates.