The causes or inducers of inflammation can classify into two main groups: exogenous and endogenous inducers.

**1. Exogenous inducers.**

This grouping can further subdivide into two classes; microbial and non-microbial exogenous inducers.

**A. Microbial inducers.**

There are two classes of microbial inducers. The first class is pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), which are carried by all microorganisms. The second class is virulence factors restricted to pathogens. Virulence factors trigger the inflammatory response due to the effects of their activity. Examples include enzymatic activity produced by helminths and exotoxins produced by bacteria, which will be sensed by known or unknown sensors.

**B. Non-Microbial**

Causes include allergens, toxic compounds, irritants, and foreign bodies that are too large to be digested or cause phagosomal damage in macrophages. Examples of foreign bodies include silica and asbestos.

**2. Endogenous inducers.**

These are signals released by tissues that are either dead, damaged, malfunctioned, or stressed.

As an alternative, we could also divide the inflammatory inducers into two large groups, which are the infectious factors and the non-infectious factors.

**I. Infectious factors**:

This category includes bacteria, viruses, and other microorganisms.

**II. Non-Infectious factors:**

This group can be due to physical injuries such as frostbite, burn, physical injury, foreign bodies, trauma, ionizing radiation, chemical compounds such as glucose, fatty acids, toxins, alcohol, and chemical irritants such as nickel and other trace elements. Apart from that, there are also biological inducers, including signals released by damaged cells and physiological due to excitement.