# Introduction

Simulation-based education is a widely utilized tool for experiential learning. Simulation techniques can employ a range of fidelity to incorporate realism; moulage is one such technique. Moulage was once the art of wax model making to depict certain conditions for medical education. As medical training has evolved, moulage has transformed into the art of special effects makeup to replicate various disease processes and injuries. Some simulation centers have the advantage of having an experienced moulage artist on staff; however, with some brief training, other individuals can learn this technique.

# Function

Moulage was once the art of wax model making to depict certain conditions for medical education. In the early 1800s, Franz Martens and Joseph Towne were some of the earliest moulage artists. Years later, Charles Lailler and Jules Pierre Francois Baretta worked in conjunction to develop one of the largest collections of wax models for Hospital Saint Louis in Paris. Johann Nepomuk Hoffmayr is yet another moulage artist who was particularly adept at creating a wide range of ophthalmic conditions for educational purposes.

Moulage can be as simple as a bruise or abrasion, or something as complicated as replicating mass casualty injuries such as impalements and burns. Moulage can also include staging an environment to provide even more immersion into a clinical setting. For example, blood pooling on a floor or bed can represent hypovolemia. Personal articles such as photographs in a simulated clinical room can add emotion to a breaking bad news scenario. Clothing can also be modified to demonstrate tears, dirt, etc. for trauma scenarios. Moulage can be effective on both SPs and mannequins. There are some products, such as grease makeup, that stain the silicone-based skin on mannequins. Therefore due diligence should be made to investigate those products before application. The simulation community is growing, and tips and tricks are abundantly published on the internet and within listservs. Lastly, always inquire whether an SP has allergies before applying products, especially those with adhesives and latex.

# Issues of Concern

There are various instructional videos and documents available online showcasing techniques for making a variety of injuries and physiologic patterns. At least one study examined the effectiveness of moulage applied by nonprofessionals (i.e., introductory training versus makeup artists) with learners reporting added realism to their immersive experience no matter who applied the moulage.

# Clinical Significance

The use of moulage consistently appears in the literature as an aid in evaluating, diagnosing, and treating burns and dermatologic conditions.

Moulage application should work in a manner that contributes to realism. Thus accuracy and authenticity are important facets to consider when using this technique; if used incorrectly, learners can become confused as to what the real diagnosis of their simulated patient is, leading to a disintegration of the simulation scenario.

**The Future**

As technology advances, one particular method can supplement and perhaps replace moulage over time. Three-dimensional (3D) printing has become increasingly prevalent in simulation. Models, once composed of wax, are now composed of various polymers and resin. Moulage items, such as skin lesions, have successfully been printed for teaching purposes. Not only does the printed lesion look realistic, but it also feels realistic.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Moulage should be used carefully to ensure it enhances the educational experience and does not become distracting or confusing.

- Used effectively, moulage can greatly enhance fidelity in medical simulation.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Moulage is commonly used in military medicine simulation to demonstrate combat injuries, along with civilian mass casualty exercises. In doing so, interprofessional teams with and across multiple organizations can perform and collaborate to triage patients appropriately.