Acute retinal necrosis is a clinical diagnosis and treatment should not be delayed in a typical case. The classical triad of ARN

American Uveitis Society criteria

For the description of the involved area of retinitis 3 zones have been described (originally for CMV retinitis).

In a patient who presents with clinical findings of acute retinal necrosis, the physician should consider a complete blood count with differential, baseline liver and renal function test, HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) testing, FTA-ABS (fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption), and RPR (rapid plasma reagin), erythrocyte sedimentation rate, toxoplasmosis titers, purified protein derivative skin test (PPD), and chest radiograph to rule out other etiologies.

- An anterior chamber paracentesis or vitreous tap for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for herpesviruses (VZV, HSV, CMV, EBV) and toxoplasmosis PCR can be performed in atypical cases. Though PCR of ocular fluids can support the clinical diagnosis of ARN, treatment should not be delayed for the results. PCR for VZV or HSV in the aqueous or vitreous humor of suspected ARN is positive in 79-100% of cases.

- Viral titers (VZV, HSV, CMV)

- Intravenous fluorescein angiography can also be considered and may demonstrate the occlusive nature of arthritis.

- Optical coherence tomography of the macula and optic nerve head may be considered and may show cystoid macular edema/ epiretinal membrane or disc edema.

- Ultrawide field fundus photography (Optos) may document and help in monitoring the progression of the disease.

- Ultrasonograms may be helpful to rule out retinal detachment in hazy media.

- If intraocular lymphoma, tertiary syphilis, or encephalitis is suspected, then a CT scan or MRI of the brain and lumbar puncture should be performed.