As mentioned previously, glutamate is stored within vesicles in axon terminals and released via exocytosis upon the influx of calcium cations. Once in the cleft, glutamate binds to its reciprocal receptors precipitating either ion influx (ionotropic receptors) or signal transduction cascades (metabotropic receptors), which then activate second messengers, ultimately regulating gene expression via neuroactive chemical release. Glutamate is subsequently removed from the synaptic cleft via glutamate transporters, which are present on adjacent glial cells, as well as presynaptic terminals. Once transported into the glial cell, glutamate undergoes conversion to glutamine and is transported back into the nerve terminal where it is ultimately converted back into glutamate. Glutamate connects the metabolic processes of neurons with those of astrocytes via the glutamate-glutamine cycle. Astrocytes, which account for a large proportion of brain mass and nutritional demand, act as meta compartments for up to 20% of the total glutamate in the brain. After neuronal release, glutamate accumulates in astrocytes, converted to glutamine via glutamine synthetase (an enzyme not found in neurons), phosphorylation, and ammonium (NH4). Astrocytes can also synthesize glutamate de novo and release it via exocytosis due to another enzyme not found in neurons, pyruvate carboxylase, which generates the glutamate precursor alpha-ketoglutarate. This synthesis seems to increase during brain activation, e.g., during memory formation. Neurons cannot synthesize glutamate or gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter, de novo from glucose. Instead, they hydrolyze glutamate to glutamine via mitochondrial glutaminase at glutamatergic synapses or convert it via glutamate decarboxylase to GABA.