Split-thickness skin grafts contain the **epidermis**and a portion of the**dermis**. The**epidermis**is the outermost layer of skin, comprised primarily of keratinocytes. The epidermis is a thin, semitransparent layer that provides a significant barrier function. The epidermis also includes melanocytes, Langerhans cells, Merkel cells, and nerve endings. Skin adnexal structures, including hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands, are epidermal derivatives that invaginate into the dermis. Stem cells from the adnexal structures, specifically hair follicles, are responsible for the reepithelialization of skin graft donor sites. The**dermis**is the fibrous layer below the epidermis composed of collagen, glycosaminoglycans, and elastin. The upper portion of the dermis, the papillary dermis, contains plexi of blood vessels and nerves. These plexi provide nutrients to the epidermis via diffusion. The undulating surface between the epidermis and papillary dermis portends stability between the two layers. The deeper portion of the dermis, the reticular dermis, contains robust collagen fibers. The dermis provides strength and stability to STSGs.

As mentioned above, STSGs do not have their own blood supply, so they must rely on the underlying wound bed for nutrients and blood supply. Presuming a stable, healthy, and well-vascularized wound bed, skin grafts take occurs in three commonly described steps:

- Imbibition:

- The skin graft passively absorbs oxygen and nutrients from the wound bed. During this phase, the skin graft is ischemic and survives on diffusion alone until reestablishing graft vasculature. The graft is pale/white during this time. Split-thickness skin grafts can tolerate up to 4 days of ischemia.

- Inosculation:

- A vascular network is established between the cut vessels on the underside of the skin graft and the capillary beds in the wound bed, establishing a vascular connection. The graft becomes pink at this point. Inosculation typically occurs at around 48 hours after graft placement.

- Revascularization 

- Several hypotheses exist regarding the exact mechanism of revascularization. The neovascularization theory is of new vessel ingrowth into the graft from the recipient wound bed. The endothelial cell ingrowth theory suggests that endothelial cells proliferate and slide from the recipient site by following pre-existing vascular basal lamina as structure, with graft endothelial cells eventually degrading.

Clinically, skin grafts are secured into place and often bolstered until postoperative day 5 to 7 to allow the skin graft to go through the above steps, ensuring the best skin graft take. Split-thickness skin grafts are typically adherent after 5 to 7 days upon completion of the stages of wound healing. Once the graft has integrated into the wound bed, it undergoes a maturation process that takes over one year to complete. Skin graft maturation can last up to several years in burn patients. The maturation process includes changes in pigmentation, flattening, and softening. Even after maturation, meshed split-thickness skin grafts may maintain a cobblestone appearance.

Split-thickness skin grafts can be meshed to increase the overall size of the graft, which is useful in cases where the wound size is greater than the available donor site. In a meshed graft, the bridges of meshed skin follow the above phases of skin graft take — the spaces between the skin heal via epithelialization from the skin bridges. Meshing can occur in various ratios such as 3/8 to 1, 1 to 1, 2 to 1, 3 to 1, and even 6 to 1. The greater the ratio, the larger the spaces between the skin bridges, and the more epithelialization necessary to heal the space in-between. Meshing a skin graft effectively expands the skin graft to increase the area that can be covered by the skin graft. Additionally, the holes between skin bridges act as drainage holes to prevent fluid, blood, or seroma build-up between the recipient wound bed and skin graft, which would cause graft failure.