Hodgkin lymphoma is a systemic disorder that is best managed by an interprofessional team for best outcomes.

The management of Hodgkin lymphoma is primarily by the oncologists. However, the patient may first present to the primary care provider or nurse practitioner with symptoms suggestive of the lymphoma. The key is prompt referral so that therapy can be initiated.

Treatment of Hodgkin lymphoma largely depends on the histologic characteristics, the stage of the disease, and the presence or absence of prognostic factors. The goal of treatment for patients with Hodgkin lymphoma is to cure the disease with control of short and long-term complications.

The pharmacist has to educate the patient on the drugs, their benefits, and side effect profile. In addition, the pharmacist has to ensure that the patient has had the recommended preoperative workup before dispensing the drugs. The oncology nurse should monitor the patient for acute side effects of the chemotherapeutic drugs and educate the patient on minimizing complications.

Because many patients develop anxiety and depression, a mental health provider should provide appropriate counseling.

The dietitian should be involved in educating the patient on foods to eat and what to avoid.

The interprofessional team has to meet on a weekly basis to discuss patient care and future therapy. The communication between the members should be clear and open to ensure that the patient's treatment has not been jeopardized. Finally, if the patient is terminal, a hospice care team should be involved.

Outcomes

Prognosis depends on several prognostic factors, including disease stage. Disease stage is currently only one factor in the prognostic indices used for pretreatment risk stratification and assessment. The 5-year overall survival (OS) in stage 1 or 2a is approximately 90%; on the other hand, stage 4 disease has a 5-year OS of approximately 60%.