Evaluation and management of every patient should begin with ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation, disability, and exposure). Usual airway and circulatory support are necessary with two exceptions. During intubation, succinylcholine should not be used because the lack of acetylcholinesterase caused by the poisoning will cause prolonged paralysis. Aggressive decontamination is necessary. All clothing should be removed and discarded. The skin and eyes should be washed to avoid continued absorption of the agent. Healthcare workers should wear protective gear to prevent dermal and inhalation exposure to the agent.

Once suspected, treatment should consist of IV administration of atropine and pralidoxime. Atropine is given first, as pralidoxime may transiently worsen symptoms. Atropine acts as a direct antidote physiologically by antagonizing the muscarinic receptor's actions of excessive acetylcholine such as bronchorrhea, bradycardia, salivation, and bronchoconstriction. Atropine can cross the blood-brain barrier and can help decrease the activity of centrally acting excess acetylcholine. The initial dose of IV atropine is 2 to 5 mg in adults and 0.05mk/kg in children every 5 minutes until pulmonary symptoms improve. Atropine must be titrated to alleviate bronchorrhea and bronchospasm; this may require large doses of atropine and treatment may continue for several days. The hospital pharmacy should receive advance notice that an extra atropine supply may be necessary.

Because atropine does not bind to nicotinic receptors, it does not treat neuromuscular dysfunction. Oximes such as pralidoxime have three actions that show benefit in acute cholinergic toxicity. Pralidoxime reactivates acetylcholinesterase, provides endogenous anticholinergic effects, and detoxifies unbound organophosphates. Oximes are used to work on the nicotinic neuromuscular junction and therefore should be given when there are signs of muscle weakness, especially if the weakness is occurring within the respiratory system.

Seizures should receive therapy with benzodiazepines, not anti-epileptics. Prophylactic diazepam decreases neuropathological damage after organophosphate poisoning.