**HPI**

Allodynia is a symptom, not a disease. It may be a patient’s chief complaint, but it is important to investigate further to determine the disease process causing the allodynia.

First, one should inquire when and how the allodynia started. Often, there is an instigating event, e.g., chemotherapy, herpes, or trauma. Sources suggest allodynia can develop more abruptly, as in trigeminal neuralgia, or may develop more insidiously, as in allodynia associated with diabetes. Other questions to ask the patient: Is the allodynia progressive? Does the pain wax and wane, or is it fairly constant? What is the quality of the pain? What have they tried for the pain? What makes it better, and what makes it worse? Is the pain associated with tactile stimuli, with movement, with temperature, or something else?

A thorough examination of past medical, surgical, and family history is also warranted, particularly for cancer, diabetes, hypertension, strokes, migraines, rheumatological history, trauma, extreme stress, and opioid history. Be sure to have an updated list of medications to spot possible iatrogenic neuropathy. Please refer to the differential diagnosis section for a list of diseases that can cause allodynia. Lastly, the IASP has published an article to assist clinicians in identifying the type and extent of neuropathic pain with which a patient is presenting.

**Physical Exam**

On physical exam, allodynia is often present with a smaller stimulus than compared to hyperalgesia. Performing a complete neurological exam is essential; this includes isolating light touch vs. temperature vs. proprioception sensory exams, along with motor and strength testing. It is critical to test the “unaffected” side, even if the professed allodynia is only on one side, for comparison. It is also important to test all four extremities, especially if the allodynia seems to be progressive from distal to proximal areas. COverage of EMGs and other neurological tests will be under the “Evaluation" section.

An example of a focused exam on an area of allodynia is below:

General:

First, perform a visual inspection of the area of allodynia. Compare it to the other side for asymmetry. Is muscle wasting present? How is the skin appearance? Are there any rashes, lesions, skin defects, or vesicles? Any scars from prior surgeries?

Light touch:

A cotton-tipped swab is a simple way to deliver a light touch. A monofilament has the added advantage of being able to objectively quantify the amount of pressure the light touch is exerting. Tell the patient to close their eyes while you perform the test, and to tell you when they sense something. Lightly stroke the unaffected side, then the affected side, and then both sides. The patient should be able to articulate which side you stroked. Sometimes patients are so sensitive that even a light breeze will elicit subjective pain. Document if the allodynia follows cutaneous dermatomes, if it is symmetrical and if it is bilateral.

Pain:

A broken wooden cotton-tipped swab is often used to test for the sensation of pain. Use the sharp tip and repeat as above for light touch. The patient should be able to articulate from where the sensation is coming. The distribution of pain sensation and hyperalgesia may be the same or different than the distribution of allodynia.

Temperature:

Some patients experience thermal, rather than tactile, allodynia. You can use the back of any cold metallic device, such as a metal tuning fork, or ice in a glove, to measure sensation to cold. Again, test various cutaneous dermatomes, and examine both sides.

Proprioception and Vibration:

These sensory tests rarely elicit allodynia. However, it is still vital to consider these tests to discern if any other neuronal sensory loss has occurred.

Motor Neurons:

Test bilateral proximal and distal muscles. Testing for coordination will often reveal subtle motor neuron deficits. If the patient is testing poorly on strength, try to ascertain if it is genuinely due to muscle weakness, or if it is due to pain leading to decreased effort.

Reflexes:

Test bilateral reflexes. Make note if the patient is hyper- or hyporeflexive and if reflexes are symmetrical.

**Other**

Many different diseases can cause allodynia. There should be a further investigation for an underlying cause depending upon history and examination.