Essential tremor is a progressive disorder with no cure. Even though it is not life-threatening, it can cause significant distress and impair functionality. There are even studies to suggest that it may give rise to Parkinson disease or dystonia. Because there are diverse treatments for essential tremor, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team.

The key is first to educate the patient on the disorder and its treatment. For those not impaired by the disorder, only observation is recommended. There are medical and non-medical therapies available for essential tremor, but there is no evidence to support one over the other. The pharmacists should explain to the patient the types of drugs available, their side effects, and their benefits.

Because essential tremors can be affected by stress and activity, the education of the patient is important. The patient should refrain from caffeinated beverages, alcohol and limit stress.

Many patients become anxious, depressed, and embarrassed over the disease and consequently become withdrawn. Thus, a mental health nurse consult is essential. Since the condition is familial, follow-up of family members by a social worker is important.

An interprofessional team of nurses, pharmacists, and clinicians will result in the best management and outcomes for these patients.

**Outcomes**

Medical therapy is usually pharmacological, but lately, invasive procedures like transcranial brain stimulation, deep brain stimulation, and botulinum toxin are being used. The prognosis for most patients is guarded because there is evidence that essential tremor may degenerate into Parkinson disease.