The definitive treatment for all food allergies is the strict elimination of the food from the diet. If a child starts on a milk-free diet, the doctor or dietitian can help plan nutritionally balanced meals. The parent or child may need to take supplements to replace calcium and nutrients found in milk, such as vitamin D and riboflavin.

Breastfeeding: Rates of cow's milk allergy in breastfeeding infants is lower than formula-fed infants and have been reported to be about 0.5%.

Hypoallergenic formulas: These formulas are hydrolyzed via enzymes to break down the milk proteins. Depending on their processing level, products are classified as either partially or extensively hydrolyzed/elemental formulas. Recommendations are for extensively hydrolyzed formulas due to increased allergenicity and associated reactions in partially hydrolyzed formulas.

Soy-based formulas: As many as 50% of children affected by cow's milk protein intolerance also develop soy protein intolerance if fed with soy-based formulas. Therefore, soy-based formulas are not generally a viable option for the treatment of cow's milk protein intolerance.

Alternative milk: substitutes such as sheep’s and goat’s milk generally are not acceptable because of a high degree of cross-reactivity with cow's milk protein. However, research shows that there have been decreased incidents of cross-reactivity to camel’s milk.

Acute treatment:

Despite the parent's best efforts, if a child accidentally consumes milk, medications such as antihistamines may reduce the mild allergic reaction.

If the parent or child has a serious allergic reaction, they may require an emergency epinephrine injection and a visit to the emergency room. If there is a risk of having a severe reaction, the parent or child may need to carry injectable epinephrine at all times. These individuals should have their doctor or pharmacist demonstrate how to use this device so that they are prepared for an emergency.