**The Cells of Bone Remodeling: The Major Players**

The bone remodeling cycle begins in early fetal life and depends on the interaction between two cell lineages. Osteoblast cells contribute to bone growth and derive from mesenchymal origin. Mesenchymal cells are stem cells that can differentiate into various cell types, such as osteoblasts, chondrocytes, myocytes, and adipocytes. Osteoclast cells cause bone resorption and originate from a hematopoietic lineage, which includes multiple blood cell types from within the bone marrow. The cellular process of remodeling begins when osteoblast and osteoclast precursor cells fuse to form a multinucleated osteoclastic cell.

**Osteoclasts**

Once the fusion of osteoblast and osteoclastic precursors has occurred, the resulting multinucleated osteoclast attaches to the bone surface and commences resorption. These cells use a combination of lysosomal enzymes and hydrogen ions to break down the bone matrix. This bone matrix has an inorganic portion of calcium phosphate crystals (hydroxyapatite) and an organic portion comprised of collagen, proteoglycans, and glycoproteins. The resorption process leaves "scooped out" regions of the bone matrix (Howship lacunae). It is believed that mononuclear macrophage lineage cells then conduct a "reversal" phase, which continues to degrade and deposit organic material while releasing growth factors to initiate the bone deposition phase.

**Osteoblasts**

The differentiated mesenchymal precursors fill the Howship lacunae by depositing new collagen and minerals. Once the osteoblast has completed the task, it will encounter three fates: flatten and become a cell to line the bone surface, become an osteocyte, or undergo cell death (apoptosis).

**Osteocytes**

Osteocytes are the most abundant cell type in mature bone. These cells are situated within the bone matrix and occupy microscopic spaces called lacunae. They play a role in bone remodeling by transmitting signals to nearby osteocytes regarding bone stress (tendons pulling on the bone). Osteocytes also regulate fluid flow within the bone; these cellular signals may be due to changes in fluid flow in response to mechanical stresses on the bone. These cells are involved in mechanotransduction, where the mechanical forces are converted to biochemical signals. Osteocytes act as conductors for this signal (or lack thereof) and instruct surrounding cells on compensating for and adapting to mechanical stress.