**Pearls and Pitfalls**

Pearls and pitfalls are noted at environmental, organizational, and individual levels.

**Environment**

**Pearl**

Environment-based policies prioritize preventative measures through deterrence.

**Pitfall**

Despite the use of preventive environmental policies, there is no decrease in the incidence of Type II WPV, which is inherently contextual and impulsive, dynamic rather than planned. Even without weapons, patients may still use their hands. Visibility and physical barriers are not impediments to verbal abuse.

**Organizational**

**Pearl**

Institutions may curtail WPV by developing policies centered on prevention and recovery.

Effective staff training should focus on the following themes.

- Risk analysis and warning signal detection.

- De-escalation.

- Restraints, evasion, and break-away techniques.

Other beneficial topics include event reporting and the incorporation of simulated drills. There was no difference in the effectiveness of online, live, and hybrid formats. Regular training seminars improve staff confidence, and those who feel prepared for WPV have a lower burnout risk.

**Pitfall**

Zero-tolerance policies are intended to counter the perceived normalization of WPV as an occupational hazard. Despite their adoption, there is no significant decrease in WPV incidence overall, though it does reduce physical violence.

Enforcement may be hampered by confusion and legal incongruency.

Screening applications may have limited applicability.

- They only work for Type II WPV and physical forms of Type I and only work for short durations.

- Screening tools are also wholly user dependent and are influenced by the operator's current state of mind.

- False-positive screens lead to misuse or misallocation of resources.

- Inappropriate use of resources can stimulate, contribute to, or inadvertently escalate violent behavior.

- Inter-organizational data sharing deficit limits cross-institutional intervention and subsequent policy generation.

**Individual**

**Pearl**

Despite improved awareness, instituting a workplace violence training program does not automatically equate to a decrease in WPV.

**Pitfall**

Training experience does not equate to proficiency. There is no concrete evidence to show de-escalation training has any clinical benefit. The application of learned techniques is challenging to replicate in practice. Regardless, more pressure may be placed on those who have completed training—especially if they are adept. Paradoxically, employees who have undergone training have double the likelihood of encountering WPV.