The care for any urinary incontinence almost always begins at a primary clinician’s office. The presentation of incontinence symptoms can often be late due to the unwillingness of the patient population to report it. Therefore, a thorough and empathetic history taking should be conducted by the primary clinician. History should include discussion about the patient’s typical voiding pattern, onset, and duration of incontinence symptoms, whether or not the patient is bothered by symptoms and any associated factors that can affect incontinence, i.e., amount and type of daily fluid intake and bladder irritants (caffeine, carbonated beverages, artificial sweeteners, alcohol, etc.). Most histories should also focus on triggering factors or events of urinary incontinence (e.g., feeling of urgency, cough, sneezing, feeling of running water, lifting, bending, sexual activity, movement, changes in position), constant or intermittent leakage of urine, coexisting medical condition (such as diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, urogynecological cancer, cardiorespiratory diseases, chronic cough, dementia, delirium, presence of a urinary tract infection, obesity and sleep apnea).

Other factors requiring assessment should include urinary frequency (>7 micturition episodes in a day), urgency, pain with a full bladder, obstetric history (number and mode of deliveries), gynecological history (history of pelvic organ prolapse, anal incompetence, menopause, sexual dysfunction), any previous pelvic surgery (incontinence procedures, pelvic floor reconstruction, and hysterectomy), history of surgery of the central nervous system or spinal surgeries.

Clinicians should also do a thorough review of any current medicines that can exacerbate or lead to incontinence symptoms, e.g., alpha-adrenergic agonists and antagonists, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, anticholinergic drugs, calcium channel blockers, cholinesterase inhibitors (increases bladder contractility and can cause urgency incontinence), diuretics, lithium, psychotropic medications, sedatives, hypnotics, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (the increased cholinergic activity can lead to urge incontinence) and lastly opioid analgesics.

It is well validated that sometimes symptom presentation is not enough to guide patient care for a specific type of urinary incontinence. A focused physical examination, therefore, should include pelvic/genitourinary examination as well as neurological, gait, mental status, and body mass index (BMI) assessment, all of which can be started in the primary care setting. An abdominal examination can reveal information regarding any costovertebral angle tenderness, pelvic masses, and palpable bladder. A positive Valsalva maneuver for >6 seconds might reveal evidence of pelvic organ prolapse. A digital examination of the pelvic floor will disclose information regarding the tone and strength of the pelvic floor. Additionally, a speculum exam might reveal vaginal atrophy, incontinence associated dermatitis, and extra-urethral urine loss/fistula.

Neurological examination should include details of mental status, perineal reflexes and sensation, patellar reflexes, gait, and a mobility assessment.

While it is challenging to not have a single test to diagnose urge incontinence, other simple office-based examinations can aid in ruling out different types and pathophysiology of incontinence. A positive cough stress test (observation of immediate leakage of urine with cough when a bladder has at least 200 mL of urine) has excellent sensitivity and specificity for stress incontinence, especially in standing position. A cotton swab test can be used to evaluate urethral hypermobility. Here a cotton swab is inserted through a lubricated urethra up to the neck of the bladder, and the test is considered positive if the cotton swab angle changes >30 degrees from resting position with the Valsalva maneuver.