The normal arc of flexion-extension is 145 degrees (0 to 145 degrees), and 75 to 85 degrees for pronosupination. An arc of movement between 30 and 130 degrees in flexion-extension and 50 degrees in pronosupination provides sufficient range for most daily life activities. It is important to individualize the degree of compromise in the range of motion, because it may vary through activity level. For example, an arch suitable for most of the general population may not be sufficient for athletes and musicians.

Pain is rare in stiffness. It may be present during flexo-extension when related to arthritis and at rest during infectious process.

**Heterotopic Ossifications**

Local inflammation, pain, and an increase in local temperature are the most common manifestations. This inflammatory phenomenon should not be confused with an infection. Pain may not always be present and usually appears at the end of the arc of movement. Regarding laboratory findings, decreased calcium and increased phosphates may be observed. Serum alkaline phosphatase rises between 2 and 4 weeks after the beginning of the symptoms and reaches 3 or 4 times above normal limit after 3 to 10 months. Bone centellogram with TC 99 shows increased metabolic activity during the first week and is prolonged for one year. X-rays are the adequate study for evaluation and monitoring. Mature bone is described as well-defined cortical presence. This maturation usually occurs after 3 to 5 months, after which it is possible to proceed with a surgical approach.