- Normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism is now a recognized phenotype of PHPT.

- It may be an earlier form or precursor of classical PHPT.

- Although asymptomatic for the most part, it is not always an indolent condition.

- Several studies have shown that nPHPT can cause end-organ damage even when normocalcemia is maintained.

- Frequent presentations include osteoporosis, nephrolithiasis, and in some instances, fractures.

- The diagnosis of nPHPT demands meticulous exclusion of possible causes of nSHPT.

- Ionized calcium values are preferred over total calcium, even when corrected to albumin.

- A second or third-generation PTH assay should be used, and iCa and PTH repeated to establish nPHPT.

- Many earlier studies have used liberal cut-offs for eGFR and 25 OH vitamin D levels, but findings should be interpreted with caution.

- In nPHPT, the parathyroids are generally smaller, are more likely to involve multiple glands, secrete less PTH, and produce lower levels of bone markers than hypercalcemic hyperparathyroid patients.

- A lower secretion of PTH and resistance to its action in the bone and kidneys may explain the maintenance of normocalcemia.

- Some nPHPT patients progress to develop overt hypercalcemia, but it is impossible to predict which ones will progress or when so regular follow-up is mandatory.

- The diagnosis of nPHPT is biochemical and is established by consistently normal iCa with persistently elevated PTH.

- Ultrasound and nuclear scans are localizing procedures if surgery is planned but do not have any role in diagnosing nPHPT.

- Ultrasounds are less predictive and discordant with Tc99m sestamibi nuclear scans in many cases of nPHPT.

- 4D-CT scanning appears promising in detecting parathyroid lesions, especially before re-operations. Its exact role in normocalcemic and hypercalcemic hyperparathyroid disease is still being determined.

- Newer localization procedures are being increasingly used and helpful.

- Indications for surgery are similar to classical PHPT and equally successful in improving bone mineral density and reducing renal problems.

- MIS, along with ioPTH monitoring, has revolutionized parathyroid surgery with minimal complications when performed by competent and experienced parathyroid surgeons.

- For others not willing or needing immediate parathyroid surgery, serial observation is the rule, with appropriate action taken as needed.

- In a small trial, alendronate was tried in nPHPT and found to help improve bone mineral density. Rank ligand inhibitors might be expected to have a similar effect but have not been studied. Calcimimetic agents do not appear to have any effect on bone.

- More long-term prospective multi-center trials in populations from the community should be undertaken to study the natural history of nPHPT systematically. This will provide opportunities to establish revised normal ranges for PTH in a vitamin D replete population and answer some of the burning questions of this newer phenotype of PHPT.

**Summary**

Normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism is a newly described variant of hyperparathyroidism.

It is defined as persistently low or normal corrected or ionized serum calcium levels taken at least six months apart in the presence of elevated parathyroid hormone levels.

It may be primary or secondary. Normocalcemic secondary hyperparathyroidism is treated medically, while primary may need surgery.

The most common causes of secondary hyperparathyroidism (renal failure with GFR<60 ml/min and vitamin D deficiency) need to be excluded before a diagnosis of nPHPT can be entertained.

The initial diagnostic approach for the patient is to rule out all secondary causes of hyperparathyroidism.

Normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism may be present in up to 17% of all cases of elevated PTH.

While usually asymptomatic, over one-third of nPHPT will progress to symptomatic bone disease or nephrolithiasis.

Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia needs to be ruled out. This can generally be done via a low calcium/creatinine clearance ratio.

A thiazide challenge test or rarely a calcium loading test may be helpful in diagnosing borderline cases.

Initial laboratory evaluation should include:

-  Serum total calcium and/or ionized calcium, intact parathyroid hormone, phosphorus, magnesium, alkaline phosphatase, 25(OH) vitamin D, albumin, BUN, creatinine, and liver function tests.

-  Urine calcium and creatinine (spot and 24-hour samples)

Initial imaging studies should include a DEXA scan and a Sestamibi scan. (Ultrasound is usually not sufficient for localization but can be tried first.)

Medical therapy is recommended for patients with secondary hyperparathyroidism and for those who are not surgical candidates. Treatment consists of bisphosphonates and calcimimetic agents. Phosphate binders may also be used as necessary.

Surgical treatment of normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism is generally recommended. Minimally invasive techniques with continuous monitoring and selective venous sampling by an experienced parathyroid surgeon are usually preferred due to better overall outcomes.

Yearly monitoring of patients treated medically includes serum calcium, P, intact PTH, eGFR, 24-hour urinary calcium excretion, and periodic renal imaging (for high-risk patients), with DEXA scans every 1 to 2 years. Surgery is recommended if patients become symptomatic or show signs of clinical deterioration.