# Continuing Education Activity

Thrombocytopenia, defined as a platelet count of under 150 x 10^9/L, is the second most common hematological abnormality in pregnancy. This CME activity reviews the presentation, diagnosis, and management of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy, and discusses the role of the an interprofessional team in managing pregnant women with low platelet counts. The reader will also learn about the role of other specialists, especially hematologists in the management of pregnant women with thrombocytopenia, as well as the etiologies of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy and how to manage them.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.
- Review the evaluation of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.

# Introduction

Thrombocytopenia, defined as a platelet count of under 150 x 10^9/L, is the second most common hematological abnormality in pregnancy.

# Etiology

Thrombocytopenia in pregnancy happens secondary to many etiologies, differing in their pathophysiology and presentation. A summary of possible etiologies is listed here:

- Gestational thrombocytopenia

- Immune thrombocytopenia

- Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA): TMA in pregnancy divides into pregnancy-specific TMA and non-pregnancy specific TMA due to differences in management.

- Pregnancy specific TMA

- Pre-eclampsia (PEC): 
- Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets (HELLP) syndrome
- Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP)


- TMA not specific to pregnancy

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
- Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS)

- Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)

- Hereditary thrombocytopenia (HT): Further classify according to the size of the platelet, genetic defect and inheritance pattern (WAS gene, HOXA 11 gene, MYH9 disorders, etc.)

- Others
- Bone marrow failure syndromes

- Aplastic anemia
- Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS),
- Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN),
- Leukemia/lymphoma 
- Marrow infiltrative disorders


- Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH),
- Drug-induced thrombocytopenia,
- Type IIB von Willebrand disease (VWD).
- Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)

It is also worthwhile to distribute the etiology of thrombocytopenia according to the trimester and the platelet count.

**First Trimester**

- Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) (most common)

- Hereditary thrombocytopenia (HT)

- Others (Please see above for a detailed list)

- Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA)

**Second Trimester**

- **Platelet count greater than 100 x 10/L**
- Gestational thrombocytopenia
- ITP
- Pre-eclampsia/ HELLP
- HT/Others/TMA

- **Platelet count under 100 x 10/L**
- ITP (most common)
- HT
- Pre-eclampsia/HELLP
- Others
- Gestational thrombocytopenia 
- TMA

**Third Trimester**

- **Platelet count more than 100 x 10/L**
- Gestational Thrombocytopenia (most common)
- Pre-eclampsia/ HELLP (second most common)
- Others/TMA/ITP/HT

- **Platelet count less than 50 x 10/L**
- Pre-eclampsia/ HELLP (most common)
- ITP
- Others
- TMA
- Gestational thrombocytopenia/HT

# Epidemiology

Thrombocytopenia affects 7 to 11% of all pregnancies. However, less than 1% of pregnancies experience a drop in platelet count below 100 x 10^9/L.

- Gestation thrombocytopenia: Overall, gestational thrombocytopenia is the reason for low platelets in nearly 75% pregnancies presenting with thrombocytopenia. It is the most common cause of low platelets in the third trimester of pregnancy.

- Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP): ITP is the most common cause of low platelets in the first trimester of pregnancy. Overall it affects 1 to 4% of all pregnancies and affects 1 to 2 per 1000 pregnancies each year.

- Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA): 

- Pregnancy specific TMA

- Pre-eclampsia (PEC): Throughout the world, PEC affects 2% to 8% of all pregnancies and accounts for 20% of patients developing thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.
- HELLP (Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets): HELLP syndrome affects 0.2 to 0.8% of all pregnancies. However, it is one of the rare causes of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.
- Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP): It is a rare cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy, which is estimated to affect 1 in 5000 to 20,000 pregnancies.


- TMA not specific to pregnancy: These are amongst the rarest causes of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP): TTP is estimated to affect 1 in 200,000 pregnancies, but 10 to 30% of all adult related TTP is obstetric.
- Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS): Atypical HUS is seen in up to 1 in 25000 pregnancies and presents with MAHA and renal failure, either at near-term or post-partum.

- Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC): DIC occurs in up to 0.35% of all pregnancies.

- Hereditary thrombocytopenia: It is a rare cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy that is commonly diagnosed in the first trimester of pregnancy, although it can present during any trimester.

- Others: Bone marrow failure, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, PNH, autoimmune conditions, and type II VWD are amongst the rare causes of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Less than 1% of patients develop thrombocytopenia secondary to 'other' causes listed.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of thrombocytopenia is dependent on the etiology. This section will discuss the pathophysiology of the major causes of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.

- Gestational thrombocytopenia: The mechanism behind gestation thrombocytopenia remains anecdotal.

- Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP): ITP is a heterogeneous disease that can either be diagnosed during pregnancy or may flare up during pregnancy.

- Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA): It is an umbrella of disorders that are united by common clinical and pathological features.
- Pregnancy-related TMA occurs secondary to obstetric complications like PEC, HELLP, and AFLP.
- The non-pregnancy related TMA occurs due to absence/inhibition of ADAMTS-13 (leads to TTP) or due to a mutation in the function or expression of proteins controlling the alternative pathway C3 convertase (leads to atypical HUS).

- Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC): DIC denotes an imbalance between activated procoagulant pathways and impairment of the internal anticoagulant pathways and fibrinolytic systems.

# History and Physical

In any patient with thrombocytopenia, a thorough history and physical exam help in establishing the etiology behind the low platelet count.

A physical exam provides clues towards determining the etiology of thrombocytopenia. Patients with gestational thrombocytopenia are often healthy, asymptomatic women who are found to have low platelets on lab investigations.

Specific clues in the history and physical exam can point a clinician towards an underlying etiology.

- Gestational thrombocytopenia: It is diagnosed based on the following criteria.
- onset in mid-second to the third trimester
- no symptoms in the mother and no history of bleeding
- no effect on the outcome of the pregnancy
- no thrombocytopenia in the neonate
- self-limited course and resolution in 4 to 8 weeks
- A tendency to recur with the same degree in subsequent pregnancies

- Pre-eclampsia: Patients present with severe hypertension after 20 weeks of gestation (defined as systolic pressure more than 160mmHg and diastolic pressure more than 110 mmHg on two separate occasions, at least 4 hours apart) or with severe persistent right upper quadrant epigastric pain which is unresponsive to medications. Eclampsia can present as a sequela to pre-eclampsia with seizures.

- HELLP syndrome: It correlates with generalized edema in more than 50% of patients who demonstrate hepatic and renal insufficiency in labs.

- AFLP: Clinically, it is quite challenging to distinguish between AFLP and HELLP syndrome. However, encephalopathy, hypoglycemia, severe coagulopathy, along with TMA like hemolysis, are more frequently present in patients with AFLP.

- PNH: Patients usually present with hemolytic anemia, pancytopenia, and thrombosis; however, the characteristic finding of hemoglobinuria is almost never seen.

- HIT: A history of recent exposure to heparin is quintessential to the diagnosis of HIT. The thrombocytopenia usually develops within 5 to 10 days of exposure to heparin but can occur sooner if the previous exposure was relatively recent. The presence of skin necrosis and/or venous thromboembolism should prompt a workup towards HIT. The clinical 4-T score also aids in the diagnosis of HIT.

# Evaluation

Laboratory evaluation of thrombocytopenia starts with a review of peripheral smear. Pseudothrombocytopenia, defined as clumping of platelets on peripheral smear, can happen in up to 1% of all pregnancies.

A complete blood count with differential helps in realizing the degree of thrombocytopenia and provides a clue about the etiology.

- Thrombocytopenia along with changes in other cell lines

- Thrombocytopenia, along with hemolytic anemia: TMA should be the first consideration in a pregnant woman presenting with anemia and thrombocytopenia.

- Hemolysis labs include lactate dehydrogenase, haptoglobin levels, total and direct bilirubin, and reticulocyte count, and the clinician should obtain an index in patients suspected with hemolytic anemia.
- The diagnosis of TMA usually involves the triad of thrombocytopenia, along with hemolysis and renal failure/injury.
- Specific test to rule out TTP includes testing for ADAMTS-13. A level of ADAMTS-13 above 5 to 10% usually rules out TTP.
- In patients suspected of atypical HUS, a genetic test must be pursued to identify mutations that prevent the expression or function of proteins involved in the regulation of the alternate C3 pathway.


- Thrombocytopenia associated with bleeding: A coagulation panel should always be done to identify any coagulopathy which may complicate thrombocytopenia with bleeding. As mentioned above, DIC can occur in association with TMA or secondary to obstetric causes.
- Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH): The diagnosis of PNH is via flow cytometric analysis of glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-AP) along with a decreased expression of both CD55 and CD59. CD55 and CD59 are still tested to exclude rare, inherited deficiency of single GPI-AP.

- Isolated thrombocytopenia:

- Immune thrombocytopenia: ITP usually presents as isolated thrombocytopenia with petechiae or bleeding manifestations.Helicobacter Pylori testing should take place in areas with high prevalence.
- Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT): Although rare, HIT can cause thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.

Gestational thrombocytopenia is a diagnosis of exclusion which is based on a thorough history and physical exam and ruling out of conflicting diagnosis with lab support. With sufficient exclusion of other etiologies, then no further laboratory evaluation is needed to confirm a diagnosis of gestational thrombocytopenia.

# Treatment / Management

In pregnancy, thrombocytopenia usually does not lead to an increased risk of bleeding. Even in patients with ITP, where thrombocytopenia is often quite severe, the risk of bleeding remains low. The obstetric indication decides the mode of delivery. Vaginal delivery is preferable from a hematologic standpoint due to the lower risk of bleeding; however, this is not a deciding factor. Administration of neuraxial anesthesia (epidural anesthesia) is a challenge. The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology recommend a platelet count of 80 x 10^9/L (level C recommendation) as the goal of administering epidural anesthesia. The platelet goal for delivery is more than 50 x 10^9/L, especially if planning a cesarean section.

- Gestational Thrombocytopenia: The platelet count rarely goes below 70 x 10^9/L in patients with gestational thrombocytopenia. No intervention is required in such patients as the condition resolves spontaneously 4 to 8 weeks after delivery. In patients whose platelet counts drop below 70 x 10^9/L, a component of ITP merits consideration. The use of steroids and intravenous immunoglobulins does not benefit patients with gestational thrombocytopenia. However, it may help those who have ITP superimposed on gestational thrombocytopenia. The neonatal outcomes are excellent, and neonates of mothers with gestational thrombocytopenia never develop thrombocytopenia.

- Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP): ITP is a very complex and heterogeneous disease. Although many treatment options exist for adult patients with ITP, pregnancy offers a unique challenge in terms of minimizing the fetal-maternal risk. Usually, an intervention is not necessary unless the platelet counts drop below 20 to 30 x 10^9/L in the first two trimesters or if thrombocytopenia is complicated with bleeding, regardless of the platelet count. Treatment in the third trimester depends on the mode of delivery and candidacy for epidural anesthesia.

- Thrombotic Microangiopathy: The management of TMA in pregnancy focuses on the antecedent cause. The thrombocytopenia is a consequence of the TMA and hence improves with the resolution of the underlying condition. It is critical to differentiate between the pregnancy-specific TMA (PEC/HELLP/AFLP), and non-pregnancy specific TMA as the management of the two conditions is very different. 

- PEC/HELLP syndrome/AFLP: The goal of treatment is the delivery of the fetus, with supportive care provided for the management of the underlying condition.
- TTP: prompt initiation of plasma exchange helps remove the inhibitor to ADAMTS-13 and supply the patients with fresh plasma to restore the function of ADAMTS-13, resolve hemolysis.
- Atypical HUS: Plasma exchange is not useful in patients with atypical HUS. The FDA has approved eculizumab for patients diagnosed with atypical HUS.

- PNH: Eculizumab is a humanized monoclonal IgG antibody that prevents cleavage of C5 into C5a and C5b, eventually blocking the formation of membrane attack complex. It leads to a reduction in complement-mediated hemolysis and improvement in platelet count.

- Disseminated intravascular coagulation: DIC is a consumptive coagulopathy where the primary goal is to treat the underlying cause. However, patients in severe DIC may require supportive measures. Patients in DIC present either with a bleeding phenotype or overt thromboembolism. In a bleeding patient, the goal for platelet transfusion is 30 to 50 x 10^9/L.

- Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: HIT rarely complicates pregnancy, unless the patient receives heparin products. After confirming the diagnosis via a platelet activation assays (serotonin release assay is the most commonly used assay), patients should not receive heparin products anymore. In such patients, direct thrombin inhibitors (argatroban and bivalirudin) serve for immediate management.

# Differential Diagnosis

The workup of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy focuses on establishing the etiology of low platelets. A list of potential diagnoses is listed above.

# Prognosis

The prognosis depends on the underlying etiology for thrombocytopenia. While thrombocytopenia does not lead to complications in pregnancy, the etiology behind the thrombocytopenia can pose significant challenges. The mode of delivery is chosen based on the obstetric indication.

- Gestational thrombocytopenia: It is a self-limiting condition that usually resolves within 4 to 8 weeks of delivery of the fetus. Although there is a high risk of recurrence with subsequent pregnancies, it is often a benign condition that seldom causes any complications in the mother.

- Immune thrombocytopenia: ITP can lead to significant bleeding issues in the mother. ITP in the mother can also affect the neonate and lead to neonatal thrombocytopenia. Despite low platelets, the risk of bleeding is quite low in the mother. In the neonates who have thrombocytopenia secondary to maternal ITP, catastrophic bleeding events (like intracranial hemorrhage) occurs in less than 1% of patients.

- TMA: Both pregnancy-related TMA (PEC/HELLP/AFLP) and TMA not specific to pregnancy (TTP/ATypical HUS) are associated with high rates of maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. Thrombocytopenia related to these conditions seldom poses any issues in the mother or the neonate. The goal of treatment is delivery of the baby.

- Clinicians should manage other causes of thrombocytopenia (bone marrow failure syndrome, PNH, etc.) according to primary etiology, and the prognosis depends on the underlying etiology.

Neonatal outcome in women with thrombocytopenia:

- The neonatal outcome is excellent in neonates born to mothers with gestational thrombocytopenia. They never develop thrombocytopenia or are at risk of bleeding.

- Neonates born to mothers with ITP may develop transient thrombocytopenia. Although the passive transfer of antibodies from the mother causing transient thrombocytopenia in the neonate is the most popular theory behind neonates developing thrombocytopenia, it is not entirely proven. The nadir of platelets appears within 24 to 48 hours. Reports of intracranial hemorrhage appear in less than 1% of neonates who develop thrombocytopenia secondary to maternal ITP.

# Complications

Thrombocytopenia in pregnancy seldom leads to bleeding in pregnancy, even with very low platelet counts seen in ITP

# Consultations

Aa high-risk obstetric clinic should follow any patient with thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. A hematology consult is needed if the platelet count drops below 70 x 10^9/L or if a pregnant woman with thrombocytopenia develops bleeding. It is critical to involve a hematologist in the management of TMA not specific to pregnancy (TTP and atypical HUS) and other rare causes of thrombocytopenia.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Though thrombocytopenia in pregnancy is benign in the majority of patients, it should be investigated thoroughly, especially if the platelet count drops below 70 x 10^9/L. In the case of gestational thrombocytopenia, patients require reassurance about the benign nature of the diagnosis. Appropriate treatment directed towards the underlying etiology should start as soon as possible, and the patients and family members should receive appropriately targeted education. Patients should be followed for platelet counts every 2 to 4 weeks to observe a trend in their platelet counts and every two weeks near term. Patients and family members should understand that the mode of delivery (vaginal or cesarean section) will be decided based on obstetric indication and not the platelet count. In addition to this, patients should also know that platelet transfusions are not routine therapy for thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. The delivery is usually uncomplicated if their platelet count is more than 50 x 10^9/L. However, a goal of more than 80 x 10^9/L is considered appropriate for administering epidural anesthesia. An expert hematologist should be involved in the care of the pregnant women with thrombocytopenia, if the platelet count drops below 70 x 10^9/L or if bleeding develops.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Thrombocytopenia in pregnancy is a benign condition in the majority of patients. However, it may be associated with more severe etiologies in a few patients. A few noteworthy points are listed here.

- Less than 1% of patients with thrombocytopenia in pregnancy have a platelet count of less than 100 x 10^9/L.

- A thorough history and complete physical is the initial step in the evaluation of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.

- A review of the peripheral smear is the first step in the lab evaluation of thrombocytopenia. It helps in ruling out pseudo-thrombocytopenia and schistocytes.

- Gestational thrombocytopenia, which is the most common cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy, is a diagnosis of exclusion.

- Despite being the most common cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy, gestational thrombocytopenia does not require any intervention as it resolves spontaneously.

- ITP is the most frequent cause of thrombocytopenia in the first trimester of pregnancy. However, it is also a diagnosis of exclusion.

- Corticosteroids and IVIG are the first-line treatment for ITP in pregnancy.

- Rituximab is safe in pregnancy for the treatment of ITP, although it may cause transient B-cell lymphopenia in the neonate, which resolves spontaneously.

- Pregnancy-related TMA management is by the delivery of the fetus. Thrombocytopenia and other abnormalities may take longer to recover after the delivery of the fetus.

- TTP is rare during pregnancy, but 10 to 30% of all patients with TTP are obstetric. Up to 25% of TTP in pregnancy is due to a congenital lack of ADAMTS-13 (Upshaw-Schulman syndrome).

- Eculizumab is designated category C by the FDA, but several reports show that it is safe for the management of atypical HUS and PNH in pregnancy.

Important points to remember for both physicians and patients:

- The mode of delivery depends on the obstetric indication, rather than the platelet count.

- A platelet count of more than 50 x 10^9/L is safe for delivery.

- The goal of platelets for administering neuraxial anesthesia is at 80 x 10^9/L.

- In a patient with gestational thrombocytopenia, if the platelet count drops below 70 x 10^9/L, then a secondary cause, like ITP, should be considered.

- Platelet transfusions are not required for low platelet counts unless the patient is bleeding.

- The neonatal outcome is excellent in neonates born to mothers with gestational thrombocytopenia.

- Transient thrombocytopenia can present in neonates born to mothers with ITP. In less than 1% of neonates, it can lead to intracranial hemorrhage. A pediatrician consult is necessary for such a scenario.

- Maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality are high in patients with TMA. The primary goal of treatment is delivery of the fetus.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Thrombocytopenia in pregnancy is the second most prevalent hematological abnormality in pregnancy. Less than 1% of pregnant women with thrombocytopenia during pregnancy would have a platelet count of less than 100 x 10^9/L. Gestational thrombocytopenia is the most frequent cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy and requires vigilant monitoring in the clinic and reassurance to the patient. There is a need for communication between the obstetrics team, hematologists, pediatricians, and nurses involved in the management of pregnant women with thrombocytopenia. Most evidence in the management of patients with gestational thrombocytopenia and ITP comes from retrospective observational studies or Cohort-Control studies (Level III).

Pregnancy-related thrombocytopenia requires an interprofessional approach to care. Clinician involvement was discussed above, but they do not operate alone. Specialty-trained nursing staff (maternal-newborn and neonatal) will be on hand to assist with delivery, medication administration, and monitoring of the mother and baby before and throughout the delivery process. The various medications used in thrombocytopenia require input from the pharmacists, who will verify dosing, check for interactions, and suggest therapeutic alternatives when necessary.  The clinicians may be running the show, but they need their supporting actors on the interprofessional healthcare team to effectively bring both the mother and newborn to a successful outcome. [Level V]