Even though most needlestick injuries do not lead to transmission of infection, sometimes one can develop a serious lifelong chronic infection like HIV or hepatitis C. The onus is on the healthcare workers to prevent needlestick injuries in the first place. Experts suggest that no one safety policy can work all the time and thus, one should have an all-inclusive policy that recognizes the behavior of the healthcare workers, institutional policies, and safe use of sharps and other devices. A critical part of any preventive program is to reduce the use of needles whenever possible and utilize other options when available. Hospital workers may also undergo continuous education and training on the newer devices used during dialysis and blood withdrawal. A monitoring program is essential as it can help eliminate potential risk factors that are responsible for needlestick injuries to ensure that the system is working. Today, most hospitals have an infectious disease committee that consists of a nurse, pharmacist, laboratory technologist, physician, and risk management that recommends and introduces safety policies. However, because of the nurse's position, she or he is in a prime position to ensure that the safety rules are being adhered to. The only way to reduce needlestick injuries is by being aware, enforcing the rules, and performing random audits on other healthcare workers.

**Outcomes**

Although many advances have been made in the development of safer needles and sheathing devices, these devices are not fail-safe and only work in settings where the work environment is constantly monitored. Studies, however, do show that the routine use of these needleless systems leads to a marked decrease in needlestick injuries. Today the onus is on healthcare institutions to educate and train their workers on the safer use of sharps and needles. It is necessary for employees to be aware of the consequence of needlestick and what can be done to prevent them. Today most hospitals have instituted policies and protocols to prevent needlestick injuries by advocating the following:

- Establish an occupational health and safety program that primarily monitors and identifies any high-risk procedure and recommended safety maneuvers

- Introduce safe needle use procedures, and use of needleless devices where possible

- Establish the cause of all injuries that occur and how they could have been prevented

- Minimize the use of needles where possible

- Encourage the use of needles with safety features

- Alters any dangerous work practice on the floor and in the operating room

- Provides healthcare professionals with education in needlestick injuries, their prevention, and the current management guidelines

- Promotes a safety culture free of retribution

- Encourage reporting of unsafe practices without fear of reappraisal

- Conducts random audits to ensure that hospital policy and procedures are being followed

- Assesses outcomes periodically