Compartment syndrome is a condition where the tissues within a fascial layer experience higher than normal pressures leading to pain, pallor, loss of pulses, and eventual paresthesias. Compartment syndrome can develop in morbidly obese patients or following crush injuries, severe burns, and impact injuries. Diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring the pressure within a fascial compartment with a pressure device, although clinical judgment is often used to determine the diagnosis. A compartment pressure of thirty mmHg or greater is pathognomonic for compartment syndrome. In patients who develop compartment syndrome, treatment regularly involves a fasciotomy. An urgent fasciotomy can be done at the bedside. A fasciotomy is a procedure where the compressing fascia is cut to relieve compartment pressure and allow the muscle to swell, decrease pressure, and restore blood flow and nerve function.

Plantar fasciopathy, or plantar fasciitis, is a common health concern in the general population resulting in inferior heel pain. Patients can receive non-invasive therapies such as physical therapy, orthosis, NSAIDs, radiation therapy, or shockwave therapy to help relieve symptoms. Invasive treatments include local corticosteroid injections, botulinum injection, platelet-rich plasma injection, and surgery.

Necrotizing fasciitis is a rare and sometimes fatal soft-tissue infection that is a medical and surgical emergency. It is the resulting condition of inflammation and necrosis at multiple layers including fascia, muscle, subcutaneous fat, and subsequent necrosis of overlying skin. Emergency radical debridement of the necrotic tissues is the standard mandatory procedure.