The intervertebral disc functions to distribute pressure evenly across the spinal segment while allowing for flexion, extension, and rotation.  The inner portion of the disc is called the nucleus pulposus. Since it is comprised mainly of a proteoglycan network and hydrated gel, it provides most of the shock-absorbing properties. The outer covering of the disc is the annulus fibrosis and is comprised of several layers of interwoven collagen that anchor the disc to the vertebral endplates and are oriented in such a way as to allow for reinforcement and rotational stresses. Fissures can form in the posterior and posterolateral segments of the annulus fibrosis that allow the nuclear material to extrude through. The outer third of the annulus, in particular, is richly innervated, and nuclear material may sensitize these nociceptors so that even relatively minor mechanical insults can be exquisitely painful.

**Historical and Anatomical Features of Discogenic Spine Pain**

Pain from a symptomatic lumbar disc is usually midline and often refers laterally across the back and/or into the buttocks and posterior thighs. Occasionally it may refer to the groin or below the knee. Typically, discogenic lower pain is reproduced or aggravated with prolonged sitting, forward flexion, transitioning from a sitting to a standing position, sit-ups, Valsalva maneuvers, and rotation while subjected to an axial load. Pain originating from a cervical or thoracic symptomatic disc is less well-defined regarding typical distribution and aggravating and relieving factors.

**Supportive Advanced Imaging**

There are imaging findings on MRI that predict with fair sensitivity and specificity discogenic lower back pain. These are the presence of a high-intensity zone (synonymous with the extrusion of nuclear material) superimposed on a disc bulge, Modic changes greater than one-third of adjacent vertebral body height, and significant disorganization of the nucleus resulting in the appearance of a "dark disc" on T2 weighted images.