Although the underlying etiology for placental insufficiency is unknown, there are proposed mechanisms. Placental insufficiency is associated with a reduction in blood flow across the umbilicus to the fetus, which can be secondary to increased umbilical-placental vascular resistance. This increased resistance can be visualized as abnormal umbilical artery doppler flow velocity waveforms and can be secondary to an abnormality of villi insertion into the placental membrane, a perfusion abnormality between the umbilicus and placenta, or a reduction in uteroplacental blood flow.

The main role of the placenta is to serve as the interface between fetal and maternal circulations. For this to occur, placental adherence and uterine arterial remodeling must be established in order to ensure nutrients can be delivered to the growing fetus. The hallmark for successful placentation is the remodeling of the uterine arteries. Following fertilization, the blastocyst forms, which is composed of an inner cell mass that will eventually become the fetus, and an outer shell called the trophoblast that becomes the fetal portion of the placenta. To aid with placental adherence, the cytotrophoblast, which is the inner layer of the trophoblast, secretes matrix metalloproteinases that breakdown the zona pellucida, and adherence is facilitated by the formation of anchoring villi and expression of adhesion molecules.

The intrauterine environment is a low-oxygen environment, and as such fetal circulation needs to be flexible in order to adapt to any changes that occur with uteroplacental function.

Successful placentation can be negatively affected by lateralization, which is when the placental invasion favors one side, and the placenta is not implanted centrally. If the placenta remains asymmetric until term, doppler ultrasound will demonstrate persistent notching on the non-implanted side, leading to a relative placental insufficiency. Placental lateralization has also been associated with increased risk for the development of maternal pre-eclampsia, and thus downstream placental insufficiency.