# Continuing Education Activity

Cancers of the anal canal are rare, comprising approximately 10% of malignancies in the anorectal region, although its incidence has been increasing over the past several decades. While the traditional approach to treatment was with abdominoperineal resection (APR), this has evolved in the modern era to concurrent chemoradiation as organ-preserving treatment. This activity reviews the role of radiation therapy for anal cancer and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of anal cancer.
- Review the workup of a patient suspected of having anal cancer.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for anal cancer.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care and outcomes in patients with anal cancer.

# Introduction

Cancers of the anal canal are rare, comprising approximately 10% of malignancies in the anorectal region, although its incidence has been increasing over the past several decades.

**Anatomy**

The anal canal runs from the anal verge (the visible junction between the internal anal canal and hair-bearing keratinized external anal skin) to the anorectal ring (the location in which the rectum enters the puborectalis sling). The anal canal is approximately 3 to 5 cm in length. The dentate line is the anatomic boundary where mucosa changes from non-keratinized squamous epithelium to colorectal-type columnar mucosa proximally. It divides the upper and lower anal canal. The anal margin, also referred to as perianal skin, is a rim of tissue around the anus encompassed by a 5 cm radius, and it bears true squamous epithelium. Lymphatic drainage of anal cancers depends upon its location relative to the dentate line. Cancers above the dentate line drain to the presacral and internal iliac nodes. Cancers below the dentate line drain to superficial inguinal and femoral nodes.

# Etiology

High-grade anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) can be a precursor to anal cancer. AIN can result from an infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), predominantly serotypes 16 and 18. HPV spreads via skin-to-skin contact and sexual intercourse.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of anal canal cancer has steadily increased over the past several years, particularly among women. Currently, anal cancer constitutes 0.5% of all cancer diagnoses in the United States. In 2018, estimates were that there were 8580 cases per year in the US (5620 in women and 2960 in men) and 1160 deaths per year in the US (680 in women and 480 in men). Anal cancer is primarily a disease of older adults, with an average age in the early 60s. However, in HIV-positive patients, there is an earlier onset of disease.

# Pathophysiology

Anal squamous cell carcinoma has links to a complex inflammatory process commonly mediated by HPV infection (predominantly serotypes 16 and 18)

# Histopathology

Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN) represents the dysplastic changes that occur on a cellular level. AIN grade I is low-grade dysplasia (LGAIN), whereas AIN-II and AIN-III are grouped together as high-grade dysplasia (HGAIN). This grading system takes into account various cellular changes, such as abnormalities in the differentiation of squamous layers, mitotic activity, and nuclear membrane changes.

Anal canal cancers are most commonly squamous cell carcinoma (75%). The remainder is often adenocarcinoma, but other rare histologic subtypes include melanomas, basaloid carcinomas, small cell carcinomas, sarcomas, and lymphomas.

# History and Physical

Clinical presentation can include bleeding (45%), pain (30%), pruritus, perianal mass, fecal urgency, or change in the stool caliber.

# Evaluation

The initial workup of biopsy-proven squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal should include digital rectal examination (DRE), inguinal lymph node evaluation with biopsy of suspicious nodes, chest and abdominal CT, pelvic CT/MRI, anoscopy, HIV testing (if HIV status unknown), CBC, CMP, and gynecologic exam for women, including cervical cancer screening per NCCN guidelines. PET/CT is useful in radiation treatment planning and to evaluate for distant metastatic disease.

# Treatment / Management

**Tumors of the Anal Margin**

Anal margin cancers are more commonly diagnosed at an earlier stage and therefore tend to have a better prognosis. Management of very early stage anal margin cancer is best by wide local excision or radiotherapy alone, similar to the management of skin cancer.

**Tumors of the Anal Canal**

The traditional management of tumors of the anal canal was via an abdominoperineal resection (APR), resulting in a permanent colostomy. Since the 1980s, there has been a paradigm shift for nonsurgical organ-preserving treatment, and modern management consists of concurrent chemoradiation. While there are no randomized trials comparing APR with chemoradiation, superior colostomy-free survival rates with equivalent survival have established chemoradiation as the preferred modality of treatment.****

**Suitability for Definitive Treatment**

Performance status must be a consideration when determining a patient’s suitability for definitive treatment. Poor performance status may preclude adherence to conventional chemoradiation. Upfront APR may also be indicated if the patient has bowel incontinence or fistula present at baseline. Other relative reasons that may preclude definitive treatment include prior pelvic radiotherapy or surgery and any underlying medical, psychiatric, and/or social concerns.

**HIV/AIDS Patients**

People living with HIV have a 15 to 35-fold increase in anal cancer incidence.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for anal cancer is broad and dependent upon its clinical presentation. Bright red blood per rectum may also be the result of hemorrhoids, polyps, diverticulosis, anal fissures, ulcers, abscess, or proctitis. A sizeable malignant mass at the anus may also originate from the rectum, bladder, prostate, or vagina.

# Surgical Oncology

Historically, APR was the standard of care for anal cancers, resulting in permanent colostomies. General principles for APR are similar to those of distal rectal cancer, which incorporate meticulous total mesorectal excision (TME) and removal of the distal colon, rectum, and anal sphincter complex using both anterior abdominal and perineal incisions. APR alone yields a poor 5-year overall survival rate of 50% and local recurrence rates of 30%.

Local excision with wide margins may be an alternative to chemoradiation in select patients with T1N0M0 anal canal cancers, as long as sphincter function can is preservable. However, the cure rates are markedly lower: 60% at 5 years, with local recurrence rates of 40%.

# Radiation Oncology

**Radiation Alone**

The efficacy of external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) alone in patients with anal cancer has undergone extensive study. In Taboul et al.

**Radiation Alone vs. Chemoradiation**

After the Nigro protocol demonstrated a high rate of complete pathologic response to neoadjuvant chemoradiation, there was the development of multiple randomized clinical trials to validate definitive chemoradiation as primary treatment of anal cancer. Concurrent chemotherapy and radiation yield result superior to those of radiation alone or surgery alone. The two most prominent trials comparing radiation alone to chemoradiation include ACT I and EORTC 22861. The ACT I trial randomized patients to radiation alone vs. chemoradiation with 5FU/MMC. Results indicated improved 3-yr local control with chemoradiation vs. radiation alone (64% vs 41%, p < 0.001).

**Radiation Dose and Technique**

The optimal dose and fractionation of radiation have yet to be fully elucidated. A minimum dose of at least 45 Gy is the current recommendation. One study showed that T1 lesions had effective treatment with a dose of 50 to 60 Gy.

Techniques associated with radiation therapy have evolved with the utilization of intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT). This inverse planning method of external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) increases the therapeutic ratio by increasing conformal dose to the target structures while reducing the dose to surrounding normal tissue.

**Dose Constraints**

The main purpose of dose constraints is to limit the acute and long-term toxicities associated with radiation to the pelvis when using IMRT. RTOG 0529 limited small and large bowel to V45 Gy less than 20 ccs, V35 Gy less than 150 cc, and V30 Gy less than 200 ccs. This resulted in acute grade 2+ GI adverse events of 73% and acute grade 3+ GI adverse events of 21%. The same study limited bladder dose to V50 Gy <= 5%, V40 Gy less than or equal to 35%, and V35 Gy less than or equal to 50%. These constraints limited acute grade 2+ GU adverse events to 15% and acute grade 3+ GU adverse events to 2%.

**Nodal Metastases**

Lymph node positivity portends a poor prognosis and correlates with worse survival and colostomy rates.

**Salvage Treatment**

Despite the effectiveness of chemoradiation as definitive management, reports exist of locoregional failure rates of 10 to 30%.

# Medical Oncology

**MMC**

RTOG 87-04 demonstrated a benefit to chemoradiation with MMC and 5FU vs. chemoradiation with 5FU alone.

**Capecitabine**

Capecitabine is an acceptable alternative to 5FU in the treatment of colon and rectal cancer with fewer hematologic toxicities, and it has therefore merited consideration as an alternative to 5FU in chemoradiation regimens for anal cancer. Although data for this regimen are limited, multiple retrospective studies have shown adequate LC, OS, and colostomy-free survival in this group of patients.

**Cisplatin**

Cisplatin as a substitute for MMC has undergone evaluation in multiple phase II studies showing promising results for chemoradiation with 5FU and cisplatin.

**Induction**

According to ACCORD 03, induction chemotherapy with 5FU and cisplatin offers no benefit in survival, complete response, or colostomy-free survival.

**Metastatic**

First-line treatment of metastatic anal cancer includes a fluoropyrimidine-based regimen plus cisplatin. Additional regimens may include carboplatin plus paclitaxel or mFOLFOX. Second-line systemic therapies may include the anti-PD-1 antibody nivolumab, which has a 17% response rate in the KEYNOTE-028 study.

# Staging

Several clinical staging systems have been used in the past. The TNM (tumor, nodes, metastases) classification system developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) is the most widely accepted classification system. TNM staging may use a combination of physical examination, positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and/or computed tomography (CT) to identify the primary tumor, involved nodes, and metastatic disease if present.

**AJCC 8th Edition:**

**Primary Tumor (T)**

- TX: Primary tumor not assessed

- T0: No evidence of primary tumor

- Tis: High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion

- T1: Tumor 2 cm or less

- T2: Tumor more than 2 cm but not more than 5 cm

- T3: Tumor more than 5 cm

- T4: Tumor of any size that invades adjacent organ(s), including vagina, urethra, or bladder

**Regional Lymph Nodes (N)**

- NX: Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

- N0: No regional lymph node metastasis

- N1: Regional lymph node metastasis present

- N1a: Metastasis in inguinal, mesorectal, or internal iliac lymph nodes

- N1b: Metastasis in external iliac lymph nodes

- N1c: Metastasis in external iliac with any N1a nodes

**Distant Metastasis (M)**

- M0: No distant metastasis

- M1: Distant Metastasis

**Anatomic Stage/Prognostic Groups:**

- Stage 0:       Tis      N0        M0

- Stage I:        T1      N0        M0

- Stage IIA:     T2      N0        M0

- Stage IIB:     T3      N0        M0

- Stage IIIA:   T1-2    N1        M0

- Stage IIIB:   T4       N0        M0

- Stage IIIC:   T3-4    N1        M0

- Stage IV:     Any T  Any N   M1

# Prognosis

A large primary tumor, the presence of nodal or distant metastases, male sex, and HIV positivity are poor prognostic factors.

Surveillance following definitive treatment involves a DRE between 8 and 12 weeks after completion of chemoradiation. Patients then get classified according to whether they have a complete response, partial response, or progressive disease. If they have persistent disease at that time without progression, patients should be managed with close follow up to determine if further regression occurs. Persistent disease may continue to regress even at 26 weeks from the start of treatment, thus avoiding APR in these patients

# Complications

Patients treated with IMRT have improved long-term toxicities relative to patients treated with conventional radiation techniques. The cumulative acute non-hematologic grade 3+ toxicity rate is ~20%. The most common non-hematologic acute toxicities include desquamation, proctitis, cystitis, and diarrhea. The cumulative rate of acute hematologic grade 3+ toxicity is ~60%, most commonly neutropenia. The most common late toxicity is grade 1 diarrhea in ~35%, which is manageable with conservative interventions. Additional long-term toxicities of chemoradiation include persistent radiation proctitis, angioectasias, and, less commonly, hip fractures, fistulas, sexual dysfunction, or strictures.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients at high risk for this disease should receive education about symptoms and risk factors for anal cancer, including patients with HIV, multiple sexual partners, chronic immunosuppression not due to HIV, and chronic inflammatory states such as Crohn disease. HPV vaccines, when given before HPV exposure, may reduce the risk of anal cancer and need to be more widely utilized, especially in high-risk populations.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Chemoradiation with 5FU and MMC remains the standard of care

- Radiation doses of 50.4-54 Gy and up to 59.4 Gy for bulky disease are the most common doses with IMRT

- APR is generally reserved for salvage

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of anal cancer requires an interprofessional discussion involving the physician subspecialties of radiology, pathology, radiation oncology, medical oncology, and surgical oncology to ensure proper diagnosis and staging as well as determine the optimal course of treatment. Also, the role of nurses, pharmacists, radiation therapists, physicists, and dosimetrists is crucial. Nurses help monitor patients during and after their treatment for pain, infection, and a variety of treatment-related complications. Pharmacists, including board-certified oncology pharmacists, dispense the recommended medications and chemotherapeutic agents in coordination with the oncology staff. Dosimetrists and physicists help the radiation oncologist develop a treatment plan delivered by the radiation therapist. Cancers of the lower GI tract require ample communication between all levels of health professionals working as an interprofessional team to improve outcomes and enhance patient safety.