The neurovascular structures which pass through the quadrangular space are essential for upper extremity function and damage to them can cause debilitating neurovascular symptoms. Misdiagnosis can occur due to the sophisticated presentation of injuries to the quadrangular space, and great care is requisite while evaluating the shoulder to identify these injuries.

**Neurovascular Compression**

Quadrangular Space Syndrome (QSS) occurs when the neurovascular structures within the quadrangular space get compressed due to mechanical forces. There are three types of QSS:

- Neurogenic quadrangular space syndrome (nQSS) is when there is compression of the axillary nerve within the quadrangular space. Patients with nQSS may present with quadrangular space tenderness, radicular pain, and paresthesia that follows a non-dermatomal pattern (more common on the posterior and lateral arm), fasciculations of the deltoid muscle in abduction, and where the denervation of muscles has occurred, muscle atrophy and weakness.

- Vascular quadrangular space syndrome (vQSS) occurs when the posterior humeral circumflex artery gets compressed within the quadrangular space. In patients with vQSS, ischemia of the PHCA can occur, which causes pain, pallor, and diminished or absent distal pulses. When compression of the PHCA leads to the formation of an aneurysm, thrombi, or a distal digital embolus, symptoms such as cyanosis and coolness of the digits and hand may occur.

- Patients may present with both neurogenic and vascular quadrangular space syndrome due to the proximity of the posterior humeral circumflex artery to the axillary nerve in the quadrangular space.

The most common cause of quadrangular space syndrome is fibrous bands within the quadrangular space, which extend from the fascia of the long head of the triceps brachii muscle to the teres major muscle. Fibrous bands tighten when the glenohumeral joint is abducted and externally rotated, leading to impingement of the underlying neurovascular structures. Muscular hypertrophy can lead to similar compressive mechanisms as well.

Glenohumeral abduction and external rotation are common in overhead sports such as baseball, volleyball, swimming, and when doing activities such as cleaning windows. Hypertrophy of the teres major muscle and space-occupying lesions such as paralabral cysts (most commonly inferior labral tears), lipomas, axillary schwannomas, humeral osteochondromas, and fracture fragments can all also cause compression of the neurovascular structures in the QS and lead to QSS.

QSS is unquestionably a diagnostic challenge in the majority of clinical presentations.  Thus, employing advanced imaging (radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging)

**Trauma**

Patients who sustain proximal humeral fractures, especially of the proximal humeral shaft, may sustain traumatic injuries to the neurovascular structures in the QS or proximity to the QS, leading to advanced conditions like humeral head avascular necrosis. Therefore, it is imperative to assess neurovascular function in patients with proximal humeral fractures.