A thorough history and physical exam can have significant value in the diagnosis of PLEVA due to the nature of the disease and uncertainty regarding its etiology. It is in the provider's best interest to ask patients about recent vaccinations, illnesses, and medications.

On physical exam, PLEVA manifests as an abrupt eruption of 10-50 erythematous macules that quickly form into inflammatory papules with a fine scale. As the rash progresses, the scale tends to remain attached centrally but lifts at the periphery. The papules may then evolve into pityriasis lichenoides chronica (PLC) lesions or undergo hemorrhagic necrosis and become ulcerated, forming the appearance of red-brown crusts, with possible post-inflammatory hyper- and hypopigmentation.

PLEVA may be asymptomatic or present with burning and pruritus. The polymorphous lesions tend to favor the trunk and flexural surfaces of the proximal extremities, but a diffuse presentation is not uncommon. PLEVA often occurs in a remitting and relapsing nature that may last several weeks to years before resolution.

Although rare, febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease (FUMHD) may follow an existing diagnosis of PLEVA or occur de novo. It is important to be aware of this subtype of PLEVA due to the severity and potential lethality of the disease. Patients affected by FUMHD present with necrotic papules that progress to plaques and large coalescent ulcers. Skin ulceration can be extensive and painful, including oral and genital mucosal.