Branchial cleft cysts are often asymptomatic but can often become tender, enlarged, or inflamed with superinfection or abscess formation during episodes of upper respiratory tract infections. The patient can present with purulent drainage of the sinus to the skin or pharynx in such situations. The most concerning symptoms include dysphagia, dyspnea, and stridor due to cyst compression of the upper airway.

The physical examination will differ depending on the location of the branchial cleft cyst.

- A first branchial cleft cyst is typically smooth, non-tender, fluctuant mass found between the external auditory canal and submandibular area. Frequently, it will have a cutaneous punctum from which fluid may be expressed. It is variably involved with the parotid gland and facial nerve, and there may be a connection to the middle or external ear, so an otologic exam is crucial in these patients.

- A second branchial cleft cyst is typically identified by a pit or punctum of the skin at the lower anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid. It may connect to the tonsillar fossa of the pharynx. It can be in proximity to the glossopharyngeal and hypoglossal nerve as well as carotid vessels. The cysts are tender if secondarily infected, and in severe cases, may lead to airway compromise. If it is associated with a sinus tract, a mucoid or purulent discharge may be present on the skin or into the pharynx.

- Third and fourth branchial cleft cysts are rare. They are normally on the left side of the neck or the suprasternal notch/clavicular area. Typically they present as a firm mass or infected cyst draining to the piriformis sinus or external neck skin. These fistulae are more likely to present when infected and they may have undergone repeated incision and drainage procedures owing to incorrect diagnosis and subsequent recurrence.