Marijuana is a complex of more than 400 compounds, including flavonoids, terpenoids, and cannabinoids. Cannabinoids are the active ingredients and appear to have individual interactive effects that contribute to the net effect of marijuana. Cytochrome p450 enzymes metabolize cannabinoids in the liver. The principal cannabinoid is tetrahydrocannabinol(THC), responsible for both the psychoactive effects sought by recreational users and the drug's therapeutic effects. Although the mechanism of action is still being researched, it is known that there are widespread cannabinoid receptors in the brain and peripheral tissues known as the endocannabinoid system. The endocannabinoid system regulates metabolism, appetite, blood pressure, glycemic control, immune response, and sense of reward. Although the receptors are located throughout the body, the central nervous system interactions arise from the most prominent effects. Since it has a high lipid-soluble profile, it circulates through the body efficiently and causes various effects based on the receptors and dosage.

The primary action is on the cannabinoid receptors, which are G-protein-linked receptors(GPCR). There are two known cannabinoid receptors: CB1 and CB2. The CB1 receptor is found in the central nervous system. It modulates the release of several neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, and gamma-aminobutyric acid(GABA). The CB2 receptor is located in the immune system. Therefore, it is assumed that it performs a function in the modulation of immune and inflammatory responses. However, CB2 expression is highly inducible on the microglia in the CNS following inflammation.