Diuretic administration is usually via the oral route, but when maximum potency is required, such as in cases of advanced HF, it can be given intravenously in a hospital setting. In such situations, continuous infusion over a specified period is preferable to bolus injections. Adverse effects (or complications) in a particular patient should be well-anticipated, and the choice of diuretic, the dose required, route of administration, and needed clinical improvement, should all merit consideration before administering any diuretic agent.

- 
**Loop Diuretics**

Loop diuretics are more than 95% albumin-bound and reach peak concentrations in 30 min to 2 hours as they are absorbed swiftly with an oral bioavailability that exceeds 80% for bumetanide and torsemide, while that of furosemide is the lowest at 50% on average. Loop diuretics are available in both oral and intravenous (IV) forms, and IV infusions can be for immediate effect. Furosemide is excreted unchanged in urine or through a renal metabolism, while bumetanide and torsemide undergo hepatic metabolism (hence respective organ damage will prolong their half-life). Torsemide has the longest half-life (3 to 4 hours) and the longest duration of action (12 hours) compared to both furosemide and bumetanide, with the practicability of once-daily dosing. Torsemide absorption is not affected by food intake, while that of furosemide and bumetanide decreases dramatically and essential to be taken on an empty stomach. Since furosemide is the most commonly used agent, dose conversion between different loop diuretics must be cautiously applied. In general, for oral diuresis 80 mg furosemide = 20 mg torsemide = 1 mg bumetanide are the conversion equivalents. While that for intravenous agents, 40 mg furosemide = 20 mg torsemide = 1 mg bumetanide are to be employed.

CKD causes a diuretic resistant state both by reducing maximal natriuresis induces a shift in the diuretic dose-response curve rightward and downward. Loop diuretics are the primary agents used in CKD, and higher starting doses are the recommendation. For furosemide, this is in the range of 40 to 80 mg is recommended for stages 4 and 5 of CKD, whereas the usual 20 to 40 mg is recommended in stages 1 through 3 of CKD. Also, continuous infusion of loop agents is recommended in hospitalized patients (to overcome anti-natriuresis), which is particularly important in CKD patients.

Dosage for the most common indications of the individual loop diuretics appear in Table 2.

- 
**Thiazide Diuretics**

All thiazides are sulfonamide derivatives that are readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract after oral administration. The oral bioavailability of thiazides ranges from 50 to 95%, and for the two most frequently used agents, hydrochlorothiazide and chlorthalidone, it is 70% and 65%, respectively. Once in the plasma, thiazides are plasma albumin-bound and do not undergo any metabolism prior to excretion, and are secreted unchanged via urine and feces.

With a half-life of approximately 42 hours, chlorthalidone has a larger volume of distribution than its thiazide-type counterpart hydrochlorothiazide because they bind to red blood cell (RBC) carbonic anhydrase and are sequestered in these cells, reaching a concentration 7 to 10 times more than that of plasma. Thus RBCs act as a reservoir, and the drug is released into the plasma gradually, which can be utilized clinically by a once-daily dosing regimen.

- 
**Potassium-sparing Diuretics**

ENaC inhibitor amiloride does not undergo any metabolic transformation in the body, while triamterene is metabolized into a sulfate ester by extensive hepatic metabolism. Thus in patients with liver pathology, amiloride is preferred, half of which is excreted in the urine unmetabolized while the other half passes through the feces. However, amiloride must be avoided in patients with renal dysfunction as it is excreted through tubular secretion, and due to its longer half-life, the drug can accumulate in the body in such patients and predispose to life-threatening hyperkalemia. Though comfortable once-daily dosing is possible with amiloride, its peer triamterene needs twice-daily dosing, and both these drugs have an oral bioavailability of approximately 50%.****Amiloride being a pregnancy category B medication, is safer to use for the treatment of Liddle syndrome in pregnant patients.

ARA spironolactone largely undergoes metabolism in the liver into its active form canrenone, which is more than 90% bound to plasma proteins. The oral bioavailability of spironolactone varies from 60 to 90%, while that of eplerenone is about 69%. Eplerenone undergoes a hepatic metabolism as well, but there are no active metabolites and is 50% bound to albumin in the serum, and about 67% is excreted in the urine while 32% passes through the feces. Food intake does not interfere with the absorption of these drugs, and taking it with food can, in effect, reduce gastric irritation and adverse symptoms associated with it.****Dosage for the most common indications of the individual PSDs appear in Table 4.

- 
**Carbonic-anhydrase Inhibitors and Osmotic Diuretics**

Acetazolamide, the only diuretic CAI, is well absorbed from the GI tract, not metabolized, and is 93% protein-bound in the plasma. The onset of action of the oral form is 1 to 1.5 h with an oral bioavailability of almost 100%. It has a plasma half-life of 13 hours, and twice-daily dosing is recommended. Almost 90% of the drug is excreted in the urine by tubular secretion and is ineffective in renal insufficiency.

Mannitol is poorly absorbed when given orally, and hence it is administered only via intravenous route as a bolus and hence has a bioavailability of 100%. Once in the plasma, mannitol, being an osmotic substance, draws fluid into the plasma, decreasing the blood viscosity and thereby the hematocrit. Mannitol is freely filtered with limited reabsorption, and it undergoes only slight metabolism in the liver to glycogen. The majority of the rest (more than 90%) is excreted unchanged in the urine, with an elimination half-life reported from 70 to 150 minutes.