For this technique, it is essential to define the breathing maneuver, as the duration of "quiet," or tidal volume, breathing must be specified; this duration is typically at least one minute. An alternate method of five vital capacity breaths followed by a breath-hold is another option. However quiet breathing technique has shown higher sensitivity likely due to false negatives due to the protective and bronchodilator effects seen at higher vital capacity breathing. Submaximal inhalation, limiting total lung capacity, can be implemented in the vital capacity method to limit these effects, thereby increasing sensitivity.

Methacholine is administered sequentially in increasing concentrations ranging from 0.016 to 16 mg/m, prepared in two to four-fold dilutions. The tester should perform spirometry before establishing a baseline. Then methacholine is given via nebulization starting with the lowest (most diluted) concentration. FEV1 then gets measured at 30, then 90 seconds post aerosol inhalation, during which the patient must be adequately coached to ensure quality measurements. If vocal cord dysfunction is under evaluation, the tester should implement full vital capacity breathing maneuvers with inspiratory and expiratory phase analysis. Otherwise, expiratory time can be decreased from six seconds to about two seconds if FEV1 is measured alone. The dose or concentration is increased in a stepwise fashion until FEV1 drops by more than 20%, or 35 to 40% specific airway conductance (SGaw) is achieved, and PD20 or PC20 is determined.

A test is considered positive if PD20 is less than or equal to 200 mcg or PC20 is less than or equal to 8 mg/mL. If using SGaw, 100 mcg, or 4 mg/mL or less indicates a positive test. A test is considered negative if PD20 is greater than 400 mcg or PC20 is greater than 16 mg/mL.

Furthermore, the degree of bronchial hyperresponsiveness can be categorized based off of PC20 as normal (more than 16 mg/mL), borderline (4.0-16 mg/mL), mild (1.0-4.0 mg/mL), or moderate to severe (less than 1.0 mg/mL).