Doxorubicin is administered intravenously and is commonly given in 21-day intervals. The drug is easily recognizable in its liquid form due to its highly pigmented, reddish appearance. Doxorubicin is incompatible with heparin and fluorouracil and can cause precipitation if mixed with these drugs. While doxorubicin may be administered rapidly (over 15 to 20 minutes), slow administration of the liposomal formulation is recommended to reduce the risk of infusion reactions. Doxorubicin should be stored in a refrigerated area and re from light before administration. Doxorubicin exhibits rapid distribution into tissues and has an elimination half-life of up to 48 hours. Doxorubicin undergoes enzymatic reduction and requires protection undergoes elimination through biliary excretion.

**Adult dosing by indication:**

Axillary node-positive breast cancer as an adjuvant:

- 60 mg/m^2 IV once on the first day of a 21-day cycle. Use with cyclophosphamide. Patients should receive 4 cycles.

Leukemia monotherapy:

- 60 to 75 mg/m^2 IV once on the first day of a 21-day cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2. (ALL or AML)

Leukemia combination therapy:

- 40 to 75 mg/m^2 IV once on the first day of a 21-day or 29-day cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2. (ALL or AML)

Lymphoma monotherapy:

- 60 to 75 mg/m^2 IV once on the first day of a 21-day cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2. (Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma)

Lymphoma combination therapy:

- 40 to 75 mg/m^2 IV once on the first day of a 21-day or 29-day cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2. (Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma)

Solid tumors, monotherapy:

- 60 to 75 mg/m^2 IV once on the first day of a 21-day cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2.

Solid tumors, combination therapy:

- 40 to 75 mg/m^2 IV once on the first day of a 21-day or 29-day cycle. The maximum cumulative dose is 550 mg/m^2.