# Continuing Education Activity

Breast cancer is the most common cancer diagnosis in women, with surgical treatment being a tenant of its care. Following breast cancer resection, breast reconstruction is commonly performed to restore the breast to its native appearance. In the case of non-nipple-sparing mastectomy, cancer involvement of the nipple-areolar complex (NAC), or NAC complications following prior reconstruction, the NAC is absent on the reconstructed breast. Nipple-areolar complex reconstruction is thus undertaken via several techniques and is typically performed as the last step in breast reconstruction. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of NAC absence with subsequent NAC reconstruction and highlights the role of the multiple techniques to achieve a natural-appearing NAC reconstruction.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the anatomical structures pertinent to nipple-areolar complex reconstruction.
- Describe the proper timing of nipple-areolar complex reconstruction concerning adjuvant breast cancer therapies.
- Summarize the equipment and techniques frequently utilized for nipple-areolar reconstruction.
- Outline the common complications following nipple-areolar reconstruction.

# Introduction

Breast cancer is the most common cancer diagnosis in women, with an annual incidence of approximately 1 in 10 women.

In general, the ideal NAC reconstruction recreates both the nipple and areola and achieves symmetry in position, size, shape, texture, pigmentation, and projection to the contralateral NAC.

For the purpose of this topic, only NAC reconstruction following breast cancer surgery will be discussed, not purely cosmetic NAC surgery. Similar techniques may be utilized in the treatment of congenital NAC abnormalities (athelia) and burn deformities.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The vascular supply of the NAC has been elucidated by several anatomic studies that have shown vascular contributions from the subdermal plexus as well as vessels from the breast parenchyma, with large perforating vessels running along Wuringer's septum.

Certainly, the native NAC size, color, orientation, and shape vary from patient to patient. While NAC reconstruction allows the surgeon to create an NAC that is in harmony with the patient's aesthetic preferences, certain ideals of the NAC position have been outlined in the literature. Classically, the ideal NAC is described as sitting at the point of maximum projection of the breast tissue. A recent study demonstrated the aesthetically ideal NAC position is located in the middle of the breast mound vertically and slightly laterally in the horizontal plane (60:40, lateral: medial ratio).

Unfortunately, NAC reconstruction does not restore the breast's ability to produce milk. Similarly, many of the NAC reconstruction methods do not provide a sensate NAC.

# Indications

NAC reconstruction is driven by patient preference. Aside from the previously mentioned psychological benefits of NAC reconstruction, the recreation of the nipple and areola are aesthetic procedures.

The correct timing of NAC reconstruction is imperative for the optimal outcome and depends on the type of reconstruction as well as the need for adjuvant treatment(s). NAC reconstruction should only be undertaken after achieving a stable breast mound, typically 3 months after autologous breast reconstruction or 3 months after permanent implant placement in prosthetic-based reconstruction.

# Contraindications

Once again, NAC reconstruction should only be performed if it is desired by the patient. Other contraindications include performing NAC reconstruction before the breast reconstruction is complete, with final shape and volume still fluctuating.

# Equipment

NAC reconstruction can typically be performed under IV sedation or using local anesthetic as autologous breast reconstruction skin flaps are often insensate. Likewise, breast envelopes following prosthetic reconstruction have varying degrees of sensation. A standard plastic surgery minor operations set (unless taking cartilage as composite grafts) will work appropriately. Sutures used to sew on grafts, or local flaps can be dissolvable or non-dissolvable and small caliber (3-0, 4-0, 5-0 suture).

# Personnel

NAC reconstruction is the culmination of an interprofessional team approach to patient care and often the final step in breast reconstruction. Procedurally, a plastic surgeon and surgical scrub team are all that is needed.

# Preparation

The most important aspects of preparation are elicitation of patient preferences in NAC reconstruction and assessing the contralateral native NAC (if present). While there are aesthetic ideals for the NAC position in the literature, it is useful to allow the patient to mark the position of the new NAC using an electrocardiogram lead pad in front of a mirror. In unilateral reconstruction, it is important to study the NAC on the unoperated breast to guide the positioning, orientation, size, and shape of the new nipple.

Informed consent should discuss complications of NAC reconstruction, which include partial or total nipple necrosis and loss of nipple projection.

# Technique or Treatment

There have been numerous surgical techniques for NAC reconstruction that have been described over time.

**Local flaps**transfer adjacent skin and subcutaneous fat to create a projected nipple. Multiple techniques exist, with at least 30 unique techniques in the literature.

**Nipple sharing**is a technique considered for patients with excessive contralateral nipple projection who are willing to sacrifice contralateral projection for ipsilateral reconstruction. About 50% of contralateral nipple height is lost in nipple sharing techniques.

**Skin grafts**can be used to reconstruct the areola or the NAC. Full-thickness skin grafts are harvested from other pigmented areas such as the axillary area or upper inner thigh. Dermabrasion has been described as an alternative to create hyperpigmented skin for the reconstructed NAC.

**Intradermal tattooing**is commonly used as an alternative to the skin graft for reconstruction of the areola or to color the NAC after nipple reconstruction with a local flap. It is typically performed 3 to 4 months after nipple reconstruction after most nipple shrinkage has occurred.

**Internal and/or external nipple prosthetics**offer patients another minimally invasive NAC reconstruction option. In the case of external prosthetics, off-the-shelf and custom options exist. For a custom prosthetic, an impression is made of the contralateral NAC, from which mold and silicone prosthetic are created by a prosthetist.

**Postoperatively,**nipple-specific dressings and/shields are placed to protect the reconstructed NAC and avoid compression, trauma, and/or infection, leading to loss of NAC projection. Multiple dressings and shields have been described in the literature, including nipple-specific plastic guards, donut-shaped sponges, occlusive dressings with anti-biotics, silicone-based products, and modified ocular shields and protectors.

**Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine (TE&RM)**nipple-areolar reconstruction with 3D-printed tissue scaffolds is presently being investigated as an NAC reconstruction method of the future.

# Complications

As previously mentioned, the main complication with local flaps is the loss of nipple projection with an anticipated loss of 45% to 75% projection. Blood supply to the reconstructed NAC is not always reliable in being located near or on prior scars; thus, the outcome may be unpredictable, and certain flap designs cannot be applied. Thus, inherently there is a risk for the flap and/or graft partial or complete failure. Finally, asymmetry and unacceptable cosmetic appearance to the patient are always risks to discuss preoperatively.

# Clinical Significance

Nipple-areolar complex reconstruction provides aesthetic and psychological benefits to the patient and can help increase acceptance of the reconstructed breast into the patient's self-image.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Breast cancer management is best managed in an interprofessional setting that involves the patient, nurse specialists, oncologists, radiologists, and surgeons. The patient should pursue NAC reconstruction once a stable breast reconstruction has been reached and after adjuvant therapies have been completed. The interprofessional team for NAC will include a surgeon, OR nurses, and surgical assistants. The patient's family clinician should also be kept in the information loop for subsequent monitoring between post-surgical follow-ups. With this type of interprofessional coordination, patients will have a better chance at a positive outcome. [Level 5]

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The reconstructive procedures mentioned above are often performed on an outpatient basis. Patients should be seen in close follow-up, typically 7 to 10 days following surgery.