Many variables alter minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), changing the amount of anesthetic required to prevent movement. When a factor is present that increases MAC, there is a decreased potency of volatile anesthetic for that person, and they require a larger amount of anesthetic to achieve immobility. The inverse is true for factors that decrease MAC. It is important to note that the conventional values of MAC are determined at a reference pressure of 1 atm and that changes in ambient pressure will change MAC.

**Physiological Factors**

Factors such as species, sex, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, or duration of anesthesia do not affect MAC; however, the age of the patient does influence the minimum alveolar concentration. MAC peaks at 6 months of age, and then decreases by approximately 6% per decade, regardless of volatile anesthetic.

- MACage = MAC40 × 10^ [-0.00269(age - 40)]

where MACage is the MAC at a given age and MAC40 is the MAC value at age 40.

See table 1 for the list of MAC values for the most commonly used inhaled anesthetics in a 40-year-old patient.

Several physiological derangements, such as anemia, hypercarbia, and hypoxia, have been shown to decrease MAC.

A special population to consider are those who are pregnant. Although the underlying cause is unclear, it has been found that MAC requirements are decreased during pregnancy by as much as 30%.

Interestingly, it has been found that individuals with red hair have a decreased sensitivity to anesthetics, and have an increased MAC requirement.

**Pharmacological Factors**

Many pharmacological agents alter MAC. Commonly-used classes of drugs in anesthesia such as sedative-hypnotic agents, intravenous drugs that potentiate GABA, a2-adrenergic agonists, local anesthetics, and opioids all decrease MAC. These include medications such as barbiturates, benzodiazepines, propofol, etomidate, and dexmedetomidine. A decrease in MAC requirement is also seen with ketamine, lithium, and verapamil.

Stimulants such as cocaine and ephedrine increase MAC. Substances such as alcohol and amphetamines depend on the chronicity of use. Chronic alcohol use and acute amphetamine use increase the MAC requirement while the inverse decreases MAC requirement.

**Pathologic Factors**

Patients presenting with a depressed level of consciousness due to trauma or a cerebrovascular insult, or patients with neurodegenerative changes due to dementia or other cognitive conditions have a decreased anesthetic requirement.

Hypoxia below 30 mmHg, acute metabolic acidosis, and acute hemorrhagic hypotension all produce decreases in roughly 10% to 50% of initial MAC.

Certain electrolyte abnormalities such as hypernatremia are associated with an increase in MAC while hyponatremia is associated with a decrease in MAC.