Postoperative mortality of OSR for AAAs has decreased over the years. While the mortality rate is highly variable among studies, it is considered to be less than 50%. Furthermore, EVAR has a lower short-term mortality rate than OSR.

The complication rate following OSR varies among studies. Post-operative complications are pulmonary (42%), cardiac (18%), renal (17%), ischaemic colitis (9%), and wound complications (7%). Postoperative end-organ ischemia, including postoperative colonic ischemia, acute lower limb ischemia, or spinal ischemia, are infrequent but serious complications. Therefore patients should be closely monitored for these conditions. EVAR carries similar risk as OSR but with a lower incident rate. Unique complications of EVAR are graft migration and endoleaks.

Migration, a condition in which due to loss of fixation, the graft moves from the original location. Hooks and barbs assist aortic attachment, increasing the friction to prevent migration from occurring. An endoleak is a condition in which the graft fails to exclude blood from entering the aneurysmal sac. Endoleaks can subdivide into; type I endoleak- due to improper fixation or sealing between the proximal graft and the blood vessel at the proximal or distal zone of the stent. Type II endoleak-blood flow from patent collateral arteries (lumbar or inferior mesenteric arteries), to the aneurysmal sac. Type III endoleak-separation of stent-graft components with possible overlapping of stent material allowing leakage. Type IV and V endoleak- type IV endoleak-blood flow through the pores of the stent-graft. Type V endoleak is blood flow into the aneurysmal sac from an unknown source. In the past, EVAR associated with access site complications such as dissection, perforation, hematoma, and fistula. But with technical advancement, these complications are less frequent.

From a didactical point of view, it might be important to classify common postoperative complications as immediate, early, and late;

- OSR immediate complication: hemorrhage and myocardial infarction.

- OSR early complication: hemorrhage, ileus, ischemic colitis, myocardial infarction, pneumonia, renal failure, wound infection.

- OSR late complication: incisional hernia

- EVAR immediate complication: aneurysm rupture with conversion to open, stent misplacement, myocardial infarction

- EVAR early complication: contrast nephropathy, endoleaks

- EVAR late complication: endoleaks, stent migration