The best imaging modality for the diagnosis of myxopapillary ependymoma is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) because of its superior soft-tissue contrast. Other imaging studies include plain radiograph and computed tomography (CT) scan.

Plain radiograph and CT scan can reveal scalloping of the vertebral bodies secondary to the expansion of the spinal canal caused by the presence of a large myxopapillary ependymoma.

Magnetic resonance imaging is helpful in identifying the extent of the tumor and its relationship to intraspinal structures. It also allows for visualization of the cauda equina both above and below the tumor and will identify drop metastases in the subarachnoid space. Such information is useful in preoperative surgical planning. Magnetic resonance imaging findings in myxopapillary ependymomas are nonspecific.

On magnetic resonance imaging, the lesion is iso- to hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2. Owing to their mucin content, the signal is hyperintense in myxopapillary ependymoma. Moreover, the tumor is heterogeneous after gadolinium injection. Hemorrhage and cyst formations are common features that contribute to signal inhomogeneity.

However, these tumors do contain certain features that help suggest the diagnosis. These features include:

- An intradural extramedullary thoracolumbar mass

- The tumor extends for several vertebral levels in the lumbar and sacral canal.

- It is hypointense to isointense on T1-weighted images.

- It is hyperintense on T2 weighted images.

- There will be an intense, homogeneous enhancement after the administration of contrast.

- There will usually be a region of slightly lower intensity at tumor margin on T2-weighted sequences.

- Cystic rostral or caudal degeneration exists in 50% of cases.