The three phases of dengue include febrile, critical, and recovery.

During the febrile phase, a sudden high-grade fever of approximately 40 C occurs that usually lasts two to seven days. Saddleback or biphasic fever is seen in approximately 6% of cases, particularly in patients with DHF and severe dengue. It is described as a fever that remits at least for one day, and the next fever spike starts, which lasts at least for one more day.

Defervescence characterizes the critical phase with a temperature of approximately 37.5 C to 38 C or less on days three through seven. It is associated with increased capillary permeability. This phase usually lasts one to two days. The onset of the critical phase is heralded by a rapid decline in platelet count, rise in hematocrit (the patient may have leukopenia up to 24 hours before platelet count drops), and the presence of warning signs. It can progress to shock, organ dysfunction, disseminated intravascular coagulation, or hemorrhage.

The recovery phase entails the gradual reabsorption of extravascular fluid in two to three days. The patient will display bradycardia at this time.

Expanded dengue syndrome refers to unusual or atypical manifestations in patients with dengue with neurological, hepatic, renal, and other isolated organ involvement. It could be due to profound shock. Neurological manifestations include febrile seizures in young children, encephalitis, aseptic meningitis, and intracranial bleeding. Gastrointestinal involvement may be seen in the form of hepatitis, liver failure, pancreatitis, or acalculous cholecystitis. It may also manifest as myocarditis, pericarditis, ARDS, acute kidney injury, or hemolytic uremic syndrome.