The toxic effects of cannabinoids are secondary to overstimulation of the endocannabinoid system by exogenous cannabinoids. This immoderate stimulation of the endocannabinoid system leads to the aforementioned erratic neurotransmitter modulation that can lead to toxicity. The absorption kinetics of cannabinoids and THC depends on the exposure route, with inhalation reaching peak serum concentrations in less than thirty minutes, and ingestion peaking in concentration at around 2 to 4 hours (or longer) after consumption. Duration of toxicity secondary to inhalation and ingestion lasts approximately 2 to 6 hours and 8 to 12 hours, respectively. THC's volume of distribution is approximately 3 liters per kilogram, and after exposure eventually collects in fat due to its high lipid solubility. Chronic exposures lead to increased accumulation in fat.

THC crosses the placenta and can accumulate in significantly elevated concentrations in breast milk. The hepatic cytochrome p450 system primarily metabolizes THC to many metabolites, mostly inactive. THC’s main active metabolite is 11-hydroxy-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol which is further broken down to numerous inactive metabolites, including 11-nor-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-carboxylic acid (THC-COOH), which is detectable in urine, as excretion is through both feces and urine over the course of hours to days, with more prolonged elimination depending on the chronicity of use. The toxicokinetics of synthetic cannabinoids are less predictable as the specifically abused compound may vary, and adulteration is not uncommon.