The placenta connects the maternal and fetal circulatory systems. The placenta provides oxygen and nutrients from the mother to the growing fetus. Also, it removes metabolic wastes and carbon dioxide from the fetus via the blood vessels in the umbilical cord. The umbilical cord develops from the placenta and is attached to the fetus.

From the IVC, blood travels through the right atrium of the heart to be directed across a shunt into the left atrium. There is greater pressure in the right atrium compared to the left atrium in fetal circulation; therefore, most of the oxygenated blood is shunted from the right atrium to the left atrium through an opening called the foramen ovale, whereas a mixture of oxygenated blood from the IVC and deoxygenated blood from the superior vena cava (SVC) becomes partially oxygenated blood in the right atrium. As a result, the estimated oxygen saturation of the left atrium is 65% compared to the right atrium, which is only 55%.

Once the oxygenated blood reaches the left atrium, it travels through the left ventricle into the coronary arteries and aorta, which branches to provide the most oxygenated blood to the brain before a shunt from the pulmonary artery, called the ductus arteriosus, allows partially oxygenated blood to be combined to the blood supply that will then flow to the systemic circulation with an estimated oxygen saturation of 60%. The partially oxygenated blood in the right atrium, mentioned above, can also enter the right ventricle and then the pulmonary artery. Because there is high resistance to blood flow in the lungs, the blood is shunted from the pulmonary artery into the aorta via the ductus arteriosus, mostly bypassing the lungs.

Blood then enters the systemic circulation, and the deoxygenated blood, with an estimated oxygen saturation of 40%, is recycled back to the placenta via the umbilical arteries to be oxygenated again by the mother.