Once esophageal motility disorder is suspected in a patient, a series of investigations can be performed. There is no particular order in which they have to be performed; rather, it is the physician’s discretion, clinical experience and varies from case to case. Generally, similar to approaching any other illness, a non-invasive investigation is chosen.

Esophagraphy: An esophagography is usually chosen as a first investigation that shows the anatomical and physiological functioning of the esophagus.

In advanced achalasia, there may be a dilated intrathoracic esophagus with an air-fluid level. There may be a tapering of the esophagus at the lower esophagus, which gives a pathognomonic appearance of a “bird beak.” There may be normal anatomy in early achalasia, but the pooling of contrast will reflect the loss of peristalsis. In some instances, an epinephric diverticula may be noted immediately above the lower esophageal sphincter (LES).

There is a 10 to 20% chance that these patients have a concurrent hiatal hernia in patients who have achalasia.

In DES, esophagogram may show the classic “corkscrew” or “rosary bead” appearance of the esophagus. Scleroderma esophagogram shows dilated esophagus, reflux, and weak or absent peristalsis.

**Manometry**

**Integrated Relaxation:**Average esophagogastric junction pressure for the 4 seconds of greatest relaxation within the 10-second period after a swallow. The normal value is up to 15mm Hg.

**Distal Latency:**The time taken for the swallow to reach the esophagogastric junction. Normal Value is up to 4.5 seconds.

**Distal Contractile Integral:**It is the measure of the strength of contraction of esophageal muscles. Normal value b/w 20 to 5000 mmHg/sec/cm.

- Achalasia: In patients with achalasia, manometry demonstrates hallmark findings of aperistalsis in the esophageal body and failure of the LES to relax.

- Spastic Esophageal Motility disorders:

- DES: It is characterized by normal peristalsis but simultaneous contractions of >30% of water swallows. Other associated findings include repetitive (>2 peaks), prolonged (>6 s), and high amplitude (>180mmHg) contractions. (Reproducibility of axial force and manometric recordings in the esophagus during wet and dry swallows.} it is also characterized by failure of LES to relax fully and abnormally high LES pressure (>40 mmHg).
- Nutcracker Esophagus: It has normal pattern peristalsis with high amplitude contractions >180mmHg with repetitive (>2 peaks), prolonged (>6 s) contractions, and high LES pressure (>40mmHg) on manometry.

**Endoscopy**

it is the first investigation in the setting of dysphagia. It is the only investigation tool that has both diagnostic and therapeutic significance while managing esophageal motility disorders. It may be inconclusive in early disease because gross abnormalities are usually appreciable later in the disease course.

Stasis of food inside the esophageal lumen can be appreciated on endoscopy and may be seen as inflamed, eroded, ulcerated, erythematous, or friable mucosa. Biopsies can be taken at the time and be sent for histopathological diagnosis, or an endoscopic intervention is done simultaneously.