Sacrum

The pelvis, consisting of a sacrum and two innominate, provides the foundational stability necessary for proper ambulation and posture. In regards to the sacrum, the anatomy involves the fusion of sacral vertebrae S1-S5, noting that this fusion is not fully completed until age 18-30. Important landmarks include the sacroiliac (SI) joints on either wings or ala of the sacrum, which articulate with the ilium and are critical for proper sacral motion, as well as the lumbosacral joint which articulates with the L5 lumbar vertebra. Moving inferiorly, the lower part of the sacrum, termed the coccyx is the final vertebral segment. The coccyx is connected to the sacrum via a fibrocartilaginous joint known as the sacrococcygeal symphysis.

The proper sacral motion requires the use of various ligaments such as the sacroiliac ligament, which connects the sacrum to the ilium and limits excessive anterior and inferior sacral motion. The sacrotuberous ligament comes together with the posterior sacroiliac ligament to function in resisting the nutation of the sacrum during normal gait.

Important ligaments involving the ilium include the iliolumbar and ilioinguinal ligaments, both of which contribute to overall pelvic stability. Finally, the true pelvic ligaments (which form a direct bone-to-bone connection) include the sacroiliac and interosseous sacroiliac ligaments. Accessory pelvic ligaments consist of the iliolumbar ligament, inguinal ligaments, sacrotuberous ligaments, and sacrospinous ligaments.

The sacral anatomy plays an important role in the proper physiological motion of the pelvis, specifically in regards to understanding the important axes of motion of the sacrum. Two diagonal oblique axes are present and go from the superior portion of the sacroiliac articulation to the contralateral inferior sacroiliac articulation and can be named either left or right, depending on their superior origin. The superior transverse axis passes through the posterior dural attachment at the second sacral segment and allows for sacral motion during the primary respiration. The middle transverse axis passes horizontally through the second sacral segment on the anterior aspect of the sacrum and is involved in postural stability that allows for appropriate sacral motion in a standing position as well as thoracic respiration. Finally, the inferior transverse axis (also at the second sacral segment) is involved in innominate motion in the way of the articulation between the ilia on the sacrum.

Innominate

The innominate is not a singular structure, but instead, the combination of three embryologically formed bones; the ilium, ischium, and pubis. Over time, these bones fuse to form the complete innominate which includes the acetabulum, or “hip socket” that houses the femoral head.

From a physiologic point of view, the innominate has the important feature of maintaining overall human stability when standing, walking, or running.