Plummer disease is a disorder that affects many organs due to the development of hyperthyroidism. Its manifestations are diverse and can be due to hyperthyroidism or the mass effect of the goiter. Hence the disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team consisting of an endocrinologist, an internist, a radiologist, a nuclear medicine specialist, a surgeon, nursing staff, and pharmacists. Plummer disease's natural history is well-researched and documented. The thyroid gland transforms itself from diffuse hyperplasia to euthyroid nodules or nodules, and then nodules with autonomy develop on the background of the enlarged thyroid gland that may also contain nonfunctional nodules. It can start as low TSH and subclinical hyperthyroidism and may eventually lead to thyrotoxicosis if not treated. It is usually seen after the age of 50. The condition is best treated with surgery or radioactive iodine. Regular follow-ups to assess post-operative hypothyroidism or disease recurrence are required for the rest of the patient's life. Lifelong antithyroid therapy is necessary if a patient is a poor candidate for surgery or refuses surgery or radioactive iodine. The other alternative is percutaneous ethanol injection of the hyperactive nodule.

Interprofessional care coordination with accurate and up-to-date record-keeping is essential to optimal patient care. The care team must have open communication lines, so everyone involved in treating the patient has the same information on which to base their clinical decisions.

Patients should be educated about the signs and symptoms of hyper-and hypothyroidism, the success and side effects of antithyroid drugs, the success rate and side effects of radioactive iodine treatment or surgical intervention, as well as complications of the different treatment choices, including the antithyroid drugs, the radioactive iodine therapy, or the thyroid surgery.