The medulla includes multiple nuclei and tracts that have information from the spinal cord as well as the higher cortex. Each nucleus in the medulla or tract passing through will have a separate explanation below.

**The cardiovascular-respiratory function of the medulla:**Multiple studies show that the cardiovascular system and the respiratory system unite as one regulating system within a specific part of the medulla. The rostral ventral lateral medulla (RVLM) has been found to have the excitatory neurons that carry information to the pre-sympathetic neurons in the spinal cord, which maintain baseline arterial pressure. Within the RVLM, there is also the ventral respiratory column, which is known to be the center of control of respiratory rhythm and pattern. The ventral respiratory column divides into multiple sub-nuclei that establish connections with the presynaptic fibers in the RVLM and regulate the oscillating respiratory pattern that allows us to perfuse our tissues with oxygen. The caudal ventrolateral medulla contains synaptic input from tonic inhibitory baroreflex control. Together both the caudal and the rostral part of the ventral medulla have been known to be an essential location for input and convergence for controlling respiration with cardiovascular regulation.

**The Nucleus of the Solitary Tract (NTS):**The NTS is in the dorsolateral medulla, from the caudal part of the facial nucleus to the caudal aspect of the pyramidal decussation. The organization of this nucleus is by the type of information transmitted, and the pathways needed to be activated. It is essential for analyzing and coordinating visceral afferent information. The afferent cardiorespiratory signals from peripheral chemoreceptors, pulmonary stretch receptors, and baroreceptors, synapse in the caudal and intermediate sections of the NTS, before reaching the RVLM in the medulla. They work in the regulation of respiration. Neurons carrying taste sensation also synapse in the NTS first before traveling to the thalamus and later on to the cortex.

**Area Postrema:**This structure lies on the dorsal surface of the medulla at the floor of the 4th ventricle, rostral to the obex, adjacent to the solitary nucleus. It is also known as the vomiting center. It is positioned to detect emetic toxins in the blood and the CSF. The cells in the area postrema are unique because they don’t have a blood-brain barrier to keep out large polar molecules. These cells receive innervation via vagal afferents leading to the solitary nucleus, which is one way a person can feel nauseous and vomit. Studies have shown a lesion in the AP does not entirely inhibit vomiting from all of the emetic drugs. Vomiting from motion sickness is also reported to be not associated with the area postrema.

**Spinal trigeminal Nucleus:**This brainstem nucleus is in the lateral medulla. It further subdivides into the trigeminal nucleus pars oralis, pars interpolaris, and pars caudalis, named rostral to caudal, respectively. The caudal portion predominantly receives nociceptive afferents from the face. The other nuclei incorporate sensory information from the sensory branches of the trigeminal cranial nerve (V) of the ipsilateral side of the face. The sensation of temperature, pain, and a deep or crude touch of the ipsilateral face are sent to this nucleus as well. It is the first central synapse and relay in the orofacial pain nerve fibers, which later reach the ventral posteromedial nucleus of the thalamus.

**Inferior Olivary nuclei**: The inferior olivary nuclei are in the superior medulla. They are two structures lateral to the pyramidal columns in a C shape, composed of grey matter. It is associated with the inferior cerebellar peduncles (ICP), and many neurons travel through the ICP to the cerebellar cortex. The inferior olivary nuclei receive information from multiple sources carrying proprioception, muscle tension, and motor intention. The neurons from this nuclei are important because they synapse directly on the Purkinje cell bodies in the cerebellum. Due to the critical connection with the cerebellum, atrophy of the inferior olivary nuclei will lead to a cerebellar loss as well.

**Reticular formation**: This is a net-like system found in the tegmentum of the midbrain, pons, and medulla, as well as the subthalamus and thalamus. This system is a complex organization divided into four regions. The 4th zone is the only one in the medulla between the medial and lateral columns. This zone plays a role in autonomic regulation of respiration, heart rate, and blood pressure.

**Pyramidal decussation of the motor pathway**: This is the most ventral and most caudal part of the medulla, which is where the majority of the motor fibers from the motor cortex in the cerebrum decussate in the medulla and form the lateral corticospinal tract in the spinal cord. Some of the fibers that don’t cross the midline become the anterior corticospinal tract.

**The Cuneate Nucleus and Gracilias Nucleus:**These nuclei are most dorsal and caudal in medulla on the same level as the pyramidal decussation. The dorsal column- medial lemniscus pathway synapse into second-order neurons from their perspective dorsal root ganglia neurons at these nuclei. This pathway conveys conscious proprioception, fine tactile discrimination, and vibration sensations from the body. The cuneate nucleus, lateral to the gracile nucleus, receives sensory information from the upper extremities. The gracile nucleus receives sensory input from the lower extremities. Both nuclei travel cephalad and from the medial lemniscus once they decussate in the medulla.

**Medial Leminscus:**The neurons that form the medial lemniscus are the internal arcuate fibers from the cuneate and gracile nucleus in the caudal medulla. Once they decussate, they form the medial lemniscus pathway and terminate in the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus, carrying proprioception, vibration, and fine touch modalities. The medial lemniscus pathway is located in between the two inferior olivary nuclei and is dorsal to the pyramidal motor pathway. It travels through the rest of the medulla up to the level of the pons and midbrain.

**Spinothalamic tract:**The spinothalamic tract includes the anterior and lateral tracts. Pain and temperature sensation travel through the lateral tract, and crude touch is through the anterior tract. The second-order neurons reaching the medulla from the spinal cord have already crossed over through the anterior white commissure in the spinal cord segment. In the medulla, the spinothalamic tract is between the inferior olivary nucleus and the spinal trigeminal nucleus. This tract goes through the whole brain stem terminating in the ventral posterior lateral nucleus in the thalamus.