Indomethacin is a potent nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). It is used as an antipyretic, anti-inflammatory, and analgesic agent to treat various conditions.

**FDA-Approved Indications**

The FDA-approved indications are listed below.

**Pain (Acute)**

Indomethacin is indicated for mild to moderate acute pain in adults.

**Rheumatoid Arthritis**

Clinicians can use indomethacin in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA); however, more effective disease-modifying anti-rheumatic agents (DMARDs) have demonstrated greater effectiveness in halting the progression of RA; thus, indomethacin is rarely used as monotherapy, but instead often in combination with agents such as adalimumab, etanercept, infliximab, methotrexate.

**Ankylosing Spondylitis**

Ankylosing spondylitis is a form of inflammatory arthritis primarily impacting the axial skeleton: one of the primary manifestations involves spinal fusion and rigidity. The disease primarily affects males, and more than 90% of patients with the condition test positive for the HLA-B27 haplotype. Clinicians often use indomethacin in conjunction with DMARDs and physical therapy to treat ankylosing spondylitis.

**Osteoarthritis**

Osteoarthritis (OA), a noninflammatory type of arthritis characterized by joint stress from "wear and tear," can often be effectively treated with indomethacin. However, it is essential to note that while indomethacin and other NSAIDs can be very effective in treating OA, first-line treatment involves acetaminophen.

**Bursitis**

Bursae are synovial fluid-filled sacs that lubricate joints- bursitis involves bursa inflammation. As a result, bursitis can present with erythematous, painful joints. This pathology is also treatable with indomethacin.

**Gouty Arthritis**

Gouty arthritis****involves the deposition of urate crystals in joints- this presents with an acute erythematous joint- often the hallux and may also respond to indomethacin therapy.

**Patent Ductus Arteriosus**

Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a non-cyanotic heart defect that results in left-to-right shunting. The clinical severity of the condition depends on several factors; however, often, it needs to be closed, and indomethacin can help accomplish this.

**Off-labeled Indications**

In addition to the FDA-approved indications, there are also off-label uses for indomethacin.

**Aphthous Stomatitis**

Aphthous stomatitis****is a pathology defined by frequent and recurrent oral ulcerations. Often these ulcers can be painful, and the cause of the ulcers is unknown. Therefore, treatment for his condition is symptomatic, and indomethacin is a therapeutic option. An ERCP is a procedure involving the insertion of an endoscope into the duodenum to visualize various portions of the GI tract. It can be useful in removing gallstones from the common bile duct; however, it correlates with a risk of post-procedural pancreatitis; indomethacin can mitigate this risk.

**Plantar Fasciitis**

Plantar fasciitis is an orthopedic pathology that involves pain on the foot's plantar (heel) surface. Walking and bending may aggravate the condition, but indomethacin can help minimize the symptoms of this pathology. Indomethacin can also alleviate back pain. Indomethacin has also been shown to have possible anti-tumor effects and may potentiate the effects of various neoplastic agents.

**Preterm-labor**

Preterm labor is parturition that occurs when birth occurs between 20 0/7 weeks of gestation and 36 6/7 weeks. Indomethacin is commonly used NSAID as a tocolytic in preterm labor. A systematic review indicates that using indomethacin leads to a reduction in preterm birth.

**Headache Disorders**

Indomethacin-responsive headache disorders include paroxysmal hemicrania, primary cough headache, exercise headache, hypnic headache, headache associated with sexual activity, and stabbing headache. Gastroprotection should be offered with PPI or H2 blockers.