During the interval period between the damage control operation and the definitive operation, various techniques are employed to maintain the open abdomen. These techniques fall under the moniker temporary abdominal closure (TAC) and include negative pressure therapy (NPT), mesh-mediated fascial closure (MMFC), the Wittman patch, fascial traction sutures, sequential tensioning of mesh, Bogota bag, and skin tension.

NPT and MMFC are two commonly utilized forms of TAC. NPT can be implemented using commonly available, cost-effective operating room materials, such as polyethylene, surgical towels, silicone drains, and a plastic polyester adhesive drape. There are also commercially available negative pressure systems. Similarly, MMFC can be performed with mesh materials readily available in most operating rooms, also an extremely cost-effective approach.

Negative pressure dressings have been shown to provide the benefits of stabilizing the abdominal wall, protecting the abdominal viscera, quantifying exudate put out from the wound, and keeping the fascia intact for subsequent closure. However, studies suggest that there is no significant difference in the success of primary delayed closure of the abdomen when either NPT or MMFC are utilized. Rather, the most significant factor in achieving closure is believed to be the utilization of an intermediary technique that applies constant tension to the opposing fascial edges, thus preventing the loss of abdominal domain.

Following TAC, definitive management of the open abdomen is ideally achieved through primary closure. This can involve either early fascial closure or sequential fascial closure. When the abdominal closure is unsuccessful, planned ventral hernia with split-thickness skin graft can be utilized to successfully cover and protect the abdominal viscera. The patient is then returned to the operating room 9 to 12 months later to excise the skin graft and perform herniorrhaphy.