Management includes resuscitation and **intensive care unit monitoring**. Respiratory failure should remain in mind, and patients followed in the intensive care unit.

Patients should have clinically monitoring for signs of **increased intracranial pressure.**These include disorientation, lethargy, headache, vomiting. Look for bradycardia, hypertension, or irregular respiratory pattern. Management includes head elevation to 30 degrees, blood-pressure management to maintain cerebral perfusion, hyperventilation, osmotherapy, and sedation. Surgery may be a consideration.

**Reperfusion/Thrombolytic therapy**: Intravenous thrombolysis with IV recombinant tissue-plasminogen activator (IV-rt-PA), and endovascular thrombectomy may be an option.

**Secondary stroke prevention**: With antiplatelets, antihypertensives, and statins. Treatment of the cause and vascular risk factors.

Evaluation of enteral nutrition: Patients may require a nasogastric tube.

**Dysphagia management:**Dietary and/or postural modifications are required. If severe dysphagia is prolonged, conversion to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) may be required. Swallowing treatment: Active exercises to strengthen swallowing musculature. Botulinum toxin type-A injections have been used to treat severe dysphagia associated with trismus.

Low-molecular-weight heparin prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis.

**Speech therapy assessment**

Hiccups: There are reports of the use of gabapentin in the treatment of persistent hiccups in cases of LMS.

Medullary infarction can cause autonomic abnormalities leading to acute heart failure. A pacemaker may be required.

Keratitis in LMS can occur due to loss of corneal sensitivity caused by trigeminal neuropathy leading to epithelial erosions. These patients need multidisciplinary management, artificial tears, night creams, autologous serum, and rarely surgical procedures.

The lateral medullary syndrome may cause chronic disabling facial pain. Gabapentin is an option for these patients.

Periodic follow up of the patient to evaluate speech and motor activity.