Perichondritis of the pinna is a clinical diagnosis; therefore, a focused history and thorough physical examination are essential.

The history should include any recent significant trauma to the lateral face and ear, including piercing, acupuncture, grazes, burns, lacerations, or pinna hematoma. Clinicians should ask about relevant symptoms such as hearing loss, otorrhea, or cranial nerve abnormalities, which would point to a different diagnosis. Particular attention should be paid to comorbidities in the patient’s past medical history, such as diabetes or immunosuppression, that could increase the likelihood of infections.

Physical examination should consist of a comprehensive ear exam with an inspection, palpation, and otoscopy. Patients will typically present with an erythematous, swollen, hot, painful pinna. In perichondritis, the lobule is often spared, helping to differentiate it from pinna cellulitis.

This is important as there are different causative organisms for both, and if pinna cellulitis is present, it would be prudent to mark the affected area. There may be a small abscess present or necrosis of the soft tissue. Palpation will reveal a tender pinna. To complete the examination mastoid process, pre and post-auricular regions should be examined for tenderness. A cranial nerve exam and neck swelling exam should be performed as indicated.

Systemic symptoms such as pyrexia or extension of erythema beyond the pinna suggest that the infection has spread beyond the external ear.

Careful otoscopy should be performed, with the unaffected ear examined first. The clinician should look for any debris or discharge, erythema, or swelling in the external ear canal, which would point to perichondritis caused by otitis externa, which is primarily treated with suction clearance and topical antibiotics. The tympanic membrane should also be assessed for an air-fluid level or perforation.

Lastly, if a patient presents with inflammation of both pinnae, nose, and joints, or tracheobronchial abnormalities, consider a diagnosis of relapsing polychondritis, which is an autoimmune condition and is primarily treated with oral steroids.