The history of a strangulation injury may be obtained from the patient, witnesses, family or friends, first responder personnel, or a combination of the above. Proper history will facilitate proper management. If possible, determine whether the strangulation was a manual, ligature, or hanging injury. When a history of ligature or hanging is elicited, the clinician should further clarify the type of material used. Incomplete versus complete hanging injuries should also be differentiated. If the injury is a complete hanging, the height of the drop should be assessed as this may help prognosticate as well as. Associated injuries and ingestions need to be evaluated. Obtaining an approximate time of injury is also essential, along with a potential duration of the sustained injury. The patient’s initial on-scene presentation, resuscitative efforts initiated, and patient stability or decompensation en route will also aid the practitioner to initiate proper management.

Physical examination may include one or more of the following “hard signs” of strangulation:

**Head, Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat**

- Visual disturbances

- Conjunctival or facial petechial hemorrhages

- Swollen tongue or oropharynx

- Foreign body (blood, vomit, tissue) in the oropharynx

- Facial edema, lacerations, abrasions, ecchymosis

- Neck abrasions, edema, lacerations, or ligature marks

- Tenderness to palpation over the larynx

- Hoarseness or stridor

- Subcutaneous edema or crepitus

**Cardiovascular**

- Cyanosis or hypoxia

- Arrhythmias

- Respiratory distress

- Crackles or wheezes

- Cough

**Neurologic**

- Altered mental status

- Seizures

- Stroke-like symptoms

- Incontinence

As with all traumatic injuries, the physical exam must first start with an examination of the airway. Blood, vomitus, sputum, and other foreign bodies may be involved. Audible stridor can result from a threatened upper airway. Auscultation of cervical structures is helpful not only to assess airway patency, but to listen for bruits, thrills, and other signs of vascular injury. The patient's breathing pattern should be noted. Bradypnea and other abnormal breathing patterns may result from Cushing's triad if the patient is showing clinical signs of grave elevations in intracranial pressure. An assessment of the patient's circulatory status is vital. Blood pressure monitoring, capillary refill, and extremity warmth can suggest to the clinician if the patient has signs of spinal shock.

To this end a thorough neurological assessment is vital. Neurological tone, reflexes, and many eponymous findings may suggest upper motor neuron injury or cerebrovascular injury. Care should be taken to assess lateralizing signs as well which may help localize a certain level of spinal cord lesions.

Skin and musculoskeletal findings are likely to be present in severe injuries. Depending on the nature of the trauma a full head to toe assessment should be done for these organ systems. Polytrauma patients may have other injuries that go unrecognized when focused on the immediate needs of the strangulation injury.

In patients where it is appropriate to do so, a rapid psychiatric assessment is necessary. Signs of depression (e.g. depressed mood, suicidal ideations, altered thought content, and many others) may be present. Assessment of the patient’s sensorium, concentration, memory, and other features may point towards concomitant intoxication or concussive head injury.