Myocardial stretch releases angiotensin II and activates endothelin type-I receptor. There is simultaneous activation of angiotensin I receptors, activation of the mineralocorticoid receptor, transactivation of the epidermal growth factor receptor, increased formation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, upstream activation of redox-sensitive kinases, myocardial sodium/hydrogen exchanger I, and an increase in calcium transient amplitude through the sodium/calcium exchanger in reverse.

The release of angiotensin II/endothelin type-I is responsible for cardiac myocyte hypertrophy, and the blockade of angiotensin II abolishes the Anrep effect. For example, the drug losartan blocks the angiotensin I receptors.  According to previous studies, angiotensin II and endothelin type-I have a one-way direction and an upstream process, as the blockade of endothelin type-I receptors eventually causes the blockade of angiotensin II. The Anrep effect is not related to any genomic mechanisms as the mechanical response occurs in a very brief period.

The oxide ion is very unstable, and it is rapidly converted by superoxide dismutase into hydrogen peroxide, a more stable, membrane-permeant reactive oxygen species with wide recognition as a signaling molecule. In the myocardium, a membrane-bound extracellular superoxide dismutase, a cytoplasmic copper-zinc superoxide dismutase, and a mitochondrial manganese superoxide dismutase perform the dismutation. Therefore, the oxide ion is easily converted into hydrogen peroxide at different cellular locations, upstream or downstream of the mitochondria. Sabri et al.

Stretching of the myocardium leads to mineralocorticoid activation by releasing preformed angiotensin II from the myocyte, which begins the release of aldosterone through angiotensin I receptor activation. Aldosterone activates the mineralocorticoid receptors in an autocrine/paracrine fashion. The chain of events started by the myocardial stretch is the release of angiotensin II followed by endothelin release, mineralocorticoid receptor activation, and epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation. These steps cause upstream mitochondrial reactive oxygen species release, which is responsible for activation of extracellular signal-related kinases (ERK)/90-kDa ribosomal S6 kinase (p90) signaling pathway (ERK1/2-p90) stimulating sodium-hydrogen antiporter I.