There are several types of toxidermia that are distinguished secondary to their unique clinical presentations.

Exanthematous eruptions, also described as morbilliform or ery­thematous maculopapular eruptions, are the most common type of drug reaction, accounting for approximately 40% of all reactions. The rash develops one day to three weeks after the offending drug is first given, although the timing can differ if previously sensitized. The eruptions appear clinically as polymorphic maculopapular lesions with no mucosal involvement, resembling a viral exanthem. Lesions usually appear first on the trunk or in areas of pressure or trauma. They spread to involve the extremities, usually in a symmetrical distribution. The most frequent drug offenders include antibiotics (beta-lactams, sulfonamides), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), antiepileptics (carbamazepine, hydantoins), and allopurinol.

Urticarial toxidermia, also known as "urticaria and Quincke's edema", typically presents in two distinct ways. Immediate urticaria occurs very rapidly after the start of treatment within 1 or 2 hours. Immediate reactions require discontinuation of the drug due to the potential for the development of anaphylaxis. Delayed urticaria usually occurs several days after the administration of the medication. Since the delayed urticaria is linked to the pharmacological properties of the medicinal product, the continuation of its use is not contraindicated.

Fixed pigmented erythema (FPE), also known as a fixed drug eruption, occurs 24 hours to a few days after administration of the offending medication. The classic form is characterized by a single or multiple round to oval-shaped, red to brown macules. These lesions have the potential to evolve into plaques with vesicles or blistering.

Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), also known as Lyell syndrome, in addition to Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), are the most serious toxidermia manifestations, accounting for a 25% mortality rate. There is a continuum between SJS and TEN, which are differentiated by the amount of skin involvement (<10% in SJS,> 30% in NET, 10% to 30% in SJS-TEN overlap syndrome). Symptoms appear 21 days after initiation of the causative medication. From the rash onset, the progression of skin lesions takes anywhere from a few hours to a few days. The skin lesions typically consist of a dark red or purpuric macular rash with pseudo-cockades conflated into a detachment dermis made of large shreds exposing the oozing dermis. The eruption often starts on the face and then gradually spreads symmetrically to the rest of the body. A specific indicator of SJS or TEN is the presence of a positive Nikolsky sign, which manifests clinically as detachment of the epidermis from the underlying dermis by a shearing force. Another indicator of SJS or TEN is the presence of painful erosions of mucous membranes affecting at least two anatomic locations (conjunctiva, nose, mouth, anal or genital area). The patient's general state of health is seriously altered by high fever, rapid dehydration, and the superinfection of skin lesions. Respiratory deterioration with tachypnea and hypoxia can be a sign of underlying necrosis of the bronchial tree, which correlates with a poor clinical prognosis.

Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), also known as drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome, is characterized by a late-onset skin eruption 2 to 6 weeks after initiation of the medication. The eruption is nonspecific, typically manifesting as a pruritic maculopapular exanthem or a febrile erythroderma. 30% of cases are associated with an infiltrated facial edema. Rarely, small pustules, purpura, or erythema multiforme lesions can appear. DRESS is distinguished from other drug eruptions by its association with voluminous adenopathies in several lymph nodes and visceral involvement. Common organ involvement includes the liver (hepatitis), kidney (interstitial nephritis), lungs, heart, and pancreas. The clinical picture of DRESS is supplemented by eosinophilia (> 1500 PNN / mm3) and a mononucleosis-like syndrome. DRESS visceral sequela can persist for several weeks and can present after the onset of the skin eruption. In addition, eosinophilia may be lacking during the initial phase of the disease. The exact pathogenesis is unknown. Patients suffering from severe cutaneous manifestations from DRESS should be hospitalized and undergo extensive clinical follow-up after hospitalization.

Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) is a scarlatiniform erythematous rash with semi-small pustules, predominantly in the large pleats (axillary folds, inguinal folds). The pustules can coalesce and subsequently lead to superficial cutaneous desquamation. Mucosal involvement is possible but limited. It is generally triggered by antibiotics, most commonly aminopenicillins and macrolides. This eruption typically begins with an abrupt onset, appearing within 24 hours to 4 days after initiation of medication. The most common symptoms are burning and pruritus. The eruption generally regresses in ten days. AGEP diagnosis is established based on history, clinical manifestations, and laboratory findings. Generalized pustular psoriasis is similar appearing dermatologic pathology that should be differentiated from AGEP. Patients with generalized pustular psoriasis often have a history of psoriasis, and these lesions clinically do not evolve as much. In addition, the two pathologies possess contrasting histological findings. The diagnosis of AGEP is important secondary to its potential severe prognosis and 5% mortality rate.