Pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis & pulmonary tumor embolism represents end-stage manifestations of malignancies and has been used interchangeably in the literature although the former represents a pathology predominantly restricted to the interstitium with absent tumor cells in pulmonary arteries and or capillaries, whereas the latter demonstrates the presence of tumor cells inside the pulmonary vessels. Pulmonary hypertension & right heart strain are much more common in pulmonary tumor embolism when compared to lymphangitic carcinomatosis.

The distribution of pulmonary lymphatics is in the peribronchovascular, centrilobular, interlobular & subpleural locations. There are many theories regarding the metastatic tumor spread predominantly confined to lymphatics though the exact mechanism is still unclear. One theory proposes the initial hematogenous spread of tumor cells, which causes obliterative endarteritis and subsequently pierce the vascular endothelium to reach the perivascular lymphatics to be stationed there. Direct entry into lymphatic circulation is feasible once a nearby lymph vessel (e.g., thoracic duct) is invaded.

Widespread retrograde permeation & embolization can occur once the hilar lymph nodes are involved. Trans diaphragmatic spread has also been proposed to explain lymphangitic carcinomatosis caused by infra diaphragmatic neoplasms. Local obstruction and fluid accumulation ensue soon after the tumor cells are trapped in the lymphatic vessels. Thickening of bronchovascular bundles and alveolar septa follows due to tissue edema,& the presence of nodular thickening suggests the possibility of the tumor cells growing locally.