Medications used to treat alcohol and opioid use disorder focus on altering their reinforcing effects on inducing euphoria.

Naltrexone blocks the effect of opioids and prevents opioid intoxication and physiologic dependence on opioid users. Naltrexone also modifies the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis to suppress ethanol consumption.

Exogenous opioids include the commonly prescribed pain relievers such as hydrocodone, oxycodone, and heroin. Usually, they induce euphoria at much higher doses than those prescribed by medical providers to relieve pain. Opioid overdose can lead to coma and respiratory compromise. Opioids act mainly via the mu receptor, although they affect mu, delta, and kappa-opioid receptors. Synthetic opioid antagonists can modify the action of opioids on these receptors.

Meta-analysis indicated that for preventing heavy drinking, NNT (number needed to treat) is 12 (95% CI, -0.13 to -0.04) with oral naltrexone.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: Naltrexone is almost completely absorbed after oral administration but has an extensive first-pass metabolism.

Distribution: Apparent volume of distribution after IV administration is 1350 L, and plasma protein binding is 21%.

Metabolism: Naltrexone is metabolized to an active metabolite 6β-naltrexone.

Excretion: After oral administration, the half-life is 4 hours, and following an intramuscular injection (IM), the half-life is 5 to 10 days. Naltrexone is excreted primarily by the kidneys as a metabolite and unchanged drug.