Although Lewy body pathologies are intriguing and may provide a clue of the pathophysiology of DLB, PD dementia, and other related neurodegenerative disorders, it is discovered on autopsy and therefore not useful for routine clinical diagnosis. DLB and PD are important dementia syndromes that overlap in many clinical features, genetics, neuropathology, and management. They are considered subtypes of an alpha-synuclein-associated disease spectrum (Lewy body diseases), from the incidental Lewy body disease and non-demented Parkinson disease to PDD, DLB, and DLB with Alzheimer disease at the most severe end. The clinical symptoms in relation to the different cognitive, psychiatric, and motor domains should be sufficient for the diagnosis. A rigorous history and physical exam, with ancillary testing including imaging and nuclear studies that like DAT, CSF profiles, and tau and amyloid pathology can be useful for diagnostic purposes but does not change medical management of these disorders. The interesting phenomenon of various biochemical markers that accumulate in DLB and PD dementia including alpha-synuclein, ubiquitin, tau, and amyloid provides evidence of the multi-factorial and complex processes that become dysfunctional in chronic and progressive neurodegenerative disease such as DLB and PD dementia. The pathophysiological threshold to develop clinical symptoms when these cellular and biochemical processes are disrupted is elusive. Although this anatomical neuropathological classification above mentioned is useful, it does not entirely predict the diagnosis, progression, and prognosis in all the synucleopathies. Further research is needed to develop relevant biomarkers and therapeutic targets that can delay the progression of diseases such as DLB and PD.