The evaluation of patients with vestibular dysfunction may include magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), electronystagmography (ENG) or videonystagmography (VNG), vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials (VEMP), and brainstem auditory evoked potentials/brainstem auditory evoked responses/auditory brainstem responses (BAEP/BAER/ABR). Not all of these tests are always needed due to their low yield and the expense associated.

Electronystagmography and videonystagmography (also known as electrooculography and videooculography) are among the more common tests performed to quantify VOR function. ENG uses surface electrodes to measure nystagmus, and VNG uses cameras for the same purpose. During ENG and VNG studies, a patient will typically undergo several different tests: following lights on a light bar, undergoing positional testing, such as the Dix-Hallpike maneuver, and undergoing caloric testing. The latter involves warm and cold water or air irrigation of the external auditory canal to cause a convection current in the horizontal semicircular canal. The amount and symmetry of nystagmus produced will indicate laterality and severity of peripheral vestibular lesions.

VEMP testing may also form a part of the testing battery performed by the audiologist. There are two types of VEMP tests, cervical and ocular. The former involves delivering an impulse sound to one ear and recording relaxation of the ipsilateral sternocleidomastoid muscle to determine at what thresholds the relaxation response occurs.

Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain is indicated when history and physical examination tests like HIT, skew deviation, HINTS, Dix-Hallpike maneuver, and visual fixation identify a central cause. Patients with risk factors for stroke or neurologic signs and symptoms should have neuroimaging to evaluate for acute ischemic stroke. Young patients who have acute sustained vertigo with no risk factors for stroke, no neurologic signs or symptoms, suppression with visual fixation, falling in the opposite direction to the nystagmus, and horizontal or torsional nystagmus do not need immediate imaging unless symptoms persist for 48 hours or longer. Brain MRI can detect acute ischemic stroke with very high sensitivity and specificity. Head CT, however, has a lower sensitivity for infarctions and other lesions in the brainstem but a high sensitivity for intracranial hemorrhage; it is also more readily available in most places and can be performed emergently. For this reason, it is often the initial screening test when evaluating for stroke.