The anatomical snuffbox is clinically significant when there is pain with palpation within its boundaries. Scaphoid fractures account for two-thirds of all carpal bone fractures and are commonly misdiagnosed. The most common form of injury is when a patient falls onto an outstretched hand when it is pronated and deviated in the ulnar plane. The hallmark of anatomic snuffbox tenderness is highly sensitive for scaphoid fractures but lacks specificity. Due to the lack of specificity, those with snuffbox tenderness should undergo radiographic studies of the wrist. Those with initial negative imaging can be managed with either a thumb spica short-armed splint or advanced imaging by MRI or CT to determine if a fracture exists. Given the unique blood flow to the scaphoid, fracture location is important in determining treatment options to prevent avascular necrosis of the bone.

The importance of correctly identifying scaphoid fractures is underlined by the fact that up to 32% of these fractures lead to non-union of the bone, which develops into osteoarthritis.

De Quervain tenosynovitis is a second clinically significant diagnosis relative to the anatomical snuffbox. De Quervain tenosynovitis is a stenosing tendinopathy that affects the first dorsal compartment, including the abductor pollicis longus and the muscle named the extensor pollicis brevis, both of which are lateral borders of the anatomical snuffbox. Diagnosis can be made based on a thorough history and physical examination. History may include repetitive hand motions in which repeated radio-ulnar deviation occurs. Patients will typically present with pain or swelling over the dorsal aspect of the wrist with associated aggravation of symptoms with the forced resistance of the thumb. Treatment typically includes conservative therapy with NSAIDs, corticosteroids, physical therapy, or splinting in a thumb spica splint. Surgery is reserved for refractory symptomology.