The following is a list of commonly recommended and implemented nursing care interventions for central lines.**Education, Training,****and Staffing**

All healthcare professionals working in a setting with indwelling CVCs should receive annual training on central line care. Updates regarding indications for the placement of CVCs, maintenance of CVCs, and infection control measures should be included.

Facilities may institute a CVC care team. Having a dedicated team of personnel who demonstrate competence in maintaining central lines has been shown to decrease central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI). Additionally, ensuring adequate staffing in intensive care units (ICUs), decreasing the number of float nurses in the ICUs, and maintaining a low patient-to-nurse ratio reduces the incidence of catheter-related bloodstream infections.

**Skin Preparation**

Before the insertion of the central line, some traditional texts advocate bathing the patient from chin to ankle using chlorhexidine wash. This should be followed by preparing the skin for catheter placement by cleansing the insertion site thoroughly with chlorhexidine gluconate. Allow the area to dry fully before the provider proceeds with catheter insertion.

**Catheter Securement**

Sutureless securement devices should be used to reduce the risk of infection at the central line site.

**Catheter Site Dressing Regimen**

Central line dressings should not be changed every day unless they are loose or soiled. Current recommendations are to change gauze dressing every two days and transparent, semi-permeable dressing every seven days unless soiled or loose. If the patient is diaphoretic, has bleeding at the insertion site, or oozing from the insertion site, use a gauze dressing until the issue has resolved. Do not use topical antibiotic ointment or cream at the insertion site as this is ineffective. The exception would be with dressing changes to hemodialysis catheters, povidone-iodine, antiseptic ointment, or bacitracin/gramicidin/polymyxin B ointment may be applied to a hemodialysis catheter insertion site at the end of the dialysis session.

**Patient Cleansing**

The patient with a central venous catheter should wash daily using chlorhexidine for skin cleansing.

**Systemic Antibiotic Prophylaxis**

Systemic antimicrobials should not be administered prophylactically in otherwise healthy patients. There are no indications that the prophylactic administration of systemic antimicrobials is beneficial, and the overuse of antimicrobials may lead to systemic resistance to these medications.

**Replacement of Central Venous Catheters**

Central lines should be removed as soon as they are no longer necessary. However, central venous catheters should not be routinely replaced. Routinely replacing central venous catheters has been shown to increase the incidence of infection at central line insertion sites. Additionally, central lines should not be removed based solely on the presence of hyperthermia. Other noninfectious causes of fever should be considered, and other evidence of infection should be sought before replacing an existing central venous catheter.

**Replacement of Administration Sets**

To decrease the incidence of CLABSI, intravenous (IV) administration sets should be changed no more frequently than every 96 hours but should be changed at least every seven days. IV tubing for blood, blood products, or fat emulsion product administration should be replaced within 24 hours of the initiation of the products. Additionally, IV tubing used for propofol administration should be changed at least every 6  to 12 hours or each time the vial is changed.

**Needleless Intravenous Catheter Systems**

The use of needleless IV catheter systems is highly recommended for reducing CVC complications. Needleless connectors and components should be changed with each IV administration set to change, no more frequently than every 72 hours. Access ports should be scrubbed with chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine, iodophor, or 70% alcohol and accessed only with sterile devices. All lumens are to be covered, preferably with disinfecting hub caps.