The ear is organized into three different anatomical structures: the outer, middle, and inner ear. The outer ear consists of the pinna, external auditory canal, and tympanic membrane and is responsible for the transmission of sound waves from the external environment.

The cochlea is a spiral-shaped fluid-filled organ located within the cochlear duct of the inner ear. The cochlea contains three distinct anatomic compartments: the scala vestibuli, scala media (also referred to as the cochlear duct), and scala tympani. The scala vestibuli and scala tympani both contain perilymph and surround the scala media, which contains endolymph. The endolymph within the scala media originates from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and is secreted by the stria vascularis, which is a network of capillaries located in the spiral ligament. The perilymph in the scala vestibuli originates from blood plasma, whereas the perilymph in the scala tympani comes from CSF. Endolymph and perilymph vary significantly in their concentration of ions, which is essential to the overall function of the cochlea. Endolymph is rich in potassium and low in sodium and calcium, whereas perilymph is rich in sodium and low in potassium and calcium. This difference in concentration allows for a positive endocochlear potential. The difference in concentration of potassium ions among the three fluid compartments within the cochlea enables proper transduction of current along with the hair cells.

Hearing

Vibration from the stapes gets transmitted through the oval window, which is an opening into the inner ear through which the middle and inner ear communicate. Vibrations across the oval window initiate a perilymph wave that propagates along the scala vestibuli, with high frequency sounds dissipating earlier at the base of the cochlea and low-frequency sounds dissipating later towards the apex of the cochlea. The perilymphatic wave terminates at the round window, another point at which the middle ear communicates with the inner ear. In contrast to the oval window, the round window does not articulate with the stapes. Rather, the round window membrane is located inferomedial to the oval window and functions to counteract the fluid shift created in the cochlea. The presence of the round window allows for fluid to move more freely through the cochlea, thereby improving sound transmission.

As vibration transmits across the oval window, perilymph gets pushed towards the cochlear apex, which causes the scala media to become compressed. Within the scala media, there is a tectorial membrane that sits atop the organ of Corti. The compression of the scala media causes the tectorial membrane to change the position of cells within the organ of Corti.

The organ of Corti is located within the scala media and is responsible for converting mechanical forces into electrical impulses. It contains 15000 inner and outer hair cells that are arranged tonotopically throughout the cochlea to help distinguish between sounds of varying frequencies. The hair cells have projections known as stereocilia and kinocilia that are in contact with the tectorial membrane. Vibrations transmitted to the tectorial membrane cause displacement of stereocilia, leading to the displacement of the adjacent kinocilia. Movement of the kinocilia triggers depolarization of the hair cell, leading to an influx of calcium and the release of specific neurotransmitters that act at the cochlear ganglion. This activity produces an action potential that is propagated along the cochlear nerve and along auditory pathways, where it eventually reaches the cochlear nuclei located in the brainstem.

Balance

The inner ear also contains the vestibular organs that are responsible for balance and position. The vestibular organs include the semicircular canals, utricle, and saccule. To understand the anatomy of the vestibular organs, it is helpful to separate the vestibular organs based on their specific functions. The semicircular canals, including their ampullas, are responsible for angular acceleration (rotational movement of the head), whereas the utricle and saccule are involved in linear acceleration.

Semicircular canals:

There are three semicircular canals; anterior, posterior, and lateral. Each semicircular canal is located in a different plane (x,y, and z) and connects to the utricle via an ampulla, which is a widening of the canal. Within the ampulla, there are sensory epithelia known as cristae that contain projections of hair cells. Above the hair cells and cristae, there is a gelatinous cupula. As the head rotates in various directions, endolymph flowing through the semicircular canals displaces the gelatinous cupula that rests above the cristae leading to excitation of the hair cells embedded within the cristae. The hair cells become depolarized or hyperpolarized depending on the direction in which endolymph flows.[7]

Utricle and Saccule:

The utricle and saccule each contain a macula, which is the fundamental end-organ (the equivalent of the crista within the ampulla described in the previous section) involved in detecting linear acceleration. The utricle is involved in longitudinal acceleration, whereas the saccule is involved in acceleration along the vertical axis. Each macule contains hair cells and supporting cells that are surrounded by a gelatinous layer, which is covered by an otolithic membrane. Resting atop the otolithic membrane are otoconia, which are heavy calcium carbonate crystals. Linear acceleration of the head causes a shear force between the otolithic membrane and macula, causing displacement of the hair bundles. Similarly to the hair bundles within the ampulla of the semicircular canals, displacement of the hair cells in the macula leads to the generation of a potential depending on the direction of movement. Movement towards the kinocilium causes the opening of channels and a subsequent depolarization of the cell. Movement away from the kinocilium causes the closure of channels leading to hyperpolarization of nerve fibers.