Treatment options are patient-dependent based on clinical findings and disease evolution. Conservative therapy with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker to slow proteinuria is recommended in all patients. If no response, a trial of corticosteroids can be started for 3 to 6 months. Immunosuppressants (mycophenolate, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide) are reserved for patients with progressive crescentic IgA nephropathy and avoided if the biopsy shows advanced interstitial fibrosis or tubular atrophy. Aggressive treatment of blood pressure with the goal of blood pressure of less than 130/80 mm Hg is highly encouraged. Although rituximab is used in many other glomerular diseases, it did not show beneficial effects on renal function or proteinuria of patients with IgA nephropathy. Tonsillectomy is not supported by current Kidney Disease Improvement Global Outcomes guidelines. Diet should consist of adequate protein and avoidance of increased salt intake. Fish oil therapy did not show a delay in disease progression and is not supported by current treatment guidelines. Renal transplantation is the preferred treatment for patients who require renal replacement therapy, but the IgA nephropathy recurrence rate is high after transplantation.

The role of tonsillectomy to remove the production of degalactosylated IgA remains controversial. Some studies do show that tonsillectomy slows down the progression of IgA nephropathy. However, the current consensus is that the procedure should be reserved for patients with tonsillar infections.