The Ebola virus was originally discovered in 1976, considered a rare, exotic disease mostly studied in highly classified laboratories. Since its discovery, over 20 outbreaks have occurred since 1976; many outbreaks were confined to rural areas in Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Republic of the Congo, and Uganda. Endemic outbreaks of the Ebola virus, most commonly Zaire and Sudan ebolavirus, are attributed to eating contaminated monkey meat. The epidemic spread is usually due to transmission to family members, then community members, and funeral practices.

The most recent outbreak is considered ongoing since June 1, 2020, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The longest outbreak turned epidemic spanned Western Africa, parts of Europe, and the United States. This complex epidemic crippled healthcare systems in some countries and shed light on the lack of preparedness for epidemics. Most reported cases outside of Africa were in healthcare workers providing aid in regions with an active outbreak, with strict travel restrictions and effective quarantine strategies, only a few travelers were infected due to direct human contact.

The mortality rate ranges from 25% to 90% based on the strain of ebolavirus. The deadliest strain, Zaire strain, was once 90% fatal. Due to increased awareness, education, and early detection, the average mortality rate is about 50%. The Ebola virus is only infectious when a person is experiencing prodromal symptoms such as fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, or when people come in contact with infected dead bodies.