Infection is transferred predominantly through the fecal-oral route. Pork consumption especially undercooked or raw pork products are responsible for yersiniosis. Outbreaks have also been reported in Norway and New Zealand from untreated drinking water contaminated with this pathogen. There are case reports of infection being transferred from an infected household pet and through transfused blood products.

The pathogen passes into the stomach, traverses the gut wall, and localized in lymphoid tissue and mesenteric lymph nodes. The bacteria has a 70 kilodalton virulent plasmid known as pYV that is present in pathogen species of Yersinia including enterocolitica, pestis, and pseudotuberculosis. The bacteria also produce ureases that metabolized urea and forms ammonia to protect itself from the harsh acidic environment of the stomach. The bacteria also produce Ail (attachment invasion focus) and YadA, that confers resistance to complement-mediated opsonization and prevents phagocytosis. The bacteria also contains Yops (Yersinia outer membrane proteins) that arrests phagocytosis by block secretion of mediators including TNF-alpha and IL-8. Certain strains produce yersiniabactin that is an iron-binding agent that can effectively bind iron in a depleted state. This further allows the bacteria to thrive and grow.

The pathogenesis of reactive arthritis is likely due to an immune response that is primarily to Yersinia antigens that cross-reacts with host antigens. The host may have HLA-B27 positivity making them susceptible to reactive arthritis. The other common post-infectious sequela is erythema nodosum.

Yersinia can invade the epithelial cells and penetrate the mucosa, resulting in colonization of lymphoid tissue (Peyer patches). From here, the organism can spread to other organs.

One unique feature of yersinia is that it cannot chelate iron, which is an essential growth factor. Yersinia utilizes siderophores produced by other organisms to chelate iron. Iron overload is known to increase the severity of Yersinia enterocolitis.