**Types of Advance Directives**

**Durable Power of Attorney/Healthcare Power of Attorney/Healthcare Surrogate**

A health care surrogate (also referred to as a health care power of attorney or health care proxy) is a person authorized to make medical decisions on behalf of the affected patient if they become incapacitated and unable to express their wishes. Best practice indicates that patients should discuss their wishes with their designated surrogate ahead of any potential emergency or end-of-life scenario. It is presumed that the surrogate will make decisions based on their understanding of what the patient would have wanted for themselves. State laws vary on who may assume the role of health care surrogate if none was previously designated. Often it is a legal guardian, spouse, adult child, or parent, and in some states, any interested party such as a neighbor or friend who held a close relationship with the patient.  As long as a patient has decision-making capacity and competency, they retain their decisional autonomy. If they are unable to speak for themselves, healthcare providers are obligated to seek direction from the healthcare surrogate or, when no surrogate is available, to make medical decisions in the best interest of the patient based on their clinical judgment. Ethics committees can be called upon to resolve conflicts or guide medical providers in complicated situations.

**Living Will**

This document is completed with or without the use of an attorney to specify the healthcare desires of the individual. These choices most commonly include cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and endotracheal intubation/mechanical ventilation. Refusing these interventions is often documented as Do Not Resuscitate (DNR), Allow Natural Death (AND), and/or Do Not Intubate (DNI). Additional options that can be considered in these documents include percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes, also known as feeding tubes, which are essentially contraindicated in patients with severe dementia.

In the vernacular, these options are often lumped together under terms such as heroic measures, extreme measures, or life-saving, life-sustaining, or life-prolonging treatments. Under the patient's right of self-determination, they can refuse any form of treatment, even if that treatment would be likely to prolong life. They also allow a patient to describe in greater detail their concept of a desirable quality of life relative to illness, prognosis, and comfort.

While the patient can refuse any treatment (negative autonomy), patients do not have the right to demand treatments that are not medically indicated, are more likely to cause harm than good, or violate the professional's right of conscience, as positive autonomy is not as broad as negative autonomy.

**Do Not Resuscitate Order (DNR)**

A DNR is a written document usually signed by the patient's health care provider that states the patient's wishes to refuse resuscitative efforts. These written orders are the only advance directives that emergency management service providers are legally obligated to consider in most states. The patient may elect which resuscitative procedures they wish to accept or refuse. Professionals should educate patients and surrogates regarding the fairly poor outcomes of CPR (11.1% survival for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest for elderly patients).

**Physician's Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST)**

The POLST form is a newer advance directive. It exists as an agreement between the doctor and the patient regarding their condition. It summarizes the patient's wishes and records them as medical orders. In states that recognize the POLST form, the medical orders carry throughout the healthcare system in all settings, including the prehospital setting. However, depending upon where the patient lives, a POLST could be void if it contradicts a pre-existing living will. In other states, the POLST can replace the living will as it is more fluid and can be adjusted more easily as the patient's condition changes, and can be completed by the surrogate rather than the patient. See the National POLST Paradigm for more information. Depending upon the laws of the various states, some states might require a physician's signature on the form, while others might allow nurse practitioners (ARNP) or physician assistants (PA) to provide the authorizing signature.

It is important to note that advance directives do not exist to deny all care to patients and that, especially with terminally ill patients, comfort care and pain management continue to be provided. Attempts to provide comfort are always appropriate.