The intracranial cavity consists of three components: cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood, and brain tissue. CSF is contained within the subarachnoid space between the arachnoid and pia layers of the meninges. CSF is produced by a specialized vascular structure called choroid plexus within each ventricle of the brain. A blood-CSF barrier is formed by ependymal cells that line the ventricles and choroid epithelial cells that line the surrounding capillaries within the choroid plexus.

The ventricular system includes two lateral ventricles, a third ventricle, and the fourth ventricle, which is encompassed by the brainstem and cerebellum. The interventricular foramen of Monro connects the third and lateral ventricles while the third and fourth ventricles communicate via the cerebral aqueduct, also known as the Aqueduct of Sylvius. CSF enters the subarachnoid space surrounding the brain and spinal cord via the foramina of Luschka and Magendie. It then travels within and around the brain and spinal cord until it is eventually reabsorbed by the arachnoid granules to finally make its way into the dural venous sinuses, back into the bloodstream.

Normal CSF pressure falls approximately within 65 to 195 mm of water or CSF within the subarachnoid space. Intracranial hypotension (ICH) is defined as CSF pressure less than 60 mm H2O.

Historically, Heinrich Irenaeus Quincke was credited with performing the first lumbar puncture (LP) in 1891. In 1898 it was August Bier, also known as the father of spinal anesthesia, who reported his observations on post-dural puncture headaches and proposed the hypothesis that ongoing leak of CSF from the dural puncture site was the inciting factor of such symptoms. His studies led to the proposition that the CSF leak exceeded the rate of CSF production. George Schaltenbrand, a German Neurologist, studied the pressure system of CSF within the cranial system. He proposed three mechanisms in which spontaneous ICH, which he termed "aliquorrhea," induce a clinical presentation identical to that of a post-LP headache. These mechanisms are a decrease in CSF production, an increase in CSF absorption, and loss of CSF volume via a leak.