**Anatomic Abnormalities**

The main pathophysiological abnormality of Ebstein anomaly is the failure of delamination of the tricuspid valve leaflets from the interventricular septum in utero.

The RV becomes split into two portions: the "atrialized", and the "functional" RV. The "atrialized" RV is where the TV inflow should normally be, extending from the undisplaced tricuspid annulus to the "functional" RV. The atrialized RV receives the regurgitant flow from the tricuspid regurgitation and becomes dilated along with the right atrium. The functional RV can be very small and may consist of just the RV outflow tract in cases of severe apical displacement of the septal and posterior leaflets of the tricuspid valve.

More than 80% of patients with Ebstein anomaly also have a secundum atrial septal defect or a patent foramen ovale

Ebstein anomaly can be associated with conduction system abnormalities thought to be due to compression of the atrioventricular node by the septal leaflet, with disruption of its function. Accessory pathways are common, and about one-third of patients have more than one accessory pathway.

**Functional Abnormalities**

The faulty coaptation of the tricuspid leaflets as a result of their anatomic displacement and tethering abnormalities leads to tricuspid regurgitation. The degree of tricuspid regurgitation is determined by the severity of the apical displacement of the posterior and septal leaflets, by the abnormality of the anterior leaflet attachments, and by the integrity of the leaflets themselves.