Guillain-Barre manifests clinically with symmetric ascending paralysis and paresthesia, which may progress to dyspnea and choking over hours to days. Management is supportive and, with ventilatory support and monitoring for cardiac arrhythmias and other complications, the prognosis is good with patients typically recovering function within 12 months.

Patients with CMT may present with distal muscle weakness, foot drop, depressed or absent deep tendon reflexes, atrophy of muscles of below the knee, and atrophy of the muscles of the thenar eminence. CMT does not reduce the lifespan, and management is supportive.

Diabetic neuropathy classically arises in patients with long-standing diabetes as a sensory neuropathy with loss of temperature, vibration, touch, and pain sensation. Patients may also have accompanying neuropathic pain. Nerve damage progresses from small sensory fibers to large sensory fibers, to large motor fibers, causing weakness, loss of function, and paralysis. Nerve damage also is more pronounced in distal extremities, a characteristic “stocking-glove” pattern. Treatment of diabetic neuropathy is limited to symptomatic treatment of neuropathic pain and maintenance of euglycemia to prevent the development of diabetic neuropathy or slow its progression.

Schwann cell neoplasms can be identified by immunohistochemistry for Schwann cell markers such as S-100. Management varies from monitoring and supportive care for asymptomatic dermal neurofibromas to surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation for metastatic MPNSTs.