Minimal change disease presents with a nephrotic syndrome characterized by an increased renal membrane permeability and loss of protein (primarily albumin) due to damage to the glomerular filtration barrier (GFB). The GFB is composed of fenestrated endothelium (inner layer), the glomerular basement membrane (middle layer), and an outer epithelial layer composed of podocytes. Podocytes are epithelial cells with large cell bodies and long foot processes that run parallel along the outside of glomerular capillaries. The space between foot processes is interspersed by cell-to-cell junctions called slit diaphragms.

Glomerular filtration is both size-specific and charge-specific. The actin cytoskeleton of podocytes provides support to the GBM and regulates flow across the basement membrane depending on hydrostatic pressures, molecular size, and molecular charge.

The pathogenesis of MCD is not exactly known, but it is thought to be multifactorial. Several studies have focused on the integrity and biology of podocytes. Because the actin cytoskeleton of podocytes maintains the integrity of the podocytes by supporting the cell body and foot processes, regulation of flow across the basement membrane is controlled by a series of interactions. As a result, multiple theories have been proposed to explain the cause of proteinuria in MCD. Some of the proposed theories published include T cell dysfunction/dysregulation that leads to cytokine release and upregulation of proteins, such as CD80 and C-mip that affects the integrity of podocytes, systemic circulating factors that disrupt podocyte function, and B- cell activation (suspected due to the efficacy of anti- CD-20 monoclonal antibodies, such as rituximab).