**Learning Theories**

There are a few major learning theories that require consideration when developing and executing simulation scenarios; social cognitive, behavioral, constructivist, and cognitive load. Social cognitive posits that the learner learns best in the real or simulated environment to develop self-efficacy and self-regulation. In doing so, learners will develop the confidence to execute the skills needed for their job, while concurrently setting goals to improve and maintain those skills.

Adult learning theory operates under the assumption that learners are self-motivated and self-directed; simulation offers a suitable method for adults to accomplish their learning goals. The ability to practice a variety of procedural skills for deliberate practice and participating in simulated patient scenarios with a well-run debrief offers adult learners the opportunity to identify and reflect upon performance, readjust goals, and work towards mastery learning of any number of concepts.

Behavioral learning theory surrounds the principle that deliberate practice and reflection support performance improvement. By adding simulation to curricular activities, competence, along with the acquisition of memory and patterns, occurs.

Constructivist learning theory is supported by using instructors as facilitators instead of as coaches. The principles of this theory realize that learners need to self-reflect and formulate their particular patterns of learning to support decision making.

Cognitive load theory is arguably one of the most important to consider. Much of the literature points to finite working memory capacity, especially when presenting new educational material.

**Feedback**

Several items should be considered concerning feedback; the type, by whom, and timing. Performance-oriented feedback provides learners with their individual results, while learning-oriented feedback provides results and explanations. Feedback can be self-assessed or provided by a subject matter expert. The self-assessment, while a component of adult education and self-directed motivation, should be weighed carefully as a sole method; literature is mixed on the accuracy. Timing of feedback can be in the moment, immediately afterward, or delayed.