The management of primary bone cancer requires a multidisciplinary approach by a specialist bone cancer center, including staff trained in providing age-appropriate care to children or adolescents. Management is dependent on several factors, including tumor type, stage and grade, and patient preference. Surgical excision remains the cornerstone of PBC treatment. Neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy are also commonplace in the management, with radiotherapy used in specific cases.

**Surgery**

Surgical resection aims to remove all tumor tissue with adequate margins while preserving as much limb function as possible. A decision for either limb salvage surgery or amputation is made using imaging, histopathology, response to adjuvant treatment, and patient wishes. Surgery often leads to significant tissue loss, and open discussion with the patient is vital. Potential risks, benefits, and expected long-term functional impact of the surgery must be highlighted. Low-grade tumors amenable to surgical excision typically require wide excision (removing the involved part of the bone with a cuff of healthy tissue), with high-grade tumors requiring radical excision (removing the affected bone and associated soft tissues within the anatomical compartment).

**Chemotherapy**

Multiple chemotherapy agents and regimens are used in the management of PBC. Often this consists of induction (neoadjuvant) and postoperative combination therapy (adjuvant), with improvements in rates of limb salvage surgery and overall survival since their introduction. Chemotherapy forms part of the standard treatment protocol for osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma. Chondrosarcoma is still primarily managed surgically, except in cases of mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, where chemotherapy and radiotherapy are often used.

Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is primarily used to reduce the rate of future metastatic spread; however, studies have suggested it can also contribute to primary tumor control. A good response to neoadjuvant therapy is determined by a histological necrosis rate of >90%, with a poor response often initiating a change in postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy agents and showing poorer outcomes.

**Radiotherapy**

Radiotherapy is often used as adjunctive therapy in PBC. Ewing sarcoma is a radiosensitive tumor, with radiotherapy commonly used as part of the definitive treatment plan. Preoperative radiotherapy is used if the response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy is poor or the tumor is positioned in a problematic anatomical location, where reduction of tumor volume will aid surgical resection. If sufficient tumor volume cannot be removed surgically or it would be unacceptably disabling, radiotherapy is used for local treatment. Where adequate margins have not been resected, postoperative radiotherapy is utilized. Chondrosarcomas are relatively radioresistant, with radiotherapy only utilized for surgically unresectable or incompletely resected tumors.

Radiotherapy has a palliative role in all PBC, used to slow tumor growth locally and relieve pain.