Even though dornase alfa is safe due to its short half-life and poor systemic absorption, the interprofessional healthcare team, including physicians (MDs and DOs), mid-level practitioners (nurse practitioners and physician assistants, pharmacists), nursing staff, and pharmacists, must follow up with the patients to ensure the correct use of the drug. Since dornase alfa is used with a nebulizer compression system, it is crucial to assist patients in understanding how to use the medication to properly achieve its fullest effects. Clinicians need to ensure that the patient is using a nebulizer with a mouthpiece to ensure the maximum drug delivery to the lungs. A patient that is unable to breathe in and out properly should not be using a mouthpiece. Instead, the recommendation should be to use a device that utilizes a face mask.

Nurses and home aid healthcare personnel also need to educate the patients not to combine dornase alfa with any other cystic fibrosis medications in the nebulizer since it will decrease the drug's efficacy. Pharmacists can also play a direct role in patient education and follow-up, reinforce proper administration, and reach out to the nurse or prescriber if they suspect any issues with the patient's therapy regimen. Interprofessional communication is essential in the care of CF patients with dornase alfa to ensure that the patient receives the most significant therapeutic benefit with the least amount of side effects, leading to optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]