Motivational Interviewing (MI) utilizes the patient's intrinsic motivations for a positive change in their health status. MI combines social and cognitive psychology to determine a patient's level of readiness to change and to work through their ambivalence to enact behavioral modifications.

The overall process behind MI is more important than the discussion between providers and patients.

Patient ambivalence can be displayed in various ways, from disinterest to reluctance to hostility, when attempting to engage them in positive behavioral modification. A tenant of MI is recognizing that patients have autonomy in making their own decisions and understanding the underlying reasons for their actions. Providers should engage their patients in discussion to learn the underlying reasons for their ambivalence and to reinforce self-motivational statements.

An effective way to determine what stage a patient is at when attempting to make behavioral changes is to utilize the transtheoretical model (TTM). While the two models were developed independently of each other, MI and TTM work synergistically to determine what stage the patient is at when discussing change and to utilize the appropriate tools and skills to help the patient to the next stage.

**Precontemplation:**The patient is not interested in changing their behavior and may have subjective justification as to why they shouldn't change

**Contemplation:**The patient is considering change but may still cling to fears and reluctancy to start

**Preparation:**The patient is actively preparing to change their behavior, potentially by considering tools and strategies to utilize, though it may require assistance with planning

**Action:**The patient is working through their plan and using their tools to ensure success

**Maintenance:**The patient has changed their behavior and is working to maintain the changes and not slip back into previous behaviors.