There is generally no fixed duration or dosage of any cosmeceutical. Providers familiar with the use, efficacy, and safety profile of different cosmeceuticals use their preferred products for specific indications. The dose and duration of therapy while planning the treatment for a particular condition may be highly variable and depends on various factors including patient, condition, ingredients, evidence (if available) of efficacy, safety, tolerability,  and clinician's personal preference based on experience.

A general approach of using cosmeceuticals for anti-aging purposes is suggested:

(1) **CLEANSERS**- Use of a gentle cleanser containing cetyl alcohol and stearyl alcohol for sensitive skin - this is typically a lather free cleanser and does not leave the face dry. For patients with oily skin, a mild exfoliating cleanser containing a low percentage of alpha-hydroxy acids (AHA), e.g. lactic acid 5%, or a combination [glycolic 1%-2%, Salicylic 1-2%, mandelic 2-5%] may be preferred. For patients with severe tendency of facial oiliness, a stronger face wash containing higher percentages of the AHAs and surfactants may be used.

(2) **SUN PROTECTION**- The key to anti-aging, prevention of unwanted pigmentation and prevention of post-treatment hyperpigmentation is effective sun protection. In addition to physical measures of sun-protection, the use of a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30 must be applied as per the modified teaspoon rule (MTSR), which means that one teaspoon (=5 ml) should be applied to the face + scalp + neck,  left arm/ forearm, right arm/forearm, and two teaspoons each to the right thigh/leg, torso, and left thigh/leg.

(3) **VITAMIN A based topicals**- Retinoids are the natural and synthetic derivatives of vitamin A and maybe a part of OTC cosmeceuticals or prescription topical medication. Retinoic acid (RA), and the synthetic higher generation retinoids such as adapalene, tazarotene, and bexarotene are registered prescription drugs. The retinoids that are typically a component of topical cosmeceutical include retinyl esters, retinol (ROL), and retinaldehyde (RAL).

(4) **ADJUVANTS**-

- **Topical nicotinamide**, a form of vitamin B3 is known to exert pleiotropic effects over the aging skin including improved epidermal barrier, direct reduction of hyperpigmentation, repair the outcome of solar damage such as redness/blotchiness, improve skin elasticity, and reduce fine rhytides in addition to its antioxidant property. A specific property of niacinamide is in the reduction of age-related yellowing of the skin that stems from the Maillard reaction, which involves spontaneous oxidation and glycation of proteins. The reaction progresses with aging and the resulting cross-linked proteins give a yellowish hue to the aged skin.

- **Soy derivatives**- The major pharmacologically active components of soy proteins include phospholipids, essential fatty oils, isoflavones, and the enzymes soybean trypsin inhibitor (STI) and Bowman-Birk inhibitor (BBI). Topical isoflavones constitute the most effective component of soy that exerts multiple anti-aging effects via anti-oxidative mechanisms, stimulation of neocollagenesis, and enhancing moisturization of the skin.  and their ability to reduce ROS, stimulate collagen synthesis, and increase the moisture content of the skin. Soy isoflavones metabolize into genistein and daidzein, which serve as phytoestrogens (plant-derived compounds with a weak pro-estrogenic effect). The thinner collagen-deficient dermis in postmenopausal women is considered to be due to the withdrawal of the favorable effect of estrogens. Akin to the effect of topical estrogen in retarding collagen loss and skin thinning, these soy derivatives have a similar potential of providing the anti-aging effect to the post-menopausal skin via estrogenic stimulation. Additionally. the enzymes STI and BBI contribute towards a reduction in skin hyperpigmentation. Recently, a novel soy-based moisturizer was found to be efficacious in improving dullness of skin, mottled pigmentation, fine rhytides, and overall skin tone after 12 weeks of use in 65 women with moderate facial photodamage.

- **Green Tea**- Green tea is the least processed form of the leaves and buds of the tea plant. Compared to black and white tea, green tea contains the highest amount of the polyphenol epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), in addition to epicatechin, and epicatechin-3-gallate (ECG). Green tea polyphenols exert anti-aging effects through their anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects via scavenging of free radicals.   Severalin vivo and in vitro studies have suggested the potential of green tea supplementation in stimulating synthesis of collagen and elastin fiber content in the dermis and suppression of MMP-3 enzyme, a collagenase with a resultant anti-wrinkle effect.

- Ascorbic acid and derivatives - Vitamin C is one of the strongest natural anti-oxidants of the human body. It has been shown in many trials to possess potent antiaging property, effected by stabilization and stimulation of collagen synthesis, and decreasing collagen degradation. Additionally, it reduced hyperpigmentation through its inhibitory effect on melanin synthesis. It works synergistically with vitamin E as an anti-oxidant unit, as the former acts as the primary replenisher of the latter. Among the various available forms, L-ascorbic acid is the most biologically active. However, L-ascorbic acid shows poor penetration into the skin owing to it being hydrophilic and unstable, unable to penetrate the hydrophobic stratum corneum.  Reducing the acidity of L-ascorbic acid to a pH below 3.5 is an effective method of improving its stability and permeability. This has shown to greatly aid its penetration, largely because of the transformation from the charged to the uncharged form of the molecule.