After deciding that an IUD placement is the best choice for the patient, the following procedure is followed:

- Confirm a negative pregnancy test.

- Obtain informed consent.

- Have the patient move into a dorsal lithotomy position.

- With gloved hands, perform a bimanual exam to determine whether the uterus is anteverted or retroverted.

- Insert speculum and identify the cervix.

- Cleanse cervix and vaginal fornices with a cleansing solution, typically povidone-iodine. If the patient has iodine or shellfish allergy, use chlorhexidine gluconate.

- At this time, if desired, consider paracervical block placement or application of the anesthetic gel, as discussed above.

- Switch to sterile gloves at this time, and using a sterile single-tooth tenaculum, grasp the anterior lip of the cervix and apply gentle traction to straighten the cervical canal and uterine cavity. If the uterus is retroverted, it may be beneficial to grasp the posterior lip of the cervix.

- Using sterile uterine sound, determine the depth of the uterine cavity, typically between 6cm to 9 cm. If less than 6 cm, IUD should not be placed. If there is difficulty in placing the uterine sound, try cervical dilators. If cervical dilators are needed, it is recommended to use a paracervical block.

- Once uterine depth is determined, follow package instructions for the specific IUD being inserted.

- Once IUD is inserted and strings are visible, cut strings to a length of 3 cm to 4 cm with sharp scissors; note this length in the chart.

- Remove the tenaculum and make sure there is no bleeding from the site of the tenaculum, and remove the speculum.

- Have the patient follow up in 4-6 weeks for a string check to ensure proper placement.

After the IUD has been in for the approved amount of time, it is time to remove the IUD. If the patient desires further contraception, it is permissible to remove and insert an IUD on the same day. For IUD removal, the steps are as follows:

- Obtain informed consent.

- Have the patient move into a dorsal lithotomy position.

- With gloved hands, insert the speculum, and identify the cervix and IUD strings. If IUD strings are not immediately identified, twirl cytobrush in os to help identify strings.

- Grasp IUD strings with ring forceps.

- Place gentle traction on the IUD strings and remove the device from the uterine cavity.

- Ensure that the IUD is intact and no portions are missing.