The exact cause of this condition is unknown, although it has been theorized that genetic factors and/or environmental triggers may play a role. One theory is atopy, a condition in which patients have a genetic predisposition to allergic responses. In one study researchers observed that 85% of patients suffering from lichen striatus have a family history of an allergy-based condition, for example, atopic dermatitis, asthma, or allergic rhinitis/ However, this study is contradictory to another study that offered no such statistically significant conclusion. Another study suggests an autoimmune response to pregnancy, whereby the pregnancy itself triggers an auto-immune response. Another possible connection may be to vitiligo, a condition in which certain areas of the skin lack pigment. It has also been suggested that the condition results following treatment with and as a consequence of the drugs adalimumab and etanercept. Others reports cite lichen striatus as a T-cell-mediated inflammatory disorder.

The other theory of etiology of lichen striatus is that it is due to environmental triggers. For example, there have been outbreaks among unrelated children living in a shared living environment. A link to it being a viral consequence has also been suggested due to elevations of interleukin 1-beta in biopsy samples of such lichen striatus patients, although no conclusive evidence has been observed to support this finding wholly.

Outbreaks have also occurred following Bacille Calmette Guerin (BCG) and hepatitis B vaccinations, in patients who were exposed to ultraviolet (UV) rays via a tanning bed, after a patient picked a pineapple leaf, after a bumblebee bite, and following varicella and influenza infection.

Another study provided evidence to support that lichen striatus was the result of epigenetic mosaicism, where the individual exhibits populations of cells with different genotypes. In this study, it is theorized that a patient with lichen striatus is predisposed genetically.  The condition is triggered by an “immunologic reaction to an infection,” and that this results in a cascade of events including the methylation or demethylation of a portion of a “partially silenced genomic element.”  Also, it has been reported that lichen striatus is triggered as a result of a viral infection of herpesvirus 6 and 7.