Once globe rupture is suspected, urgent ophthalmologic consultation is required. The patient should first be treated for any other potentially life-threatening injuries and remain NPO (nothing by mouth). The affected eye should be protected using a Fox shield, cup, or another protective device.

Open globe injuries are tetanus-prone wounds, and patients should receive a booster if their immunization history is uncertain or incomplete.

Surgical management by an ophthalmologist should commence as soon as the patient can safely undergo surgery, a delay in surgical intervention may lead to worse final visual outcomes and increase the risk of postoperative endophthalmitis.

If there is a perforating injury that affects that eye posteriorly, further surgical intervention may be necessary. While anterior wounds require suturing, the surgeon may choose to leave the posterior wound unrepaired so that extrusion of vitreous or retinal disruption during attempted closure is avoidable. Fibrous proliferation occurs along the damaged vitreous between the entrance and exit wounds, which often closes the wounds within a week following the trauma. This fibroblastic proliferation can lead to retinal detachments, epiretinal membranes, and proliferative vitreoretinopathy, leading to loss of vision. Indications for a vitrectomy include signs of developing transvitreal detachment, the presence of moderate to severe vitreous hemorrhage, phacoanaphylactic uveitis, and damage to other tissue requiring repair. If there is an intraocular foreign body, removal with culture is often necessary, especially if the material is toxic to the eye over time.

Following surgical repair, patients will start on topical antibiotics covering the most common pathogens for endophthalmitis following globe rupture - Bacillus cereus and gram-negative organisms.