Fleas are a critical factor in the epidemiologic cycles of several diseases including plague and typhus. As carriers of these diseases, they can spread them to humans through their bites.

Yersinia pestis, also known as the plague, is transmitted by fleas. Humans, after becoming infected with Y. pestis, are considered to be hosts but do not play an instrumental role in the natural disease cycle. In the United States, Y. pestis is most common in the south-western and Pacific coast states; however, the incidence of plague is low in the United States given that many of the regions affected are uninhabited.Y. pestis, a gram-negative coccobacillus, manifests initially as regional lymphadenopathy secondary to an invasion of the lymphatic system. These inflamed lymph nodes are called buboes. Subsequent disease progression presents itself as pneumonia, hemorrhagic lesions, purpuric skin lesions, and sepsis secondary to bacteremia.

Murine typhus is transmitted by fleas, primarily the rat flea, Xenopsylla cheopis. It also spreads by the mouse flea, Leptopsyllia segnis, and the cat flea, Ctenocephalides. Inoculation of humans occurs through the contamination of bite wounds with the feces of infected fleas. In the United States, R. typhi highly correlates with areas with large rat populations. R. typhi and Rickettsia felis are also found to be maintained by domestic cats and opossums in suburban settings.Rickettsia felis does not cause murine typhus, the presentation of its infection is clinically indistinguishable from those of murine typhus. Manifestations include fever, headache, chills, myalgias, and other non-specific symptoms. A faint, maculopapular rash may also occur, spreading centrifugally but sparring the palms and soles.