Head and neck surgeons of all types, like otolaryngologists and oral and maxillofacial surgeons, as well as dentists and dental specialists, like orthodontists, will commonly describe the positions of the maxilla and mandible in three dimensions. The first is in the anterior-posterior plane, often referred to as the AP plane. This view is seen when looking at the patient from a side profile, or radiographically, a sagittal plane. The second is the transverse plane, or looking directly at a patient in frontal view, radiographically synonymous with the coronal plane. The third is vertical, this is appreciated like the AP plane, and best understood when looking laterally at a patient.

Retrognathia is a term used to describe an unusual position of the mandible. Retro implies that there is deficient growth and 'gnathia' means about the jaws (particularly mandible). To the specialists above, describing a patient as retrognathic specifically means the patient is deficient in the AP plane of growth. That is, when viewed from the side, the mandible is posterior to and behind where it should be. There is often a vertical component in growth deficiency and sometimes a transverse issue, but they are less critical in thinking about retrognathia unless planning a surgical correction. To summarize, when you describe a patient as retrognathic, it implies the mandible is deficient in growth, particularly in the AP plane.

Why does retrognathia matter as a diagnosis? First, to rule out associated syndromes with far-reaching health effects, to recognize and be able to appropriately refer for orthodontic evaluation with possible need for surgery surgical correction, to consider if you are a health care professional who would ever deal with or manage an airway, and to consider the implications in the setting of obstructive sleep apnea.