The skin has many functions. It serves as a **barrier**to water, invasion by microorganisms, mechanical and chemical trauma, and damage from UV light. The epidermal water barrier established by the**cell envelop**, a layer of insoluble proteins on the inner surface of the plasma membrane. It is formed by cross-linking of small proline-rich proteins and larger proteins like cystatin, desmoplakin, filaggrin and contributes to strong mechanics of barrier. And the**lipid envelope**, a lipid/hydrophobic layer attached to the outer surface of the plasma membrane. As keratinocytes in stratum spinosum produce keratohyalin granules, they also produce lamellar bodies (containing a mixture of glycosphingolipids, phospholipids, and ceramides) assembled within Golgi.  Lamellar bodies’ contents are then secreted by exocytosis into extracellular spaces between the stratum granulosum and corneum. Skin is the first site of immunological****defense by the action of the Langerhans cells in the epidermis which are dendritic epidermal T lymphocytes and part of the adaptive immune system. The skin preserves the bodies**homeostasis**by regulating temperature and water loss, while also serving both**endocrine and exocrine**functions. The**endocrine**functions include the production of vitamin D in the keratinocytes which are responsible for converting 7-dehydrocholesterol in the epidermis to vitamin D, with the assistance of UV light from the sun. The keratinocytes express the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and also contain the enzymes needed to convert vitamin D to its active form of 1, 25 dihydroxy vitamin D. The significance of the VDR is that stimulation of it plays a role in the proliferation of the stratum basale and differentiation of keratinocytes as they move upwards in the epidermis. The**exocrine**functions of the skin are by way of the sweat and sebaceous glands. Another important role of the skin is a**sensation**to touch, heat, cold, and pain by the actions of the nociceptors. The general appearance, turgor, and other qualities also give insight into the general health of the body.