The internal carotid arteries are of vital importance for oxygenated blood supply to the brain, and so they are of major importance in clinical evaluation. They are susceptible to atherosclerosis, which can cause stenosis and embolization of plaque distally towards the brain. Particular pathologies in which the internal carotid artery should undergo evaluation include, but are not limited to, stroke, transient ischemic attack, penetrating neck trauma, and hypovolemic shock.

Several physical exam maneuvers, such as the carotid pulse check and carotid auscultation, can be done to assess the carotid arteries. The carotid pulse is palpable at approximately 60 to 70 mmHg systolic blood pressure; loss of carotid pulse can be an indication of severe hypovolemic shock or cardiac arrest. While an unequal carotid pulse check can indicate atherosclerosis, aortic dissection, arteritis, or embolus. Carotid auscultation can elicit a carotid bruit, which can indicate turbulent, non-laminar blood flow through a stenotic artery, arteriovenous connections, or flow disturbances transmitted from the aortic valve or subclavian artery. In addition to the auscultation of bruits, these sounds are occasionally palpable as a thrill. It is important to be aware that these sounds may occasionally be normal, such as the venous hum in a child.

Penetrating neck trauma is another important pathology that warrants carotid investigation. Current literature advises to use the ‘no zonal approach’ due to superior patient outcomes; however, this still can vary by the institution.

Severe stenosis of the carotid artery is a significant cause of stroke and transient ischemic attacks, and it is one of the most common causes of death worldwide and the most common cause of long-term disability.