Cilostazol is a phosphodiesterase III (PDE3) inhibitor. PDE3s are enzymes that utilize a catalytic core to hydrolyze cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP).

Myosin light-chain kinase normally phosphorylates the light chain of myosin in the presence of calcium and calmodulin, which activates myosin to interact with actin. With the inactivation of myosin light-chain kinase by PKA, the myosin-actin interaction cannot occur, and thus, there is an inability to generate a smooth muscle contraction.

Cilostazol has also recently been demonstrated to reduce plasma triglycerides and increase HDL cholesterol concentrations.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Cilostazol is absorbed after oral administration. A high-fat meal increases absorption, with an approximately 90% increase in peak serum concentration and a 25% increase in plasma concentration of the drug over time.

**Distribution:**Cilostazol is 95% to 98% protein-bound, predominantly to albumin. The free fraction of cilostazol is 27% higher in subjects with renal impairment than in healthy volunteers.

**Metabolism:**Cilostazol metabolism occurs extensively in the liver by hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes (mainly CYP3A4 and, to a lesser extent, CYP2C19). Two metabolites are primarily active, with one appearing to account for at least half of the pharmacologic activity (PDE3 inhibition) after the administration of the drug

**Excretion:**Cilostazol is predominately eliminated by urinary excretion of metabolites (74%), with the remainder being excreted fecally (20%).