**Contraindications**

- Benazepril should not be used when there is a history of hypersensitivity to benazepril or any other ACE inhibitor.

- Benazepril is contraindicated in patients with prior history of angioedema or a history of angioedema caused by ACE inhibitors.

- Do not use benazepril when the patients used valsartan or sacubitril within the last 36 hours.

- Do not use benazepril when patients with diabetes are treated with aliskiren.

**Warnings**

**Head and Neck Angioedema:**In the clinical trials, 0.5% of patients experienced angioedema while on benazepril. Angioedema involves the face, tongue, glottis, or larynx, and it can progress to airway obstruction. Benazepril should be discontinued if the patient develops angioedema.

**Intestinal Angioedema:**Patients presenting with abdominal pain require monitoring for intestinal angioedema. In some patients, abdominal pain can present along with nausea and vomiting. An abdominal CT scan or ultrasound is necessary to diagnose or rule out intestinal angioedema.

**Hepatic Failure:**ACE inhibitors can rarely cause hepatic failure. This process begins with cholestatic jaundice and progresses to fulminant hepatic necrosis with possible death. Patients on ACE inhibitors who develop jaundice and/or hepatic enzyme elevation should discontinue ACE inhibitors and be monitored closely for signs of hepatic failure.

**Neutropenia/Agranulocytosis:**In patients with renal impairment and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), ACE inhibitors can induce agranulocytosis and bone marrow suppression. If a patient is known to have a collagen-vascular disease associated with reduced renal function, then white blood cell counts should be monitored closely.