**Demyelination**

Demyelination is a destructive removal of myelin that induces a paramount impairment in impulse transmission. A demyelinated axon, indeed, transmits impulses up to 10 times slower than normal myelinated, whereas a complete stop of the transmission is also possible. Myelin and axonal degradation are observed in multiple sclerosis (MS). In this immune-mediated inflammatory disease, the inflammatory and demyelinating plaques are accompanied by perivenular macrophage, lymphocyte infiltration, and oligodendrocyte degradation. The observable clinical symptoms associated with the latter depend on the location of the affected neurons. The exponential downward trend of neurodegeneration development is complicated and could be related to the dysfunction of ion channels, calcium overload, synaptopathy, activation of apoptotic pathways, or glutamate-related excitotoxicity.

Other pathologies may induce immune-mediated myelin damage. Multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN), also known as multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block (MMNCB), is a rare, acquired, motor neuropathy featuring progressive asymmetric weakness without sensory problems. It typically involves upper limbs more than the lower limbs. Concerning pathophysiology, pieces of evidence suggest that anti-ganglioside antibodies (anti-GM1) may be responsible for sodium and potassium channel dysfunction at the node of Ranvier of myelinated motor axons ('node-paranodopathy').

**Axonal acute damage**

Apart from MS, research focuses on understanding the mechanisms of axonal damage in acute and chronic pathologies. In the mid-nineteenth century, the British physiologist Augustus Volney Waller (1816-1870) showed that a full-thickness section of a nerve induces degeneration and reabsorption of its distal segment. The leading cause of this degeneration (Wallerian degeneration) is the interruption of axonal flow and the lack of ribosomes in the axon. The post-injury degenerative process has been subject to further dissection. In the case of a focal traumatic axonal lesion (e.g., due to spinal cord injury, SCI), the adjacent 400 to 600 micrometers of the axon on both sides of the lesion is involved in a rapid degenerative process (acute axonal degeneration). The molecular mechanisms comprise a cascade of events involving a rapid calcium influx into the axon, activation of calcium-dependent proteases (e.g., calpain and calcineurin), mitochondrial damage with the production of reactive oxygen species, alterations of neurofilaments with the fragmentation of microtubules, and impairment of axonal transport. The cascade culminates in the activation of autophagy. After 24 to 72 hours, the distal part of the axon is subject to Wallerian degeneration, which is mediated by the activation of nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase (neuroprotective under physiological conditions) and is directed along the axon.

The traumatic axonal injury (TAI) is severe axonal mechanical damage due to the high rotational acceleration of the brain.

**Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy**

The neurotoxicity, due to the anticancer drugs, also referred to as chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN), has multiple mechanisms involving axon and other neuronal compartments.

**Neurodegenerative processes**

In neurodegenerative processes such as Parkinson disease (PD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the axonal compartment degenerates more slowly over longer time-periods. Research has also described the features of focal axonal degeneration. They manifest themselves as district morphological alterations due to damage of axonal transport, in turn, secondary to harmful processes affecting mitochondria and other support structures. Interestingly, these processes, within certain limits, can be reversible. Furthermore, several studies have focused on alterations of bi-directional axonal transport and the pathogenetic role of microtubule alterations in degenerative diseases.