**Characteristic EEG Patterns Encountered in Acute Encephalopathy**

**Diffuse Slowing:**

In any acute encephalopathy, slowing of the background frequencies is a common EEG finding. The severity of the impairment in attention or consciousness is related to the degree of slowing. The initial changes in mild encephalopathy are typically slowing of the posterior dominant rhythm and reduction in the beta activity in the frontal regions.

**Triphasic Waves (TWs)**

TWs are characterized by a waveform with a triphasic morphology, with a blunt and broad contour, typically frontally dominant with an anterior to posterior phase lag. These could appear in a periodic pattern up to 2.5 Hz in frequency and may have a generalized distribution.

**Generalized Rhythmic Delta Activity (GRDA)**

Frontally dominant generalized rhythmic delta activity, previously referred to as frontal intermittent rhythmic delta activity (FIRDA), is a 2 to 3 Hz high amplitude rhythmic to semi-rhythmic activity with anterior predominance.

**Lateralized Periodic Discharges (LPDs) or Periodic Lateralized Epileptiform Discharges (PLED)**

This EEG pattern is characterized by sharp waves or spikes of complexes 1-3Hz frequency in a semi-rhythmic pattern with no clear progression or spread.****These are usually associated with a subacute structural lesion. The most common condition associated with this pattern is stroke, among several other etiologies.

**Generalized Periodic Epileptiform Discharges (GPEDs) and Bilateral Independent Periodic Epileptiform Discharges (BiPEDs):**

As the names indicate, the GPEDs and BiPEDs are generalized and bilateral independent periodic epileptiform discharges, respectively. These patterns are seen in several conditions, including anoxic brain injury with severe diffuse cerebral dysfunction.

**Alpha Coma and Spindle Coma**

In comatose individuals, diffuse alpha frequency activity can be seen. When the predominant alpha activity is noted in the posterior head regions and varies with noxious external stimuli, the etiology of the coma may be secondary to a brainstem lesion; this is associated with a poor prognosis.****EEG pattern spindle coma is associated with the involvement of the ponto-mesencephalic junction.

**Burst Suppression**

Burst-suppression pattern consists of periods of mixed frequency activity (bursts) and inactivity periods or suppressing the background.

**Electrocerebral Inactivity (ECI) or Silence (ECS)**

Electrocerebral inactivity (ECI) or electrocerebral silence (ECS) is encountered when there is no EEG activity over 2 mV when recorded from scalp electrode pairs equal to or over 10 cm apart and with interelectrode impedances below 10,000 Ohms (10KOhms), but above 100 Ohms for at least 30 minutes of the recording. A qualified technologist should perform these types of recordings. When other causes like drug overdose are excluded, this pattern is associated with brain death.