A spinal cord injury can be classified as complete or incomplete. A complete injury, based on the International Standard Neurological Classification of Spinal Cord Injury (ISNCSCI) examination, developed by the American Spinal Cord Injury Association (ASIA), implies that there is no sensation at the inferior segments of the spinal cord (S4-S5). No deep anal pressure (DAP) or voluntary anal contraction (VAC) is present. If no perianal sensation is present and DAP and VAC are absent, the present function below the level of injury is a zone of partial preservation.

An injury in the cervical region often results in quadriplegia if both sides of the spinal cord are affected and hemiplegia if only one side is affected. Nerves from C3, C4, and C5 stimulate the phrenic nerve, which controls the diaphragm, so injury to C4 and above may result in a permanent need for a ventilator. An injury to the thoracic region often limits the function of nerves related to the lower torso and lower extremities. Usually, it does not affect the upper torso and upper extremities, except in rare cases such as subacute posttraumatic ascending myelopathy (SPAM).

**Incomplete Spinal Cord Injury and Associated Syndromes**

- Central cord syndrome: typically occurs in those who suffer a hyperextension injury (i.e., a car accident), leading to upper extremity weakness and urinary retention.

- Posterior cord syndrome: a lesion of the posterior spinal cord leading to loss of proprioception and vibration, hypotonia, decreased deep tendon reflexes, a positive Romberg sign, and an ataxic gait.

- Anterior cord syndrome: caused by a compromised blood supply to the anterior 2/3 of the spinal cord, affecting the spinothalamic and corticospinal tracts, causing motor paralysis below the level of the injury and loss of pain and temperature at and below the level of the injury.

- Brown-Séquard syndrome: hemisection of the spinal cord leading to ipsilateral weakness and paralysis and contralateral loss of pain and temperature.

- Conus medullaris syndrome: caused by compression of the spinal cord at T12-L2, which leads to sudden, bilateral back pain, symmetrical and bilateral perianal numbness, fasciculations, urinary retention, and impotence.

- Cauda equina syndrome: caused by injury to the nerve roots of L2-S4. Typically, cauda equina syndrome is gradual and unilateral, with more severe radicular pain and less severe back pain than conus medullaris syndrome. Compression of these nerve roots can lead to numbness of the inner thigh (saddle anesthesia), asymmetric areflexic paraplegia, and atrophy.

**Complete Spinal Cord Injury**

A complete spinal cord injury leads to the loss of all motor and sensory functions below the level of injury or lesion.