Classically, a patient with a pulmonary embolism (PE) due to a DVT presents with symptoms of crushing, pleuritic chest pain, chest pressure, or dyspnea with a history of a swollen, painful lower extremity. Upon physical exam, tachycardia is almost always present. In most cases, the chest x-ray is unremarkable, but occasionally, one or both of the classic chest x-ray findings are visible. Westermark's sign is a sharp delineation between the area of perfusion and hypo-perfusion within a vessel indicating an embolism is blocking flow, and Hampton's hump presents as a wedge-shaped, focal opacity in the periphery of the lung.

When clots form in the body, they are continually being reconstructed. Clotting factor XIII is responsible for cross-linking fibrin into a mesh. Upon degradation, plasmin lyses the fibrin bonds and releases the fibrin degradation products called D-dimers. In some cases of suspected pulmonary embolisms, physicians may order blood samples to test a D-dimer. An elevated D-dimer level has high sensitivity but low specificity for a pulmonary embolism. A D-dimer can be elevated in the setting of any hypercoagulable state such as pregnancy, congestive heart failure, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and other chronic diseases, this test is most useful when a pulmonary embolism is suspected in a younger patient with no co-morbidities. The gold standard of diagnosing a PE is computed tomography (CT) angiography. The contrast is given intravenously and will indicate areas of hypoperfusion caused by a thrombus. However, in instances when there is a contraindication to this imaging study such as in the setting of renal failure when contrast dye cannot be given, a pulmonary ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan can be performed.

Another potential complication of pulmonary circulation is pulmonary arterial hypertension. Pulmonary arterial hypertension is defined by a mean pulmonary artery pressure of greater than twenty-five millimeters of mercury and pulmonary vascular resistance greater than three millimeters of mercury which is measured via right heart catheterization. Interestingly, pulmonary arterial hypertension can be caused by a variety of circumstances such as obstruction of the pulmonary arteries and arterioles, increased pulmonary vascular resistance, luminal thickening, vascular remodeling, and chronic inflammation.

In pulmonary arterial hypertension, there is an increase in pulmonary vascular resistance which can be caused by the destruction of the pulmonary vasculature, chronic vasoconstriction, endothelial thickening, arteriole smooth muscle hypertrophy, and endothelial wall remodeling. Thromboxane and endothelin-1 are believed to have increased activity which causes enhanced vasoconstriction while prostacyclin and nitric oxide which both function as vasodilators, have decreased efficiency. Because of these, blood vessels are narrowed which causes higher flow rates and thus pressure in the vasculature. However, these cause increased pulmonary vascular resistance which decreases endothelial integrity. The body naturally attempts to heal endothelial damage by sending coagulation factors to the intimal surface of the vessel.

Left-sided heart failure commonly causes pulmonary venous hypertension. The left side of the heart has difficulty maintaining function. Therefore, blood is forced back into the lungs leading to increased pressure in the pulmonary vein. In the case of left-sided heart failure due to valve failure, decreased ejection fraction, or volume overload, blood that should be ejected into systemic circulation backs up into the left ventricle, left atrium, and finally, the pulmonary veins. Increased pulmonary venous pressure can lead to capillary remodeling and elevated capillary permeability causing fluid leakage into the lung bases. The most common cause of this is congestive heart failure due to left heart dysfunction and volume overload.