Neuronal cells, glial cells, and stromal cells comprise the peripheral nervous system. The nerves are consist of different combinations of sensory, motor, and autonomic neurons. Motor and autonomic neurons are efferent neurons that receive signals from the central nervous system, while sensory neurons are afferent neurons that receive signals from specialized cell types (e.g., Pacinian corpuscles).

The stromal connective tissues are the endoneurium, perineurium, epineurium. They are important scaffold (mechanical and protective role) for the nerve and are essential in comprehending and classifying peripheral nerve injuries. Each myelinated or unmyelinated axon is enclosed by the endoneurium, which consists of collagen fibers. Axons are grouped together in bundles called a fascicle. The perineurium surrounds each fascicle and separates extracellular space from intrafascicular endoneurial space. It is composed of specialized myofibroblasts and intercellular tight junctions. The outermost stromal layer is the epineurium, which is rich in collagen fibers. It is composed of two parts, the epifascicular and epineural epineurium. The epifascicular epineurium or internal epineurium encases and separates fascicles while the epineural epineurium or external epineurium is more superficial and surrounds the nerve trunk proper. The external epineurium defines a nerve anatomically.

Schwann cells are glial cells that enclose nerves in a layer of myelin. It also releases neurotrophic factors such as nerve growth factor (NGF), which provide trophic support. The myelin enhances conduction velocity by restricting the sites of ionic transfer in the axon to the nodes of Ranvier; this results in saltatory conduction, an expedient, "jumping" action potential propagation. There are myelinated and myelinated nerve fibers. The most heavily myelinated fibers are type Aα (efferent to muscles, for the motor function), followed by Type Aβ (afferent from skin and joints, for tactile & proprioception), type Aγ (efferent to muscle spindles, for muscle tone), type Aδ (from afferent sensory nerves; for pain, cold, temperature and touch) and the least myelinated is type B (preganglionic sympathetic, for various autonomic functions). Type C is unmyelinated and is responsible for multiple autonomic functions, pain, temperature, and touch.