Atrioventricular dissociation poses a diagnostic dilemma. Patients may present with non-specific signs and symptoms or, at times, even be asymptomatic. Moreover, the ECG diagnosis of AV dissociation is easy to be misread and challenging to differentiate from other confounders. The initial diagnosis and management of the patient often begin with an emergency department physician, hospitalist, or intensivist. Stabilization of a patient with hemodynamic collapse or severe sinus bradycardia requires close coordination between the nursing staff and ancillary health care workers for executing the algorithms of advanced cardiac life support. They are also necessary for the possible transport of the patient to a critical care facility if they are not in one already. The crucial nursing staff will monitor the patient’s vital signs and telemetry while also coordinating with the patient and the family with the education of the disease.

The pharmacist who will be in close communication with the nurses will ensure the patient is on the right medication, check for drug-drug interaction [Level 5] and recommend dosage adjustments based on changing the clinical setting and comorbid conditions of the patient.

The primary care team will coordinate with consulting physicians, as a cardiologist is required for an advanced ECG reading and care of the patient. An electro-physicist may be needed for the placement of a temporary pacemaker in cases of complete heart block. An interventional cardiologist might be necessary as myocardial ischemia can present with dissociation. He might be required for the placement of a permeant pacemaker as well.

Although the outcomes of AV dissociation is dependent on the cause, an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, consulting physicians, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists are required for optimal patient outcomes.