The prevalence of adverse effects from amiodarone therapy is as high as 15% within the first year of use and 50% for long-term use. The risk/benefit ratio often leads to the discontinuation of amiodarone in the first year of treatment for patients with atrial fibrillation. The most common side effect is corneal microdeposits, which occur in at least 90% of patients taking amiodarone; this is thought to be due to the secretion of amiodarone in the lacrimal gland with uptake by the corneal epithelium. However, only about 10% of these patients will develop actual visual symptoms. Other ocular side effects include photophobia, optic neuropathy, and visual halos. Baseline ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended for patients starting amiodarone.

Cardiac toxicity from amiodarone administration can be related to its therapeutic mechanism. Unfortunately, the same qualities that make this drug useful for treating arrhythmias can also lead to bradycardia and atrioventricular and intraventricular conduction abnormalities. While most studies have proven the safety of amiodarone regarding pro-arrhythmic events, amiodarone may induce TdP in the first 48 hours of IV administration. Amiodarone may be the most common cause of drug-induced TdP. The risk of developing TdP increases in patients who have pre-existing electrolyte abnormalities or are also receiving treatment with beta-blockers and/or digoxin. QTc prolongation is a risk factor for TdP, but amiodarone-induced TdP can occur even with a normal QTc interval. Chronic oral administration of amiodarone is rarely associated with TdP.

Pulmonary toxicity typically presents in the first year of use and most commonly resembles interstitial lung disease. However, pulmonary toxicity also can present as organizing pneumonia, pleural effusion, acute respiratory distress syndrome, or diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Unfortunately, there is no pathognomonic finding to diagnose amiodarone-induced pulmonary toxicity, and work up involves rigorous evaluation to exclude alternative diagnoses. Mortality from amiodarone-induced pulmonary toxicity has been reported to be close to 10%. Fortunately, steroids have been useful in treating this adverse reaction.  Baseline and yearly chest X-rays are recommended for patients starting amiodarone, and in some cases, pulmonary function tests may be indicated to assess for the development of pulmonary toxicity.

Amiodarone therapy may result in hypo- or hyperthyroidism, with hypothyroidism being almost twice as common. Toxicity usually is related to thyroiditis. Due to the risk of thyroid disease, the clinician should obtain baseline thyroid function tests and followed up every six months. Amiodarone-induced thyroid toxicity should be suspected in patients with weight loss or any change in cardiac status. Treatment of hypothyroidism includes levothyroxine. Treatment of hyperthyroidism may involve a combination of corticosteroids, propylthiouracil or methimazole, and possible thyroidectomy. Patients with a pre-existing hyperthyroid disease can develop thyrotoxicosis because amiodarone contains iodine. Amiodarone-associated thyrotoxicosis can be difficult to treat and carries a high risk of mortality. Adding to this complexity is amiodarone’s beta-blocking effects, which can mask classic symptoms of thyrotoxicosis.

There is a 1% annual incidence of liver toxicity in patients treated with amiodarone. Most cases resolve after stopping the drug; however, toxicity can occasionally progress to end-stage liver disease and cirrhosis. IV amiodarone may cause acute liver injury within one day of infusion. Nausea, anorexia, and constipation are the most common gastrointestinal side effects.

Neurologic toxicity can occur in up to 27.5% of patients, ranging from cognitive impairment to peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, and in some rare cases, quadriplegia. Dermatologic effects include blue skin discoloration ("smurf-skin") and photosensitivity. In rare instances, amiodarone may cause epididymitis and erectile dysfunction.

Drug interactions are another adverse effect of amiodarone. Given that amiodarone is a cytochrome P450 inhibitor, it can reduce warfarin clearance. The international normalized ratio (INR) should be monitored closely in patients starting amiodarone or have a change in the dosing of either amiodarone or warfarin. Digoxin concentrations have increased, even doubled, with co-administration of amiodarone. Prescribing any QTc-prolonging agent in addition to amiodarone should be carefully considered, and the QTc interval should be checked regularly after starting the second agent.

Peripheral IV administration of amiodarone can result in phlebitis. If a patient has a central venous catheter, that route may be preferable to peripheral IV. When infusing amiodarone through a peripheral IV, the access site requires frequent monitoring, and the infusion stopped and changed to another site if the staff notes phlebitis.