The nail can be the first clue to different types of cutaneous or systemic diseases. The nail examination is underutilized and should be a part of every annual full body skin check. Several different types of conditions can involve the nail. Below are the names and findings of several nail diseases:

- **Subungual Melanoma**
- Melanoma arises from the nail apparatus consisted of about 0.18 to 7% of all cutaneous melanomas. Its incidence is higher in dark-skinned and Asian population. Most commonly it presents in the thumb or great toenail, possibly due to the increased density of nail matric in these digits. It typically arises from the nail matrix and less commonly in the nail bed or folds. It presents with a longitudinal melanonychia or nail dystrophy. Longitudinal melanonychia can also present from benign hyperplasia of melanocytes. It is essential to follow the ABCDE (asymmetry, border, color, diameter, evolution) rules when considering subungual melanoma; however, a biopsy is necessary for diagnosis confirmation. Hutchinson sign is when the nail melanoma extends laterally onto the periungual tissue.

- 
**Onychomycosis**
            
              
- Onychomycosis, typically caused by a dermatophyte, is a fungal infection in the nail unit. Less commonly, it can result from yeasts. Onychomycosis of the toenail is more prevalent than the fingernails. Asymptomatic, dry hyperkeratotic tinea pedis is a frequent precursor. Organisms can be present in hotels, public showers, pool decks, etc.  Over time, the dermatophytes causing the tinea pedis can penetrate the nail bed and cause tinea unguium, another name for onychomycosis. It causes damage to the nail matrix leading to the hyperkeratotic and thickened nail bed. It can be differentiated from dystrophy toenails by longitudinal striae whereas transverse onycholysis is consistent with nail dystrophy. Systemic antifungals are the most effective treatment.

- 
**Periungual Warts**
            
              
- Periungal warts commonly seen in children and young adults. Typically located around the nail, leaving the nail plate unaffected. It can present as firm, keratotic papules with ranging sizes. Clinical presentation is a paronychia0lik inflammatory reaction with distal wart emerging under the cuticle.

- 
**Trachyonychia**
            
              
- Trachyonychia is a term used for rough nails covered with scale and extensive superficial longitudinal ridges. Nails become brittle and can split at the free edge. It can be associated with one nail or all finger and toenails (twenty-nail dystrophy syndrome) It has been seen commonly with lichen planus, psoriasis and alopecia areata.

- 
**Onycholysis**
            
              
- Onychosis is the painless separation of the nail from the nail bed. It is fairly common. Separation typically begins at the distal groove and progresses proximally in an irregular pattern. The nonadherent portion of the nail is white. Causes include psoriasis, trauma, infections such as Pseudomonas or Candida, internal medication, photochemotherapy, contact with irritants, or prolonged allergic contact dermatitis. It can also be associated with thyroid disease. It can be treated by removing the separated nail and keeping the area dry to decrease the risk of infection. Any form of manipulation to the area should be discouraged.

- 
**Ingrown Toenails**
            
              
- Ingrown toenails are most common in the large toe. The nail begins to grow laterally and pierce the lateral nail folds, acting as a foreign body.  It typically presents as swelling and pain and can progress to purulent or edematous granulation tissue. It can occur from continuous lateral pressure of ill-fitting shoes, improper or excess trimming of lateral nail plates or trauma. Treatment is determined by if the area exhibit inflammation or not. Typically the area can be cut under local anesthesia if inflamed but otherwise absorbent cotton can provide immediate relief of pain once placed to separate the distal top and lateral edges of the toenail from the soft tissue.