**Underlying Medical Conditions**

Most underlying medical conditions are not necessarily disqualifying. Simple osteoarthritis or the need for near vision correction along with various underlying medical conditions may qualify outright, require Conditions AME's Can Issue (CACI), or require SI (Special Issuance) (SI).

Seldom is a medical denied outright. Noting that issuance of a medical requires that the airmen "May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges"  means that entities such as terminal metastatic disease, rapidly progressive multiple sclerosis, or structural cervical stenosis with myelopathy would be cases for denial. Denial by the AME is discouraged by the FAA and requires an additional letter to the FAA. Deferrals are common in many medical conditions, such as coronary artery disease. The candidate usually gets follow-up correspondence from the FAA, usually certified letter, following the deferral outlining exactly what else is required for review, such as hospital records, labs, stress tests, echocardiogram, etc., commonly with a 60 to 90-day deadline. It is not uncommon for several reviews and requests to go back and forth with the FAA requesting additional information based on the ongoing review. The AME must be tolerant of this process and be able to explain and counsel the candidate through the process. It is not uncommon to request an extension to the deadline. If there is no response to the request from the FAA, then the medical is invalidated or denied outright for what is considered to be "failure to provide."

**SI  (Special Issuance)**

There are 15 FAA "Disqualifying Conditions"; however, in many cases, when the condition is adequately controlled, the FAA will issue medical certification contingent on periodic reports. This is known as a Special Issuance. The AME is responsible for the actual exam and makes the deferral. The FAA responds, noting what they need, and the AME may or may not help in the response to the FAA. The FAA then makes the SI or denies outright based on the information they get. In the case of the SI, the FAA does the actual issuance of the medical certificate, which bears the signature of one of the regional flight surgeons. The initial SI insurance outlines what the AME needs to do for subsequent medical issuances for the duration of the SI. A FIRST class SI for CAD through a senior AME or an SI thought a HIMS AME for a history of more than one episode of driving under the influence are both examples of SI. The initial letter from the FAA for the SI outlines exactly what is to be done at the time of the repeat SI (reports from counselors or peer pilots, reports of echocardiogram and stress tests, etc.) and notes the valid period, usually six months or one year, rather than the standard time frame for the class medical. The SI usually does not revert to a lower class of medical certificate when it is past the designated SI time frame. A FIRST class medical issued for CAD often has the restriction "not valid for any class after six months"  The AME then follows the FAA outline, and the AME is responsible for communicating deterioration in the SI condition and has liability outside of medical malpractice if they fail to do so.

**CACI (Conditions AMEs Can Issue)**

CACI is a group of conditions that allow AMEs to regularly issue, without correspondence back and forth to the FAA, whether the applicant meets the parameters of what is known as a CACI Condition Worksheet. There are currently 19 CACI conditions that can be found in "the Guide."  These are not disqualifying conditions but rather cases such as stable, retained nephrolithiasis controlled HTN or hypothyroidism. The worksheets provide detailed instructions to the examiner and outline condition-specific requirements for the applicant.

**Medication Use**

The FAA maintains a list of acceptable medications, all of which require a period of monitoring. Certain medications in combination are not permitted, and certain meds such as clonidine, all, and any chronic use of any controlled substances are not permitted.

**Acute vs. Chronic Conditions**

Acute issues such as upper respiratory infection and orthopedic fractures are the airman's responsibility to ground themselves until they are healthy and recovered. Many airlines have their own policy on returning acutely ill/injured pilots to active flight status. An airman who needs an elective procedure such as cosmetic surgery colonoscopy is permitted to return to flight status once they are fully recovered, off all medications such as pain meds, but pilots may elect to consult their AME regarding return to flight status. Airlines often have their own guidelines on these return-to-cockpit timelines.

**Pregnancy**

The FAA has little to say about medical status and pregnancy leaving it to a discussion between the woman and her OB/GYN. Pregnancy under normal circumstances is not disqualifying, and generally, pregnancy during air flight is considered safe.

**Statement of Demonstrated Ability (SODA)**

The FAA issues a SODA as an option for an airman with a "static non-progressive defect" to have an opportunity to demonstrate that their impairment is not AERO-medically significant. A SODA is often issued after a "Medical Flight Exam."  The most common SODA is issued for color vision deficiency where a local FAA representative observes a pilot identifying red, white, and green light gun signals from an air-traffic control tower.

**Equipment List**

The FAA has a minimum equipment list that the AME must have available in their office. These include simple things such as a sphygmomanometer, stethoscope, otoscope and Ophthalmoscope, and Snellen eye chart. There are alternatives for the visual field, conjugate gaze testing, and color vision testing.   There are many "either-or" options and a list of several different types of vision tests that are acceptable. The FAA issues a mandatory standard near and intermediate vision card, and pre-paid envelopes for SI and CACI documents are provided on request.

**Aircraft and Phase Considerations**

The class of medical examination may also be related to the aircraft being flown. The THIRD class medical permits a pilot to fly any aircraft under 12,500 pounds (5670 kg) gross weight and less than three engines. Any flying that is done for hire, such as transporting passengers or paid cargo, requires SECOND or FIRST class certification, plus there are other requirements such as commercial rating, in addition to endorsements such as pressurized endorsement, and instrument rating, which is beyond the scope of this article but is mentioned because they should not be confused with medical class requirements.

The initial rating a pilot reaches is known as the  PPL (Private Pilot License),  and there are two initial phases of this training. Initially, a student pilot flies with an instructor. Then, that student flies solo, and they are not allowed to have anyone else in the aircraft which is not an instructor or another pilot that is not an instructor, in which case the student is merely a passenger. Eventually, the student passes their written and practical exams and earns their PPL, at which point is then allowed and takes passengers. During the initial phase of training with the instructor, the student is usually sent to get the medical exam. The medical exam is required before the first solo flight. Some aeronautical institutions, flight schools, colleges, and even private flight instructors require the medical exam before accepting and investing time and energy in the student. Additionally, financial aid programs may require passing the medical before considering funding aviation education.

Much the way a driver needs car insurance, pilots need aircraft insurance on personally owned aircraft. If hangered at an airport, the airport usually requires to be listed as "additionally insured." This is relevant because recent trends in insurance aviation have, in some cases, exceeded FAA requirements. There are currently no aviation insurance companies that will insure a pilot over age 70 in any aircraft with retractable gear, regardless of having a FIRST class medical. Some insurance companies may not accept "Basic Med," discussed later, in cases of "complex high performance" (defined as engine greater than 200 brake HP at sea level, flaps, variable pitch propeller, and retractable landing gear). They may even mandate the exam every six months for insurance purposes, and while the medical may be valid for two years, the airman needs to visit the AME and recertify if they want to continue to be insured. It should be noted that insurance is not a legal requirement. Many private airstrips and pilots are not insured but may not be permitted to land at certain airports for this reason.

**Monocular Contacts**

This topic warrants mention because it has been an ongoing source of confusion and unfortunate accidents.

Many persons will wear one contact in their non-dominant eye for near vision correction, enabling them to avoid wearing near-vision reading glasses. There is a specific question in the 8500 form " Do you wear near-vision contact lenses when flying?"   While this may be convenient for the average middle-aged person in their day-to-day life, it disables accurate depth perception, especially at relatively high speeds, and is thus an absolute no in terms of FAA medical certification. Such persons often end up with a restriction of "Must have near vision correction available" on their medical certificate and then wear low-profile "readers." Similar to driving a car, the pilot looks over them when looking out the cockpit window and looks down through them to read things such as maps and checklists in their lap. There are anecdotal reports of "teams" or couples that fly together often where one reads the near vision and the other does not. The PIC (Pilot In Command) is only one person, and that person needs to be able to manage all aspects of flight and handle the airplane alone. This includes reading instruments at the intermediate vision, reading charts using near vision, and looking outside the aircraft for distant vision. This should be differentiated from planes that require two pilots, often PIC ad SIC (Second in command), or more complicated aircraft that require other crew such as navigators, flight engineers who may need nothing other than near vision, but still need to hold a medical certificate.

**"Basic Med" a non-FAA THIRD class Substitute**

Technically "Basic Med" is not an FAA or AME topic, but it is relevant to aviation medicine and the practice of the AME.

In addition to issuing a follow-up THIRD class medical to an airman with or without an SI, there is an option known as BM (Basic Med). Airmen requiring FRIST to SECOND class medicals are NOT able to execute those privileges under basic med.

This is a comparatively recent program whereby any medical doctor, including an AME, can examine the patient, fill out actual paperwork, sign, and the airman effectively can fly as if they had a THIRD class medical. The airman needs to do an online course initially every two years and be seen by the MD/DO every four years. Two caveats are that they must have had a previously valid THIRD class medical, and their most recent medical cannot have been denied, deferred, or revoked. Again this is only the THIRD class and only after an initial certification by an AME. Pilots cannot do Basic Med as initial certification. There may be other factors to consider, such as aircraft liability insurance companies who routinely want to know about continued training, certification, and medical status of the pilot and aircraft they are insuring. It may substantially increase rates if the pilot is flying under Basic Med. Many medical doctors pause once they look at the paperwork and attestation they are asked to sign. Medical Mal insurance carriers were known to send policy clarifications to insured physicians; they are not covered for Basic Med. Likewise, many hospitals systems and large groups have made it clear they do not provide that service and recommend/refer to an AME. When redone year after year for stable disease, SI's often require additional testing and labs that may not be covered by health insurance. Such cases are often simplified by getting Basic Med. Pilots requiring a FIRST or SECOND class medical based on their job or the type of plane they fly are not eligible.

Issues have arisen, and it is not uncommon for pilots who attempted to get a medical, had it deferred or denied, then went to a non-AME and got the paperwork filled out. While they may have the paperwork in hand, it is not valid. Furthermore, the course clearly covers under what circumstances the Basic Med is and is not valid, and, at the end of the course, there is an attestation to this effect. Pilots ignoring this or saying they "didn't know" when they had to pass a quiz about under what circumstances Basic Med is not valid as a defense in front of the NTSB, their insurance carrier, or any one of a number of regulatory agencies.