Ritonavir has several constitutional side effects, including malaise, dizziness, and insomnia, gastrointestinal side effects including nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea, and metabolic side effects such as hyperlipidemia, hypertriglyceridemia, transaminitis, and rhabdomyolysis.

Because of the metabolic side effects of ritonavir, lipid-lowering agents might also be indicated along with protease inhibitors to reduce cardiovascular disease risk. Other serious adverse effects are pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, renal failure, hypersensitivity reactions, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), hepatotoxicity, leukopenia, and neutropenia.

It requires cautious use with other medications that inhibit the CYP450-3A4 enzyme, causing an increase in serum drug levels. Ritonavir should also not be given to patients on pharmacological agents that act as CYP inducers. These can cause drastically reduced levels of ritonavir, resulting in potential drug resistance.

Fat Redistribution and/or accumulation, including dorsocervical fat enlargement (buffalo hump), central obesity, peripheral wasting, breast enlargement, facial wasting, and "cushingoid appearance," have been observed in patients receiving antiretroviral therapy, but causal relationships haven't been established.

Reports of increased bleeding, spontaneous skin hematomas, and hemarthrosis in patients with hemophilia type A and B treated with protease inhibitors. Still, causal relationships between protease inhibitor therapy and these events are not established.

Reports of varying degrees of cross-resistance among protease inhibitors have been observed. Continued use of ritonavir 1200 mg daily following a loss of viral suppression might increase the risk of cross-resistance with other protease inhibitors.