The terminal branches of the brachial plexus include the axillary, musculocutaneous, radial, ulnar, and median nerves. Each is responsible for specific motor and sensory innervation of the upper extremity. This review covers physical course and sensory innervation here while motor innervation is the topic in the section below.

The axillary nerve has its origin from the posterior cord and carries nerve fibers from the C5 and C6 levels. After arising from the brachial plexus, it travels inferior and posterior to the shoulder joint capsule accompanied by the posterior circumflex humeral artery. This neurovascular bundle appears in the quadrangular space. The nerve then splits into superficial and deep branches.  The sensation of the lateral proximal arm derives from the superior lateral cutaneous branch.

The musculocutaneous nerve originates from the lateral cord and carries fibers from C5-C7. It pierces the belly of the coracobrachialis and then travels distally between the biceps and brachialis muscles. The nerve terminates as the lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm, which is responsible for sensation along the lateral forearm.

The radial nerve arises from the posterior cord and carries fibers from C5-T1. It begins its course medial to the humerus but quickly crosses posteriorly running in the spiral groove close to the deep brachial artery and the bone surface. Distally, it pierces the lateral intermuscular septum entering the anterior compartment of the arm. As it enters the forearm, the nerve splits into a deep motor branch (posterior interosseous nerve) and a superficial sensory branch. The radial nerve is responsible for cutaneous innervation of the posterior arm (via the posterior cutaneous nerve of the arm), the lateral arm (via the inferior lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm), the posterior forearm (via the posterior cutaneous nerve of the forearm), and the dorsal aspect of the lateral 3.5 fingers (via superficial digital branches).

The ulnar nerve has its origin from the medial cord and carries fibers from C8-T1. It descends distally along the medial aspect of the arm. It passes posterior to the medial epicondyle through the cubital tunnel. In the forearm, it runs between the two heads of flexor carpi ulnaris. At the wrist, it travels superficial to the flexor retinaculum and through the Guyon canal to enter the hand. Before entering the Guyon canal, it gives rise to dorsal and palmar cutaneous branches which innervate the dorsal 1.5 digits and palmar aspects of the proximal hand, respectively. The nerve terminates as superficial (provides sensory innervation to the palmar 1.5 digits) and deep (provides motor innervation) branches.

The median nerve emerges from the lateral and medial cords and carries fibers from C5-T1. It runs medial to the biceps and brachialis and lateral to the brachial artery. It enters the forearm under the biceps aponeurosis and through the two heads of pronator teres. It gives rise to the anterior interosseous nerve in the forearm and then continues distally through the carpal tunnel. The median nerve is responsible for cutaneous innervation of the palm (via the palmar cutaneous nerve branching before the carpal tunnel), and the volar aspects of the lateral 3.5 digits (via superficial digital branches).