**Treatment/Management**

Medical management: Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is usually responsive to pharmacotherapy, especially with carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine.

Carbamazepine: Starting dose 200 mg/day in a single dose (extended-release), two divided doses (immediate-release tablet), or in four divided doses (oral solution). Increase the dose gradually with increments of 200 mg/day as needed. If the dose exceeds 200mg per day, it is advisable to administer extended-release capsules in two divided doses. Maintenance dose: 400 to 800 mg daily in two divided doses (immediate-release tablet) forms) or four divided doses (oral solution); maximum dose: no more than 1,200 mg/day.

The other neuropathic pain medicines recommended by the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) are as below:

- Gabapentin (100 to 5000 mg/day in 1 to 4 divided doses),

- Duloxetine (20 to 90mg/day),

- Valproic acid (125-2500 mg/day in 1 to 2 divided doses),

- Clonazepam (0.5-8 mg/day),

- Lamotrigine (50 to 500 mg/day in 1 to 2 divided doses),

- Baclofen (10 to 80 mg/day in 1 to 4 divided doses),

- Phenytoin (200 to 600 mg/day in 1 to 3 divided doses),

- Pregabalin (75 to 500 mg/day in 1 to 2 divided doses) and

- Topiramate (50 to 1000 mg/day in 1 to 2 divided doses)

As a general rule, these medications should be started at low doses and titrated up as needed based on their effectiveness, tolerability, and side effects. This pain condition often shows a relapsing-remitting course, so medication can be tapered down to a low maintenance dose. Combining two or more medications with different mechanisms of action can help achieve better pain relief while avoiding side effects. A short course of opioids can be useful for intractable pain.

Adjuvant care: Cold and hot compresses, physical therapy, and psychological counseling are all options in addition to medical therapy. The success rate is variable but can be helpful.

**Interventional Pain Management Techniques**

Glossopharyngeal nerve blocks merit consideration for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. This block can be an option in conjunction with pharmacotherapy. A diagnostic block with a local anesthetic should be tried first to confirm the origin of the pain. If diagnostic blocks are successful, chemical neurolysis or thermal radiofrequency ablation can be performed on the nerve. Chemical neurolytic agents such as alcohol, glycerol, or phenol are typical choices. Radiofrequency ablation is typically performed at the jugular foramen to target the inferior petrous ganglion of Andersch. Accurate needle placement is critical as life-threatening bradycardia and hypotension can occur if the vagus nerve gets stimulated during the procedure. There are two common approaches to block the glossopharyngeal nerve: the intraoral and extra-oral approaches. The extra-oral technique is preferred since it is safe and easy to perform. Complications are not uncommon with glossopharyngeal neuralgia blocks. The glossopharyngeal nerve is in the vicinity of the internal jugular vein, and the carotid artery and intravascular injection can easily occur. The concomitant block of the recurrent laryngeal nerve may cause hoarseness of the voice. Always avoid bilateral glossopharyngeal nerve blocks at the same time to avoid complete vocal cord paralysis. Blockade of the vagus nerve may result in tachycardia and hypertension via blockade of parasympathetic fibers.

**Surgical Management of Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia**

Several surgical modalities are used for the treatment of glossopharyngeal neuralgia based on the etiology of the pain. The compression of the glossopharyngeal nerve by a vascular structure is the most common cause of secondary glossopharyngeal neuralgia. Microvascular decompression (MVD) of the glossopharyngeal nerve is the most widely used surgical modality to correct vascular compression of the nerve. Alternatively, a resection of the glossopharyngeal nerve alone or with branches of the vagus nerve can also be performed.

Extracranial techniques are percutaneous radiofrequency rhizotomy and direct surgical resection. These techniques are ideal in patients with essential glossopharyngeal neuralgia who failed medical management but cannot tolerate an open intracranial resection. Resection of the ipsilateral styloid process, also known as stylectomy, is a therapeutic option for Eagle syndrome. The physician must rule out other central causes of glossopharyngeal neuralgia before pursuing this surgery.

Intracranial techniques include rhizotomy or an intracranial root resection of the glossopharyngeal nerve and/or vagus nerves from its origin in the brainstem at the cerebellopontine angle. Persistent dysphagia and hoarseness of voice are the most common complications of these surgeries. Stereotactic radiosurgery with gamma knife surgery provides a less-invasive option, but data on safety and efficacy is limited.