Typically patients presenting with focal neurological deficits undergo a code stroke alert protocol. ICVT has the risk of presenting as an ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke; thus, special care is necessary for making a rapid and accurate diagnosis. Often inefficient, inaccurate, and disjointed communication can contribute to a delay in treatment. Managing focal neurological deficits involves a multidisciplinary approach that incorporates not just physicians but various other healthcare providers.

Emergency medical services (EMS) must be activated to rapidly obtain vital information such as last known well time and provide rapid transit to a medical institution. Concomitantly there is coordination with the emergency department for prompt radiological imaging of the brain. Once a patient reaches the emergency department, the nursing team must obtain vascular access while the neurologist begins the assessment using the NIH stroke scale. Technicians are involved in this process for the appropriate transport of the patient. In the meantime, on-call neurosurgery must be notified of the patient for the probable need of mechanical thrombectomy.

The process is multifaceted, and many disciplines are needed in the overall care of this patient. One way to help optimize this process and decrease miscommunication is through medical simulations. One study found that using standardized interprofessional collaborative simulations was an effective learning experience for students entering the healthcare field. This study also found that interprofessional team simulation can be an effective and efficient learning experience for students. It also reveals positive changes in stroke best-practice knowledge and IPC competencies.