Children who have CAH often are tall in early childhood, but ultimately are short in adulthood. Recent data suggest that patients born with CAH are about 10 cm shorter than their parentally based targets. Advanced bone age and central precocious puberty due to androgen excess causing early epiphyseal fusion are the primary factors. In addition, the treatment of CAH with glucocorticoids can suppress growth and diminish the final height. Experimental treatment with growth hormone and luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analog (to hold off puberty) are reported to lead to an average height gain of 7.3 cm.

The influence of prenatal sex steroid exposure on personality is controversial. More consistent evidence regarding the effects of androgens comes from gendered play activities of young children.

Most children with CAH manifest normal neuropsychological development. Moreover, despite a tendency toward male gender role behavior and homoerotic fantasy, most girls with CAH identify as females and exhibit a heterosexual preference. Both male and female patients are fertile but have reduced fertility rates. This consequence is due to biological, psychological, social, and sexual factors.

Bone density is reported to be normal in most patients. The prevalence of metabolic abnormalities such as obesity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and the polycystic ovarian syndrome has been reported to be high due to the diseases themselves or glucocorticoid treatment

This disease and treatment complications and long-term consequences are challenging for practitioners. Multiple subspecialty professionals should be involved in management. Gene therapy shows the potential for a CAH cure.