A thorough discussion with a patient prior to the procedure includes the following:

- A detailed explanation of the procedure

- The expected level of discomfort

- Option for local anesthesia

- History of bleeding disorders or anticoagulant use

- Prior medical conditions that might affect the procedure

- Potential diagnoses resulting from the procedure

- Potential complications of the procedure

The patient is placed in a supine position for the procedure. Prior to beginning the procedure, a brief preliminary ultrasound of the thyroid is performed to asses the nodule's location. The operator can take this time to better position the patient, probe, and monitor. This also allows the operator to visualize the proposed needle trajectory and surrounding vasculature via doppler mapping. The skin is then marked at the proposed site of entry.

Whether sterile technique and local anesthesia are employed for the procedure often remains dependent on provider and institution preference. The incidence of local infection from FNA is exceptionally rare.

The skin site is cleaned, and a sterile field is established with a fenestrated drape or with towel drapes. A high-resolution (7.5 MHz to 15 MHz) linear-array transducer is used for optimal visualization of the target nodule. A sterile cover is placed over the head of the probe. Sterile ultrasound gel can be avoided if the skin site is sterilized with an iodine-based solution, which can serve as an adequate ultrasound coupling medium. Local anesthesia is administered with approximately 1 mL to 3 mL of 1% lidocaine hydrochloride, either subcutaneously or through the proposed soft tissue trajectory of the FNA needle. This ultimately depends on nodule depth and location. A 22 gauge to 27 gauge needle with an attached syringe is used for specimen acquisition.

The ultrasound monitor should be located across the patient from the operator. A general linear alignment of the needle, the long axis of the transducer, and the monitor is important for optimal hand-eye coordination. This allows the operator to easily assess needle positioning within the soft tissues on the monitor while comfortably manipulating the needle.