Botulinum toxin exerts its paralytic effect via the blockade of acetylcholine release at the presynaptic motor nerve terminal. Specifically, the light chain of the botulinum toxin binds to a protein called SNARE. The cleavage of SNARE prevents the export mechanism of acetylcholine vesicles at the presynaptic nerve terminal. In this manner, acetylcholine is unavailable to affect the postsynaptic motor endplate, and nerve transduction is halted.

The intrinsic muscles of the larynx are important in respiration and phonation, whereas the extrinsic muscles of the larynx assist in swallowing. Intrinsic muscles include the posterior cricoarytenoid, paired thyroarytenoid (vocalis), cricothyroid, paired lateral cricoarytenoid, and the interarytenoid (grouped transverse and oblique arytenoid) muscles. All of the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are innervated by the recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN), a branch of the vagus nerve, except for the cricothyroid. The cricothyroid is the only intrinsic muscle of the larynx that is not innervated by the RLN; rather, it is innervated by the extrinsic branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (SLN),  which is also a branch of the vagus nerve. The cricothyroid functions to pivot the thyroid cartilage forward and lengthen the vocal cords, increasing the pitch of the voice.

Laryngeal dystonia, also known as spasmodic dysphonia (SD), results from intrinsic laryngeal muscle spasms. Spasms can result in untimely closure or opening of the glottic inlet. Adductor spasmodic dysphonia leads to the former, leading to a sensation of strangled speech or untimely breaks in speech. Abductor spasmodic dysphonia leads to the latter symptom and can cause a breathy voice or hypophonia.

In abductor spasmodic dysphonia (ABSD), spasms of the posterior cricoarytenoid muscle (PCA) cause breathy voice quality and voice breaks. The PCA is the only muscle of the larynx that functions to abduct and is, therefore, the target of chemical denervation with botulinum toxin in this disorder.

In adductor spasmodic dysphonia (ADSD), the focal laryngeal dystonia is caused by spasms of the laryngeal adductors. Frequently implicated and addressed therapeutically are the thyroarytenoid (TA) and lateral cricoarytenoid (LCA) muscles. The LCA is the primary adductor and also assists in internal rotation. Hyper-adduction (phonation against a closed glottis) in this disorder can improve with alcohol intake and worsen with stress. Singing, whispering, and talking in an accent can also be associated with improved voice quality. Mixed spasmodic dysphonia contains components of both ADSD and ABSD, and therefore may include spasms of both laryngeal adductor and abductor muscles and can be difficult to treat.

"Tremor," as a perceptual voice abnormality, suggests either organic vocal tremor due to pathology involving the extrapyramidal system, laryngeal dystonia/spasmodic dysphonia, or psychogenic tremor. Laryngeal tremor can occur concomitantly with SD, or it can occur in isolation. Both can be successfully treated with botulinum toxin injections.

The vocal process is the area where the vocal ligament attaches to the anterior surface of arytenoid cartilages. A vocal process granuloma is a non-cancerous lesion, which typically occurs along the medial surface of the arytenoid towers or medial surface of the arytenoid cartilages. Risk factors for the development of vocal process granuloma are gastroesophageal reflux, poor vocal hygiene, and a history of intubation. It is not a true granuloma but rather a reactive process that results in intact stratified squamous epithelium overlying fibrosis or granulation tissue. Vocal process granuloma has no malignant potential, but it does have a propensity for recurrence.

The cricopharyngeus (CP) muscle, which makes up a part of the upper esophageal sphincter (UES), normally relaxes during swallowing. It is a ring-shaped muscle that has fibers oriented horizontally and obliquely. When the CP relaxes, anterior-superior displacement of the hyolaryngeal complex decreases the pressure needed to open the UES, allowing the bolus to pass into the cervical esophagus. When the CP does not relax properly, patients can have dysphagia. A cricopharyngeal "bar" can be seen on a videofluoroscopic swallow study (VFSS), which narrows the pharyngoesophageal segment (PES). Selective chemodenervation of the CP in this condition has been reported in the literature.