Several preparations of hyaluronic acid are available for many FDA-approved indications. The most common application indications are for cosmetics and intra-articular use, although many other ophthalmic and topical forms are also available.

Hyaluronic acid gel fillers are injected to restore volume lost due to age or disease, provide facial contour, and help maintain a youthful appearance. Filler injection has become one of the most commonly performed procedures in a dermatology cosmetic practice. Many different types of hyaluronic acid gel fillers differ in their hyaluronic acid concentration, particle size, cross-linking density, duration, and presence of lidocaine. High-density, large-particle fillers are recommended for deep dermal injections, while the low-density, small-particle fillers are recommended for fine lines. Hyaluronic acid filler has become popular because of its low allergic response, ease of injection, rapid recovery, reproducibility, and immediate results.

Intraarticular injections of hyaluronic acid are also widely used, especially for pain relief in patients with osteoarthritis of the knees. They have become popular as a non-surgical treatment modality, especially with the concern most clinicians have with repeating intraarticular corticosteroid injections. Several preparations are available, including various commercially available injections of sodium hyaluronate, hylan polymers A and B, and hyaluronan.

**United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Labeled Indications**

Intraarticular injection:

- For pain relief in patients with mild to moderate osteoarthritis (OA) of the knees, who have not responded to conservative non-pharmacological measures and/or analgesics. The FDA has not evaluated nor approved this treatment for any other joints.

Intradermal injection:

- Injection into the mid-to-deep dermis for correction of facial wrinkles or folds and perioral rhytids. Patients must be over the age of 21.

Subcutaneous injection:

- Volume deficit correction for dorsal hands in patients over the age of 21.

- Correction of age-related volume loss and for cheek augmentation in mid-face in patients over the age of 21.

Subperiosteal injection:

- Correction of age-related volume loss and for cheek augmentation in mid-face in patients over the age of 21.

Submucosal injection:

- Injection into the lips for lip augmentation in patients over the age of 21.

Topical cream/gel:

- Management of wounds, skin ulcers

- Relief of symptoms (burning, itching, and pain) in dermatoses such as atopic dermatitis, radiodermatitis, and allergic contact dermatitis.

Ophthalmic:

- Surgical aid cataract extraction, intraocular lens implantation, corneal transplant, glaucoma filtration, retinal attachment surgery, and anterior segment surgery.

**Non-FDA-Labeled Indications**

- Injection to provide a scaffold for regenerative endodontic procedures

- Injection into vocal folds to treat glottal insufficiency

- Injection into the areola to enhance nipple projection after breast reconstructive surgery

- Refractory interstitial cystitis