Atypical antipsychotics block a variety of neurotransmitter receptors, which varies from one drug to another regarding which is responsible for any toxic effects from an overdose. By blocking dopamine receptors, second-generation antipsychotics can cause extrapyramidal symptoms and neuroleptic malignant syndrome, although to a lesser extent, compared to a typical antipsychotic, e.g., haloperidol. Alpha-adrenergic blockade causes orthostatic hypotension and tachycardia via vasodilation. Olanzapine, clozapine, aripiprazole, and quetiapine cause significant anti-alpha-adrenergic effects. Almost all atypical agents block serotonin receptors, and several of them inhibit muscarinic receptors. Quetiapine, clozapine, and olanzapine are powerful anti-muscarinic agents, and toxicity can cause urinary retention, tachycardia, hyperthermia, and delirium. Many second-generation antipsychotics also cause significant sedation by antihistamine activity; these agents are aripiprazole, quetiapine, clozapine, and olanzapine. Olanzapine causes central nervous system depression, hypotension, sedation, sometimes agitation and is rarely lethal in monotherapy overdose.

On the other hand, clozapine can sometimes be lethal in overdose by causing respiratory depression, myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, changes in heart rhythm, and altered mental status. In overdose, quetiapine is rarely fatal; however, it correlates with the highest mortality rate of all antipsychotics as it successfully blocks muscarinic, alpha-adrenergic, and histamine receptors. Toxicity with quetiapine presents with tachycardia, delirium, central nervous system depression, and rarely fatal ventricular arrhythmia. There are no reported fatalities with aripiprazole, and symptoms of overdose with ziprasidone include tachycardia and central nervous system depression, and toxicity is seldom lethal.