Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is a disorder of reduced acetylcholine release from the presynaptic nerve terminals due to antibodies to voltage-gated calcium channels in the presynaptic neuronal cell membrane.

The following is the normal mechanism of ACh release and interaction:

- ACh is synthesized and stored in vesicles at the motor nerve terminal.

- Upon stimulation by an action potential which travels down the motor nerve, ACh is released into the nerve terminal. The release of ACh is dependent on the influx of calcium ions via the voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC).

- ACh then binds to the ACh receptors on the postsynaptic neuron, leading to the rapid entry of cations which produces depolarization at the end plate region of the muscle fiber and generating an action potential and subsequent muscle contraction.

- Acetylcholine within the synaptic cleft is rapidly broken down by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase.

VGCC, a large transmembrane protein with multiple subunits has an important role as it mediates the influx of calcium into the nerve terminal. In Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, VGCC is reduced due to the IgG antibody-mediated cross-linking of the channels. More specifically, antibodies are directed towards the P/Q subtype of VGCC.  85% of patients with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome demonstrate antibodies against the P/Q type VGCC. Rarely, antibodies against the N-type VGCC has been found in malignancy-associated Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome.

Autoimmunity with SCLC: In patients with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome associated with SCLC, the tumor tissue expresses VGCC. This expression of antigens on the tumor cells induces the autoantibody production, and the autoantibodies cross-react with presynaptic VGCC antigens.

Genetic predisposition: Non-tumor Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is associated with HLA-B8 (HLA - class I) and HLA -DR3 and -DQ2 (HLA class II). These HLA genotypes have also been associated with other autoimmune conditions including myasthenia gravis. Conversely, it is not seen in Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome associated with SCLC.