Other TACs that require differentiation from cluster headaches are as follows:

- Paroxysmal hemicrania: This unilateral headache lasts only 2 to 30 minutes. It responds to indomethacin.

- Short-Lasting unilateral neuralgiform headaches with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT syndrome): This extremely rare unilateral headache lasts 5 to 240 seconds. They can occur three to 200 times daily and are usually refractory to treatment.

- Short-Lasting unilateral neuralgiform headaches with cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA)

- Hemicrania continua

- Probable trigeminal autonomic cephalgia

Some other primary headaches may also fall into differential:

- Tension headache: This bilateral headache is described as a dull ache or squeezing ache. It is associated with fatigue, pericranial muscle tenderness, or sleep disturbances.

- Trigeminal neuralgia: this is an inconsistent, paroxysmal headache described as an electrical, sharp, or stabbing pain in the trigeminal distribution. Events last for a few seconds.

- Primary stabbing headache: Stabs lasting from 1 to 10 seconds, without cranial autonomic symptoms

- Migraine: the most common description of this headache is a unilateral "throbbing" headache. Patients tend to lie quietly in a dark room. It is associated with fatigue, nausea, photophobia, phonophobia, and vomiting. Up to 50% of patients can have bilateral autonomic symptoms; this is the most common condition with which cluster headache is confused.

Other structural lesions may present as TACs.

- Vascular abnormalities

- Carotid artery dissection
- Intracranial large artery aneurysms
- Cerebral venous thrombosis
- Cerebral cavernous hemangioma
- Brain arteriovenous malformations
- Brain dural arteriovenous fistulas

- Inflammatory or infectious pathologies

- Temporal arteritis
- Dental abscess
- Sinusitis

- Neoplasms

- Meningiomas
- Prolactinomas and growth hormone tumors
- Nasopharyngeal carcinoma