The first step in diagnosing thoracic outlet syndrome is the physical exam. After the patient has undergone evaluation, diagnostic confirmation is possible with more advanced imaging or testing. The first step is a basic chest x-ray or cervical spine x-ray.

Ultrasound has limited importance for TOS due to the inability to see the area of interest in full. However, Longley et al. reported a 92% specificity and 95% sensitivity to diagnose venous TOS.

Angiography can be helpful; however, it remains controversial. Angiography gives highly accurate views of the arterial system of the region, so in theory, it should be ideal for diagnosing arterial TOS. However, arterial TOS is often positional and challenging to reproduce on command, making this an obstacle in this diagnostic approach.

Venous dopplers are useful to help detect compression of the subclavian vein or other veins in the thoracic outlet syndrome. The most significant benefit to this diagnostic modality is the ability to have the patient perform a movement or get into positions to duplicate the increased pressure in the thoracic outlet.

Electrodiagnostic studies (EMS) are a classic diagnostic mode to diagnose neurogenic TOS. Much like the trouble with angiography, EMS has issues with neurogenic TOS often being transient; however, if positive can give a confirmatory diagnosis. A positive result is considered a reduction of less than 85 m/s, and an overall velocity of less than 60 m/s is regarded as an indication for surgery.