As with any other type of seizure, it is most important to make sure that the episode is, indeed, a seizure. A detailed history from the patient and family members is important.

Diagnosing a simple partial seizure can be difficult, especially when sensory, autonomic, or psychic symptoms are predominant. Suspicion of simple partial seizure is based on typical history and reproducible patterns with known simple partial seizure types. A neurological examination may or may not show subtle focality. Some patients may have postepileptic paresis (Todd paralysis). Examination during a seizure is helpful to assess consciousness. The patient should be able to follow simple commands and remember the events postictally to make a diagnosis of a simple partial seizure. Simple commands like moving extremity on both sides, repeating a two-syllable command will help assess responsiveness. Some patients with motor manifestations may not be able to perform a motor task but remember the instructions postictally; this should be interpreted as intact responsiveness.

Symptoms depend on the area involved.

- Temporal lobe focal-aware seizures can cause autonomic or psychological symptoms. The most common symptom is an epigastric rising sensation. Sometimes sensory symptoms like auditory and olfactory hallucinations can be present.

- Frontal lobe simple partial seizures are usually short but can have a rapid generalization. They have prominent motor manifestations like twitching or stiffness in one muscle group on one side.

- Parietal lobe focal aware seizures present with predominantly sensory symptoms. They may have a feeling of tingling or numbness that may or may not spread in a Jacksonian manner. The Head, arm, and face are most commonly involved. They can also present with visual metamorphopsia, loss of awareness of a body part, vertigo, and sometimes language disturbances.

- Occipital lobe seizures usually have visual manifestations like scotoma, amaurosis, or flashing lights. They also can have visual hallucinations and perceptive illusions in which objects appear distorted.