Adrenocortical carcinomas can arise sporadically or be part of a familial cancer syndrome. Although the molecular mechanisms underlying tumorigenesis in many of the hereditary syndromes are well characterized, the molecular pathogenesis of sporadic ACC is less well understood. Furthermore, most cases of ACC appear to be sporadic. Several studies on the clonality of adrenocortical tumors have demonstrated that most benign adrenocortical lesions are polyclonal; however, some ACC that have been studied indicate monoclonal proliferation.

- Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a familial cancer syndrome arising from a germline mutation of the TP53 gene located at 17p13. Patients are susceptible to breast cancer, sarcomas, brain tumors, leukemia, and adrenocortical carcinoma.**Tp53 pathway**.

- Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or Gardner syndrome, which is a mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC) located in 5q21 chromosomal, present with multiple colonic polyps and an increased risk of early colon carcinomas. Furthermore, FAP is associated with pigmented retinal lesions, desmoids tumors, osteomas, thyroid adenoma/carcinomas, and other different malignant tumors. Adrenocortical tumors, especially nonfunctional nodular hyperplasia, cortisol-producing adenomas (CPA), and ACC occur in 7 to 13% of patients with FAP. FAP results from a germline inactivating mutation of APC, a tumor suppressor gene that inhibits Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. According to Knudson’s model, ACC in patients with FAP exhibits somatic APC mutations as a second hit. The activation of the **Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway**occurs in a third of ACC cases, and less commonly observed in adrenocortical adenoma. Activation of b-catenin is mainly related to the mutation of the Catenin beta-1 gene (CTNNB1). Consistently, transcriptome studies have shown an overexpression of Wnt/b-catenin target genes in ACC.

- Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) characteristically demonstrates genetic and epigenetic events at the 11p15.5 region involving the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1C (CDKN1C), insulin-growth-factor II (IGF-II), and H19 genes, which results in overgrowth disorders, visceromegaly (macroglossia, hemihyperplasia), malformations (wall defect, umbilical hernia), and predisposition to embryonal malignancies. ACC belongs to the BWS tumor spectrum, which also includes Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma with an overall risk for tumor development in children estimated at 7.5%; most of the tumors occur in the first 8  to 10 years of life.

- Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 has an abnormal genetic locus at 11q13, where a defective MEN1 gene encodes a defective tumor suppressor protein, which is the Menin protein. The abnormal function of this protein predisposes the patient to parathyroid, pituitary, endocrine pancreatic, and adrenocortical tumors, including adrenocortical carcinoma.

These candidate genes as a cause of cancer have as their basis the hypothesis that a germline alteration of the genes causing a hereditary familial tumor syndrome also occurs as a somatic event leading to a sporadic tumor. This approach was indeed very successful in identifying TP53 mutation or insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) overexpression in ACC, and APC and the Wnt/b-catenin pathway. Genomewide approaches, including transcriptome, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array, methylation, and microRNAs (miRNAs) analysis, have identified new genetic and epigenetic alterations.

- DNA methylation is the most characterized epigenetic mechanism of regulation of transcription. This methylation occurs in the cytosine of CpG dinucleotides in specific regions with many CpG called CpG islands. Beyond the abnormalities described at the IGF2 locus, a global alteration of methylation patterns has been described in ACC at the genome-wide level.

- MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small RNAs (approximately 22 nucleotides) regulating gene expression at the posttranscriptional level by targeting mRNAs for cleavage or translation repression. They play an essential role in the pathogenesis of several neoplasms; they are responsible for both oncogene activation and tumor suppressor genes silencing. Their profile of expression can serve as diagnostic and/or prognosis markers and the fact that one can measure them in blood samples.