# Continuing Education Activity

Small bowel bleeding compromises 5% to 10% of all GI bleeds. The etiology is extensive and poses a diagnostic challenge for physicians. To avoid the high morbidity and mortality associated with this condition, it must be promptly diagnosed and treated. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of small bowel bleeding and highlights the interprofessional team's role in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of small bowel bleeding.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with small bowel bleeding.
- Explain the typical imaging findings associated with small bowel bleeding.
- Review the management of a patient with small bowel bleeding.

# Introduction

Gastrointestinal bleed is the most common diagnosis for GI-related inpatient admissions. Amongst the GI bleeds, about 50% are due to upper GI tract bleeds, 40% are due to lower GI tract bleeds, and about 5% to 10% are due to lesions in the small bowel.

Patients are considered to have overt bleeding when they have visible bleeding, either melena or hematochezia. The bleeding is considered occult when there is no gross bleeding, but signs and symptoms of anemia, including fatigue, dyspnea, or palpitations, are present. Small bowel bleeding poses a significant diagnostic challenge for gastroenterologists. The clinical significance lies in the fact that most small bowel causes go undetected because the small bowel is long and hard to reach and therefore difficult to evaluate.

# Etiology

The etiology of small bowel bleeding is extensive, and it varies with the patient's age.

The most common cause of small bowel GI bleed is a vascular lesion. 30-40% of bleeding in the small bowel is caused by abnormal vessels in the small bowel, with angiodysplasia being the most common.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence of small bowel lesions has been estimated to be 5 to 10% in patients presenting with GI bleeding.

# History and Physical

The patient's initial assessment with small bowel bleeding must include a good clinical history and physical examination. A small bowel bleed can present with varying presentations. It can be overt or occult bleeding. It can be a massive bleed presenting as shock or could be persistent bleeding leading to anemia. A detailed history can help in guiding towards a specific diagnosis.

- Medical history (valvular heart disease, liver cirrhosis, chronic pancreatitis, radiation therapy)

- Surgical history (liver transplantation, abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, bowel resection)

- Medications (NSAIDs, anticoagulants, antiplatelets)

- Family history (Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, Peutz Jegher syndrome)

- Social history (alcohol intake)

The physical examination findings can help to narrow down the diagnosis. The findings of telangiectasia in HHT (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia), spider angioma, and caput medusa in portal hypertension, pigmented lips in Peutz Jegher's syndrome can be found on examination.

The history of chronic pancreatitis can lead to the diagnosis of rare causes like Haemosuccus pancreaticus.

# Evaluation

Small intestinal bleeding is a rare cause of gastrointestinal bleeding. The diagnosis is challenging for the physician and involves much time and financial burden. The initial step in evaluation is endoscopy. However, with the advancement in novel endoscopic and radiological techniques, diagnosis and treatment have evolved. The latest diagnostic modalities including, capsule endoscopy and deep enteroscopy, have made it possible to go farther into the small bowel, helping to visualize and treat the lesions.

**Endoscopy**

Endoscopy is the first diagnostic study. A regular endoscope helps evaluate the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum. It is capable of providing a good view up to the first part of the small bowel. It has the advantage of being diagnostic and therapeutic at the same time. The endoscopist would be able to perform an intervention if any lesion is found.

**Imaging Studies**

CT enterography involves the use of oral contrast solution. It allows for the detailed inspection of the small bowel lining and looks for any lesions.

**Capsule Endoscopy**

Capsule endoscopy is used when the endoscopy studies have failed to find any bleeding source. The camera is attached to a device that is about the size of a pill. It helps visualize the entire GI tract as it takes images until it is finally eliminated in the stool.

The capsule study is generally safe. It has the advantage of visualizing the entire GI tract and localize the bleeding source. The disadvantages include the inability to take biopsies and do any intervention. In patients with prior history of abdominal surgeries, the capsule can rarely get stuck inside the GI tract. It may require surgery if the capsule gets stuck. Despite these limitations, capsule endoscopy is the second line if the standard endoscope fails to diagnose any bleeding source.

**Push Enteroscopy**

Push enteroscopy or double-balloon enteroscopy is a new advancement to standard endoscopes. They have been used when the lesion is farther down in the small bowel and not seen with the standard endoscopes. It uses two balloons, which can help the scope be pushed farther into the small bowel.

**Intraoperative Enteroscopy**

Surgery may be required in cases when no diagnosis could be found. Intraoperative enteroscopy is done under general anesthesia by a team comprising of gastroenterologists and surgeons. The scope is advanced through the incision in the small bowel. The advantage is that it allows to treat the cause of bleeding, AVMs, or to remove masses or polyps. It has been shown to treat about 70% of the patients effectively.

# Treatment / Management

The management options for small bowel bleeding involve conservative, radiological, pharmacologic, endoscopic, and surgical methods. The choice depends upon the indications, availability, and expertise.

The pharmacological therapies are used when the lesions are extensive and cannot be treated with invasive therapies. The different pharmacological options include hormonal therapies (estrogen and progesterone) and octreotide.

The endoscopic and interventional radiographic techniques are used for treating vascular lesions. The choice of the appropriate therapy depends upon the availability and expertise. The options include electrocoagulation, laser photocoagulation, argon plasma coagulation (APC), injection sclerotherapy, hemoclip placement, endoscopic band ligation, and/or a combination of these.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Inflammatory bowel disease

- Meckel's diverticulum

- GI stromal cell tumor

- Polypoid lesions

- Dieulafoy lesions

- Angioectasia

- NSAID ulcers

- Haemobilia

- 
Haemosuccus pancreaticus

- Aorto-enteric fistula

# Prognosis

There are limited studies regarding the prognosis after a small bowel bleed. The in-hospital mortality is low, < 5%. Most of the complications occur in patients with comorbid conditions.

# Complications

- Heart failure

- Respiratory distress

- Myocardial infarction

- Infection

- Shock

- Death

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should be educated about the manifestations of GI bleed. They should be made aware of various presentations such as melena, signs of anemia such as fatigue, palpitations, and dyspnea. Counseling should be provided to limit the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and to quit smoking and alcohol.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients usually present to the primary physician with anemia-like symptoms and to the emergency with hematochezia. The management usually involves an interprofessional approach involving surgeons, gastroenterologists, radiologists, and intensivists, supported by nursing staff with training in gastrointestinal disorders.

CT enterography and CT angiography are useful in localizing the lesion. Endoscopic management involving EGD and push enteroscopy are helpful diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. Surgery is usually the last resort, and some refractory patients may need it for diagnosis and treatment.