**Incision and Drainage plus Word Catheter Placement**

A scalpel is used to perform a medial incision into the cyst/abscess after the application of a local anesthetic. The incision should not be performed on the outside of the labium majus due to the risk of fistula formation.

**Marsupialization**

A scalpel is used to perform an elliptical incision in the mucosa of the vulva and the underlying cyst wall. Care should be taken not to incise on the outer margin of the labium majus due to the risk of fistula formation. After draining the contents of the open cavity, the edges of the cyst cavity are sewn to the surrounding skin. This procedure forms a permanent open pocket, and the new outflow tract will shrink over time as it heals.

**Surgical Excision**

Excision of a Bartholin cyst or abscess may be required when office-based treatments fail. Possible complications include an increased risk of bleeding, post-surgical infection, pain secondary to scar tissue, and complications from general anesthesia. The surgical removal of Bartholin glands has not been shown to interfere with sexual function.

The surgeon uses a scalpel to perform an elliptical incision in the mucosa of the vulvar. Care is necessary not to incise into the cyst/abscess. Dissection using sharp and blunt methods separates the cyst/abscess from the surrounding structures. At the base of the cyst of the Bartholin gland is identified. The blood supply can be ligated using either cautery or suture. Then the cyst/abscess can be removed entirely. Utilizing a multi-layer closure, the space where the Bartholin cyst/abscess was is closed with interrupted sutures. The mucosal layer is closed with a simple running suture.

**Other Treatment Methods**

Carbon dioxide laser therapy can provide cyst vaporization in the outpatient setting. A study by Fambrini M et al. has concluded that CO2 laser vaporization is a safe and effective way to treat a Bartholin cyst completely.