The pathogenic mechanism is different in various conditions associated with hypomelanosis. Pathophysiology for a few are discussed below:

1. Pityriasis alba - There is no proven cause identified. Most studies suggest that UV light exposure has a causal relationship. UV radiation affects the function of active melanocytes, thereby altering the synthesis of melanin.

2. Pityriasis/Tinea versicolor - Malassezia is a common commensal of healthy skin transforms into a pathogenic (filamentous) form. Factors that contribute to pathogenic conversion are genetic predisposition, environment conditions (heat, humidity), oily skin, and application of oily creams or lotions.

3. Idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis [IGH] - The predominant involvement of sun-exposed areas in IGH raises suspicion of UV light as a primary factor affecting melanin synthesis. Few studies also suggest that IGH has a positive association with HLA DQ3, repeated microtrauma, and autoimmunity.****Histopathologic correlation like structural abnormalities of melanocytes, defective keratinocyte uptake, and decrease melanosomes help to understand the pathogenic mechanisms involved in developing hypopigmented macules in IGH.

4. Vitiligo - Multiple pathogenic mechanisms were proposed. T cell-induced melanocyte apoptosis, autoantibodies to components of melanocytes leads to decreased melanin production and thereby causing hypopigmentation.

5. Albinism - This is an autosomal recessive disease, associated with a deficiency of tyrosinase enzyme (the rate-limiting enzyme in melanin synthesis). The severity of clinical features depend on the mutation involved.

6. Halo nevus - Based on histopathological findings, the abundance of Langerhans cells in the area of the lesion is responsible for hypopigmentation. This condition is benign. Some also argue that the halo nevus condition has an association with vitiligo.

8. Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation - This condition is associated with trauma or exposure to chemicals (cleaning agents, chemicals used to remove tattoos, or for cosmetic purposes). The pathogenesis in this condition is related to melanocyte injury resulting in decreased melanin, which in turn causes hypopigmented or depigmented patches. Post-inflammatory conditions can also be associated with hyperpigmentation.

9. Ash leaf spots - These are the cutaneous findings associated with the neurocutaneous disorder. The presence of three or more ash leaf spots should raise suspicion of tuberous sclerosis.