Initially, if CML is suspected, cytogenetic testing, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), and/or reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to determine the Philadelphia chromosome, or BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein presence can be performed on peripheral blood.

At the time of diagnosis, laboratory blood testing should include a complete blood count with differential, chemistry panel, hepatitis panel, and a quantitative PCR for BCR-ABL1. A baseline bone marrow aspirate and biopsy should be performed with cytogenetics. Quantitative PCR should be repeated every three months after initiation of therapy. After BCR-ABL1 is less than or equal to 1% by international scale, quantitative PCR should continue for two years and then every 3 to 6 months after two years.

If chronic phase CML is established, additional evaluation includes determining the risk score using Sokal et al. or Hasford et al. risk calculations before determining first-line therapy.

- Sokal risk calculation uses age, spleen size, platelet count, and percentage of myeloblasts in peripheral blood to determine the risk group.

- Hasford risk calculation uses age, spleen size, platelet count, and percentage of blasts, eosinophils, and basophils in the peripheral blood to determine the risk group.

If accelerated or blast phase CML is diagnosed or progresses from chronic phase CML, additional testing should include flow cytometry to determine lineage, mutational analysis, and HLA testing if allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HCT) is being considered. Additional bone marrow cytogenetics and mutational analysis should be considered when there is a failure to reach response milestones or any sign of hematologic or cytogenetic relapse.