Early complications after total laryngectomy include bleeding, postoperative edema, and airway compromise. The patient should be carefully monitored for these complications in the immediate postoperative period. The patient should be on a postoperative ward familiar with laryngectomy care, as the stoma will need frequent suctioning in the first few days. Signs should be placed at the head of the bed and the room door indicating that the patient is a permanent neck breather and cannot be intubated orally or nasally.

A postoperative hematoma will present as a firm or fluctuant swelling and may result in purplish discoloration of the overlying skin; this should be promptly recognized and surgically evacuated. Wound infection is minimized using broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage for oral and oropharyngeal flora; this is continued until the drains are removed.

Pharyngocutaneous fistula is a complex and common complication of total laryngectomy due to dehiscence of the pharyngeal suture line. If left untreated, this can progress to pharyngocutaneous fistula. Initial presentation is typically between postoperative days four and five, with neck swelling and erythema of the overlying flaps. If drains are in place and functioning, saliva or mucopurulent fluid may be seen in the drain. The incidence of fistula formation depends on tension on the pharyngeal suture line, previous radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy, nutritional status of the patient, and the presence of a medical comorbidity such as diabetes.

Overall primary pharyngeal leak rates for non-radiated patients are near 10% but rise to greater than 30% in patients undergoing a post-radiation laryngectomy.

Late complications of total laryngectomy include pharyngoesophageal stenosis, stoma stenosis, and hypothyroidism.