The pathophysiologic effects of Mycobacterium tuberculosis on the eye can be characterized by the mode of infection. Patients who present with extraocular involvement (lids, lacrimal apparatus, adnexa, sclera, conjunctiva, or cornea) likely have a primary ocular infection as a result of direct contact with the eye.

Hematogenous spread of TB from pulmonary or extrapulmonary sites most commonly affects the uveal tract, consisting of the iris and ciliary body (anteriorly) and the choroid (posteriorly). Therefore, tubercular uveitis may present as anterior, intermediate, posterior, or panuveitis (granulomatous or non-granulomatous). The choroid receives the highest blood flow per unit of tissue in the body and creates an oxygen-rich environment analogous to the apex of the lung.M. tuberculosis-laden macrophages deposit in the first available capillary beds upon entering the eye, which leads to posterior uveitis as the most common presentation of ocular TB. Bacilli multiply and incite local inflammation, which manifests as a choroid tubercle.

Tubercles that coalesce, or grow large, are reclassified as a tuberculoma. The tubercles and tuberculoma, involve all layers of choroidal tissue and are surrounded by obliterated choroidal blood vessels. The lesion may liquefy into a subretinal abscess. The overlying retinal pigment epithelium remains normal in early stages, but later it can become disrupted with pigmentation, and the overlying retina may detach. Early intervention may completely resolve the lesion or result in an atrophic scar.

Hypersensitivity reactions involving the eye, such as phlyctenular disease or Eales disease, are theorized to be the result of an immunologic response to nonviable TB organisms in ocular tissue. The pathophysiologic mechanism is poorly understood.