The antacids reduce the acid reaching the duodenum by neutralizing the acid present in the stomach. The main therapeutic objectives are:

- Alleviating pain

- Relieving pylorospasms

- Avoid digestion and corrosion by acid chyme

The salts' mechanism of neutralization of acid varies, and each salt has a different mechanism with the ultimate goal of acid neutralization.

**Aluminum Hydroxide**

The formulation of aluminum hydrochloride and water results in the neutralization of the acid in the stomach. It is also known to inhibit pepsin activity.

Aluminum hydroxide is also useful in hyperphosphatemia due to its ability to bind phosphate in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and subsequently prevent the absorption of phosphate.

**Calcium Salts**

Calcium salts neutralize gastric acidity, resulting in increased gastric and duodenal bulb pH; they also inhibit pepsin's proteolytic activity if the pH is greater than 4 and increase lower esophageal sphincter tone. The calcium released from calcium carbonate is known to increase peristalsis in the esophagus, pushing the acid into the stomach and providing relief from heartburn symptoms. The calcium salts also form combined insoluble compounds with dietary phosphate and prevent the absorption of the latter.

The acid-neutralizing mechanism of the antacids is well understood, as mentioned above. In addition to this, other mechanisms add to the ulcer healing properties of this class of drugs. The exact mechanism is still unclear, but it is believed to be a combination of

- Ability to promote angiogenesis

- Bind to bile acids

- Inhibit peptic activity

- Suppress Helicobacter pylori growth