**Osteosarcoma**

Osteosarcoma is primarily managed surgically, with 1.5 to 2 cm margin excision.

**Fibrous Dysplasia**

Fibrous dysplasia bony expansion stabilizes as bony maturity is achieved; therefore, the timing of any intervention must be closely considered in light of the patient’s age. Patients with a milder degree of deformity will require no surgery as they adapt to the facial expansion. Surgical management consists of debulking and recontouring. While the bony skeleton is still growing, the fibrous dysplasia is in a more active phase, and therefore recurrence is more likely to occur. It is, therefore, preferable to wait until adulthood before surgical intervention is undertaken.

**Central Giant Cell Granuloma**

These lesions can be treated via surgical and non-surgical means. The surgery varies depending on the location, size, and aggressiveness of the lesion and can range from curettage to large-scale resection and reconstruction.

**Osteoma**

As a benign, slowly growing pathology, the management of osteoma is dependent on the symptoms it produces. When small and not causing any functional or aesthetic distortion, it can be monitored.

**Osteochondroma**

Treatment is dependent on the size and location of the osteochondroma. Generally, they required surgical excision, as their location in the joint impinges function. If the entirety of the condyle is involved, a condylectomy is performed and most commonly reconstructed with alloplastic total joint prostheses.

**Osteoblastoma**

The main obstacle to treatment for osteoblastoma is diagnostic certainty. Treatment is case-specific, depending on the aggressiveness of the tumor. Some cases are well managed with local curettage, whereas others undergo wide margin resections.