Chronic medical therapy includes several interventions. First, a short-acting beta agonist such as albuterol is integral for acute shortness of breath and bronchodilation. Anti-muscarinic agents such as tiotropium, ipratropium, and umeclidinium are beneficial as they dry secretions of goblet cells, decrease bronchoconstriction, and inhibit excessive fluid production in bronchi. Long-acting beta agonists like salmeterol and formoterol can be added, but should never be monotherapy. Necessary vaccinations for patients include **pneumococcal 13**-valent conjugate**vaccine**given initially and**pneumococcal vaccine**polyvalent given one year later and a yearly inactivated influenza vaccine. Smoking cessation is beneficial to combat the progression of the disease and decrease mortality. Long-term oxygen is a possible add-on therapy if the pO2 is < 55 or the oxygen saturation is < 88% on a six-minute walk test.

Acute exacerbations should be handled with oxygen, albuterol-ipratropium, and steroids.  Systemic glucocorticoid therapy with a short five-day course of prednisone provides benefit.  ABG is critical to assess for carbon dioxide retention. Chest X-Ray is essential to assess for pneumothorax or new infiltrate requiring antibiotics.  One may also want to explore triggers for these exacerbations such as respiratory infections.

Treatment of bullous emphysema is sometimes surgical. The general indications include moderate or severe dyspnea, a bulla occupying over 30% of the hemithorax and complications such as pneumothorax, infection, and hemoptysis. Where medical management is inadequate, surgical interventions such as lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) and lung transplantation are needed.

A further option for these patients is lung volume reduction surgery(LVRS).  This procedure involves a wedge excision of emphysematous tissue and is thought to provide benefit by reducing the size of hyperinflated lungs and therefore improving expiratory airflow in the nondiseased lungs.  Studies have shown that elastic recoil of the lungs may improve after LVRS, which in turn improves the expiratory airflow in the lungs. There are extensive criteria for LVRS including notable airflow obstruction on spirometry, evidence of air trapping on lung volume measurements, and CT findings of heterogeneously distributed emphysema.