It is difficult to determine the exact prevalence of uremia in the United States because patients with ESRD typically begin dialysis before developing uremic symptoms. Uremic symptoms typically arise once creatinine clearance is less than 10mL/min or 15mL/min in the case of diabetic patients. According to the United States Renal Data System (USRDS) 2009 data, the incidence and prevalence of advanced chronic kidney disease in the United States were reported to be 354 and 1665 per million people per year. In 2009, 116,395 patients started renal replacement therapy, accounting for an unadjusted incidence of 371 per million.

Japan has the highest prevalence of end-stage renal disease patients in the world, followed by Taiwan.

The majority of patients with ESRD are Whites (59.8%), and the remainder is African American (33.2%), Asian (3.6%), or Native American (1.6%). However, the incidence of ESRD among Black individuals is 3.7 times higher than the white population. Similarly, the incidence among Native Americans is 1.8 times greater than it is among whites.

Additionally, minority populations tend to initiate dialysis care later in the course of renal disease; usually once there is a significant decline in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). It is unknown, however, whether racial or ethnic background affects predisposition to developing uremic symptoms.

Men are 1.2 times more likely than women to develop ESRD, though women are 1.7 times more likely to delay the initiation of dialysis. Women are also more prone to developing uremic symptoms at lower creatinine levels due to the decreased amount of muscle mass and baseline serum creatinine levels.