Once the sensory receptor is activated, the GVA impulse travels through unipolar neurons to reach the CNS. When the GVA fiber reaches the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, it terminates on a second-order neuron. These neurons then ascend upwards into the brain for further processing. Normally, visceral afferent activity does not reach the level of consciousness. However, if the visceral afferent activity is pain related, it can reach the level of consciousness. Visceral pain is frequently felt in a remote area from the location of the organ; this is known as referred pain. The chart at the end of this article provides more information about where referred pain appears for specific organs.

The cranial nerves with GVA fibers are the facial nerve (CN VII), the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX), and the vagus nerve (CN X). The facial nerve has a small amount of GVA fibers and primarily uses sensory neurons in the geniculate ganglion.

The carotid sinus is found proximal to the internal carotid artery and possesses baroreceptors sensitive to blood pressure, while the carotid body is located at the bifurcation of the carotid artery with chemoreceptors that mean O2 levels. Fibers from both the carotid sinus and carotid body terminate on the solitary nucleus. Other areas that are innervated by GVA fibers of the glossopharyngeal nerve include mucosal membranes that line the inner surface of the middle ear, the Eustachian tube, the tonsils, posterior third of the tongue, and the posterior/upper surfaces of the pharynx. Fibers from these areas contain cell bodies in the inferior ganglion of CN IX and terminate in the nucleus of the solitary tract.

The vagus nerve has GVA fibers in the tongue, larynx, pharynx, trachea, esophagus, lungs, bronchi, stomach, heart, and intestines.