The Frank-Starling relationship describes how the left ventricle responds to increased preload under normal conditions. Figure 2 demonstrates this in a graphical representation. The transverse axis represents preload, often measured as LVEDV or LVEDP, and the longitudinal axis is stroke volume. As passive tension due to LVEDV or LVEDP increases, the active contraction is stronger, leading to higher stroke volume and cardiac output. This increased stroke volume is represented by moving along various points on the green curve and appears similar to the length-tension relationship (image 1). Changes in contractility cause the normal curve to shift up or down, meaning there is a difference in contractility for any given preload. Of note, there is a plateau of the Frank-Starling relationship at higher amounts of preload, which might be due to increases in sarcomere length that exceed the optimal value leading to decreases in the affinity of calcium for troponin. The plateau is also attributable to the use of LVEDP instead of LVEDV in clinical practice because of its ease of measurement. In a healthy heart, LVEDP is strongly correlated with LVEDV. Decreases in compliance, often seen in heart disease, can lead to high LVEDP at lower LVEDV. As a result, there is very little stretching to produce the length-dependent activation observed in the Frank-Starling relationship.

The Frank-Starling relationship is essential in understanding the underlying pathophysiology of heart failure.

Systolic heart failure results from a decrease in myocardial contractility, which induces a downward and right-sided shift in the stroke volume-LVEDP curve represented by the red curve. This change means that there is a reduction of maximal cardiac output for any given preload.  Initially, increases in sympathetic activity help compensate for the decline by increasing contractility and heart rate. Additionally, renal salt and water retention lead to increased preload, which increases systolic function via the Frank-Starling mechanism. However, the curve continues to shift as contractility is further diminished, eventually overwhelming the compensatory mechanisms.