Treatment of akinesia in adults revolves around controlling the progression of the underlying disease. The management of akinesia is symptomatic rather than curative.

- Drug therapy: In patients with PD, this mainly aims to modify/supplement the impaired dopamine release.

- Progressive resistance exercise is useful in improving symptoms of an improved static posturography, gait, and the general quality of living in patients with an akinetic rigid variant of PD.

- Surgical therapy: The most studied surgical procedure aiding in the management of akinesia is deep brain stimulation, typically used to improve dopamine secretion and improve symptoms of tremors, akinesia, and rigidity.

- Other procedures performed in severe cases include thalamotomy, pallidotomy, neural implants, and electrical stimulation.

The treatment for fetal akinesia is supportive mainly due to a dismal prognosis in a live birth. Resuscitative measures are initially employed to combat pulmonary hypoplasia. Medications like sildenafil and iloprost to control raised pulmonary pressures are initially used. They can still be converted to a less life-sustaining comfort care approach after adequate discussions with the parents. Antimicrobials may be required. Prolonged parental nutrition is often needed in these patients due to malrotation of gut, short-gut syndrome, and impaired swallowing. Central nervous system anomalies like seizures and endocrine disorders like hypothyroidism need treatment with anticonvulsants and thyroid hormone replacements.