**Classic SPS**

Classic SPS is a condition with an insidious onset and gradual progression over few months. It usually starts with rigidity and stiffness of the trunk muscles, specifically in the thoracolumbar region, due to continuous contraction of both abdominal and paraspinal muscles. Patients describe difficulties bending and turning, feeling that they walk like a “tin-man.” Later, the rigidity spreads to proximal upper and lower extremities.

Due to common psychiatric comorbidities, SPS is being misdiagnosed for a functional neurological disorder or a primary psychiatric condition. Patients usually have diurnal fluctuations of symptoms, worse with physical and emotional stress, cold weather, and infection. Distal and facial muscles are spared until later in the disease course. The frequency and duration of painful spasms vary. In some cases, severe spasms can last for hours ("status spasticus"), often requiring an emergency room visit for treatment intravenous muscle relaxants. In rare cases, respiratory muscles can be involved.

**Partial SPS Variants**

Stiff limb syndrome presents with isolated limb spasms and mostly spared trunk muscles. Abnormal posturing of the distal limb can resemble dystonia. Stiffness can eventually involve other muscles, but it remains most severe in one limb. In stiff trunk syndrome, spasms involve only axial musculature, sparing extremities. Rarely extraocular abnormalities with oscillopsia, opsoclonus, and nystagmus were reported.

**Paraneoplastic SPS**

It was described by some authors that paraneoplastic SPS demonstrates more significant stiffness in the neck and upper extremities. These patients usually show a faster response to therapy and significant clinical improvement once their malignancy is removed.

**Progressive Encephalomyelitis with Rigidity and Myoclonus**

PERM is a more severe variant of SPS, and it is characterized by relapsing-remitting course and more extensive involvement of different parts of the CNS, including the brainstem. This results in decreased consciousness or altered mentation, extraocular muscle dysfunction, ataxia, and autonomic failure.