Biosafety guidelines are a set of policies, rules, and procedures necessary to observe by personnel working in various facilities handling microbiological agents such as bacteria, viruses, parasites, fungi, prions, and other related agents and microbiological products. Institutions requiring strict adherence to these biosafety guidelines include clinical and microbiological laboratories, biomedical research facilities, teaching and training laboratories, and other healthcare institutions (e.g., clinics, health centers, hospital facilities). These guidelines are intended to provide proper management and regulation of biosafety programs and practices implemented at all levels of the organization.

Essential components of the biosafety guidelines contain some or all the following, depending on the facility: bio-risk assessment and identification; specific biosafety measures, which cover the code of practice, physical plant such as laboratory design and facilities, equipment acquisition and maintenance, medical surveillance, staff training, safe handling of chemicals, with fire, radiation and electricity safety, among others. Additional components may be included, such as commissioning and certification guidelines for the facilities.

Biosafety guidelines must be made clear, practical, and suitable for each facility and must be available for easy reference by all staff, must be reviewed, and updated regularly. While it provides guidance in the application of biosafety practices, this technical guide cannot solely ensure a safe working environment without the commitment of each person to adhere adequately to the biosafety guidelines at all times. Continuous research on biosafety can improve the development of future guidelines.