Understanding the function and anatomy of the skin and its appendages is important to thoroughly appreciate the applications of ablative laser therapy. As the body's largest organ, the skin can be divided into several distinct layers, including the epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis:

- The **epidermis**is an epithelial layer derived from the ectodermal germ layer of the embryo. The layers of the epidermis, from deep to superficial, include:
- Stratum basale is a single layer of columnar cells, which are the only layer to undergo mitosis in the epidermis. Cells will migrate upward from the basal layer until they are ultimately shed from the skin surface.
- Stratum spinosum consists of eight to ten layers of irregularly shaped cells with prominent intercellular bridges, known as desmosomes, giving this layer a spiny appearance under a microscope.
- Stratum granulosum is where the process of keratin formation occurs and where cells are arranged in a sheet of two to four layers filled with granules known as keratohyalin as well as small bodies of glycophospholipids.
- Stratum lucidum is a layer of flat keratinocytes closely packed and clear, with typically absent nuclei. This layer is often absent in thin skin (i.e., around the eyelids) and is most prominent on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet.
- Stratum corneum is the most superficial layer of the epidermis and consists of a very thin squamous layer mostly comprising skin cells that are dead and are shedding. This layer is replenished continually by the deeper layers of the epidermis, filled with keratin, and moved to the skin's surface—the stratum corneum functions as a barrier to water, physical trauma, and other environmental threats.

- The **dermis**is a relatively dense and vascular connective tissue layer that may average more than 4 mm in thickness. It is divided into a thick reticular layer on the deep aspect and a thinner papillary layer on the superficial surface.
- Reticular layer: This deeper layer has a thick network of fibers of mostly collagen and elastin. It serves as a layer of attachment for numerous skeletal and smooth muscle fibers and contains many somatic sensory receptors and hair follicles, and other skin glands.
- Papillary layer: The presence of dermal papillae composed of loose connective tissue and thin collagen and elastin fibers is evident in the papillary layer of the dermis. These are responsible for forming frictional ridges in the skin, which are important to the structure of fingerprints.

- The **hypodermis**is the subcutaneous layer, which is not strictly part of the skin but lies deep to it. It contains mostly loose fibrous and adipose tissue, and it is responsible for carrying the major blood supply and innervation to the skin.

**Laser Basics**

Within the ablative laser category, the two major lasing media are CO2 and Er:YAG, with therapeutic options being further subdivided into non-fractionated and fractionated ablation. Non-fractionated, or "full field," lasers provide treatment over the entire targeted area of skin instead of fractionated lasers, which target therapy to specific fractions or columns of skin within the targeted area, thereby minimizing the risk of adverse effects and hastening recovery. Ablative lasers vaporize tissue and are generally considered more aggressive therapies; they produce more dramatic outcomes compared with nonablative lasers, which produce less striking improvements but leave the epidermis otherwise intact. Nonablative lasers are beyond the scope of this review but can be useful to minimize the appearance of less prominent rhytides and dyspigmentation without a significant recovery period.

A laser light emits photons at a particular wavelength, CO2 at 10,600 nm and Er:YAG at 2,940 nm, which will be absorbed by the target tissue's chromophores, namely water and melanin. Laser is an acronym that stands for light amplification by the stimulated emission of radiation; true laser light is collimated (all waves are parallel), coherent (all waves are in phase), and monochromatic (all waves have the same frequency and wavelength). The goal is to ensure adequate but safe depth of penetration of the laser and delivery of sufficient energy to the targeted tissues while minimizing heat transfer to adjacent structures.

Energy delivery to tissues is directly correlated to the power of a laser, measured in watts. Power density or fluence is the energy delivered per unit area (joules/cm2) and must be sufficient to achieve the desired effect while minimizing tissue damage.

The depth of penetration of light energy is generally correlated with increasing light wavelengths. Carbon dioxide lasers generally produce a 20 to 60 μm depth of vaporization on the first pass compared with Er:YAG lasers that produce a 3 to 5 μm depth of vaporization on the first pass, depending on the settings used.

**CO2 Ablative Lasers**

The application of laser ablation to facial rejuvenation began with the use of a continuous wave CO2 laser.

Carbon dioxide lasers are thought to produce contraction of the skin immediately by denaturing collagen fibrils and subsequently by stimulating the production of new collagen. Studies have demonstrated improvement in rhytides by up to 90% using CO2 laser ablation.

The discomfort associated with CO2 laser therapy often requires local anesthetic with additional sedation, anxiolytics, and possible oral analgesia, whereas a topical anesthetic alone is often sufficient for treatment with Er:YAG lasers.****Photodamage is less severe in individuals with dark skin, but laser-induced dyspigmentation is a major concern for these individuals. For this reason, non-fractional CO2 laser use is not recommended for Fitzpatrick skin phototypes IV or higher.

Fractional ablative laser therapy was first available for CO2 lasers in 1998.

**Er:YAG Ablative Lasers**

The erbium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet laser was developed in the 1990s and produces laser light at a wavelength of 2,940 nm. The chromophore is water, similar to the CO2 laser; however, energy absorption is 12 to 18 times greater. Re-epithelialization of the epidermal layer occurs more rapidly when compared with CO2 lasers, in approximately five days and with erythema persisting only 3 to 4 weeks after treatment.

The Er:YAG laser has a similar mechanism of action to traditional CO2 lasers but typically has less skin tightening effect.

Topical anesthetics are generally sufficient for Er:YAG laser procedures, with local anesthesia available as a contingency plan if needed.

Fractional delivery of Er:YAG laser energy was developed and applied in a similar fashion to that of CO2 lasers. Cosmetic outcomes were found to be similar to traditional, non-fractional Er:YAG laser delivery.