Historically, the decision-making process in the management of patients with coronary artery disease, including medical management, percutaneous coronary intervention, as well as referral for coronary artery bypass surgery, has been the sole responsibility of the cardiologist. The management of coronary restenosis is complex and challenging; research shows that an interprofessional heart team results in the best clinical outcomes. The heart team for coronary revascularization can include, the interventional cardiologist, the cardiovascular surgeon when necessary, intravascular imaging specialists, and the primary cardiologist. Some patients with complex lesions not suitable for percutaneous treatment will ultimately benefit from coronary artery bypass surgery, and the presence of a cardiovascular surgeon in the team will facilitate that decision when indicated.

Patients with coronary in-stent restenosis often have other co-morbidities, and broadening the interprofessional team to include appropriate sub-specialists such as the expertise of an endocrinologist for diabetes mellitus, a pulmonologist for pulmonary disorders, or a nephrologist for chronic kidney disease is imperative. Individualized optimization of patients in the peri-procedural period leads to improved outcomes. Registered nurses and radiologic technologists who possess highly specialized critical care and technical skills are essential components of the cardiac catheterization laboratory team. In the post-procedural period, the role of the nurse case managers and social workers in addressing the social circumstances that could preclude patients' compliance with medications and necessary lifestyle changes cannot be over-emphasized. Their management must be coordinated with the clinicians.

Nursing staff can assess for medication adherence (especially DAPT) and also monitor for adverse events associated with medication therapy, reporting concerns to the team. Pharmacists must perform medication reconciliation and verify dosing; they may also offer suggestions for which antiplatelet medication may be most effective, in conjunction with the treating vascular surgeon or cardiologist. Managing restenosis, or potential restenosis, to optimal outcomes is a collaborative interprofessional effort for the entire healthcare team. [Level 5]