Like ACE inhibitors such as enalapril and direct renin inhibitors such as aliskiren, candesartan interferes with the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). Normally, renin is released by renal juxtaglomerular cells in response to decreased renal perfusion pressure, increased sympathetic tone, and decreased delivery of sodium chloride to macula densa cells in the distal convoluted tubule of the nephron. Angiotensinogen, released by the liver, is cleaved into angiotensin I by renin. Angiotensin I is converted into angiotensin II in the lungs by the action of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE). Angiotensin II has several effects, including:

- Binding to angiotensin II receptor type 1 in vascular smooth muscle, leading to vasoconstriction and increased blood pressure.

- Constricting the efferent arteriole in the kidney, preserving glomerular filtration rate when renal perfusion drops.

- Increasing the activity of the sodium-proton cotransporter in the proximal convoluted tubule of the nephron. This action promotes the reabsorption of sodium, water, and bicarbonate.

- Stimulating the secretion of aldosterone from the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone acts on alpha-intercalated cells in the collecting duct to promote proton secretion and urine acidification. Aldosterone also acts on principal cells in the collecting duct to drive sodium reabsorption and potassium excretion. Ultimately, this leads to water retention, increased intravascular volume, and increased blood pressure.

- Promoting the release of antidiuretic hormone from the posterior pituitary gland, which acts on principal cells to increase water reabsorption via aquaporin-2 channels. This action raises the intravascular volume and increases blood pressure.

Candesartan works by antagonizing the angiotensin II receptor type 1. This activity blocks the effects mentioned above of angiotensin II and leads to a reduction in blood pressure and fluid retention. Since candesartan only blocks the binding of angiotensin II to its target receptor, its action is independent of the upstream steps leading to angiotensin II biosynthesis. An angiotensin II receptor type 2 also exists, but it plays no role in maintaining blood pressure and normal hemodynamics. Furthermore, candesartan binds angiotensin II receptor type 1 ten-thousand times more strongly than it does type 2.