The Apidae family (honey bees, and bumblebees, among others) are usually not aggressive and only sting when threatened or provoked. However, there is a subset of “Killer Bees” or “Africanized bees” that are very defensive, often aggressive, and tend to swarm. These Killer Bees were introduced in Brazil in the 1950s but have since spread to other areas in South and North America (Southwestern United States). They are an invasive species and account for many deaths associated with bee stings. The Apidae family uses barbed stingers, which often remain attached to the skin after a single sting.

The Vespidae family (wasps, yellow jackets, hornets) are known to be more aggressive than their Apidae relatives. They are found in all 50 states. They can be classified as solitary or social wasps. Social wasps, including the yellow-jacket and hornet, commonly make larger nests in the ground (yellow jacket) or shrubbery/trees (hornet). Solitary wasps (mud wasps) usually make smaller nests in areas such as the sides of windows. Unlike the Apidae, the Vespidae family does not have a barbed stinger and hence, can sting multiple times.

The Formicidae family includes all ants. Most ants bite with pincer-shaped mandibles; however, similar to the Apidae and Vespidae, some ants have developed the ability to sting with stingers in their abdomens. Fire ants (Solenopsis) are aggressive species that use their pincer mandibles to latch on to their target and then use their stinger to administer multiple doses of venom. These ant colonies are most commonly found in the southeastern United States but are spreading fast and becoming more common in border areas. Other species in the Formicidae family also use stingers but are not found in the United States, so these are not included in this discussion.

It is important to be aware that bee venom is also used in apitherapy. The venom is often applied to the eye or skin and can result in an allergic or anaphylactic shock.