Most of the lash conditions are diagnosed by clinical examination: the relevant findings have been presented above.

In the presence of trichiasis, a careful examination of the eyelid margin, the tarsal conjunctiva, the fornix, the bulbar conjunctiva, and the cornea is vital to exclude some of the more serious conditions which may initially present just with trichiasis.

**Trichiasis with Evidence of Lash Loss**

Examine the eyelid margin under the biomicroscope for vessels, ulceration, plaques, irregularities which may indicate eyelid malignancy (basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma).

**Trichiasis with Evidence of Lash Loss and Thickened Eyelid**

Beware the sebaceous carcinoma which can present like a chalazion, vague lid thickening or with loss of lashes as well as trichiasis. Here a full-thickness specimen of the eyelid is sent fresh to the pathologist for special stains and immunohistochemistry.

**Trichiasis with Conjunctival Scarring**

Examine the tarsal conjunctiva and the fornix for scarring and symblepharon. Trichiasis can be the first presentation of mucous membrane pemphigoid (MMP) disease.

**Trichiasis with Conjunctival Scarring, Entropion, Corneal Opacification**

Advanced stage trachoma will present with frank cicatricial entropion, corneal scarring, decreased vision, and conjunctival inflammation. The earlier stage of the disease will show follicular conjunctivitis with limbal follicles and limbal neovascularization.

**Madarosis**

Always examine the area of madarosis for underlying growth/thickening/ulceration/vascularization which may be indicative of a malignancy.