Neurosarcoidosis should be considered in patients with sarcoidosis who develop neurologic abnormalities. However, the index of suspicion is lower and thus much more difficult in cases where a patient is not known to have sarcoid but has neurologic abnormalities. Unfortunately, there is no diagnostic marker for neurosarcoidosis.

If neurosarcoidosis is suspected, it is important to assess for signs of systemic diseases, such as the skin, lymph nodes, and lungs. Tests to conduct include ophthalmologic exam (including optical coherence tomography), nasal/sinus examination, chest x-ray (for perihilar lymphadenopathy), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) assay (not specific), and in rare cases a magnetic resonance, gallium or fluorodeoxyglucose emission tomographic scan for areas of inflammation that may be biopsied.

In evaluating peripheral neuropathy, it is important to rule out other common causes of neuropathy such as hyperglycemic states, vitamin deficiencies, kidney failure, and toxins. Thermal threshold testing may be used for small-fiber neuropathy.

Neurodiagnostic tests may help rule out other differentials such as infection and malignancy. The imaging of choice is a contrast-enhanced MRI. Typical findings are basal meningeal enhancement especially with contrast-enhancing lesions involving the hypothalamus, pituitary stalk, and adjacent tissues. (See MRI below). Gadolinium and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) are helpful to identify T2 enhancement of nerve roots, plexuses, and nerves. Active inflammation may be seen with meningeal or parenchymal enhancement. Parenchymal, meningeal masses, and hydrocephalus may also be seen with MRI.

As with other inflammatory states, ESR may be elevated. Creatinine kinase and aldolase may also be used to evaluate for myopathy. Liver function testing may also be abnormal, thereby reflecting the systemic involvement of sarcoidosis. If the pituitary-hypothalamic axis is affected, endocrine studies should be done. In recent years, F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) imaging has been used to evaluate for neurosarcoidosis. F-18 FDG PET/CT is gaining popularity in patients with suspected systemic sarcoidosis, especially with pulmonary or cardiac involvement. It can provide valuable information to the site of involvement by the disease and the selection of more surgically accessible sites for biopsy.

If the diagnosis remains uncertain, biopsies of the meninges, brain, or spinal cord may be indicated.