Voclosporin, similar to other CNIs, can cause acute and chronic nephrotoxicity. The major adverse effect of voclosporin is reduced glomerular filtration rate. Nephrotoxicity is usually dose-dependent and can be influenced by drug–drug interactions and intracellular concentrations. Acute nephrotoxicity can be caused by a reversible glomerular filtration rate (GFR) decrease. Chronic nephrotoxicity can be marked by nonspecific arteriolar lesions, focal and segmental and global glomerular sclerosis, patchy interstitial fibrosis, and tubular atrophy, which can progress to irreversible lesions.

Hypertension is a common adverse effect of voclosporin; it can be explained by the vasoconstrictive effect of voclosporin on afferent pre-glomerular arterioles. Hypertension also contributes to decreased eGFR and subsequent salt and water retention. Arterial hypertension is less severe with voclosporin when compared to other CNIs.

Voclosporin can cause neurotoxicity, including posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), delirium, seizure, coma, tremors, paresthesia, headache, and mental status changes.

Although clinically apparent acute liver injury with jaundice has not been classically linked to voclosporin, it can be associated with a low rate of transient serum enzyme elevations during treatment.

Electrolyte disturbances of hyperkalemia and hypomagnesemia can occur with the administration of calcineurin inhibitors, including voclosporin. Hypomagnesemia can be caused by reduced renal reabsorption of magnesium and chronic renal magnesium wasting. Due to the inhibition of calcineurin, there is reduced expression of Na-K-2Cl-cotransporter on the tubular epithelial cells, which plays a role in hyperkalemia. These electrolyte abnormalities may be responsible for voclosporin prolonging QTc interval. Dose-dependent QTc prolongation was noted after a single dose of voclosporin 0.5 to 4.5 mg/kg (which is up to 9-fold higher than the therapeutic dose).

The exact association between pure red cell aplasia (PRCA) and voclosporin is unknown. If a patient develops PRCA while on treatment with voclosporin, the discontinuation of voclosporin should be considered. Voclosporin may increase the risk of developing lymphomas and malignancies predominantly of the skin.

Other adverse effects reported with voclosporin are as follows, and these can be approached on a case-by-case basis, weighing the benefits and the risks.

- Diarrhea

- Nausea with vomiting

- Headache

- Anemia

- Cough

- Increased risk of infections such as upper respiratory tract infections

- Peripheral edema

- Alopecia

- Insomnia