Active tuberculosis is a multiorgan disease caused by primary infection or as a reactivation of latent tuberculosis. Accordingly, active tuberculosis could be primary tuberculosis or reactivation tuberculosis. Primary tuberculosis occurs when the immune system is unable to defend against the Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacterium (MTB) infection. Reactivation tuberculosis, as the name suggests, is the reactivation of contained mycobacterial infection. Reactivation Tb is the most common form of active tuberculosis, representing 90% of the cases. The lung is the most commonly involved organ, other organ systems commonly affected include the gastrointestinal system, the musculoskeletal system, the lymphoreticular system, skin, liver, and the reproductive system.

The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that, annually, around 8 million people develop active tuberculosis globally, and nearly 2 million people die from the disease. Of every 10 people infected with M. tuberculosis, one may develop an active infection sometime in their lifetime. The WHO reported in 2017 that the estimated global incidence rate for tuberculosis has decreased by 1.5% each year since 2000. However, despite these substantial gains and drastic global efforts to eradicate tuberculosis, the disease still accounts for significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. Developing countries like India, Pakistan, the Philippines, China, South Africa, Indonesia, and Nigeria experience the highest morbidity and mortality rates. When combined, these countries accounted for 64% of all tuberculosis-related deaths in 2016, according to the WHO.