# Continuing Education Activity

Conjunctivitis, also informally known as "pink eye," makes up the majority of ophthalmologic disorders seen at primary care clinics. Patients present complaining of eye redness, which may or may not be accompanied by pain, itching, and discharge. Dilation of conjunctival blood vessels secondary to viral or bacterial infection, chemical exposures, or allergies results in the redness seen on the examination. While viral and allergic conjunctivitis occurs more frequently, bacterial conjunctivitis is responsible for increased morbidity and provides a more challenging clinical scenario for physicians. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis and explains the role of the healthcare team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of bacterial conjunctivitis.
- Summarize the appropriate history and physical exam findings of bacterial conjunctivitis. 
- Describe the treatment and management options available for bacterial conjunctivitis. 

- Explain the importance of communication among the inter-professional team concerning the initiation of antibiotic therapy and identify ways to affect the growing problem of microbial resistance positively.

# Introduction

Conjunctivitis, also informally known as "pink eye," makes up the majority of ophthalmologic disorders seen at primary care clinics. Patients present complaining of eye redness, which may or may not be accompanied by pain, itching, and discharge. Dilation of conjunctival blood vessels secondary to viral or bacterial infection, chemical exposures, or allergies results in the redness seen on the examination.

# Etiology

Patterns of spread for bacterial conjunctivitis include hand to eye, eye contact with fomite, and person to person through respiratory droplets.Haemophilus influenzae, followed by Streptococcus pneumoniae and Moraxella catarrhalis.Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae responsible for a smaller percentage of cases.Staphylococcus aureus is more commonly found in adults and the elderly but is also present in pediatric cases of bacterial conjunctivitis.Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).Pseudomonas aeruginosa is more likely to be the isolate from critically ill, hospitalized patients.Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis resulting in acute bacterial conjunctivitis.

# Epidemiology

Acute conjunctivitis of all causes is estimated to occur in 6 million individuals annually in the United States.

# Pathophysiology

Direct transmission of pathogens onto the conjunctiva leads to infectious conjunctivitis. Conjunctivitis can occur when the epithelial layer of the eye is compromised, or there is disruption in overall defense mechanisms. An immunocompromised state may also predispose to bacterial conjunctivitis.

# History and Physical

Patients with bacterial conjunctivitis often present complaining of redness, tearing, and discharge from one or both eyes.

Certain clinical features can indicate a bacterial origin to conjunctivitis; however, findings are often variable, and there is cross-over between conjunctivitis symptoms of different etiologies.

Classic physical examination findings of bacterial conjunctivitis are conjunctival erythema and purulent discharge.

# Evaluation

Laboratory and radiographic testing have limited application in the diagnosis and evaluation of bacterial conjunctivitis. However, conjunctival cultures are the recommended course in cases where ophthalmia neonatorum is suspected, or where copious purulent discharge makes the diagnosis of gonococcal or chlamydial infection more likely.

# Treatment / Management

Management of acute bacterial conjunctivitis centers around the decision to initiate antimicrobials based on the physician's clinical assessment and with the consideration of benefits of treatment, the natural course of the disease if left untreated, antibiotic resistance, and the philosophy of antibiotic stewardship. Several clinical features make the diagnosis of bacterial conjunctivitis more likely; however, the presentation remains variable. Distinguishing bacterial conjunctivitis from other etiologies can be difficult, and practitioners often err on the side of empiric antibiotic therapy.

The natural course of untreated bacterial conjunctivitis is the resolution of the infection within one week.

Recently, data has shown recorded emerging resistance to most classes of these drugs.Haemophilus influenzae have limited its usefulness. Topical polymyxin B/trimethoprim and several fluoroquinolones effectively manage most cases of acute bacterial conjunctivitis.Chlamydia trachomatis requires oral or intravenous erythromycin in addition to topical erythromycin for 14 days.

Follow up for acute bacterial conjunctivitis should be encouraged if there is no improvement in symptoms after one to two days.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for bacterial conjunctivitis includes viral and allergic conjunctivitis.

# Prognosis

The prognosis for uncomplicated bacterial conjunctivitis is good with complete resolution and rare adverse events with both antibiotic treatment and expectant management strategies.

# Complications

Complications from bacterial conjunctivitis are uncommon; however, severe infections can result in keratitis, corneal ulceration and perforation, and blindness.

# Consultations

Referral to an ophthalmologist is the recommendation in cases of vision loss, non-response to treatment, recurrent infections, corneal involvement, and severe pain or discharge.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients should receive education on the signs and symptoms concerning for complications of bacterial conjunctivitis. Contact lens wearers must be instructed to remove lenses until completion of the treatment course and resolution of symptoms. Transmission prevention is essential, with an emphasis on handwashing. Adolescents and adults with gonococcal or chlamydial infection should have counseling on safe sex practices and partner treatment.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Bacterial conjunctivitis provides a common and challenging clinical scenario for practitioners. The variability of presentations makes differentiating bacterial conjunctivitis from other etiologies difficult and has led to the over-prescribing of antibiotics.

Several studies have sought to define characteristics of conjunctivitis that make a bacterial origin more likely and have proposed these findings to improve the management of the condition.

Interprofessional consultation with pharmacists, infectious disease specialists, and ophthalmologists may provide information on local antibiotic resistance patterns and guide clinician therapy. The pharmacist should verify agent selection and dosing/duration, perform medication reconciliation to prevent any drug-drug interactions, and deliver patient counseling on the importance of medication compliance, reporting any concerns to the prescribing/order physician. Nursing can evaluate and assist in monitoring patient compliance, treatment progress, and adverse medication reactions on followup visits, or in the case of inpatients, as they administer the medications, and communicate to the prescriber any issues they encounter.

Ophthalmology referral is necessary in complicated cases, and communication with specialists may reinforce the physician's decision to start, or not to start, antibiotic therapy in uncomplicated cases.

Bacterial conjunctivitis requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V]