Body image involves two independent modalities

- A attitudinal component: the feelings that an individual has about their body size and shape

- A perceptual component: the accuracy with which an individual can judge the dimensions of their body or body parts

**Measuring the Attitudinal Component**

Assessment of the attitudinal component of body image has been more straight-forward than the perceptual component. Body dissatisfaction is the most frequently measured attitudinal component of body image. Commonly, psychometric tools are used to evaluate body dissatisfaction. Although a variety of techniques are available for the assessment of body dissatisfaction, figure rating scales have been the most commonly used tool. This type of scale typically includes a set of figures that vary in body size from being very underweight to very overweight. Participants are asked to choose a figure that represents their perceived actual body size, and also the figure that they would like to be (i.e., the ideal body size). The discrepancy between an individual’s perceptual and ideal body image represents body dissatisfaction. Fortunately, several quantifiable measures are available for body image assessment in children, adolescents, and adult.

Some measurements available for assessment of the attitudinal component of body image in children

- Kid’s Eating Disorders Survey

- Body Image Assessment Procedure for Children's (BIA-C)

- Body Image Scale

- body-esteem questionnaire

Some measurements available for assessment of the attitudinal component of body image in adolescents and adults

- Contour Drawing Rating Scale: a type of figure rating scale comprises of nine sub-figures. The participant is required to choose sub-figures that represents their current, ideal, and healthy body size.

- Multidimensional Body-Self Relations Questionnaire (MBSRQ): A validated; 69 item inventory consists of 10 subscales that assess multiple aspects of body image.

- Body Image Assessment (BIA): this is a type of figure rating scale comprised of nine sub-figures.

- Somatomorphic matrix (a computerized test)

- Body esteem scale

- Body-esteem scale for adolescents and adults

- Body-Image Ideals Questionnaire (BIQ)

- Self-Image Questionnaire for Young Adolescents (SIQYA)

- Attention to Body Shape Scale (ABS)

**Measuring the Perceptual Component**

Assessment of the perceptual component of body image has been more challenging than the attitudinal component. To date, several methods have been developed that classified into two general groups.

1- Depictive methods: the participant compares their own body to a visual or a 2D image, and include tasks such as

- The distorting mirror

- The distorted photograph technique

- Video distortion

- Template matching

2- Metric methods: the participant compares their own body to a physical length or a 1D standard, and include tasks such as:

- the moving caliper

- the image marking procedure

- the adjustable light beam apparatus

Computer Generated Imagery (CGI) is a new technology that has been used to generate standard stimuli and personalized 3D avatars that reflect changes in body shape based on BMI.

**Other Useful Measures**

Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI-3) is also helpful to assess body image. Three subscales of the EDI-3 are especially important for measuring body image. The body dissatisfaction subscale, the drive for thinness subscale, and the interoceptive awareness subscale.

Several other useful inventories available for clinical work include the body areas satisfaction test, the wishing well test, the distressing situations test, the body image thoughts test, and the body/self-relationship test.