Listed below are several important differential diagnoses to consider. Brief details are listed next to each diagnosis to help differentiate from stable angina - for specific details and diagnostic criteria for each differential diagnosis, please reference their designated articles.

**Cardiovascular**

- Acute coronary syndrome

- 
              
- Unstable angina: Detailed history is pertinent. Chest pain less likely to follow a predictable pattern, and the patient may even experience chest pain at rest.
              
              
- NSTEMI: Elevated cardiac enzymes with or without EKG changes.
              
              
- STEMI: Elevated cardiac enzymes with regional ST elevations noted on EKG.

- Myocarditis: Elevated cardiac enzymes with EKG changes.

- Pericarditis: Diffuse ST elevations noted on EKG with or without an elevation in cardiac enzymes. Chest pain is pleuritic and is often relieved with leaning forward.

**Gastrointestinal**

- Esophageal spasm: Temporal relationship to meals with or without dysphagia

- Gastroesophageal reflux disease: Temporal relationship to meals

**Pulmonary**

- Asthma: Abnormal lung sounds expected on the exam. Anticipate improvement in symptoms with pulmonary hygiene and inhaled beta-agonists.

- Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Abnormal lung sounds expected on the exam. Anticipate improvement in symptoms with pulmonary hygiene and inhaled beta-agonists.

- Pulmonary embolus: Chest pain pleuritic in nature. Typically, the presentation includes tachycardia and hypoxemia.

**Musculoskeletal**

- Costochondritis: Chest pain reproducible on the exam. History often reveals recent heavy lifting or exercise.

- Trauma: History reveals the mechanism of trauma. Imaging may reveal fractures.