**Conservative Treatment**

A cervical orthosis is only indicated for cervical facet fractures without significant subluxation, dislocation or kyphosis, or poor operative candidates. Typically these injuries occur due to a traumatic event and require some form of operative stabilization.

The use of high dose methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg bolus, followed by 5.4 mg/kg infusion) within 8 hours of presentation has classically been the standard of care for acute spinal cord injury after the National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Studies (NASCIS). However, in recent years, high-dose steroids have shown to increase respiratory infection rates and gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Steroids are still used today in the setting of cervical trauma, mainly for medicolegal issues, and at significantly lower doses.

Unilateral or bilateral facet dislocations are almost always treated with surgical management. For the facets to dislocate, the PLC must be injured, and instrumentation is required to stabilize the spine. Typically, stabilization is obtained by instrumentation of at least 1 level above and below the levels of injury. However, a longer fusion construct could be recommended when multiple levels are involved.

**Operative Treatment**

**Immediate Closed Reduction, then MRI and Surgical Stabilization**

- This procedure is done in the **awake**and**cooperative patient**with a unilateral or bilateral facet dislocation with neurological deficits. This is performed by inserting cranial tongs with axial traction by adding weights. The weight of traction depends on patient size and level of dislocation. Generally, the weight applied is 10 lbs (for the weight of the head) followed by an additional 5 lbs per level, with a component of cervical flexion and rotation to aid in reduction. For example, a C6 dislocation would require about 40 lbs of weight (10 lbs for the head + 30 lbs for the C6 level). More weight is added as needed, and the weight can not exceed 100 lbs. Serial neurological exams and plain lateral radiographs after the addition of each weight. If the neurological exam worsens, remove all weight, and emergent MRI must be performed. Always obtain MRI after reduction to determine the best approach for surgical stabilization.

**Immediate MRI, Followed by Open Reduction and Surgical Stabilization**

- Patients with facet dislocations accompanied by mental status change or who are uncooperative, and patients who fail closed reduction.****

**Anterior Open Reduction and Anterior Cervical Decompression and Fusion (ACDF)**

- Indicated when MRI demonstrates cervical disc herniation with significant anterior spinal cord compression.

- Open reduction performed using Caspar pins to distract vertebral bodies and adding rotation.

- It can be used for unilateral facet dislocations, not as effective in reducing bilateral facet dislocations.

**Posterior Reduction and Instrumented Stabilization**

- Indicated when unable to reduce by closed or anterior approach and no anterior spinal cord compression from a herniated cervical disc.

- Classically performed with lateral mass screws.

**Combined Anterior Decompression and Posterior Reduction or Stabilization**

- Indicated when cervical disc herniation is present that requires decompression in a patient that can not be reduced through closed or open anterior technique.

- The anterior approach first to perform discectomy and decompression. Then posterior approach to perform reduction and instrumentation.

**Deep Venous Thrombosis Prophylaxis**

- Patients have a high-risk factor for deep venous thrombosis (DVT)

- Immediate use of compression devices and starting chemical prophylaxis as soon as possible and deemed safe by operating surgeon

**Cardiopulmonary Management**

- Hypotension should be avoided to prevent hypoperfusion to the spinal cord.