Of all the neuromuscular blocking agents, vecuronium correlates with the lowest level of histamine release; however, there are still reports of life-threatening anaphylactic reactions occurring. Due to the excessive salivation that can occur with this histamine release, caution is necessary when administering vecuronium to patients with bronchospasm and asthma.

Electrolyte abnormalities such as severe hypocalcemia, hypokalemia, or hypomagnesemia may potentiate the effects of vecuronium. Other relative contraindications to the use of vecuronium include myopathy, obesity, and neuromuscular diseases, such as Eaton-Lambert syndrome and myasthenia gravis, as these conditions may prolong the drug’s effect.

Vecuronium use requires caution in patients with underlying cardiac disease that may be associated with slower circulation time. Patients with impaired circulation in certain cardiovascular disease or advanced age, or edema that results in increased volume of distribution, can result in delayed honest of muscle paralysis; clinicians should not increase the dosage in such instances.

Due to its clearance via the liver, vecuronium use merits caution in patients with liver failure or cirrhosis. Prolonged recovery from muscle paralysis may occur in patients with underlying liver disease. Caution is also necessary when administering vecuronium to renal failure patients, as hepatic elimination decreases in patients with uremia, which may cause accumulation of the drug’s active 3-hydroxy metabolite.

Caution is advised when administering vecuronium to patients with burns greater than or equal to 20% of their total body surface area. Resistance to the muscle paralysis caused by vecuronium may occur several days after the injury and persist for several months after wound healing.