Henry’s law is significant to aerospace medicine in several ways. The most apparent is that Henry’s law accurately describes the phenomena that result in decompression illness as well as affording the framework for the measures used to treat these conditions.

While the concept of Henry’s law can logically apply to both aerospace and undersea medicine, the manifestations of Henry’s law in flight do not perfectly correspond to those underwater. Specifically, manifestations such as decompression sickness directly tie to the absolute altitude achieved. While pressurization reduces the effects of decompression illness and can allow the pilot and other crew members to gradually acclimate to decreased air pressure, at higher elevations, even pressurized aircraft cannot fly safely due to the risk of supersaturation of inert gases in the bloodstream.

Current data suggests that a flyer in a pressurized cabin is less likely to experience decompression illness at an exposure equivalent of fewer than 18000 feet (5486 meters). In civilian and military aviation, the challenge of avoiding decompression illness tends to be higher in rotor wing, or helicopter, pilots, and crew. These aircraft have unique requirements that usually preclude cabin pressurization and thus are forced to fly at lower altitudes to avoid the effects of Henry’s law on human physiology.

Several techniques are effective in both the prevention and treatment of conditions at altitude related to Henry’s law. Breathing gases used in high altitude aircraft usually have a higher concentration of oxygen than at sea level to both prevent hypoxia and help promote denitrogenation; by removing nitrogen, the hope is to avoid supersaturation effects at altitude. This approach is also the premise behind placing oxygen masks on oneself during an airline emergency where the cabin pressure is compromised. Cabin pressurization is the other significant preventive measure to reduce the risk of decompression.

The ideal option for resolving symptoms of bubble formation while in flight is threefold. First, drop in altitude, ideally to sea level if possible. Second, oxygen should be used therapeutically to “blow off” nitrous gas. Finally, landing to permit evaluation by a flight surgeon is optimal to determine if further interventions are necessary. If symptoms persist or significant central nervous system manifestations occur, it is essential to immediately transfer the patient to a hyperbaric chamber to pressurize the gas surrounding the patient and dissolve nitrogen gas back into solution in the bloodstream.