Many different etiologies can precipitate this condition.

One of the most common traumatic causes is femoral neck fracture or dislocation of the femoral head from acetabulum. When these types of trauma occur, the blood supply to the head of the femur can be easily disrupted, leading to avascular necrosis. Osteonecrosis is the result in 15% to 50% of fractures of the neck of the femur and 10% to 25% of hip dislocations.

Chronic steroid use and excessive alcohol consumption represent the bulk of non-traumatic etiologies, contributing to more than 80% of them. Steroid-associated osteonecrosis represents the second most common cause of osteonecrosis overall, after trauma. Despite evidence demonstrating the correlation between steroid use and osteonecrosis, the exact pathophysiology is not clear and probably multifactorial. The cause is most likely an aggregate of factors such as fat emboli, fat cell hypertrophy leading to increased intraosseous pressure, endothelial dysfunction, hyperlipidemia, and abnormality of the stem cell pool of the bone marrow; all of which contribute to ischemia and subsequent necrosis.

Sickle cell disease can often precipitate osteonecrosis. The misshapen and rigid red blood cells impede blood flow leading to ischemia and bony infarction, with the femoral head being the most common site of osteonecrosis in these patients.

There are other less common, but still clinically important causes, one of which is Legg-Calve-Perthes. Legg-Calve-Perthes is idiopathic avascular necrosis of the femoral head that affects pediatric populations. Lack of blood supply causes necrosis of the femoral head leading to a deformity that puts the patient at high risk of developing osteoarthritis and/or losing range of motion (ROM). This disease progresses through four stages

- Initial/necrosis – when blood supply gets disrupted, and necrosis begins

- Fragmentation – when the body resorbs the necrotic bone and replaces it with woven bone that is weak and prone to breaking and collapse

- Reossification – when stronger bone develops

- Healed/Remodeling – when bone regrowth is complete, and shape becomes finalized (whether normal or abnormal, depending on the damage done during the fragmentation phase)

Vascular disease secondary to diabetes, as well as direct damage from cytotoxic agents have also been implicated in the development of femoral head osteonecrosis.