The spinal column is the principal support system of the body and comprises 33 vertebrae, with the spinal cord passing through the center of each vertebra. The spinal column is divided into five sections: cervical spine, thoracic spine, lumbar spine; sacral spine; and the coccyx.

Vertebrae themselves have several anatomical features, but they can be broadly classified into the portions anterior and posterior to the spinal cord for the sake of this review. The anterior portion contains the large, rounded vertebral body lined anteriorly by the anterior longitudinal ligament and posteriorly by the posterior longitudinal ligament. The posterior portion contains the spinous and transverse processes, vertebral arch, and the posterior ligament complex comprised of the facet joint capsules, the supraspinous ligament, the interspinous ligament, and the ligamentum flavum.

Between each vertebra are fluid-filled discs (the nucleus pulposus) surrounded by a tough ring of ligament fibers (the annulus fibrosus) that act as shock absorbers.

Several classification systems were used to categorize spinal fractures, with one of the most widely adopted being the three-column theory proposed by Francis Denis in 1983.

The anterior column contains the anterior portion of the vertebral body, the anterior longitudinal ligament, and the anterior annulus fibrosis.

The middle column contains the posterior portion of the vertebral body, the posterior longitudinal ligament, and the posterior annulus fibrosus.

The posterior column contains the posterior ligament complex, vertebral arch, and transverse and spinous processes.

In Denis' theory, injury to two or more columns is considered an unstable fracture to injure the spinal cord that lies within the spinal column. The purported benefit of spinal motion restriction is that by minimizing spinal motion, one can reduce the potential for secondary spinal cord injuries from unstable fracture fragments during extrication, transport, and evaluation of trauma patients.