In the era of cost curtailment in healthcare and the broadening of first access to healthcare in independent urgent care centers (as opposed to hospital emergency departments), it is important to be aware of the exceptions to Occam’s razor principle.

When an asthmatic returns for exacerbations time and again despite conventional therapy, it is important to recognize the pattern of recurrence or persistence. Broadening the suspicion and correlating with simple initial blood work like cell differential, ESR, CRP, and even IgE is worthwhile. Other organ involvement, like cardiomyopathy, renal disease, or GI symptoms, if present, should be tied together to a common unified diagnosis like EGPA. In a patient with eosinophilic asthma and multisystem involvement, discontinuation of leukotriene receptor antagonists should also be considered due to their potential role in pathogenesis. Prompt recognition and treatment are rewarding to the healthcare provider and immensely impactful to the prognosis and life expectancy in diseases like EGPA.

Finally, post-diagnosis and treatment, awareness of the likelihood of prolonged steroid dependence and, therefore, its adverse effects become essential. Periodic screening of glycemic status, bone density, fall prevention, and infection prevention becomes a routine care plan for the disease. An interprofessional team, including primary care providers, specialists, nurse practitioners, and pharmacists, assist in improving care. Prompt referral is imperative. Pharmacists evaluate appropriate dosing, check for drug-drug interactions, and provide patient education. Nurses administer treatment, monitor for side effects, provide patient and family education, and relay information to the team. All these disciplines coordinating as an interprofessional team, will enhance patient outcomes. [Level 5]