Von Willebrand disease (vWD) is a common bleeding disorder caused by quantitative or qualitative defects of the von Willebrand factor (vWF). The clinical management of vWD has evolved over the past few decades, but it continues to pose a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. In current practice, desmopressin is the treatment of choice for type 1 vWD because it corrects the FVIII/vWF levels.

Replacement therapy in the management of Von Willebrand disease has advanced over the past few years. Initially, cryoprecipitate was the commonly used form of replacement therapy and is currently no longer recommended in the United States or Europe. Since then, there has been a progression in the replacement forms of vWF, from crude preparations of plasma proteins to plasma concentrate mixtures that contain both von Willebrand factor and factor VIII (FVIII). More recently, the replacement therapy in vWD has transitioned from plasma-derived concentrates of vWF/FVIII mixture with higher FVII component to a recombinant vWF with a much lower concentration of FVII.

Desmopressin is regarded as first-line therapy in managing vWD in cases of acute bleeding and prophylactically before minor surgeries. However, it is imperative to understand the limitations of desmopressin. It can be limited by tachyphylaxis, and data correlating the biologic response to desmopressin with efficacy are limited. There are also concerns about metabolic adverse events such as hyponatremia with desmopressin administration. Physicians may prefer to use replacement therapy in certain high-risk individuals. Certain types of vWD have poor/minimal response to desmopressin. Desmopressin is also contraindicated for use in patients with vWD Type 2B or 3. Currently, there are no clear guidelines that are universally in place for the use of replacement therapy in the management of patients with vWD.

The most common indications for the use of the von Willebrand factor in clinical practice are listed below:

- Patients with vWD who do not respond or are minimally responsive to desmopressin

- Patients with vWD undergoing major surgery and procedures with high bleeding risk

- Patients with type 3 vWD; As a response to desmopressin is limited or absent in these patients

- Patients with certain variants of Type 2 vWD:

a) Subtypes 2B and 2 M wherein there is altered vWF-dependent platelet adhesion

b) Subtypes 2A wherein there are high-molecular-weight vWF multimer deficiencies or abnormalities

c) Subtype 2N wherein there is decreased  affinity for FVIII binding

- Patients with very severe type 1 vWD (vWF:RCo activity less than 10 IU/dL / FVIII activity less than 20 IU/dL)

- Some clinicians also prefer vWF replacement therapy in certain high-risk conditions like puparium, major surgery, in pediatric populations below two years of age, elderly patients with extensive comorbidities, patients at high risk for thrombosis (old age, cancer surgery, orthopedic surgery),

- Prophylactically before major surgeries or procedures in patients with acquired Von Willebrand syndrome type (AVWS)

- It can be used along with FVIII in patients with monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS) who have failed to respond to desmopressin.

- Indicated in children with Hemophilia (HA) who have previously failed immune tolerance induction with pure recombinant FVIII alone and is used along with FVIII concentrates;(Immune tolerance induction (ITI) protocols are particularly recommended for hemophilia A children who have developed an inhibitor against FVIII and is one of the most serious complications of substitutive treatment in hemophilia.)

- Secondary prophylaxis may be useful in patients with type 3 vWD with concomitant low FVIII levels who may experience frequent hemarthrosis, frequent and chronic epistaxis, development of chronic arthropathy, and recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding.