The exact causative agent for tropical sprue is unknown. Although there has been significant research and studies, little is known about the etiology of tropical sprue. It may be an interaction of multiple factors.

The factors that seem to be responsible for the pathogenesis include intestinal damage due to a toxic agent, a deficiency, or an infection.

- Toxins: There has been no evidence found in multiple studies on any toxin being the causative agent. There was a hypothesis concerning the rancid fats as a possible cause. However, there is not enough evidence to support this.

- Deficiency: It has been hypothesized that vitamin or mineral deficiency could be causing the disease. However, studies have shown that these are secondary to the disease and not the primary event causing the disease.

- Infection: Studies have suggested infection to be causative for the disease. The factor favoring this is a long latent period between the exposure and the onset. This rules out toxins or a deficiency state.

There has been no definitive evidence on the exact agent causing the disease. Studies have proposed bacterial and viral infections causing the disease.

- Bacterial infection: The symptomatic resolution with anti-bacterial agents suggests that bacterial infections may be causative. However, contradictory to this, stool cultures from patients to look for bacterial infections have not shown any positive results.

- Viral infection: The viral illnesses cause enterocyte injury. They usually cause acute, self-limiting diarrhea but not chronic diarrhea lasting months, as seen in tropical sprue. Viruses like Reovirus, when inoculated into monkeys, caused diarrhea lasting up to weeks. The virus has not been successfully isolated from tropical sprue patients so far. Although evidence supports viral illness to be the causative agent, there is a need to develop techniques to isolate these agents.