The risk of complications from this procedure can be as high as 20%. Most complications, however, are minor and include the following:

1. Hematoma formation

1. Nerve injury or dysfunction has been reported in up to 35% of cases with median nerve dysfunction reported in 10% to 25% of cases in the form of carpal tunnel syndrome (positive Phalen test). During this procedure, the highest risk of injury appears to be to the dorsal sensory branch of the ulnar nerve and the sensory branch of the radial nerve.

2. Vascular injury: This should be addressed during the procedure by involving the vascular surgical team.

3. Infection: Certain factors can increase the risk of postoperative infection such as the age of the patient (the elderly population is at higher risk), immunocompromised patients, patients suffering from kidney disease or diabetes, and smoking patients. The rate of infection can be lowered by the use of prophylactic antibiotics preoperatively.

4. Nonunion can be suspected if the patient continues to have wrist pain post-operatively. Radiographs can be taken to investigate this further if suspicions are high. The risk of non-union is low as fusion rates are more than 90%.

5. Tendon injury, most commonly injury to the extensor policis longus tendon, is due to its superficial anatomical location; however, in rare cases, the flexor tendons can also be injured.

6.Tendon irritation from the plate or fracture of the metalwork

7. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy

8. Neuroma formation

9. Distal radioulnar joint arthritis

10. Iliac crest donor site complications (if used for harvesting bone graft): hematoma, infection, lateral cutaneous femoral nerve injury, prolonged discomfort

11. Hardware complications, such as screw fracture, plate loosening or plate fracture