**General Screening Criteria**

A screen must meet certain established criteria before it can be implemented for mass screening. The original guidelines were articulated by the World Health Organization based on the Wilson and Jungner 1968 publication, which has been expanded in follow-up discussions to incorporate the implications of genomic testing.

**Medical Ethics**

The U.S. newborn screening program attempts to uphold the core pillars of medical ethics: beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy. The benefit of newborn screening is clear: early identification of affected infants provides an opportunity to initiate life-saving or life-altering treatment.

**Resource Allocation**

As in all healthcare paradigms, the scarcity of resources forces a strategic plan in utilization. The cost of this mass screening program must be considered against its potential benefits. Factors to consider include the following: prevalence of the disease, cost of testing materials and equipment, the expense of follow-up investigations, the impact of early intervention, and funding for continued research. One example of this cost-benefit balancing act is in the selection of screening cut-off values; designing a less sensitive screen would result in fewer false-positives but at the risk of missing a true disease.

**Technological Advancement**

As technology continues to push the boundaries of the information providers can easily and inexpensively obtain, healthcare teams must meet these advancements with conscientious consideration for the ethical implications.

**Neonatal Intensive Care Unit**

Infants in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) require additional considerations regarding newborn screening. Premature newborns have immature enzymes and metabolic instability, which result in more false-positive results.