Absorption of glucose into cells depends on specific transporters. Some require sodium (Na+) as a cotransporter, while others do not. The Na+-dependent transport of glucose uses the Na+/K+ ATPase pump to generate a negative potential gradient that drives the passive transport of Na+ into the cell.

Once glucose enters these cells, Na+-independent glucose transporters bring glucose into the blood. Na+ independent transport of glucose refers to specialized transporters that vary in type depending on specific tissues.

Glucose homeostasis in the plasma depends on the balance of the hormones glucagon and insulin. Both hormones get released from the pancreas (insulin from beta-cells found in the islet of Langerhans and glucagon from alpha cells) in response to plasma glucose levels.

Insulin exerts its effects through binding to insulin receptors, which possess tyrosine kinase activity, and activation of a series of downstream events beginning with insulin substrate-1 (IRS-1) culminates in the increased expression of GLUT4.

The major target organ for glucagon is the liver, which binds to a specific G protein-coupled receptor, expressed abundantly in the liver and kidney and, to a lesser extent, in other tissues, including the heart, adipose, pancreas, and brain. Glucagon stimulates the production of glucose in the liver predominantly by glycogenolysis.

Insulin inhibits glucagon release from the pancreas and decreases glucagon gene expression, thereby attenuating its biosynthesis.

Importantly, plasma glucose levels undergo regulation through a few key pathways: glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, and glycogenesis/glycogenolysis. Insulin can affect glycolysis and gluconeogenesis through dephosphorylation of the phosphofructokinase-2 enzyme (PFK-2), which increases levels of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (F-2,6-BP).

Other hormones that influence glucose homeostasis include incretins such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP). Incretins potentiate the release of insulin in response to oral glucose. Other hormones that influence glucose metabolism include pancreatic amylin, glucocorticoids (increase insulin resistance and gluconeogenesis), thyroid hormones (promote glucose absorption, glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis), growth hormones (inhibit glucose uptake into cells), and epinephrine.

Epinephrine (also called adrenaline), a catecholamine secreted by the adrenal medulla, stimulates glucose production (glycogenolysis) and decreases glucose use, thereby increasing blood glucose concentrations. It also stimulates glucagon secretion and inhibits insulin secretion by the pancreas.

Diabetes mellitus is a disorder in regulating blood glucose levels and is associated with genetic and lifestyle factors, such as family history, race, obesity, and diet. Diabetes resulting from other causes include monogenic diabetes (such as neonatal diabetes), maturity onset of diabetes in the young (MODY), gestational diabetes, pancreatic insufficiency, or drug-induced. High blood glucose levels characterize the disorder due to insulin resistance and ultimate insulin deficiency.

Diabetes occurs most commonly in two main types: type 1 or type 2.

The most practical markers of β-cell autoimmunity are circulating antibodies, which have been detected in the serum years before the onset of hyperglycemia. Almost 85% of type 1 diabetes patients have circulating islet cell antibodies, most of which are directed against β cell glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD).

Type 2 diabetes occurs in the majority of patients with weight gain. This type is more strongly associated with obesity, progressive metabolic dysregulation, and insulin resistance.

In diabetes, glucose stays elevated outside of the cells resulting in starved cells despite high glucose levels in plasma.