Mitotic nondisjunction can cause somatic mosaicism, with the chromosome imbalance only reflected in the direct offspring of the original cell where the nondisjunction occurred. This can cause some forms of cancer, including retinoblastoma.

Meiotic nondisjunction is of greater clinical significance since most aneuploidies are incompatible with life. However, some will result in viable offspring with a spectrum of developmental disorders.

**Autosomal Trisomies**

Patau syndrome: Trisomy of chromosome 13

- Clinical Features: Rocker-bottom feet, microphthalmia (abnormally small eyes), microcephaly (abnormally small head), polydactyly, holoprosencephaly, cleft lip and palate, congenital heart disease, and severe intellectual disability. Life expectancy is seldom longer than one year.

Edwards syndrome: Trisomy of chromosome 18

- Clinical Features: Rocker-bottom feet, low set ears, micrognathia (abnormally small jaw), clenched hands with overlapping fingers, congenital heart disease, and severe intellectual disability. Life expectancy is normally less than one year.

Down syndrome: Trisomy of chromosome 21

- The most common viable aneuploidy.

- Clinical Features: Single palmar crease, flat facies, prominent epicanthal folds, duodenal atresia, congenital heart disease, Hirschsprung disease, intellectual disability. Notably increased risk to develop Alzheimer's disease or leukemia. Life expectancy is about 60 years.

**Sex Chromosome Trisomies**

Klinefelter Syndrome: An extra X chromosome in a male (47, XXY)

- Clinical Features: Tall, long extremities, gynecomastia, female hair distribution, testicular atrophy, developmental delay.

Triple X syndrome: An extra X chromosome in a female (47, XXX)

- Clinical Features: Phenotypically normal, some with unusually tall stature.

- X chromosomes are inactivated as Barr bodies. Therefore, 2 extra Barr bodies are seen, though no clinical abnormalities result.

XYY syndrome: An extra Y chromosome in a male (47, XYY)

- Clinical Features: phenotypically normal, unusually tall stature.

- Most cases go undiagnosed due to a lack of clinical abnormalities.

**Sex Chromosome Monosomies**

Turner Syndrome: Monosomy of X chromosome in a female (45, X)

- The only chromosomal monosomy that is compatible with life.

- Clinical Features: Unusually short stature, shield chest, congenital heart disease, webbed neck, horseshoe kidney, ovarian dysgenesis.

- The most common cause of primary amenorrhea. No Barr bodies are seen.