As lung pathology remains a significant cause of morbidity and mortality nationwide, understanding of basic lung physiology and its ties to pathology is essential for the clinician. Dysfunction of the pulmonary system ultimately leads to hypoxia. There are four classifications of hypoxia etiology: hypoventilation, right-to-left-shunt, V/Q mismatch, and diffusion limitations.

**Hypoventilation:**

Any disease that decreases the ventilatory rate of alveoli ultimately results in hypoventilation. Several causes include obesity, CNS depressants, rib fractures, neurologic defects, and kyphoscoliosis.

**Right-to-left-shunt:**

The right-to-left shunt is when deoxygenated blood bypasses the lungs from the right heart to the left heart. This situation can occur both anatomically and physiologically. Anatomical causes of anatomical shunts include congenital heart malformations (i.e., tetralogy of Fallot) and arteriovenous malformations. Physiologic shunts occur when there is blood flow to an unventilated alveolus; this occurs in instances where air cannot diffuse across the alveolus, such as acute respiratory distress syndrome or pleural effusions.

**V/Q mismatches:**

V/Q mismatches occur when blood flow and ventilation are mismatched, as the name implies. Ideally, ventilation and perfusion match, for proper gas exchange. Normal V/Q ratio is 0.8. A high V/Q ratio occurs when ventilation exceeds perfusion. The classic example of this would be in a pulmonary embolism, where perfusion is completely blocked to a segment of lung, while ventilation remains unaffected. A low V/Q ratio occurs when there is normal blood flow to a region of the lung, but ventilation is blocked. An example of this would be in COPD, where the alveolus’ surface area is decreased, causing inadequate gas exchange.

**Diffusion limitations:**

Diffusion limitation occurs when oxygen cannot effectively move from the alveoli into the pulmonary capillaries. This condition can take place when there is the destruction of the alveoli (i.e., COPD), or in instances where there is destruction or thickening of the lung parenchyma (i.e., interstitial fibrosis). These commonly occur in conjunction with V/Q mismatches.