Fexofenadine comes in multiple different forms. It may be administered orally as a tablet, oral suspension (syrup), or orally disintegrating tablets. Fexofenadine may be used in adults and children, though the dose for children is lower than that of adults (up to 60 mg vs. 180 mg daily PO).

ODT tablets are branded and should be placed on the tongue, allowed to dissolve (with or without water) then swallowed. Patients should not chew and should take the medication before eating or drinking.

- ODT tablets are typically used in pediatric patients, and dosing is 30 mg PO BID for ages 6 to 12 for seasonal allergic rhinitis and chronic urticaria.

**Adult Dosing**

- The dose for seasonal allergic rhinitis and chronic urticaria is 60 mg PO BID or 180 mg PO daily.

- According to the American college of allergy, asthma & immunology (ACAAI) and American academy of allergy asthma & immunology (AAAAI) recommendations, a second-generation antihistamine such as fexofenadine is safe and effective. It is considered one of the first-line agents for treating chronic urticaria.

**Pediatrics Dosing**(differs based on age and indication)

- Seasonal Allergic Rhinitis****

- 
              
- Not approved for use in children less than two years of age
              
              
- Children 2-12 years old: 30 mg PO BID
              
              
- Children older than 12 years old: 60 mg PO BID or 180 mg PO daily

- Chronic Urticaria

- 
              
- Not approved for use in infants less than six months old
              
              
- Children 6 months to 2 years old: 15 mg PO BID
              
              
- Children 2-12 years old: 30 mg PO BID
              
              
- Children older than 12 years: 60 mg PO BID or 180 mg PO daily

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**The product manufacturer has not reported information on dose adjustment based on hepatic function.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**(creatinine clearance less than 80 ml/min).

- Adults should take 60 mg PO daily.

- Dosing for pediatric patients with renal impairment varies by age as follows:

- 
              
- Children 6 months to 2 years old: 15 mg PO daily
              
              
- Children 2-12 years old: 30 mg PO daily
              
              
- Children older than 12 years: 60 mg PO daily
              
              
- ESRD decreases nonrenal transporter function, as evident by a 63% decrease in clearance and a 2.8-fold increase in AUC for fexofenadine. Consequently, dose reduction is required in patients with ESRD.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Fexofenadine is not usually prescribed during pregnancy (former FDA pregnancy category C), and other antihistamines with more data could be used.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Fexofenadine might decrease milk production, especially if used with pseudoephedrine. While breastfeeding an infant, monitor for possible irritability and jitteriness.