Complications of RA span multiple organ systems and are known to worsen clinical outcomes in patients with RA. It is imperative to monitor patients for the development of these complications and quickly alter treatment plans if applicable. Frequent recurrent serious opportunistic infections occur in patients with RA, which warrants withholding DMARD therapy until they are treated. The increased frequency of infections in patients with RA is thought to be due to underlying immune dysfunction from the disease itself and the use of DMARD therapy.

**Complications and Comorbidities Associated with Uncontrolled Systemic Inflammation**

- Chronic joint inflammation results in radiographic damage, progressive deformity, and functional disability.

- Anemia of chronic disease and Felty syndrome are well-documented complications of seropositive RA.

- The secondary form of Sjögren syndrome is associated with RA and can have a prevalence of as high as 10% in patients with RA and pulmonary disease.

- Pleuritis, bronchiolitis, and interstitial lung disease are also associated with RA. Although rare, RA treatment with methotrexate and anti-TNF agents can also lead to pulmonary injury. There is also an increased risk of pulmonary embolism in RA. Interstitial lung disease (ILD) affects 5 to 16% of RA patients and is associated with RA-specific autoantibodies and increased mortality.MUC5B promoter variant rs35705950 is associated with ILD in patients with RA. This gene encodes mucin 5B, and this variant is a gain of function. RA-ILD compared to unaffected controls, the odds ratio is 3.8 (95% CI 2.8-5.2), and RA-ILD, compared to RA without ILD, the odds ratio is 3.1 (95% CI 1.8-5.4).

- Coronary artery disease has a strong association with RA.

- Patients with RA also have a greater risk of developing lymphoma, with a higher incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in these patients. The clinical course of RA in these patients is accelerated, and diffuse B-cell lymphoma is often the most common subtype.

**Complications and Comorbidities Associated with RA Disease and Treatment**

- Premature death

- Serious infections

- Osteopenia and osteoporosis are complications of the disease itself and can also be associated with drug therapies (glucocorticoids). Compared to the general population, patients with RA have a 60% to 100% increased risk of fracture.

- There is an increased risk of venous thromboembolic disease in patients with RA, as stated above, even after adjusting for other risk factors for thromboembolic disease.

**Others**

- Depression is a significant complication of RA. It is present in patients with long-term active disease and debilitating physical dysfunction. A 2013 meta-analysis reported a 17% to 39% prevalence of depression in patients with RA.