**Potential Consequences of Fetal Radiation**

- Evidence for the harmful effects of radiation on fetal development emerges primarily from animal studies and nuclear accidents, like the Chernobyl disaster and the nuclear bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. During the first 14 days post-conception, the developing embryo is at the highest risk, just before the implantation stage. A mere dose of 0.1Gy is enough to cause a pre-implantation death in mice in the zygotic stage. This occurs as an "all or none" phenomenon when a direct exposure of as little as 0.15-0.2 Gy at the pre-implantation stage can cause embryonic death. However, should the embryo survives, there is no increase in malformations, given that they are not exposed to more radiation later.

- As the embryo grows, its radiosensitivity decreases. Most malformations are observed during the brief period of organogenesis, which occurs at about the third to seventh-week post-implantation. This is when the fetus is at the highest risk of growth retardation. The brain develops between the 8th and 15th-week post-implantation. Any irradiation above the threshold during this period can result in mental impairment and impact cognitive functions. Doses below 0.1Gy are unlikely to cause cognitive impairment; however, doses higher than 0.3 Gy would affect higher functioning. Doses between 0.1Gy-0.49 Gy have been associated with a 6% incidence of mental retardation.

- The second trimester (16 to 25 weeks) has risks similar to those in the first trimester, such as malformations, growth and mental retardation, cataracts, sterility, and malignancy; however, the risk is much lower. Mental retardation was reportedly as low as 2%, even with a maximum dose of 0.49 Gy. Miller et al. reported microcephaly in 2 out of 30 children exposed to doses lower than 0.1 Gy, and 2 out of 44 children exposed to 0.1- 0.5 Gy, for pregnant mothers who had exposure post-atomic bombings during their second trimester of the period of gestation.

- In the third trimester, there is the lowest risk of malformation and mental retardation. Miller reported microcephaly only in 3 out of 39 children exposed to a dose below 0.1 Gy and 1 out of 50 exposed to a dose in between 0.1 to 0.5 Gy.

- There is conflicting evidence to suggest the risk of malignancy post-radiation exposure in utero. In 1975, Bithell and Stewart, in their study of childhood cancer, noticed an increase in all types of childhood malignancy post-radiation exposure in utero. They describe an increased risk of 6.4% for carcinogenesis per Gy of fetal radiation exposure.

**Potential Effects From Fetal Radiation Exposure**

- **Malformations**
- The risk of malformations is higher in early pregnancy during the organogenesis period (2 to 8 weeks). For a fetus under 16 weeks of gestation, the threshold for possible prenatal radiation effects is approximately 0.10 to 0.20 Gy (100 to 200 mGy, 10 to 20 rads). This threshold is much higher after 16 weeks of gestation, at least 0.50 to 0.70 Gy (500 to 700 mGy, 50 to 70 rads). After approximately 20 to 25 weeks of gestation, which is about late in the second trimester, the fetus is relatively resistant to ionizing radiation's teratogenic effects.
- Brent reported frequent malformations in neonates born to mothers who underwent abdominopelvic irradiation in which the dose exceeded 0.5 Gy.

- **Growth restriction**
- Follow-up data from atomic bomb survivors exhibited a permanent physical growth restriction with increasing radiation dose, significantly above 1 Gy. This was most obvious when the exposure occurred in the first trimester. A 3% to 4% decrease in height at age 18 occurred whenever the cumulative dose was higher than 1 Gy.

- **Mental retardation**
- As described earlier, studies demonstrated that the risk of mental retardation and microcephaly was most evident when the exposure occurred at 8 to 15 weeks post-conception. The abnormalities were associated with aberrant neuronal development, presumably due to radiation-induced irreversible cell injury, alteration in cellular differentiation, and impaired neuronal migration. No severe intellectual disability cases were seen in newborns of survivors exposed before 8 weeks or after 25 weeks post-conception. The risk emerged as a linear function of dose exposed, with a threshold of 0.12 Gy (120 mGy, 12 rads) at 8 to 15 weeks, and 0.21 Gy (210 mGy, 21 rads) at 16 to 25 weeks.
- In terms of IQ parameters, the average IQ loss at 8 to 15 weeks is approximately 25 to 31 points per Gy above 0.1 Gy (100 mGy, 10 rads) with a 40% risk of developing severe intellectual disability per Gy above 0.1 Gy. In contrast, the average IQ loss at 16 to 25 weeks was approximately 13 to 21 points per Gy at doses above 0.7 Gy (700 mGy, 70 rads) with a small 9% risk of developing severe intellectual disability per Gy above 0.7 Gy.

- **Carcinogenesis**
- Animal experiments suggest that carcinogenic effects are commonly seen during the late stages of fetal development. Risk of having childhood cancer, particularly leukemia, increases by a factor of 1.5 to 2 when exposed to 0.01 to 0.02 Gy (10 to 20 mGy; 1 to 2 rad) levels of radiation in utero.
-  Similarly, when newborns are exposed to radiation of 0.01 Gy (10 mGy, 1 rad), there is an increased risk of 0.3% to 0.7% for developing a childhood malignancy, particularly leukemia (non-exposed risk: 0.2% to 0.3%). However, the evidence of carcinogenic potential at low-level radiation is debatable since non-exposed siblings of exposed children also have a higher leukemia incidence. Furthermore, there was an insignificant increased rate of carcinogenicity in children exposed in utero during the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

- **Genetic mutations**
- Ionizing radiation may increase the frequency of naturally occurring genetic mutations; however, it is hard to detect such small mutations when the spontaneously occurring mutations are already high at approximately 10%.
- Incidence of radiation-induced mutagenesis has been primarily studied in animal and plant models; however, only limited human data is available apart from follow-up observations of atomic bomb survivors offsprings. In consensus, ionizing radiation-induced mutagenesis has not been demonstrated in any human population at any radiation dose.
- As for non-ionizing radiation from electromagnetic waves from computers, warming blankets, heating pads, microwave communication systems, microwave ovens, cellular phones, household appliances, power lines, and airport screening devices have minimal reproductive risk. The literature concludes that there is no significant evidence for an association between a woman's exposure to such sources and fetal loss or other adverse reproductive outcomes.