Nerve conduction studies in AIDP may show signs of demyelination, such as delayed distal latencies, decreased conduction velocities, temporal dispersion, and conduction block (1 or more nerves) in SNAPs and CMAPs. The European Federation of the Neurological Societies (EFNS) and Peripheral Nerve Societies (PNS) have specific electrodiagnostic criteria for diagnosing AIDP.

- Prolonged distal latencies (2 or more nerves with > 115 to 125% of the upper limits of normal)

- Decreased conduction velocities (2 or more nerves with < 80 to 90% of lower limits of normal), can be preserved if done too early in the disease course (< 3 weeks)

- Unequivocal conduction block- proximal/distal CMAP area ratio of <0.50.
- Possible conduction block- proximal/distal CMAP area ratio of <0.70
- Temporal dispersion (1 or more nerves)- proximal/distal CMAP duration ratio > 1.15

- Prolonged late responses (1 or more nerves, >125% of upper limits of normal)- F response and H reflex

- Exception- if CMAP amplitude is too low, the absent F response may be normal

NCS may show the sparing of the sural nerves. F-wave studies, while normally limited in their utility in many pathologies, are particularly useful in testing for AIDP. F-wave testing can detect early inflammation proximally at the nerve roots. Because the F-wave tests the entire length of the nerve, it can detect abnormalities that clinicians would otherwise miss with standard segmental nerve conduction studies. Also, F-ratios may increase, suggesting greater proximal demyelination compared to distal.

Needle electromyography is usually unremarkable in AIDP because most cases are demyelinating and not axonal. However, with axonal involvement, EMG studies may demonstrate signs of active denervation, positive sharp waves/fibrillation potentials, increased duration, increased amplitude, and fiber reinnervation signs.