In the years preceding the HMO Act of 1973, rising health care costs and feelings of inferior care quality in the U.S. motivated innovation in health care delivery.

The HMO Act offered funds to support HMO development with the hope of improving overall U.S. health care and simultaneously decreasing costs. HMOs are designed to accomplish these goals by integrating health insurance and health care delivery within the same organization and thus aligning the incentives of the health care payer and provider.

From a patient’s perspective, HMOs represent a potential option for health insurance. HMOs provide medical care for their patients for a prepaid fee. Compared to other common health insurance plans, such as preferred provider organizations (PPOs), HMOs are generally less expensive. Patients with an HMO must have a primary care provider (PCP). These patients usually need to receive referrals from their PCP to receive coverage to see a specialist. For this reason, the PCP is sometimes referred to as a “gatekeeper” as they are the first providers to evaluate patients before sending patients to specialists if necessary.

HMOs feature a variety of payment processes and structures but generally collect payment from their enrolled patients through methods such as premiums, copays, and deductibles. Copays and deductibles are cost-sharing strategies where patients are potentially responsible for paying a portion of the cost of seeing a provider. By charging patients per provider visit, cost-sharing strategies seek to disincentivize the overuse of medical services that might occur if patients were not responsible for any per-visit costs.

Over the years, different types of HMOs have developed with varying structures.

Over the years, HMOs have faced a variety of issues leading some vendors to financial collapse. Given that HMOs operate with a prepaid model and thus must make predictions about future costs and revenue, failures generally involve the HMO underestimating its incurred claims while overestimating the funds it receives.

Accountable care organizations (ACOs), including the similar concept of clinically integrated organizations (CIOs), represent one such innovation in the managed care space. CIOs are the commercial counterpart of ACOs, as ACOs were designed, strictly speaking, to contract with Medicare only.

Despite attempts to decrease health care costs and improve care quality in the U.S. through strategies such as HMOs, the U.S. health care system is still the most expensive of any health care system in the world, encompassing approximately 18% of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP).