**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

Oral trauma accounts for a relatively low percentage of traumatic injuries in all age groups but is responsible for around 17% of total injuries seen in children.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

The three most prevalent orofacial infections in one British study were periapical abscesses (14 to 25%), followed by pericoronitis (10 to 11%), with periodontal abscesses being the least common (6 to 7%).

Additionally, some dental infections show a preference for distinct populations. For example, since pericoronitis is most commonly seen with erupting third molars, the condition is prevalent in patients in their twenties.

Dental infections make up the majority of hospital admissions from the emergency department for those presenting with dental-related complaints. Most people who visit the emergency department with a dental complaint are discharged. Of the 5% who require admission, an overwhelming majority (85%) have a diagnosis of dental infection with diseases of the pulp and periapical tissue.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

**Post-procedural Bleeding**

Bleeding is a widely recognized and expected complication encountered in dental practice, and the incidence increases with the presence of congenital or acquired coagulopathies.

While the prevalence of patients with congenital coagulopathies remains low, hemophilia A, hemophilia B, and Von Willebrand disease account for 97% of this population, with Von Willebrand disease being the most common.

Prolonged postoperative bleeding most commonly occurs in the mandibular molars compared to the maxillary molars. Dental extractions involving infected supporting structures are also associated with an increased incidence of post-extraction bleeding.

**Alveolar Osteitis**

While the incidence of alveolar osteitis ranges between 0.5% and 68% in the current literature, studies with larger patient populations suggest that the true incidence is likely less than 5%.