Contributory laboratory findings are mainly drawn from a liver function test, a coagulation profile, and a complete blood count. Liver function tests may reveal elevated levels of conjugated bilirubin and liver enzymes (alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase). Transaminases may be elevated nonspecifically. Immunological studies may be obtained to assess certain autoimmune etiologies of biliary strictures. Apt diagnosis and further management are based on the correlation of laboratory data, imaging findings with epidemiologic and clinical data.

Deranged liver function tests and coagulation profiles may help to determine the algorithm of subsequent imaging and minimally invasive studies.

Assay of CA19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) can be obtained in patients with suspected hepatobiliary malignancy as they can help with diagnosis and follow-up. Of note, these are not specific to biliary malignancy. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) guided fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) is highly sensitive and specific but not useful to rule out malignancy.

Ductal dilatation is a major feature of imaging for biliary strictures.

Computed tomography (CT) scan has higher sensitivity than trans-abdominal ultrasound for biliary malignancy, and its utility can be improved with the use of a multi-detector CT (MDCT) scan and CT-pancreatic protocol in providing more information on tumor vascular encroachment and biliary tree obstruction. It is also able to detect complications from biliary obstruction such as cholangitis and abscesses.

MRCP can provide high-quality cholangiograms, thus establishing the location and extent of biliary strictures. It provides a cross-sectional and three-dimensional reconstruction of the biliary tree.

Evaluation of biliary strictures by ERCP can determine etiology, provide tissue samples for cytology and histology, and facilitate therapeutic interventions like stenting of obstructed segments from strictures. It is, however, associated with post-ERCP pancreatitis and is also being overtaken by newer technologies like confocal laser endomicroscopy (CLE). Other emerging technologies useful in the assessment of the etiology of biliary strictures include fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH), direct peroral cholangioscopy, and intraductal ultrasound.

A hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan helps to identify the level of bile leaks and bile injuries after cholecystectomy.