A dosing regimen of an oral daily dose of 25 mg/ kg of body weight of ethambutol reaches a therapeutic range of 2 to 6 mcg/mL in serum 2 hours after administration.

Ethambutol may cause ocular toxicity, which may be related to the dose and duration of the treatment. If signs indicate such an effect, it requires immediate discontinuation of the drug. However, there are reports of cases of irreversible blindness. Due to the adverse effect of ethambutol associated optic neuropathy, visual acuity testings such as baseline visual acuity, color vision, and a Humphrey visual field (HVF) should be performed periodically when administering EMB treatment during the regimen.

Hepatotoxicity is a common adverse effect with antituberculosis treatments. Hence, both baseline and periodic hepatic function require assessment.

Patients receiving iron overload may need prolonged treatment or add an additional bactericidal drug to their regimen. One study showed that iron loading negatively affected the bactericidal properties of isoniazid (INH) and ethambutol (EMB). The excess iron has a limiting effect on the bactericidal effects of INH and completely inhibits that of EMB. Although this study focused on murine tuberculosis, it may have clinical implications for HIV-positive patients with lower CD4+ cells but may also have certain degrees of iron loading or patients with haptoglobin 2-2 genotype. Due to the adverse effects of excess iron, patients who have these conditions may need to consider a more prolonged treatment and/or add an additional bactericidal drug to their regimen against tuberculosis.