**Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease**

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a pulmonary disease that causes chronic obstruction of airflow. Chronic inflammation of the bronchioles along with mucous production causes them to become deformed and narrow along with mucous production, limiting the airflow as a person exhales. Because the patient is not able to fully exhale, carbon dioxide remains in the alveoli due to the loss of elasticity of the sac. The patients suffer from shortness of breath, productive cough, respiratory acidosis, and complicated pneumonia.

In 1992, a study showed that carbohydrate-rich food increases the production of CO2, leading to an increase in respiratory rate and eventually respiratory failure. On the contrary, fat-rich meals decrease the production of CO2, leading to reduce alveolar ventilation and minor improvement in respiration in patients who initially have an RQ ratio greater than 0.75.

**Non-Insulin Dependent Weight Gain**

The respiratory quotient can be used to predict weight gain in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Normally, a diabetic patient has insulin-resistant receptors, which results in hyperglycemia. This prevents metabolization from occurring via glycolysis, therefore, increasing lipolysis. As mentioned, an increase in lipolysis will reduce the production of CO2. A study done in 1998, demonstrated an inverse correlation between RQ ratio and serum glucose levels in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus treated with oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin. Patients who were on the oral hypoglycemic agents and had a higher BMI verified that their RQ ratio was much higher than those of average BMI. After following them for a year, a weight gain of 3 kg was noticed in 50% of the patients along with an increase in the RQ ratio. This study concluded that the RQ ratio is a valid predictor for weight gain in diabetics treated with oral agents.

**Nutrition Guide for Sick Patients**

Utilizing the indirect calorimetry and respiratory energy expenditure aids in calculating the ideal kcal patients need to consume per day, especially when unable to estimate caloric requirements, inadequate clinical response to a predicted equation, or clinical sign of over and under-feeding. Patients who are morbidly obese or suffering from sepsis have an alteration in their VCO2 release and VO2 consumption. For this reason, a daily RQ and indirect calorimetry are essential to optimize their diet and reduce hospital stay.

- REE = (kcal/d)= (VO2 x 3.94) + (VCO2 x 1.11) x 1440