Omega-3 fatty acids (OM3FAs) are unsaturated fatty acids with at least one double bond located between the third and fourth omega end carbon. Currently, the three most clinically relevant omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are α-linolenic acid (ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Oils containing these fatty acids originate in plant sources and can be found in fish, fish products, seeds, nuts, green leafy vegetables, and beans.

Currently, the FDA has approved the use of two prescription omega-3 fatty acids products, icosapent ethyl and omega-3-acid ethyl esters. Omega-3-carboxylic acids and omega-3-acid ethyl esters A are two prescription omega-3 fatty acids formulations that have since been discontinued. Omega-3-acid ethyl esters,omega-3-carboxylic acids, and omega-3-acid ethyl esters A contain both EPA and DHA, whereas icosapent ethyl contains ethyl esters of EPA only.

It is important to note that while these prescription OM3FA products are the only FDA approved products for the treatment of hypertriglyceridemia, ongoing research is currently investigating the significance of OM3FAs and their promising role in the treatment of conditions and ailments listed below:

- Cardiovascular disease

- Hypertriglyceridemia (200 to 499 mg/dL)

- Type 2 diabetes

- Cancer

- Alzheimer disease and dementia

- Depression

- Visual and neurological/brain development

- Maternal health during pregnancy and child health

- Conditions benefiting from prebiotics

- Heart failure

- Intervertebral disc degeneration

- Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

- Maternal depression

- Menopausal night sweats

- Rheumatoid arthritis

- Asthma

- Periodontal disease

- Epilepsy

- Diabetic retinopathy

- Efficacy, tolerability, and side-effects of chemotherapy

- Premenstrual syndrome

- Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

Omega-3 intake and/or supplementation have been shown to be beneficial in treating the above conditions; however, much controversy still exists in many of the above uses. More research with well-conducted clinical trials will need to be completed before definitive conclusions can be made.