Early recognition of the most plausible cause of meningitis is crucial to begin treatment as soon as possible. Initial stabilization of the patient is necessary, and intravenous fluids for 48 hours have been proven beneficial.

If the CSF results are more consistent with aseptic meningitis, antibiotics should then be discontinued (keeping in mind the initial presentation of the patient and his clinical status). Viral meningitis (excluding HSV and VZV) management is more supportive care.

Steroids are used as adjunctive therapy to reduce the inflammatory response. Evidence supports the use of dexamethasone 10 to 20 minutes prior to antibiotics or concomitant with their administration, even though the etiology is initially unknown while awaiting culture results.

Repeat LP is unnecessary but should be considered in patients whose clinical status does not improve after 48 hours.

Once the diagnosis of aseptic meningitis has been established, the patient can often be discharged home except for the elderly, immunocompromised, and children with pleocytosis. When discharging the patient, home care needs should be based on etiology. For instance, patients with diagnosed enterovirus should be advised to practice excellent hand hygiene and avoid sharing food as it is primarily transmitted via the fecal-oral route.

Supportive treatment is needed in all patients, including pain management and fever control with antipyretics such as acetaminophen/paracetamol and ibuprofen.

Also, if the meningitis is drug-induced, the drug should be stopped or, if essential, be replaced with a drug not associated with meningeal irritation.