The lymphoid progenitors exit out of the thymus to form the T-cells. Their antigen detection is mediated through t-cell receptors (TCR).

CTCL pathogenesis includes inhibition of apoptosis and promoting oncogenesis by targeting the tumor suppressor genes. Alteration of key signaling pathways, which include NOTCH overexpression, which helps in cell differentiation and proliferation, Fas underexpression, dysregulation of JaK3/STAT by decreasing function and expression of negative regulators. The affinity of CTCL to the skin is thought to be mediated through the adhesion receptor mechanism. The cells migrate using the interaction between E selectin present in the endothelium and cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen(CLA) expressed in CTCL cells. These interactions are through chemokine receptors, the most common being CCR4, which is overexpressed here. CTCL has shown to have distinct microRNA expression(miR-21 and miR155), which resists apoptosis and thus promotes proliferation.

MF and SS mostly consist of helper memory or effector T-cells. They are usually positive for all T-cell markers. CD7 is expressed early in the differentiation process, but they are absent in T-cells homing to the skin, but marked deletion of CD7 is considered as an ancillary confirmatory test. Malignant T-cells activate the T-cell receptor (TCR) pathway, which leads to the release of T-helper cell cytokines and persistent proliferation through alteration of Fas-mediated apoptosis and TGF beta related growth suppression.

PTCLs arise from post thymic T-cells/Natural killer (NK) cells, and the pathogenesis is poorly understood. Some studies of gene expression profiling have shown us that pathways altered are nuclear factor kappa B signaling and cell cycle deregulation, but those were underpowered studies. Most of them have a clonal expansion of TCR rearranged lymphocytes. This may not be seen in NK cell neoplasms. Some cytogenic aberrations seen in PTCL-NOS include gains in chromosome 7q, rearrangements of TP63, which results in oncogenic p63. Some of the other mechanisms include altering the microenvironment and the remodeling of the T-cell genome by viral molecules. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma(ALCL) is divided into two categories depending on the presence or absence of anaplastic lymphoma kinase protein(ALK). This distinction is necessary for clinical and prognostic assessment. Adult T-cell lymphoma, caused by HTLV-1, is spread through bodily fluids and causes clonal expansion and antiapoptosis of the CD4 cells by incorporating viral proteins that alter the signaling pathways, including and not limited to JAK-STAT, NFkB, and thus leading to impaired cytokine production and host immunity.