In about two-thirds of cases, symptoms are present for 2 weeks or less. The diagnosis is made at a mean of 8 days after the onset of symptoms. The course ranges from indolent to fulminant. Most manifestations of brain abscess tend to be nonspecific, resulting in a delay in establishing the diagnosis. Most symptoms are a direct result of the size and location of the space-occupying lesion or lesions. The triad of fever, headache, and the focal neurologic deficit is observed in less than half of patients. The frequency of common symptoms and signs is as follows:

- A headache (69% to 70%) the most common medical symptom.

- Mental status changes (65%) lethargy progressing to coma is indicative of severe cerebral edema and a poor prognostic sign.

- Focal neurologic deficits (50% to 65%) occur days to weeks after the onset of a headache.

- Pain is usually localized to the side of the abscess, and its onset can be gradual or sudden in nature. The pain is most severe in intensity and not relieved by over-the-counter pain medications.

- Fever (45% to 53%)

- Seizures (25% to 35%) can be the first manifestation of brain abscess. Grand mal seizures are particularly common in frontal abscesses.

- Nausea and vomiting (40%) are mostly seen with raised intracranial pressure

- Nuchal rigidity (15%) is most commonly associated with occipital lobe abscess or an abscess that has leaked into a lateral ventricle.

- Third and sixth cranial nerve deficits.

- Rupture of abscess usually presented with suddenly worsening headache and followed by emerging signs of meningismus.