**Glycolysis Phases**

Glycolysis has two phases: the investment phase and the payoff phase. The investment phase is where there is energy, as ATP, is put in, and the payoff phase is where the net creation of ATP and NADH molecules occurs. A total of 2 ATP goes in the investment phase, with the production of 4 ATP resulting in the payoff phase; thus, there is a net total of 2 ATP. The steps by which new ATP is created has the name of substrate-level phosphorylation.

**Investment Phase**

In this phase, there are two phosphates added to glucose. Glycolysis begins with hexokinase phosphorylating glucose into glucose-6 phosphate (G6P). This step is the first transfer of a phosphate group and where the consumption of the first ATP takes place. Also, this is an irreversible step. This phosphorylation traps the glucose molecule in the cell because it cannot readily pass the cell membrane. From there, phosphoglucose isomerase isomerizes G6P into fructose 6-phosphate (F6P). Then, phosphofructokinase (PFK-1) adds the second phosphate. PFK-1 uses the second ATP and phosphorylates the F6P into fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. This step is also irreversible and is the rate-limiting step. In the following step, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate undergoes lysis into two molecules, which are substrates for fructose-bisphosphate aldolase to convert it into dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P). DHAP is turned into G3P by triosephosphate isomerase. DHAP and G3p are in equilibrium with each other, meaning they transform back and forth.

**Payoff Phase**

It is critical to remember that there are a total of two 3-carbon sugars for every one glucose at the beginning of this phase. The enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase metabolizes the G3P into 1,3-diphosphoglycerate by reducing NAD+ into NADH. Next, the 1,3-diphosphoglycerate loses a phosphate group through phosphoglycerate kinase to make 3-phosphoglycerate and creates an ATP through substrate-level phosphorylation. At this point, there are 2 ATP produced, one from each 3-carbon molecule. The 3-phosphoglycerate turns into 2-phosphoglycerate by phosphoglycerate mutase, and then enolase turns the 2-phosphoglycerate into phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). In the final step, pyruvate kinase turns PEP into pyruvate and phosphorylates ADP into ATP through substrate-level phosphorylation, thus creating two more ATP. This step is also irreversible. Overall, the input for 1 glucose molecule is 2 ATP, and the output is 4 ATP and 2 NADH and 2 pyruvate molecules.

In cells, NADH must recycle back to NAD+ to permit glycolysis to keep running. Absent NAD+, the payoff phase will come to a halt resulting in a backup in glycolysis. In aerobic cells, NADH recycles back into NAD+ by way of oxidative phosphorylation. In aerobic cells, it occurs through fermentation. There are two types of fermentation: lactic acid and alcohol fermentation.