Infection control is an important consideration when discussing penile prosthesis implantation. While antibiotics are not routinely given weeks or days prior to surgery, preoperative parenteral antibiotics must be given. The most recent guideline from the American Urological Association guidelines advocates for the use of an aminoglycoside plus cephalosporin or vancomycin as first-line prophylaxis.

Surgical prep should be performed with alcohol-based skin prep. Though iodine-based prep has historically been used for genitourinary surgery, recent data suggest improved post-prep skin cultures with chlorhexidine-based products for implant surgery.

Once the room and patient have been prepared for surgery, general anesthesia is administered. Next, the patient is prepped from the umbilicus down to the mid-thigh, and sterile draping is applied. A foley catheter is placed on the sterile field, and the bladder is drained. This serves both to help avoid injury to the bladder and also to more clearly identify the urethra. An Iodoform drape can be applied over the skin if preferred and cut to expose only the penis and scrotum in order to minimize skin contact. Using this so-called “no-touch” technique may allow for a decreased rate of infection.

Three-piece, inflatable devices can be placed via an infrapubic or penoscrotal incision depending on surgeon preference and patient anatomy. Infrapubic placement allows for reservoir placement under direct visualization; however, the penoscrotal or high scrotal approach has been preferred historically. A skin incision is made, and subcutaneous tissue is dissected. Dissection can be aided by the use of a self-retaining retractor with blunt tissue hooks. Dissection is carried down through the Dartos and then Buck fascia to the tunica albuginea on each side of the urethra. It may be helpful to place stay sutures in the corporal bodies on either side of the urethra prior to making a corporotomy incision. Doing so can both aid in ease of incision as well as closure once a cylinder has been placed. Corporotomy is then performed using Bovie cautery. Once the corporotomy is made, the corporal bodies may be initially dilated with blunt tip scissors. Sequential Hegar dilators can then be used to dilate down to the crus proximally and distally to the mid glans. Careful attention should be paid to ensure distal dilation occurs in a craniolateral direction to avoid corporal crossover or urethral injury. After both sides are appropriately dilated, the surgeon should evaluate for corporal crossover by placing a dilator in both corpora and looking for asymmetry. If crossover has occurred, the surgeon can elect to abort the remainder of the procedure. Alternatively, a distal perforation can be repaired in 2-layers using an absorbable suture. Proximal perforations can be managed by placing a non-absorbable suture through the solid base of the cylinder, in the fashion of a “sling stitch."

If a urethral injury has occurred, as noted by irrigation flowing around the catheter and out of the meatus, the procedure should be aborted and a catheter should be left in place for several days.

Once the reservoir has been placed, cylinder measurements should be performed. The measurements should be confirmed verbally by the surgeon, surgical technician, as well as the medical device provider if present. Only after confirmation should the device be opened and prepared for implantation. The proper cylinder size is an important part of implant function and durability. A suture with a Keith needle is attached to the distal end of the cylinder and loaded through a furlough device, then placed through the glans. This procedure is then repeated on the contralateral side. Once both cylinders are in place, 60 ml of saline is used to inflate to evaluate size and positioning. Rear tip extenders can be used to more accurately size the corporal bodies. The corporotomy is then closed by tying the corporal stay sutures together. If necessary, an additional interrupted suture may be placed, with caution not to puncture the cylinder. Next, the scrotal pump is placed by developing a subdartos plane. This is performed using a combination of blunt and sharp dissection. A nasal speculum may be used to form a pocket within the scrotal sac. The dartos tissue can then be re-approximated over the pump. The tubing for the pump, reservoir, and cylinders are then connected. It is essential to confirm that no air is introduced to the system during connection.

Once all components are connected and in position, the skin is closed in two layers. A drain may be placed if the patient is scheduled to stay in the hospital overnight. The drain may be removed on postoperative day number one at the same time as foley catheter removal. The penis is then wrapped in sterile gauze and a gentle compression dressing. The penis should then be placed upward on the lower abdomen, to limit any downward curvature of this penis postoperatively. Most patients will stay in the hospital overnight following prosthesis placement. This allows for proper guidance on post-operative instructions, as well as the ability to remove the foley catheter without an additional visit to the outpatient clinic. The foley catheter is removed, and adequate bladder emptying is confirmed. Historically, prophylactic antibiotics have been prescribed on discharge; however, recent data suggest no significant difference in infectious complications when compared to the antibiotic-free group.

A short course of narcotic pain medication may be warranted. The patient is instructed to avoid any heavy lifting until the follow-up visit in 7-14 days. Scrotal support or tight mesh underwear may be used after the sterile dressing is removed. Showering is generally acceptable 24 hours after surgery. Finally, the patient is instructed to pull the pump caudally several times per day upon discharge to prevent migration.