When a patient presents with a disorder of the neurohypophysis, its manifestation is most commonly related to a disorder of the antidiuretic hormone. The antidiuretic hormone affects the distal collecting duct, and its regulatory function is to increase free water reabsorption and promote indirect sodium excretion. Any disturbances related to this hormone can create sodium electrolyte abnormalities.

Brain magnetic resonance imaging, which is the gold standard for visualization of the anterior and posterior pituitary, should be ordered to find or rule out possible etiologies that can produce neurohypophysis dysfunction.

**Diabetic Insipidus**

Serum and urine sodium, serum and urine osmolality, hourly urine output, 24-hour urine volume, and specific gravity must be obtained. Central DI must be distinguished from nephrogenic DI. A water deprivation test can be used with or without desmopressin injection. In central DI, the vasopressin will correct urine osmolality while in nephrogenic DI, the correction will be suboptimal.

Criteria for the diagnosis of central DI:

- Polyuria in two consecutive hours of > 300 ml/hr or 4 to 5 ml/kg/hr in two consecutive hours

- Polyuria > 3L/24 hours or > 2ml/kg/hr in 24 hours

- Serum osmolality > 300 mOsm/kg

- Urine osmolality < 300 mOsm/kg

- Urine/plasma osmolality <  1

- The specific gravity of less than 1.005

**SIADH Secretion**

The first step is to assess the fluid status and obtain laboratory tests to evaluate serum and urine sodium, serum and urine osmolality, blood sugar, potassium levels, and liver function. When SIADH secretion is suspected, it is important to order thyroid-stimulating hormone and thyroxine levels (TSH/T4), and serum cortisol to rule out glucocorticoid and thyroid hormone deficiency. The most common presentation in SIADH secretion will be hyponatremia with a euvolemic fluid status. Patients will have decrease plasma osmolality and increase sodium excretion.

Criteria for the diagnosis of SIADH secretion:

- serum sodium < 135 mEq/L

- serum osmolality < 275 mOsm/kg

- Urine osmolality  > 100 mOsm/kg

- Urine sodium  > 30 mEq/L

- Normal dietary and water intake

- No recent use of diuretic agents

- Correction of deficit with fluid restriction