Elucidating a thorough history is critical in patients presenting with extensive hair loss. Most patients presenting with AT will have a history of discrete, patchy hair loss, which has progressed to total scalp involvement, though only 5%-10% of patients with AF progress to totalis or universalis.

Family history and past medical history are also important to obtain. There is a positive family history of hair loss in about 20% of cases. Comorbid conditions are common in patients with AA and might be slightly more frequent in those with AT, affecting about 20% of patients. Comorbidities in order of highest frequency include autoimmune thyroid disease, vitiligo, type I diabetes mellitus, atopy, and inflammatory bowel disease.

On physical examination, there is a near-complete loss of scalp hair, with preservation of hair at other bodily sites, including the eyelashes, eyebrows, axilla, and pubic area. On the scalp, follicular orifices should be visible, in contrast to scarring alopecia, where they are absent. There should be minimal scalp erythema or scale. At the periphery of affected areas, exclamation point hairs may be seen. These are thick at the apex of the hair shaft and thinner towards the base of the shaft. In previously affected areas where spontaneous regrowth has occurred, the hair may initially be non-pigmented, but repigmentation usually occurs in weeks to months.

The nails should be closely evaluated as nail involvement is common in alopecia areata. This is even more frequent in patients with AT than AF and is seen in about 20%.