All patients suspected of PEX should undergo a dilated slit-lamp examination and gonioscopy. Baseline IOP must be measured at the time of diagnosis and periodically due to the high risk of developing ocular hypertension and PEG.

The evaluation of patients suspected of PEG is identical to those suspected of primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG).

To summarise, the clinical evaluation involves:

- Visual examination of optic nerve head: This is evaluated using a slit lamp and condensing lens of sufficient magnification. The typical signs associated with glaucomatous damage include an increased cup-to-disc ratio (CDR) greater than 0.5, optic nerve cupping and notching (See image of glaucomatous optic nerve cupping), asymmetry of CDR between both eyes and disc hemorrhages.

- IOP measurement: Glaucomatous damage in pseudoexfoliation is associated with raised IOP and shows marked variation in diurnal IOP levels. IOP should therefore be measured at multiple different times of the day. Goldmann applanation tonometry is the gold standard for assessment,

- Visual Field Analysis: Static computer automated perimetry is useful for a baseline investigation of glaucoma suspects and monitoring progression in those with confirmed glaucoma. Characteristic field defects are seen as with POAG, but those seen with PEG are typically more severe and tend to progress at a faster rate.

- Optical coherence tomography (OCT): Peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thinning is associated with glaucomatous damage. Inferotemporal thinning tends to be associated with early glaucomatous changes, whereas superotemporal thinning may be used to differentiate severe glaucoma from healthy controls.