HIV is transmitted through exposure to infected blood, semen, vaginal fluid, or breast milk.

From days to weeks after exposure to the virus, early symptoms of HIV infection may include fever, sore throat, enlarged lymph nodes, weight loss, myalgia, or rash. Then, an infected person can become asymptomatic while the virus continues to replicate, and the number of CD4+ T-cells progressively decreases. Once the CD4+ count drops below a certain level, there is a significant increase in risk for infections that can become life-threatening, defining the Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) stage of HIV infection. Without treatment, the time from the start of infection to AIDS-related death is estimated to be about 11 years.

**Retrovirus**

HIV belongs to the retrovirus family with complex genomes and capsid core particles.

**Basic Structure**

HIV consists of two primary components: the capsid and the genome. The conical capsid encloses the viral RNA genome, giving it shape and protection. The genome carries genetic information.

**Capsid**

The capsid protects the genome, transfers the viral genome between cells, and interacts with host factors to further viral replication.

**Envelope**

For the virus to enter a cell, its envelope must fuse with the host cell’s membrane. The viral envelope consists of glycoproteins gp120 and gp41, forming spikes that allow for attachment. These glycoproteins recognize the host cell’s surface receptors CD4+, CCR5, and CXCR4.

**Proteins Involved in Adsorption**

Adsorption occurs when HIV binds and enters a cell through fusion. The spikes on the HIV envelope consist of gp120 and gp41. Gp120 binds CD4 receptors and either CCR5 or CXCR4 on the host cell, allowing HIV entry into the cell. Gp41 promotes the fusion of HIV and the host cell membrane. CXCR4 presents on T-cells and many other cells, and CCR5 presents mainly on macrophages.

**The Function of HIV Genes**

Every retrovirus encodes three essential structural genes: gag, pol, and env. The gag gene determines the structural core proteins, creating the capsid; pol encodes for enzymes necessary for viral replication, including reverse transcriptase; and env encodes the glycoproteins of the viral envelope. The HIV-1 genome also encodes six other regulatory genes that modulate replication: tat, rev, vif, vpx, vpr, nef.

**Mutations**

Because HIV consists of two RNA molecules, genetic mutations are likely, as point mutations can occur on either molecule. The high frequency of mutations allows the virus to escape from the body’s immune system.