The clinical diagnosis of rubella is difficult because the manifestations can be mild and non-specific. Therefore, physicians must rely on serological testing to confirm rubella.

The most common diagnostic test for recent postnatal infection is the detection of rubella-specific IgM antibodies by using an enzyme immunoassay. Rubella-specific IgM antibodies are usually detectable 4 days after the onset of rash.

In those cases in which a pregnant woman has been exposed to a suspected rubella case, a specimen of blood should be tested as soon as possible for the measurement of rubella-specific IgG antibodies. If it is positive, then the woman was likely to be immune and could be reassured. If it is negative, a determination rubella-specific IgG and rubella-specific IgM antibodies should be obtained in 3 weeks to exclude an asymptomatic primary rubella infection.

Congenital rubella infection may be diagnosed prenatally either by a demonstration of specific IgM in fetal blood or by the detection rubella RNA in amniotic fluid, fetal blood, or chorionic villus biopsy using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In the newborn period, the serologic diagnosis of congenital rubella is made by the detection of rubella-specific IgM within the first 6 months of life. Congenital rubella infection can also be confirmed by the increase or persistence of rubella-specific IgG in the infant after 6 to 12 months of age. Detection of the viral genome in nasopharyngeal swabs, urine, and oral fluid by RT-PCR provides laboratory evidence of CRS.