The oculocerebrorenal syndrome has systemic manifestations that can impact patient morbidity and mortality. Treatment focuses on optimizing function and preventing acute illness.

**The Nervous and Musculoskeletal Systems**

Treatment of hypotonia requires early physical therapy and rehabilitation. Maintaining articular mobility reduces the development of contractures. Prevention or treatment of osteomalacia involves oral supplementation of Vitamin D, calcitriol, and phosphate. Hypotonia resulting in dysphagia may necessitate tube feeding.

Anticonvulsant therapy is required if seizures are present. Treatment of behavioral and psychiatric disorders is best managed by multidisciplinary team care, which may include special education services, occupational therapy, and speech/language therapy. Some pharmacologic agents that have shown benefits in patients include stimulants, antipsychotics, and antidepressants.

**The Ocular System**

Early cataract removal within the first three months of life is important to prevent amblyopia. Infants are often left aphakic and provided with spectacles or contact lenses to correct refractive error. In patients with infantile and/or aphakic glaucoma, intraocular pressures are often difficult to control with medical therapy alone. In many cases, surgical management is necessary.

The most commonly reported glaucoma surgeries performed in this patient population are trabeculectomy and goniotomy. The next most common glaucoma surgery in these patients is aqueous tube shunt implantation. Patching or extraocular muscle surgery are used to treat patients with strabismus. Corneal keloids can be surgically removed, particularly if they compromise visual acuity. However, some patients suffer from corneal scarring or require corneal transplantation.

**The Renal System**

Alkali supplementation, including sodium bicarbonate, is critical for patients with acidemia. Monitoring calcium and Parathyroid Hormone (PTH) helps prevent excess Vitamin D supplementation, which could increase hypercalciuria and the risk of nephrolithiasis.

Dialysis is necessary for patients who advance to ESRD. Kidney transplantation in patients with oculocerebrorenal syndrome has been rarely reported in the literature.