Arterial baroreceptors function to inform the autonomic nervous system of beat-to-beat changes in blood pressure within the arterial system. Rapid decreases in blood pressure, such as in orthostatic hypotension, resulted in decreased stretching of the artery wall and decreased action potential frequency, ultimately resulting in increased cardiac output and vasoconstriction resulting in increased blood pressure. The opposite is found to be true of increased blood pressure.

Cardiopulmonary receptors, or volume receptors, are similarly mechanoreceptors that function to inform the autonomic nervous system of the blood volume within the system. In low volume states, circulatory and renal changes result in increased salt and water resorption within the kidneys, increased salt and water oral intake, and slower, longer-term mean pressure changes.

One study showed that the carotid baroreceptor reflex could regulate cerebral blood flow at rest and during dynamic exercise. This study was small, with only seven subjects around the age of 26. It found that with heavy exercise, middle cerebral artery blood flow tripled, and cerebral tissue oxygenation was almost tripled, but prazosin was able to blunt the mean arterial pressure, cerebral oxygenation, and cerebral blood flow during exercise and at rest. Prazosin is a sympatholytic medication and an alpha-1 blocker resulting in vascular smooth muscle relaxation. The choice of this drug was due to the vascular smooth musculature found in the carotid sinus, carotid body, and cerebral vasculature.

Another small study with only 8 participants found that group III/IV afferent muscle fibers are critical in resetting the carotid baroreflex mean arterial pressure and heart rate operating points despite changes induced by exercise when a subject is in command of the spontaneous movements.

Cardiopulmonary receptors have strong associations with body position changes and with activation evoke sympathoinhibition demonstrated by a small study of 13 healthy men around the age of 21 showing an increase in heart rate, stroke volume, and cardiac output when subjects are in seated positions as opposed to no changes while in the supine position. These changes are blunted to statistical insignificance with a beta-1 adrenergic blockade, such as with atenolol, demonstrating the sympathetic mediation of cardiac responses.