Myelomeningocele is one of the forms of spina bifida and described as a fluid contained sac containing neural tissue protruding from the back. It occurs when there is an incomplete closure of the spinal cord during the first month of pregnancy. Many factors can lead to myelomeningocele, and a vast majority of cases are preventable with adequate maternal nutrition and folic acid supplementation during pregnancy.

Children can be at higher risk of developing complications such as urinary problems, difficulties in passing stool, troubles in walking, and some might experience learning disabilities in the future.

Some children might have other associated problems, such as scoliosis and muscle weakness. Others might have a condition called hydrocephalus, which happens when the fluid in their brain ventricles exceeds the average ratio causing head enlargement. If a child has a diagnosis of hydrocephalus, he or she might require shunt surgery. Surgeons perform shunt surgery by inserting a hollow tube into the brain to drain excess fluid from the ventricles. Also, it is advised to stay away from latex products as some children might be allergic to latex.

Early surgical intervention before or within 24 to 48 hours after birth is essential to prevent more damage. It can improve the quality of living, especially if followed by integrated medical care. It should involve several doctors from different specialties to provide accessible therapeutic services aimed to meet the children’s needs. Hence, early surgical management of myelomeningocele has proven to be effective in increasing the rate of survival and lowering the risk of complications.

Nevertheless, children might require frequent medical evaluation and hospital visits to address their needs and complaints. Early medical management for children complaining of learning and cognitive disabilities in schools can help them prepare for their future education. Parents should be aware that the child might show a particular area of disability. Hence, individualized school programs and community services should be implemented to help patients accommodate their lives according to their physical abilities and limitations. Cognitive impairments in patients with spina bifida, especially problems in executive functioning can improve by achieving specific educational strategies at school. Executive functioning refers to brain skills that are required to perform. They include memory, planning, attention, time management, and flexibility. For example, teaching the child to write important information to remember, providing them clocks to recognize the time, breaking huge tasks into smaller ones, minimizing anxiety, and encouraging them to complete their work.

Having a child with spina bifida would increase the risk of having another affected child in subsequent pregnancies. To avoid the risk of another affected pregnancy, genetic counseling should be required before conception. Genetic counselors help parents understand their family history and the risk of genetic and congenital anomalies that might occur in the future.

Recent advances in medicine can help children with myelomeningocele improve their quality of life. It is crucial to recognize associated health problems earlier to avoid more complications, particularly in mobility, bowel, and bladder functions. Therefore, early multidisciplinary medical and surgical management are essential to prevent further deficits and increase the chances of improvement in the future.