Patients with symptomatic hypermagnesemia can present different clinical manifestations depending on the level and the time in which the electrolytic disturbance has occurred. Hypermagnesemia is generally well tolerated. Thus patients with altered values (under 4 mg/dL) may be asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic. The most frequent symptoms and signs may include weakness, nausea, dizziness, and confusion (less than 7.0 mg/dL). Increasing values (7 to 12 mg/dL) induce decreased reflexes, worsening confusional state, drowsiness, bladder paralysis, flushing, headache, and constipation. A slight reduction in blood pressure and blurred vision caused by diminished accommodation and convergence can manifest. For higher values (over 12.0 mg/dL) muscle paralysis, paralytic ileus, decreased breathing rate, low blood pressure, electrocardiogram (ECG) changes including an increase in PR and QRS interval with sinus bradycardia, and atrioventricular block, coma and cardiac arrest (exceeding 15.0 mg/dL) may occur. When associated with hypocalcemia, hypermagnesemia may induce choreiform movements and seizures. The clinical picture becomes particularly severe, and there are few case reports of patients who survived to higher hypermagnesaemia levels.

In summary:

- Mild hypermagnesemia (less than 7 mg/dL) - Asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic: weakness, nausea, dizziness, and confusion

- Moderate hypermagnesemia (7 to 12 mg/dL) - Decreased reflexes, worsening of the confusional state and sleepiness, bladder paralysis, flushing, headache, and constipation. A slight reduction in blood pressure, bradycardia, and blurred vision caused by diminished accommodation and convergence are usually present.

- Severe hypermagnesemia (greater than 12 mg/dL) - Muscle flaccid paralysis, decreased breathing rate, more evident hypotension and bradycardia, prolongation of the P-R interval, atrioventricular block, and lethargy are common. Coma and cardiorespiratory arrest can occur for higher values (over 15 mg/dL).