The human testes, exhibiting an ellipsoid shape, are two reproductive organs that reside in a sac called the scrotum. Each testis is about 2.5 x 4 cm in diameter, surrounded by an active capsule of connective tissue called tunica albuginea. The parenchyma of the testis is divided roughly into 370 conical lobules by thin septula testis. Within the lobules are the seminiferous tubules as well as inter-tubular tissue. This tissue contains groups of Leydig cells and further cellular elements.

The seminiferous tubules consist of entwined loops whose ends unfold into the open space of the rete testis. Rete testis is a network of tubules found in the hilum of the testicle and function to carry collected sperm to the efferent ducts of the epididymis as the seminiferous tubules secrete it. The germinal epithelium constitutes the seminiferous tubule. The invagination of Sertoli cells houses many cells. These cells include germ cells in different developmental stages such as spermatogonia, primary and secondary spermatocytes, and spermatids. The tight junctions of cellular membranes connect Sertoli cells. The specialized zones of tight junctions form the blood-testis barrier. Germ cells pass the hurdle during maturation, where they get protection from the diffusion of external substances. Sertoli cells are known to be the “biological clock” of the testis. When visualized in histological sections, they manifest rising amounts of lipid droplets with time. Therefore, the increasing numbers of lipids correlate to the advancing age of the individual.

Other functions attributable to Sertoli cells include providing nutrition for the germ cells, delivering mature spermatids to the tubular lumen, regulating spermatogenesis by producing endocrine and paracrine substances, maintaining the epithelia of the efferent ductal system by secreting ABP (androgen binding protein) as well as interacting with the inter-tubular Leydig cells. The lamina propria of seminiferous tubules, also known as the peritubular tissue, constitutes the basement membrane of the basal lamina and functions to surround the cellular elements. It consists of connective tissue intermingled around five layers of myofibroblasts. These myofibroblasts play a vital role in the peristaltic contraction of seminiferous tubules to allow for the transport of immotile spermatozoa to the hilum of the testis, the rete testis. Peritubular tissue usually is about 8 micrometers in thickness. Alteration of spermatogenesis can increase the width to 12 micrometers by connective tissue.

Leydig cells, which are most prominent in the inter-tubular space, form clusters surrounding the capillaries. They produce and secrete one of the essential male reproductive hormones, testosterone. Testosterone is vital for male reproduction as it activates the hypophyseal testicular axis. It is crucial for the development of male genital organs as well as masculinization and formation of the secondary sex characteristics. Testosterone plays a significant role in initiating, processing, and maintaining spermatogenesis. Hormone production does not correlate with the number of Leydig cells. Immunohistochemical investigations prove that the creation of testosterone only takes place in a few Leydig cells despite their increased number. An increased number of cells occurs in hyperplasia or tumors.