The superior mesenteric artery can be stenosed or become narrowed leading to acute mesenteric ischemia. If not recognized it can lead to gangrene of the bowel. The superior mesenteric artery may develop low flow as a result of hypotension from any cause, or it may be become occluded as a result of atherosclerosis or an embolus.

An acute mesenteric arterial embolism is of myocardial origin in most cases. Classic causes include atrial thrombi, mural thrombus following a myocardial infarct, atrial fibrillation, mycotic aneurysms, or thrombi from atherosclerotic plaques.

Arterial thrombosis of the superior mesenteric artery is usually due to visceral atherosclerosis. Symptoms typically do not appear until all the branches of the mesenteric artery are blocked. The thrombus results in a gradual decrease in blood flow and over time the patient develops abdominal pain after eating. If not recognized, the bowel can become necrotic. Elevated serum lactate may be found due to bowel ischemia. Emergent CT Angiogram of the abdomen is indicated if one suspects acute mesenteric ischemia.

Treatment options for acute thrombosis include open surgery, percutaneous angioplasty, and stenting or thrombolytic therapy. The condition carries very high mortality if there is a delay in treatment.

Nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia results in decreased perfusion of the bowel. It may be due to septic shock, a myocardial infarct, hypovolemia, or the use of high doses of vasopressors which can cause vasoconstriction.