# Continuing Education Activity

Atazanavir is FDA approved for treating HIV-1 infection, in combination with other antiretroviral agents, for patients who are 3-months-old or older, weighing 5 or more kilograms. It is in the protease inhibitor class of HIV-1 medications. This activity will highlight the indications, mechanism of action, administration, adverse effects, contraindications, and monitoring for atazanavir pertinent for healthcare team members in the management of patients with HIV/AIDS.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of atazanavir.
- Describe the potential adverse effects of atazanavir.
- Explain appropriate monitoring strategies to identify potential atazanavir toxicity in patients.
- Outline the importance of communication and coordination of care among the interprofessional team and how it can enhance patient care when monitoring atazanavir treatment to improve HIV/AIDS patient outcomes.

# Indications

Atazanavir is indicated for the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection.

Atazanavir therapy works in combination with other anti-HIV drugs.

Because of cross-resistance among antiretroviral agents, information on the baseline mutations in the virus, as determined by genotype testing, should guide the drug regimen selection, especially in patients who have had prior treatment with protease inhibitors.

Atazanavir is not recommended to children younger than three months of age, and the optimal dosage remains unestablished. Atazanavir may cause kernicterus in this group as it is a competitive inhibitor of an enzyme that catalyzes bilirubin glucuronidation.

# Mechanism of Action

Human immunodeficiency virus is a lentivirus in the retrovirus family.

The life cycle of HIV provides several drug targets.

The first drug approved as an anti-HIV agent was azidothymidine (zidovudine), a nucleoside analog of thymidine without 3’-hydroxyl group on the sugar.

Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors also bind to the enzyme, but not at the same sites where the nucleotide substrate binds. Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors are non-competitive inhibitors of reverse transcriptase. The six FDA-approved non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors are delavirdine, doravirine, efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, and rilpivirine.

Viral integrase enzyme is essential for the integration of proviral DNA into the host chromosome. The four FDA-approved viral integrase inhibitors are bictegravir, dolutegravir, elvitegravir, and raltegravir are integrase inhibitors.

Due to the essential role of HIV protease in the production of the mature virus, HIV protease has been the target for anti-HIV drugs. The ten FDA approved protease inhibitors are amprenavir, atazanavir, darunavir, fosamprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, saquinavir, and tipranavir. These drugs are peptide mimetics that compete with the Gag and Gag-Pol proteins, which are natural substrates of HIV protease.

Additionally, enfuvirtide and maraviroc are viral entry inhibitors. Enfuvirtide is a peptide mimic to the region of the HIV-1 glycoprotein 41 that is essential for the entry of HIV-1 to the host cells. Maraviroc is a chemokine receptor CCR5 inhibitor. The CCR5 is a co-receptor that HIV uses for host cell entry.

These therapeutics are used in various combinations, called antiretroviral treatment (ART), to combat the rapid mutation rate that leads to the evolution of drug resistance seen in HIV.

# Administration

Atazanavir administration is via the oral route. Administration with food has demonstrated enhanced bioavailability and reduced pharmacokinetic variability. Gastric acid is necessary for the dissolution of atazanavir. Therefore, co-administration of antacids, buffered medications, proton pump inhibitors, and histamine H2-receptor antagonists requires a careful plan for separated dosing time.

Atazanavir is the first once-daily administered protease inhibitor; administration is with low dose ritonavir or cobicistat. Cobicistat and ritonavir are cytochrome P450 (CYP3A4) inhibitors. Because the same enzyme metabolizes atazanavir, co-administration with cobicistat or ritonavir will increase the bioavailability of atazanavir. Atazanavir without these pharmacokinetic boosts may be administered in patients with underlying hyperlipidemia, as ritonavir-boosted therapy may enhance the risk of hyperlipidemia.

# Adverse Effects

Common adverse effects are hyperbilirubinemia (35 to 49% in adults, 16% in children), rash (up to 21%), hypercholesterolemia (6 to 25%), hyperamylasemia (14 to 33%), jaundice (5 to 9% in adults, 13 to 15% in children), nausea (3 to 14%), cough (21% in children), and fever (2% in adults, 18-19% in children). Severe adverse effects are Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic skin eruptions, erythema multiforme, angioedema, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, interstitial nephritis, diabetic ketoacidosis, and AV block. Other potential adverse effects are nephrolithiasis, cholelithiasis, hyperlipidemia, hypertriglyceridemia, bleeding, pancreatitis, exacerbation of diabetes mellitus or hyperglycemia, and lactic acidosis in combination with nucleoside analogs.

Although immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) is not a direct side effect of atazanavir, a pathological inflammatory response may occur after initiation of antiretroviral treatment for HIV infection. Up to a 75% mortality rate in IRIS with tuberculosis in the central nervous system has been reported.

# Contraindications

Hypersensitivity reaction to atazanavir in the form of a mild rash, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic skin eruptions, or erythema multiforme may occur. Atazanavir should be discontinued in patients who develop serious hypersensitivity reactions.

Atazanavir metabolism occurs via CYP3A4 and inhibits CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and CYP2C9.

# Monitoring

Human immunodeficiency virus is highly mutatable due to the lack of proofreading capability of viral reverse transcriptase, which creates a higher risk for the development of drug resistance. Viral genetic testing should take place to monitor the occurrence of drug resistance, especially when the viral titer increases.

Research has reported first-degree AV block in patients treated with ritonavir and atazanavir co-administration. An electrocardiogram is necessary for patients who have pre-existing conduction diseases or simultaneously take medications that may cause PR prolongation.

Delayed hypersensitivity to atazanavir or any of its components may develop. A mild rash may often develop but can disappear after 1 to 2 weeks and does not require stopping atazanavir. However, the development of serious reactions to the drug requires monitoring, especially the development of a severe rash, flu-like symptoms, fever, muscle or joint aches, conjunctivitis, blisters, mouth sores, facial swelling, painful/inflamed skin lesions.

Clinicians should monitor the development of acute immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome following the initiation of antiretroviral therapy.

Drug interactions with co-administrated medications should require monitoring, as do hepatic function and renal function. Signs of hepatic impairment include hyperbilirubinemia, elevated liver enzymes in the serum, jaundice, dark-colored urine, light-colored bowel movements, nausea, itching, and abdominal pain.

# Toxicity

There is no specific antidote for atazanavir toxicity. Healthcare staff should provide symptomatic and supportive care. Patient monitoring for signs of respiratory distress and other vital signs is necessary. Electrocardiogram monitoring of the patient is recommended as the atazanavir may worsen AV block due to PR interval prolongation. If the simultaneous overdose with nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors is suspected, clinicians should monitor patients for symptoms of lactic acidosis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Estimates are that more than a million people in the United States have HIV infection. Once diagnosed with HIV infection, immediate initiation of antiretroviral treatment is the recommended course to delay the disease progression from HIV infection to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in the infected patient. This approach requires an interprofessional team effort.

Adherence to the treatment plan is equally crucial to prevent HIV transmission to others by reducing viral load.

Recently, research has shown that a single-tablet regimen improved pharmaceutical adherence over multi-tablet regimens.

In summary, interprofessional healthcare teams can enhance HIV treatment outcomes in various ways, especially by improving drug adherence through education, careful monitoring, and consideration of the patient's needs and lifestyle. [Level 5]