A high index of suspicion in the appropriate clinical setting and a low threshold for further evaluation is imperative for early diagnosis and treatment, which significantly reduces morbidity and mortality. Laboratory findings are often non-specific and may show a high blood sugar reading with/without evidence of acidosis or ketoacidosis. An arterial blood gas report can rule out acidosis, dyselectrolytemia, and serum or urine ketone tests can screen for ketone bodies. A complete blood cell count can rule out a neutropenic state. Iron studies might be required to rule out suspected iron overload states in the form of low total iron-binding capacity and high ferritin values.

Computed tomography (CT) scan can demonstrate the nature and extent of soft tissue abnormalities in the sinuses, orbits, and brain. Mucosal thickening of sinuses along with opacification is often noted. Edema, inflammation, and infarcts in the brain are also detected. CT scan is advantageous over magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) due to its ability to detect bony erosion and necrosis though such findings indicate an advanced disease with a poor prognosis. A contrast CT scan also shows evidence of cavernous sinus thrombosis and enhancement of vessels. MRI is more helpful over the CT brain in clearly delineating early vascular invasion, intracranial spread, and also in the assessment for early perineural spread. A T2 weighted MRI with fat saturation sequences or short- TI inversion recovery (STIR) images is ideal.

Definite diagnosis is arrived at only by demonstrating the characteristic ribbon-shaped non-septate or pauciseptate, irregularly branching hyphae in the tissue specimens, and the finding is further strengthened by demonstrating thrombosis of the vessels signifying angioinvasion. Fresh tissue specimens subjected to PCR techniques often show high sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis. The biopsy specimens could be fresh, frozen, and/or permanent. If safe and feasible, an arterial biopsy needs to be considered, if all the available tissue specimens come back negative for fungal hyphae despite a high degree of suspicion.

Tissue cultures are rarely positive, and extreme caution needs to be exercised to avoid the homogenization process, which will destroy the fragile hyphae. Fine mincing of the tissues is preferred over-grinding or crushing to preserve the hyphae. The culture positivity could be challenging at times since the differentiation between colonization versus contamination versus pathogenicity could be difficult. It is a well-accepted fact that Mucorales could be a colonizer in airways or could often contaminate microbiology specimens.

PCR techniques can help in identifying the fungal species in histologic specimens, even when the culture is negative. MALDI -TOF mass spectrometry can be used for species identification in culture specimens.