The majority of the institutions consider LAAC when AF patients are at high thromboembolic risk (with a CHADS2DS2-Vasc score of greater than or equal to 3 or CHADS2 score of greater than or equal to 2) with contraindication for long term oral anticoagulants (OACs), as well as patients with thromboembolic events despite adequate use of OACs. It is also indicated when there is a high probability of therapeutic non-compliance to OACs and patients with OAC intolerance. The 2019 American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines on the management of atrial fibrillation gave a class IIb recommendation for percutaneous LAAC in patients with an increased risk of stroke who cannot tolerate long term anticoagulation.

The depth of the left atrial appendage must be at least longer than the width of the ostium of the LAA for optimal device deployment and closure of LAA. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved only one device for stroke and systemic embolism reduction in 2015, the Watchman (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA). However, its use is limited to patients at increased stroke risk and can tolerate short-term anticoagulation. Another device used off-label for LAAC is the Lariat (SentreHeart Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA), which is FDA-approved for facilitating percutaneous ligation of LAA. Percutaneous LAAC is performed off-label for patients intolerant to OACs and at high risk of stroke. However, there is a lack of strong evidence supporting its use in these patients. In AF patients undergoing cardiac surgery, concomitant surgical ligation of the left atrial appendage is a class IIb indication.