Clinical diagnostic sputum tests aim to detect the causes of lower respiratory tract infections and some other diseases. It also provides an efficacious tool for monitoring the effectiveness of clinical treatment. Sputum culture is the most common test needed to be performed when the patient has pneumonia. It is used to identify the bacteria or fungi causing the airways or lung infection.

Sputum smear microscopy is the initial step taken in laboratory sputum analysis. It is a fast and inexpensive technique, precisely, in resource-limited settings. Gram stain is used to differentiate bacteria into two broad groups (gram-positive and gram-negative microorganisms). The Gram stain is the first staining technique performed in preliminary bacterial identification, which helps determine if there is an adequate amount of pathogens in the culture and make a definitive diagnosis. It is also crucial because it can address antibiotic therapy more specifically. With the Gram stain, the bacterial species are distinguished into gram-positive and gram-negative groups by the differences in cell walls' physical and chemical properties. Some bacteria have a thick peptidoglycan layer cell wall stained with crystal violet (gram-positive).

In contrast, some other bacteria have a thinner peptidoglycan layer stained red or pink by counterstain (gram-negative).Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Mycobacteria are a group of rod-shaped acid-fast bacilli. They can be distinguished under the microscope after an AFB staining procedure where the bacilli retain the stain color after an acid-fast wash. The Grocott-Gomori's methenamine silver stain (GMS) is a standard staining method used to detect fungal microorganisms. GMS staining is critical in identifying Pneumocystis jirovecii. This microorganism first appeared in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in the 1980s, and it was used to be classified as a protozoan. This microorganism, which is now classified as a fungus, was initially called Pneumocystis carinii. Colony morphology is a method that describes the characteristics of an individual colony of bacteria growing on agar in a Petri dish. It can help the lab technologist to identify some specific bacteria.

However, only relying on microscopic observation and colony morphology maybe not be enough to get the relevant information of the species and genus of etiologic microorganisms. Biochemical tests of bacterial growth are the next step to perform to recognize the bacteria. The common biochemical tests used to identify bacterial growth include motility, McFarland standard, fluid thioglycollate medium (FTM), catalase, and oxidase tests.

Respiratory viruses have been tested in sputum specimens from patients with cystic fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Sputum cytology examination is using a microscope to determine whether abnormal cells are present in sputum samples. The thin layer of sputum placed on a slide before specific staining and diagnosed directly under the microscope helps find out some abnormal cells. Sputum cytology helps detect both lung cancer cells and non-cancer cellular and acellular material useful for the diagnosis of conditions such as pneumonia, tuberculosis, interstitial lung diseases, or pneumoconiosis (e.g., asbestosis). Hematoxylin and eosin stain is the worldwide most performed tissue stain in medical laboratory diagnosis. It is often considered the gold standard.

Further, Wright stain, Giemsa stain, and Wright-Giemsa mixture stain are used for staining the sputum smears. These stain methods facilitate the differentiation of blood cell types by using specific solutions. These staining methods help detect abnormal white blood cells of sputum, which are vital signs of lung infection.

Sputum molecular analysis is a new insight and advanced technique used to detect lung cancer-related biomarkers to assist in the early stage of a lung cancer diagnosis. Many DNA mutations, such as p53, KRAS, EML4-ALK, and GFR mutations, have been investigated on sputum specimens.APRIL, MAGE, Telomerase, CEA, et al., have been found rapidly degraded in sputum specimens of lung cancer patients by RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry.

Finally, sputum antimicrobial susceptibility testing is performed on the bacteria or fungi, leading to lung infection after being identified in a sputum culture sample. The most common approaches consist of the disk diffusion and minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) methods. These tests are used to detect the effectiveness of the specific antibiotics on the bacteria or to detect whether the bacteria have already developed resistance to certain antibiotics or not. The results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing help to select the most likely effective antibiotics in treating lung infection.