Drug development refers to the process of introducing a new pharmaceutical agent to the market following the discovery, synthesis, or modification of a compound. It includes pre-clinical research as well as drug trials involving human subjects.

Pre-clinical investigations are non-human studies that involve testing the drug in microorganisms and animal subjects to generate data on its toxicity, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics. If further studies will take place in human subjects in the United States, this data requires submission to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for approval of an investigational new drug (IND) application. Other countries typically have a similar approval process. Once the IND application gets approved, the investigational drug undergoes various phases of human drug trials. If the drug tests as safe and efficacious during phases I to III of the drug trials, the drug sponsor can submit a New Drug Application (NDA) to the FDA. The national drug regulatory authority then reviews the application to determine whether the drug can receive final approval for marketing.

Drug trials in human subjects are generally subdivided into five phases, with each phase comprised of at least one distinct clinical trial. The drug is usually approved for use in the general population by the national regulatory authority if it successfully passes through drug trial phases I, II, and III. The entire drug development process usually takes several years to proceed through all the phases.

Phase 0 trials are optional, exploratory, first-in-human trials that are designed to determine whether the drug affects human subjects as expected from earlier pre-clinical investigations. These trials involve the administration of low, nontherapeutic doses of the study drug to a small number of participants (typically 10 to 15) and help gather preliminary data on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the drug in human subjects.

Phase I drug trials screen the investigational drug for safety. These trials help determine a safe dose range and identify any side effects associated with the new drug. Drug testing occurs over a few weeks or a month in a small group of healthy volunteers (usually 20 to 80).

In phase II clinical trials, the experimental drug testing takes place within a larger group of participants (typically 100 to 300) to determine its efficacy and to further evaluate its safety. Phase II trials usually last for months and involve participants with the target disease or condition.

Once preliminary evidence from phase II trials establishes the efficacy of the drug, phase III trials are conducted to obtain final confirmation of its safety and effectiveness. This phase involves a complete examination of the risk/benefit profile of the drug, usually comparing it to commonly used treatments in a broader population (typically 1000 to 3000 subjects) over a longer period (often six months).

Phase IV drug trials take place following the approval of the drug to be sold in the market and provide additional evidence regarding the risks, benefits, and optimal use of the drug. Of the phase IV studies, those non-interventional studies that are mandated by the regulatory authority to verify the tolerability, safety, and effectiveness of a marketed drug in the real-world setting are termed post-marketing surveillance (PMS) studies. Post-marketing safety surveillance helps detect any long-term or rare adverse effects over a longer period of time and in a much larger patient population than is possible in any of the other phases of drug trials. In addition to safety monitoring, post-marketing surveillance studies also help in the planned collection of clinical data related to the use of a drug in a varied spectrum of patients, thus, yielding data that researchers may not have gathered during phase III studies.

Investigator-initiated or academic clinical trials are clinical studies initiated and conducted by a non-pharmaceutical company researcher, who could be an individual investigator, a collaborative study group, or an institution. The key premise in this type of clinical trial is that the responsibility of being the sponsor as well as the investigator may lie with the person who designs and conducts the study, though sponsors sometimes fund these trials, especially if they think it may lend support for a new indication. Investigator-initiated trials help generate data on the safety and effectiveness of a drug in the real-world setting. They are largely driven by questions that remain unanswered from phases I to III of drug trials.