Empiric antibiotic therapy, such as intravenous third-generation cephalosporin, should be started in all patients with suspected SBP and a PMN count of greater than 250 cells/microliter on ascitic fluid analysis. Exceptions to this rule include patients with recent beta-lactam antibiotic exposure or diagnosis of SBP in a nosocomial setting. Antibiotics should be chosen based on the results of susceptibility testing in these cases.

Patients with an ascitic fluid PMN count of greater than 500cells/uL should be admitted and treated with empiric antibiotic therapy as soon as possible, and the antibiotics adjusted later based on the results of susceptibility testing. A follow-up analysis of ascitic fluid to assess PMN count should be performed to ensure the patient receives adequate and appropriate antibiotic therapy. This is important, as lack of improvement after 48 hours of therapy may indicate an underlying perforation or abscess formation, such as secondary bacterial peritonitis, that may require surgery. In general, ascitic fluid PMN count should be reduced by at least 25% after 48 hours of antibiotic therapy.

Some cirrhotic patients with SBP and either a serum creatinine higher than 1 mg/dL, a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) higher than 30mg/dL, or total bilirubin greater than 4 mg/dL should be given adjunctive (i.e., in addition to antibiotics) albumin intravenously. This has been shown to reduce both in-hospital mortality and renal damage compared to the use of antibiotic therapy alone.

Certain high-risk patients may benefit from outpatient antibiotic prophylactic therapy, including norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. These individuals have had a prior episode of SBP, or ascitic fluid with either a low protein count (< 1 g/dL) or is associated with a GI bleed.

A common related concern to antibiotic prophylaxis is antibiotic resistance, especially in those centers which particularly use fluoroquinolone as SBP prophylaxis. In these patients, cefotaxime is the treatment of choice. Piperacillin-tazobactam or a carbapenem can also be used as an alternative empirically if cefotaxime can not be utilized.

Renal failure is the major cause of death in patients with SBP and develops in 30 to 40 percent of the patients. The risk can be minimized by giving IV albumin. IV albumin should be given when the creatinine is > 1 mg/dl, the blood urea nitrogen is > 30 mg/dl, or the total bilirubin is > 4 mg/dl. Treatment with octreotide or midodrine is helpful if renal failure develops.