Phosphate is responsible for several functions in the human body. Its role in different parts of the body are as follows:

**Bone mineralization**: phosphate is responsible for mineralization of the bony matrix. This process begins in the matrix vesicle, which are extracellular structures derived from the cell membrane of the osteoblast and chondrocytes. Matrix vesicles acquire phosphate by two pathways:

- Tissue nonspecific Alkaline phosphatase present within matrix vesicles hydrolyzes phosphoric esters to inorganic phosphate.

- Matrix vesicles uptake extracellular phosphate via Type II Na/Pi cotransporter.

Matrix vesicles form hydroxyapatite crystals from calcium and phosphate; these crystals mineralize the extracellular matrix of the bone.

**Endochondral Ossification**: Phosphate is responsible for endochondral ossification of the bone as increased intracellular phosphate levels induce apoptosis of the terminally differentiated chondrocytes.

**Teeth**: Phosphate is important for mineralization of all the structural components of the teeth i.e., it is an integral component of enamel, dentin, cementum, and alveolar bone.

**Cellular functions**: In the cells, phosphate is an important component of the lipid bilayer of cell membranes, DNA, RNA, and proteins. It is responsible for several enzymatic reactions within the cells, e.g., glycolysis and ammoniagenesis. It modifies the actions of different molecules by getting attached or detached from them in response to kinases and phosphates. It also carries out oxidative phosphorylation, which is the reaction that converts adenosine diphosphate to adenosine triphosphate, the energy currency of the cell.

Phosphate has a role in the oxygen-carrying capacity of hemoglobin by regulating the synthesis of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate.

****Urinary Buffer**:**Inorganic phosphate ( HPO42-)  is an important urinary buffer, as it can bind reversibly bind with free hydrogen ions, and its PKA, which is 6.8, is also very close to plasma pH. Also, the concentration of phosphate increases as the fluid is resorbed within the tubule, thus making it an excellent buffer.****