HLA-B27 associated syndromes frequently present in particular patterns that are critical to recognize in assessment for these diseases.

The cardinal feature of axial spondyloarthritis is inflammatory back pain. This condition may be differentiated from more common mechanical causes of back pain by the insidious onset of symptoms over three months at age under 45, prominent nocturnal pain in the second half of the night, morning stiffness with improvement with exercise, and lack of improvement with rest.

Peripheral predominant presentations of spondyloarthritis share similar extra spinal features of the disease, including inflammatory arthritis, dactylitis, and enthesitis.

Patients with reactive arthritis typically present with a sudden onset of oligoarthritis. Identification of preceding genitourinary or enteric infection, typically in the preceding 1 to 4 weeks, may differentiate reactive arthritis from other forms of inflammatory arthritis.  Urethritis and uveitis may also be associated.

Acute anterior uveitis (AAU) has been strongly linked with HLA-B27 and is the most common cause of non-infectious uveitis. HLA-B27 associated uveitis is more common in younger patients with a typical age range of 20 to 40.

Inflammatory bowel disease may predate the onset of enteropathic arthritis or occur later in the disease course.  Attention is necessary to any changes in bowel habits and blood in the stool. Additionally, many patients may experience subclinical colonic inflammation.