**In the Abdomen**

The femoral nerve begins its course in the abdomen by passing through the psoas major muscle. It then traverses laterally to the distal part of the psoas major muscle, and finally, it is "sandwiched" between the iliacus muscle and the psoas major muscle.

**In the Pelvis**

The femoral nerve then enters the thigh. To do so, it must enter the femoral triangle by running inferior to the inguinal ligament. The femoral triangle is formed by three structures: sartorius (laterally), adductor longus (medially), and the inguinal ligament (superiorly).****A memory aid to remember the order of the structures is NAVEL from lateral to medial. N = femoral nerve; A = femoral artery; V = femoral vein; EL = empty space with lymphatics (femoral canal with lymph node of Cloquet). About 4 cm below the inguinal ligament, the femoral nerve then divides into anterior and posterior divisions. The two divisions of the femoral nerve are distinguishable because the lateral femoral cutaneous artery splits them.

**Anterior Division**

The anterior division of the femoral nerve has four terminal branches, two motor and two sensory. The motor branches are the nerve to the pectineus and the nerve to the sartorius. These muscles help to flex the thigh at the hip as well. The pectineus muscle is a

The sensory branches of the anterior division are the medial cutaneous nerve of the thigh and the intermediate cutaneous nerve of the thigh. These nerves are collectively responsible for the anteromedial sensory innervation of the thigh.

**Posterior Division**

The posterior division of the femoral nerve has a sensory nerve, four motor branches, and nerves to the hip and knee joints (articular branches). The sensory nerve is called the saphenous nerve and is the largest cutaneous branch of the femoral nerve. It is responsible for sensory innervation along the anteromedial and posteromedial aspects of the leg into the medial foot.

The four motor branches of the posterior division of the femoral nerve are nerves to the rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus intermedius, and vastus lateralis. These muscles are the principal extensors of the leg at the knee and collectively form the quadriceps femoris muscle.

Lastly, branches from the posterior division of the femoral nerve also supply the knee and hip joints, termed articular joint nerves. The nerve to the rectus femoris supplies the hip, while all three nerves supply the knee joint as well as innervating the vastus medialis, vastus intermedius, and vastus lateralis. The articular nerves innervate the fibrous capsule, ligaments, and synovial membranes of the joints, following Hilton's law. Hilton's law is named for the English surgeon Dr. John Hilton, who noted that the nerve innervating the muscles which act on a joint also innervates the joint itself and often the skin over the joint as well.