**Timing of Postnatal Visits**

In April 2018, The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) recommends12 weeks of support, rather than a single six-week postpartum visit. ACOG also recommends postpartum evaluation within the first 3 weeks after delivery in-person or by phone, which later is followed up with ongoing care as needed, concluding with a comprehensive postpartum visit no later than 12 weeks.

**Components of Postpartum Care**

- **Vaginal pain:**Genital tract trauma is obvious with spontaneous vaginal delivery.

- **Vaginal bleeding/discharge:**Bloody vaginal discharge (lochia rubra) is heavy for the first 3-4 days, and slowly it becomes watery in consistency and color changes to pinkish-brown (lochia serosa). After the next 10-12 days, it changes to yellowish-white (lochia alba).  Advise women to seek medical attention if heavy vaginal bleeding persists (soaking a pad or more in less than an hour). Women with heavy, persistent postpartum bleeding should be evaluated for complications such as retained placenta, uterine atony, rarely invasive placenta, or coagulation disorders.

- **Breastfeeding:**Breastfeeding is beneficial for the mother and the newborn.

- **Nutrition and exercise:**Women at higher risk for postpartum weight retention are those with higher gestational weight gain, black race, and lower socioeconomic status, which at the same time increase their risk of future obesity and type 2 diabetes.

- **Breast engorgement:**Women may experience full, firm, and tender breasts after the delivery. Frequent breastfeeding on both breasts is recommended to avoid engorgement.

- **Bladder and bowel function:**Voiding must be encouraged and monitored to prevent asymptomatic bladder overfilling. Women are encouraged to use mild laxatives such as docusate, psyllium, bisacodyl if defecation has not occurred within 3 days of delivery. Another consideration is Osmotic laxatives as polyethylene glycol and lactulose.

- **Sexual relations:**Libido may decrease after the delivery because of decreased estrogen levels. This may not return for as long as 1 year postpartum, particularly in women who are breastfeeding. Reassurance is usually appropriate.  Advice women to wait for their perineal area to heal before resuming sexual activity, and it may take 4-6 weeks for the perineal tears to heal completely. Health care providers should be more comfortable discussing women about sexuality during the early postpartum period.

- **Contraception:**The prenatal period is the best time to discuss postpartum contraception. In adolescents begin motivational interviewing, discussion of long-acting reversible contraception during pregnancy.

- **Education:**Health care providers should provide essential education regarding newborn care, such as umbilical cord care, bathing, breastfeeding, and the importance of immunizations.

- **Miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death:**For mothers who experience any pregnancy loss, it is essential to ensure follow-up. Key elements are to provide emotional support and bereavement counseling; referral, if appropriate, to counselor and support groups. Also review of any laboratory or pathology studies related to the loss and counseling regarding recurrent risk and future pregnancy planning.