**Postpartum Endometritis**

Postpartum endometritis typically presents with fever, uterine tenderness, and lower abdominal pain, which is typically significant. Additionally, lochia may be purulent, foul-smelling, and heavier than usual due to subinvolution of the uterus (which is more common with uterine infections).

It is also important to maintain a high index of suspicion for maternal sepsis. In addition to fever and tachycardia, signs include hypotension, hypothermia, altered mental status, and evidence of end-organ dysfunction. Clostridium species is often particularly severe, and can quickly develop into toxic shock syndrome and/or necrotizing fasciitis.

**Acute Endometritis**

Patients are typically sexually active individuals who present with lower abdominal or pelvic pain and often deep dyspareunia that is typically bilateral and has developed acutely over several days.

The history should also attempt to identify common risk factors for PID, which include:

- Age < 25

- Multiple, new, or symptomatic sex partners

- Nonbarrier contraception (e.g., oral contraceptive pills, IUDs)

- Recent IUD insertion

- History of STIs

The key finding on physical exam is significant tenderness to palpation of the infected internal genital organs. In cases of endometritis, this is typically seen as significant uterine tenderness on pelvic and abdominal examinations; concurrent cervical motion tenderness and adnexal tenderness are also common. Cervical inflammation with purulent discharge is often present, and a sample should be obtained for diagnostic testing.

**Chronic Endometritis**

Chronic endometritis is often asymptomatic, though it may present with some bleeding irregularities, vague pelvic discomfort, and/or leukorrhea.