**Challenges/Complication During the Awake Phase**

- Seizures: incidence of seizure is 2% to 20% in awake craniotomy. A seizure occurs most commonly during stimulation for brain mapping. Many intraoperative seizures are focal, brief, and resolve spontaneously, whereas others are generalized. Patients with a history of seizures and younger patients, especially with tumors of the frontal lobe, are more prone to seizures.

- Hypertension: Hypertension is commonly secondary to pain, agitation, and anxiety. However, other causes like hypoxia, hypercapnia must be checked. Underlying causes should be taken care of, and Labetalol or esmolol may be administered as a temporizing measure.

- Nausea and vomiting – Nausea is seen in approximately 4 percent of patients undergoing awake craniotomy. It is usually due to opioids, anxiety, or surgical stimulation. Ondansetron, dexamethasone, and propofol are suitable drugs to manage nausea and vomiting.

- Respiratory complications: Airway obstruction may occur due to excessive sedation, causing hypoxia and hypercarbia. Oral/ nasopharyngeal airways may relieve airway obstruction but assisted ventilation and a supraglottic intubation device may be needed to manage hypoxia and hypercarbia.

- Air Embolism: Incidence of venous air embolism is as high as 20 to 40% during craniotomy in sitting position. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is the most sensitive device to detect air embolism.  It can detect as little as 0.02 mL/kg of air, but it is invasive. Precordialdoppler is the most commonly used device for the detection of air embolism.

- Hyponatremia: Hyponatremia is the most frequent electrolyte imbalance in neurosurgical patients. Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) is the most common cause of hyponatremia. Still, other causes like Acute ACTH deficiency or Cerebral salt wasting syndrome (CSWS) should also be considered. SIADH is characterized by inappropriate water retention leading to dilutional hyponatremia in a clinically euvolemic patient, whereas excessive natriuresis resulting in relative hypovolemia is seen in CSWS. Hyponatremia may increase intracranial pressure, delayed awakening, and neurologic deterioration.

- Failed awake craniotomy: Awake craniotomy was considered a failure if conversion to general anesthesia was required or if adequate mapping or monitoring could not have been achieved. Failed awake craniotomy occurs in about 2 percent (0% to 6%) of awake craniotomies,  may be minimized by appropriate patient selection.

**Postoperative Care**

After the surgery, the patient is usually transferred to a high dependency unit or ICU. Pain management can be achieved by multi-modal analgesia technique utilizing regional anesthesia technique (scalp block or local infiltration), acetaminophen, small doses of opioids intravenously, including patient-controlled analgesia. Postoperative analgesic requirement and the incidence of nausea and vomiting are lower in awake craniotomy than craniotomy under general anesthesia.