Ocular hypotony is often encountered because of the excessive drainage of aqueous humor from the eye, which could occur following glaucoma filtering surgery or perforating globe injury. Less frequently, ocular hypotony can result from reduced aqueous humor production, secondary to intraocular inflammation. Following a decrease in the volume of circulating aqueous, the anterior-posterior axial length of the eyeball decreases with an accompanying inward displacement of the scleral wall. This creates redundancy in the choroid and retina, which manifests as choroidal-retinal folds that can be observed clinically as macular striae, retinal pigment epithelium changes, and retinal vascular tortuosity. With a decrease in the anteroposterior diameter of the vitreous cavity, the thick perifoveal retina is thrown into radial folds around the fovea.

The clinical entity described is known as hypotony maculopathy. Hypotony maculopathy occurs in up to 20% of cases after glaucoma filtering surgery. The occurrence of this complication has become more common after introducing antimetabolites.

Other effects of ocular hypotony include a hyperopic shift in refraction due to a reduction in axial length. Because of the anterior bowing of the lamina cribrosa, there is restricted axoplasmic flow, which results in optic disc swelling. The edges of the Bruch membrane and the openings in the lamina cribrosa are thought to constrict axon bundles in ocular hypotony. Also, the finding of optic disc swelling has been associated with posterior globe flattening.

Other common posterior segment associations of ocular hypotony after glaucoma surgeries include choroidal detachment and ocular decompression retinopathy.**Figure 2**shows a post-operative choroidal detachment on the B scan of a patient's right eye after glaucoma filtering surgery resulted in ocular hypotony.**Figure 3**, a repeat B scan after normalization of the IOP weeks later, shows a complete resolution of the choroidal detachment and a normal-appearing posterior segment.