In the evaluation of an ankle injury, a practitioner should elicit a history of the mechanism of injury. The practitioner should also investigate whether the injury involved inversion, eversion, rotational stressing, or direct contact, and take into account a history of previous ankle injuries and the patient's ability to bear weight after the injury.

Physical examination should include inspection, palpation, and functional testing. Each of the three lateral ligaments should be palpated at the anterior (ATFL), inferior (CFL), and posterior (PTFL) aspects of the lateral malleoli. The medial ankle should also be palpated along with the entire fibula.  Palpation of the proximal fibula is critical to elicit for pain and/or crepitus, which may suggest a maisonneuve fracture pattern.  The latter consists of a high grade ankle injury, typically involving an exerternal rotational force with associated fibular fracture component depending on inversion or eversion position of the hindfoot.  The maisonneuve fracture pattern disrupts the deltoid ligament, the syndesmotic ligaments, and the fracture force propagating proximally and exiting as a fracture of the proximal fibula.

The foot should also be palpated for associated injuries, particularly over the base of the fifth metatarsal, the navicular, and the midfoot to rule out a potential lisfranc injury.  In the latter, plantar-based ecchymosis is often observed on the inspection part of the physical examination.

Evidence of a syndesmotic sprain can be elicited with the squeeze test and the external rotation stress test. A positive squeeze test results in pain in the area of the tibiofibular syndesmosis when the mid-calf is compressed and released. To perform the external rotation stress test, externally rotate the slightly dorsiflexed foot. Pain with this maneuver is a positive result and suggests a syndesmotic sprain.  This examination can be done under live fluoroscopy in the operating room or in a static radiograph with the foot/ankle positioned in the same position as obtaining a mortise ankle radiographic film.  The other stress examination is the gravity stress view.  To obtain a gravity stress view, the patient is positioned in the contralateral lateral decubitus position with the injuried extremity/fibula pointed upward and the leg elevated with a leg holder.  The cassette is positioned posterior to the heel of the affected ankle, and the beam again directed at an angle of 15-20 degrees of internal rotation to view the ankle in the "mortise trajectory"

Stability of the ATFL can be assessed with the anterior drawer test. This is performed by stabilizing the distal leg with one hand while the other hands grasp the calcaneus. With the foot in 20 degrees of plantar flexion, the examiner pulls forward on the calcaneus. Greater than 1 cm of translation of the foot compared with the uninjured leg suggests ligamentous laxity.

The talar tilt test also assesses the lateral ankle ligaments for laxity, specifically calcaneofibular ligamentous laxity. The test is performed by stabilizing the distal leg in a neutral position while the examiner inverts the ankle. The degree of inversion is compared with the uninjured ankle. Both the talar tilt test and anterior drawer test can be falsely negative soon after the injury due to pain and muscle spasm.