Medical clearance: risk stratification and medical optimization for general anesthesia are necessary. Patients with an history of depression should be counseled that depression may recur during the postoperative period.

Neurologic examination: trigeminal and facial nerve function requires documentation.

Pre-operative photography: static and dynamic images in a frontal, three-quarter, and lateral views should adequately document ear position/shape, facial asymmetries, hairlines, and patterns of muscle action. The "chin-down" position is very useful to assess the effectiveness of any facelift on the cervico-mental angle and the neck in general.

The surgeon should mark the incisions in the temporal hairline (to ensure maximal preservation of hairline) and post-tragal (pre-auricular in men to avoid transplanting hair-bearing skin onto the tragus). A retro-auricular incision and occipital hairline incision may be needed depending on the amount of planed dissection and skin redundancy.

Important landmarks are identified including the trajectory of the temporal branch of the facial nerve (0.5 cm inferior to the tragus to 1.5 cm superior to the lateral brow

Anesthesia: although the deep plane facelift may be performed entirely under local anesthesia, general anesthesia or intravenous techniques (i.e., propofol) are advisable to ensure patient comfort. Muscle relaxants are avoided to allow monitoring of the facial nerve.

Administration of a single dose of intravenous antibiotics covering skin flora should take place pre-operatively.

A single dose of an intravenous steroid injection (i.e., 8 mg of dexamethasone) may help with swelling.

Local anesthesia is infiltrated along the proposed incision lines and beneath the area of planned subcutaneous dissection.