The majority of colorectal cancer, including rectal cancer, is sporadic (70%), with an average age diagnosis after 50 years old. A minority of patients (10%) show a true inheritance pattern (which carries a higher risk in patients younger than 50), and the remaining 20% of rectal cancer is seen as familial clustering in the absence of identifiable inherited syndrome. Approximately 5% of all CRC cancers are attributed to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and Lynch syndrome (hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer [HNPCC]), the most common named cancer syndromes.

Hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes are discussed in a different StatPearls chapter. Risk factors include: personal or family history of colorectal cancer, adenomatous polyps, and polyps with villous or tubulovillous dysplasia. Patients with these features are at high risk for synchronous or metachronous colorectal primary cancer (up to 3% to 5% at five years) and require close screening. Inflammatory bowel disease (more commonly ulcerative colitis (UC) than Crohn disease) with rectal involvement increases cancer risk. For UC, there is an estimated incidence of 0.5% per year between 10 to 20 years after UC diagnosis, then 1% per year after that with up to 30% probability of colorectal cancer by the fourth decade after diagnosis. Large studies have seen an increased risk of rectal cancer associated with the history of radiation for prostate cancer (HR, 2.06; 95% CI, 1.42 to 2.99).

Epidemiologic studies indicate strong environmental and lifestyle associations for colorectal cancer, and distinct patterns between colon and rectum potentially exist. There is a modestly increased risk of colon cancer seen with risk factors such as obesity, red/processed meat, tobacco, alcohol, androgen deprivation therapy, and cholecystectomy (among others) without any increased risk of rectal cancer. On the other hand, large population studies with variable strength evidence have found protective factors - such as physical activity, diet (fruits and vegetables, fiber, resistant starch, fish), vitamin supplements (folate, folic acid, pyridoxine B6, calcium, vitamin D, magnesium), garlic and coffee, drugs (aspirin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]), hormonal replacement therapy in postmenopausal women, statins, bisphosphonate, and angiotensin inhibitors - protective for both colon and rectal cancer. Interestingly, a randomized controlled clinical trial found that 600 mg of aspirin given to patients with Lynch syndrome had a protective effect against colorectal adenomas and cancer with substantially reduced cancer incidence after 55.7 months with an HR of 0.56 (95% CI; 0.32, 0.99; p = 0.05). However, this association has not been robustly studied in the general population.