Currently, no treatment modality is approved to prevent or reverse visual loss in patients with STGD1. Patients are advised photoprotection to delay the disease progression and low-vision aids for those with visual field loss. Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) injections are the preferred treatment modality for patients who develop CNVM. However, several ongoing clinical trials are investigating various novel therapeutic modalities.

- Pharmacological therapy: Several drugs that can reduce lipofuscin accumulation are being investigated. This can be achieved by either inhibiting the retinoid cycle by inhibiting the key enzymes (emixustat and isotretinoin) or disrupting the transporters like retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4) to decrease the toxic bisretinoids formation (fenretinide, A1120, BPN-14136, STG-001, LBS-008 or tinlarebant).

a) Emixustat hydrochloride (ACU-4429) inhibits the enzyme isomerase RPE65 (all-trans: 11-cis retinol isomerase) in a dose-dependent reversible manner. This prevents the isomerization of all-trans-retinyl ester to 11-cis-retinol, thus reducing the production of toxic by-products like A2E. A Phase 1a study demonstrated a dose-dependent reversible suppression (returned to the baseline by day 7) of the enzyme, which manifested as slow recovery of the rod b-wave amplitude after photobleaching on ERG.

- A Phase 1b study revealed that the drug was systematically safe but had few reversible ocular adverse effects like chromatopsia, blurring of vision, and reduction of visual acuity.

b) ALK-001 (deuterated vitamin A): It slows down the rate of vitamin A dimerization, subsequently decelerating the rate of A2E and lipofuscin formation. Studies evaluating its efficacy in murine models have shown promising results with no adverse effects on retinal functions.

- A Phase II clinical trial evaluated the drug's pharmacokinetics and one-year interim safety in 50 subjects with age ≥18 years who were suffering from ABCA4-related STGD1 and had a well-delineated area of atrophy. Results of the trial showed that it was well-tolerated, and there were no adverse reactions like night blindness, impaired dark adaptation, and clinically-significant derangement of liver function tests or serum vitamin A levels. An expanded study is currently being conducted to recruit new participants aged≥12 years.

c) Fenretinide (retinoid-based RBP4 antagonist): It is a synthetic derivative of vitamin A and is a competitive inhibitor of retinol as it prevents the binding of retinol to the retinal binding protein (RBP) in the eye. The RBP-fenretinide complex gets excreted in the urine, thus reducing the circulating RBP levels. This subsequently enhances the clearance of retinol from the eye and decreases the biosynthesis of A2E.

- A Phase 2 clinical trial demonstrated that 300 mg fenretinide significantly reduces the growth of geographic atrophy and the onset of CNVM in patients with dry age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). However, there are concerns regarding its long-term safety due to reports of teratogenicity and hemangiosarcomas formation in mice.

d) Role of vitamin A: As per the current recommendations, vitamin A dietary supplements are better avoided as excess vitamin A is thought to be detrimental. However, these recommendations have a theoretical basis only. To date, there is little evidence to support or exclude the role of vitamin A in deteriorating the disease.

- Gene therapy: The goal is to introduce a functional ABCA4 gene, which can produce an adequate amount of the standard, active transporter protein in the photoreceptor cells, thus preventing disease progression. Adeno-associated viruses (AAV) are classically used for the effective delivery of genes to the ocular tissues. However, the limited packaging capacity (4.7 kb) of the AAV vector renders it insufficient to pack the large ABCA4 gene (7 kb). This problem can be solved with the help of a "dual-vector strategy," i.e., large genes are split into two halves and packaged in two separate AAV vectors.

- Lentivirus-based vectors have recently been developed to deliver larger genes. One such lentivirus-based vector is delivered subretinally.

- Stem-cell therapy: It can treat the disease by regenerating the RPE cells.