The spinal cord has a significant amount of length in the body. It holds the body upright and a medium through which nerves can enter and exit to their target locations.

In ages younger than 15, it is very rare to encounter a spinal cord injury. Usually, it is the motor vehicle accidents that have been shown to be the major contributor. Data showed, 68% of the patients had an injury to the level of C1 to C4, 25%  had the injury to the levels of C5 to C7, and 7% of the pediatric population had the injury to both locations.

Vascular etiology can cause spinal cord injury, such as a stroke. A stroke of the anterior spinal artery results in loss of blood supply to a major portion of the spinal cord. This is known as anterior spinal artery syndrome, which is characterized by loss of motor function below the level of injury, loss of sensations carried by the anterior columns of the spinal cord (pain and temperature) while not affecting proprioception carried by the dorsal columns. The blood supply does not affect this dorsal portion of the spinal cord.

In adolescents, adults, and the elderly, the criteria for spinal cord injury is more broadened. There is a further distinction between the 2 genders. Adolescents experience spinal cord injury primarily through accidental means. Many of these patients experience back pain. One cause is the slipped disk or herniated disk. The result of wear and tear may cause this. As people age, the spinal discs lose their elasticity. They can lose their gel-like fluid and become brittle and cracked. In adults, it is due to lifting a heavy object or accident. These discs, also known as the nucleus pulposus, are between 2 vertebrae. Once slipped, the disc impinges on the nearby nerve irritating it. The symptoms experienced by these patients can be sudden or severe shooting pain.

Women experience a weakening of the bones, especially after menopause. The hormone estrogen is protective as it acts as an inhibitor for the resorption of bone. After menopause, the levels of estrogen decrease, and bone resorption occurs at a greater rate than bone formation. Women require hormone replacement and vitamin D supplements to prevent bone fracture. The pathology is known as osteoporosis, and this can take place in the vertebrae leading to vertebral compression fractures.

The elderly can experience spinal stenosis, a serious arthritic spine problem. Stenosis is a narrowing or constriction of a neural structure such as the spinal cord or a nerve. Once this happens, the stenotic portion impinges on the nerve causing chronic pain. There are 2 types of stenosis in the vertebral column; Cervical stenosis and lumbar stenosis. Cervical stenosis refers to the narrowing of the spinal canal in the neck. Unlike the lumbar spine, the true spinal cord is located in the cervical spine and not just the nerves. Damage to the spinal cord at this level can cause total body paralysis and even quadriplegia. Symptoms rarely include neck pain, but rather numbness and clumsiness of the hands. They also have difficulty in walking due to balance problems. The other stenosis is lumbar, which refers to the narrowing of the low back area. This the region where the spinal cord ends and the nerves travel in a bundle known as the cauda equina. The major complaint is numbness in legs, and it is relieved by leaning on a cane or taking frequent breaks. This is a chronic condition and patients complain for years to a point where they can longer walk for more than a few minutes. The problem becomes severe when sacral functions are affected, such as urinary and fecal incontinence. This requires a surgical approach to attempt to resolve the problem. A study was conducted to identify the causes and the rehabilitation outcome of traumatic spinal cord injury in patients older than 60 years at the time of injury. The results showed that 34 patients (77%) were injured after falling from a height, 24 with cervical lesions. Thirty-five patients (80%) had incomplete lesions, and they had the best outcome regarding functionality. They concluded a high proportion of the patients had cervical spinal stenosis and incomplete spinal cord injury; most of them regained good function.

An additional problem of the spine is the physical distortion of the spine itself. The terms are known as kyphosis, scoliosis, and lordosis. Kyphosis is the abnormal convex curvature of the spine mostly involving the thoracic region. The most obvious symptom is a rounded back, general fatigue, weakness, and pain in the muscles. Scoliosis is an unnatural sideways curvature of the spine. The curvature can be mild or it can increase. Symptoms include periodic pain in the lower back and unevenly aligned arms and hips. Lordosis is the abnormal concave curvature of the spine. It can either be lumbar lordosis or cervical lordosis. Symptoms of these conditions include lower back pain, inward curve of the spine, a limited range of motion, and weakness in the lumbar muscles.