In an experimental vitreous hemorrhage, induced by Forrester et al. by injecting 0.2 ml of whole blood in the rabbit eye, within 24 hours, a clotted mass of RBCs with fibrin formed pocket within the vitreous, displacing normal collagen fibrils.

- On the second day, cellular response began.

- By 5th day, macrophages had come in the picture. Collagen formed an outer layer around the clot.

- By day 6, considerable vitreous liquefaction occurred.

- After 1 week, RBCs were released from the clot for phagocytosis.

- After 2 weeks, there was a surge in the number of macrophages, multinucleated giant cells.

- The lysis of these cells occurred within vitreous after 3 weeks, which was followed by another wave of mononuclear cells.

- After 5 weeks up to 2 months, RBCs, its debris, fibrin, and recently migrating macrophages decreased, whereas older macrophages and collagen pseudocapsule remained. Iron staining in Perl’s reaction was pronounced.

- After 5 months, much of RBC debris are removed, and only a few intact RBCs are present.

- Eighteen months later, there are hardly any RBCs left, with fine vitreous strands, large inactive macrophages with young mononuclear cells suggesting low-grade inflammation.

Vitreous liquefaction occurs due to iron content in the blood. Iron generates hydroxyl radical, leading to depolymerization of hyaluronic acid.

Infrequent sequelae following intraocular hemorrhage include cholesterolosis bulbi. It may be present in the anterior or posterior chamber. Cholesterol particles formed as a result of the breakdown of RBCs, when present in the vitreous cavity is known as synchysis scintillans. These cholesterol crystals are usually found in subretinal space in long-standing retinal detachment in severely damaged eyes. The crystals in such cases deposit inferiorly at rest and can involve the whole vitreous with ocular movements (unlike asteroid hyalosis which remains suspended in the vitreous fibrils and do not deposit or gravitate). Synchysis scintillans/cholesterolosis bulbi is often associated with very poor vision or end-stage eye disease.

Accumulation of RBC and its debris, which are suspended in vitreous collagen, also form the so-called, Ochre membrane.

Hemoglobin spherulosis was noted in vitreous in some unusual cases with subretinal hemorrhage by Grossniklaus et al.

Similarly, detached vitreous lamellae sometimes condense and curl and form vitreous cylinders.

In the studies conducted on human eyes, Hogan found that blood clots were surrounded by a single or laminated endothelial membrane layer derived from the retina. Forrester et al. on experiments on enucleated eye found that all stages of extracellular hemolysis, including intact RBCs to ghost cells, were present by the 9th day.

In long-standing recurrent hemorrhages, both extracellular and intracellular hemolysis with moderately sized macrophages is seen. In recurrent and fresh hemorrhages, young active macrophages are seen. Two different types of red blood cell lysis are seen, with granular type occurring in giant cells, and hemolytic in young macrophages.