Presenting neurologic deficits are primarily determined by the physiologic function of involved vascular territories (see figure and table). From caudal to rostral, obstruction of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA, also the most frequent location for a cerebellar infarct) leads to a headache and less commonly vomiting, vertigo, horizontal ipsilateral nystagmus, and truncal ataxia. Anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) territory infarction more often leads to dysmetria, Horner's syndrome, unilateral hearing loss and ipsilateral facial paralysis or anesthesia with contralateral hemibody sensory loss of pain and temperature. Finally, obstruction of the superior cerebellar artery (SCA, located most rostral) tends to produce more ataxia, dysarthria, and nystagmus, with less vertigo, headache, and vomiting.

Reactive cerebral edema surrounding the territory of an initial infarct can be especially problematic as it evolves in the case of cerebellar strokes. The cerebellum sits in the relatively tight cranial space of the posterior cranial fossa, between the tentorium cerebelli above it and the occipital bone behind and beside it, with the foramen magnum below and the fourth ventricle and brainstem in front. Swelling can lead to upward transtentorial herniation of the cerebellar vermis to relieve the rising intracranial pressure. Alternatively, edema can also obstruct the fourth ventricle and aqueducts anteriorly, causing direct brainstem compression. Since intracranial pressure builds from the choroid plexus superiorly where cerebrospinal fluid is synthesized and transmitted downwards through the remainder of the brain, obstructing the fourth ventricle can thus also create tremendous downward pressure and lead to disastrous herniation of the cerebellar tonsils into the foramen magnum.