The female pelvis is made up of two hip bones, articulating with each other anteriorly at the pubic symphysis and posteriorly with the sacrum via sacroiliac joints bilaterally. Each hip bone, in turn, is composed of three bones: the ilium, the ischium, and the pubic bones (which completely fuse around puberty). The primary function of the pelvis is to transfer the weight of the upper body into the lower limbs and protect and elevate pelvic and lower abdominal organs. The pelvic girdle is divided into the greater/false pelvis (containing lower abdominal viscera) and the lesser/true pelvis (containing pelvic organs). The junction between the two is defined by the pelvic inlet.

The pelvic inlet is bordered by pubic symphysis anteriorly, sacral ala posteriorly, and laterally it is outlined by the arcuate line of the ilium and the pectineal line of the superior pubic ramus. The female pelvis is wider, broader, oval-shaped with a greater diameter than the male pelvis, which is clearly adapted for childbirth.

In females, pelvic organs include the reproductive organs such as the uterus, paired fallopian tubes, and ovaries, along with other organs such as the bladder, rectum, surrounded by ligaments, nerves, lymph nodes, and vasculature.

The body is the largest part of the uterus and is wider at the fundus and narrows down, creating the isthmus with its lowest section, the cervix. The cervix opens into the vagina. The uterine wall contains three layers. From inside out, they are the endometrium, myometrium, and perimetrium. The endometrium is the mucous lining of the uterus with basal and functional layers, while the myometrium is a layer of the smooth muscle undergoing hypertrophy during pregnancy. The functional layer of the endometrium changes during the menstrual cycle.

The proliferative phase begins after menstruation and allows regeneration of the functional layer. After ovulation (in midcycle), under the influence of increased levels of progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum, the endometrium enters the secretory phase characterized by increased mucus production. It continues until menstruation occurs when the functional layer sheds and the cycle is repeated. The perimetrium is part of the peritoneum and is continuous with the abdominal peritoneal layer. The anatomical position of the uterus can be described as "anteverted" with respect to the vagina and "anteflexed" based on its relationship to the cervix. In the most common orientation, the uterus is "anteverted and anteflexed," which means that it's rotated and flexed forward towards the abdominal wall.

Paired fallopian tubes connect to the uterus at the level of the fundus and extend laterally, opening into the abdominal cavity. The main function of the fallopian tubes is the transport of the ovum from laterally positioned ovaries into the uterus. It also acts as the main site of fertilization. From medial to lateral, fallopian tubes have the following parts: intramural (embedded within the wall of the uterus and the most narrow part), isthmus (extending from the uterus), followed by the ampulla (the widest section and the most common site of fertilization) opening into the infundibulum with finger-like projections called fimbriae.

Fimbriae "extend" towards the ovary to "catch" the ovum. The ovaries are paired female gonads producing the female gametes (oocytes) as well as sex hormones, estrogen, and progesterone. Ovaries are attached to the broad ligament on the posterior part of the uterus by the mesovarium. The broad ligament provides support for the female reproductive tract. It is a sheet of peritoneum extending from lateral walls and folding over the uterus anteriorly and posteriorly. Ovaries undergo physiological changes with the menstrual cycle.

During the follicular phase, a few ovarian follicles proliferate, ultimately one of them developing into a dominant follicle (Graafian follicle), which can be up to 24 mm in size. During ovulation, the dominant follicle releases the ovum. The follicle then enters the luteal phase and develops into the corpus luteum (thick-walled cystic structure), producing progesterone and regressing in the absence of pregnancy.