History must include detailed information describing patient and clinician-reported changes in physical appearance associated with antiretroviral agents. Information about specific antiretroviral medications is a necessity, as well as medicines used to treat comorbid conditions. The length of treatment with each ART combination, including PIs, NRTIs, NNRTIs, and/or integrase inhibitors, is needed data. A personal and family history assessment for metabolic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease should also is a requirement. A social history should include diet, exercise regimen, smoking, alcohol consumption, and illicit drug use. Patients may report sleep difficulties due to neck enlargement. Patients should undergo evaluation for anxiety, depression, and a loss of self-esteem depression as well as compliance with ART. It is well known that lipodystrophy can cause patients to be non-compliant with ART.

A physical exam should include body mass index, waist circumference, blood pressure, and clinical signs of lipodystrophy. The clinician should evaluate for features of lipoatrophy as manifested by loss of peripheral fat tissue noticed in the upper and lower extremities and buttocks as well as malar and temporal areas. Extremities may appear thin with the prominence of superficial veins, and loss of facial fat causes sunken eyes and cachectic facial features.

**Clinical Features of Lipoatrophy**

Lipoatrophy presents as loss of subcutaneous fat in the face, arms, legs, abdomen, and/or buttocks.

Lipoatrophy in the extremities presents with a prominence of veins and musculature, while central lipoatrophy presents with loss of subcutaneous fat in the abdomen.

**Clinical Features of Lipohypertrophy**

The hallmark features of this phenotype include central adipose tissue deposition with increased abdominal girth and a "buffalo hump" in the dorsocervical area. However, these features are difficult to distinguish from general obesity. It is the lack of subcutaneous fat that helps distinguish this syndrome from obesity.