Medications: Anti-parkinsonian drugs are the mainstay symptomatic treatment for parkinsonisms, with different response intensity and duration for the different causes. The most responsive etiology is Parkinson's disease.

**Levodopa-Carbidopa**

Dopamine itself cannot cross the blood-brain barrier. Levodopa, an amino acid gets metabolized to form dopamine, which compensates for the dopamine deficiency seen in PD. Furthermore, a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor, carbidopa is given along with levodopa for therapeutic advantage. Small doses of combined carbidopa-levodopa are given in a dose of 25/100 mg half tablet twice or thrice a day along with meals. The common adverse effects include nausea, dizziness, and somnolence. Prolonged therapy with levodopa can lead to 'wearing off' phenomenon in which patients notice an improvement in mobility after an hour or two of levodopa dosing, however, the effect starts to wear off after dosing interval, and rigidity and bradykinesias manifest again. Abrupt cessation of levodopa may lead to the development of the neuroleptic malignant syndrome.

A recent study intending to demonstrate a disease-modifying effect of the degeneration has proved the lack of such an effect, thus supporting the idea that this treatment is only symptomatic.

**Dopamine Agonists**

These drugs stimulate dopamine receptors directly. The ergot derivative includes bromocriptine, and the non-ergot derivatives are ropinirole and pramipexole. Both these drugs are immediate-release formulations that can be given three times daily. Pramipexole dosing is 0.125 mg three times a day whereas ropinirole is given as 0.25 mg thrice a day. Commonly seen adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, and orthostatic hypotension.

**Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) Inhibitors**

Entacapone results in the blockade of peripheral COMT, an enzyme responsible for the degradation of dopamine. It helps to decrease the breakdown of levodopa, thus increasing its availability to the brain. Entacapone dosing is 200mg with every dose of levodopa, and up to eight doses can be given each day, whereas the dose of tolcapone is 100 mg three times a day. The commonly seen adverse effects include hallucinations and dyskinesias.

**Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) Inhibitors**

Drugs like selegiline and rasagiline decrease the metabolism of dopamine by blocking the enzyme, monoamine oxidase. The daily dosing of selegiline is 5 mg, usually given in the morning to avoid insomnia. A dose greater than 10 mg should not be used in PD patients as it can lead to nonselective MAO inhibition causing a hypertensive crisis as a result of interaction with tyramine-containing foodstuff. Rasagiline can be initiated with a dose of 0.5 mg once a day and gradually increased to 1 mg once a day. The commonly seen adverse effects of MAO B inhibitors include nausea and headache.

**Amantadine**

It acts by blocking N-methyl-D-aspartate and acetylcholine receptors. It is available as immediate-release tablets or capsules 100 mg each given twice or thrice daily. It is excreted via the kidney and thus should be used cautiously in patients with kidney injury. The commonly seen adverse effects are livedo reticularis and pedal edema.

**Anticholinergic Drugs**

Benztropine and trihexyphenidyl result in the blockade of acetylcholine receptors. They can be useful for the treatment of tremors and rigidity seen in parkinsonism as well as to treat DIP. Trihexyphenidyl is usually given in a dose of 0.5 to 1 mg twice a day that is gradually increased to 2 mg thrice a day. The benztropine dose is 0.5 to 2 mg twice in a day. Anticholinergic drugs adversely result in confusion and hallucinations. Also, antimuscarinic side effects like tachycardia, dry mouth, constipation, and urinary retention present.

**Treatment of Specific Causes of Parkinsonism**

**Normal-pressure Hydrocephalus**

Literature reveals that shunt surgery or removal of CSF results in the reversibility of parkinsonism.

**Vascular Parkinsonism**

Levodopa administration forms the primary treatment for VP, given in a dose of up to 1000 mg per day. Antiplatelet agents such as aspirin and clopidogrel are also an option when MRI is suggestive of massive white matter infarct

**Drug-induced Parkinsonism**

Removal of the offending drug is the primary measure for DIP resulting in the resolution of symptoms. Patients with underlying psychiatric conditions can be alternatively started on atypical antipsychotics, as these drugs have a lesser risk of DIP. Anticholinergic drugs like benztropine and trihexyphenidyl are frequent choices for the treatment of DIP. If anticholinergics are not effective, amantadine with a dose of 100 mg twice or thrice daily can be used. Electroconvulsive therapy is also an option when all other treatment modalities fail to resolve symptoms.

**Brain Tumors**

Literature reveals that most of the patients achieve complete remission after surgical removal of the neoplasm resolving the parkinsonian features.

**Juvenile Parkinsonism**

Management of the underlying condition leading to parkinsonism should be of paramount importance in patients with JP.