There are many clinical tests utilized to evaluate the function of cardiac muscle. This list discusses the use of high-yield clinical testing and is not meant to be exhaustive.

**Echocardiogram:**an ultrasound of the heart routinely used to identify cardiac abnormalities. An echocardiogram can assess valvular abnormalities, masses, pericardial disease, congenital abnormalities, and pulmonary hypertension. An echo is also routinely utilized to assess cardiac muscle function and is useful in diagnosing congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathies. An echocardiogram can be performed as a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) or a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE).

- **TTE:**a non-invasive test that utilizes an echocardiography probe placed on the chest wall.

- **TEE:**a specialized probe with an ultrasound transducer at the tip passed into the patient's esophagus, allowing for a posterior view of the heart.

Echocardiogram reports are detailed and offer essential information regarding the heart's function. Echo reports typically include:

- Rate and rhythm

- Chamber size

- Indications of hypertrophy

- Right ventricular function

- Left ventricular systolic function and ejection fraction

- Left ventricular diastolic function

- Valvular pathology (if any)

- Evidence of mass or thrombus

- Congenital defects

- Pericardial anomalies

- Incidental findings

**Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG):**an EKG is a non-invasive test that utilizes electrodes placed on the surface of the body to record the electrical rhythms of the heart. These electrical rhythms cause depolarization of the heart, which, in turn, leads to the contraction of the myocardium. With this knowledge, it can be understood that the EKG indirectly indicates the heart's contraction.

**Cardiac biomarkers****:**blood tests may be performed to identify enzymes and proteins that can indicate heart disease or heart damage.

- **Troponin:**measures the levels of cardiac proteins troponin T and troponin I. These proteins are found in cardiac muscle and are released upon damage to the heart, with troponin I being the more sensitive and specific marker of cardiac injury.

- **Creatine kinase (CK):**This is an enzyme released from cardiac and skeletal muscle upon damage. The isozyme CK-MB is more sensitive in diagnosing heart damage after a heart attack, with CK-MB levels rising 4-6 hours after a heart attack, peaking at 24 hours, and returning to baseline in 48 to 72 hours.

- **Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP):**a hormone secreted by the ventricular myocardium in response to ventricular wall stress (i.e., pressure overload or volume expansion). The gold standard in the diagnosis of heart failure is the measurement of BNP levels, with an elevated level indicating heart failure.