# Introduction

Kupffer cells (also known as stellate sinusoidal macrophages or Kupffer-Browicz cells) are macrophages found in the sinusoids of the liver. Kupffer cells make up 80% to 90% of all the macrophages in the entire human body.

Differentiation of Kupffer cells is regulated by macrophage colony-stimulating factors (M-CSFs) found in the serum and liver, as well as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factors (GM-CSFs).

# Structure

Kupffer cells are specialized macrophages found in the hepatic sinusoid, along with sinusoidal endothelial cells, Ito cells, and pit cells.

Kupffer cells' function and structure differ depending on their location in the centrilobular or periportal regions of the liver. Kupffer cells in the periportal regions tend to be larger, have more lysosomal enzyme activities, and have more phagocytic activity, while those in the centrilobular regions produce more superoxide anion.

# Function

The lifespan of a Kupffer cell is estimated to be 3.8 days.

The phagocytic ability of the Kupffer cells is vast; they can engulf pathogens, immune complexes, liposomes, lipid microspheres, tumor cells, endotoxins, and various other particles. Kupffer cells are also known to be heterogeneous in function based on their location. In zone 1 (periportal) of the liver lobules, they have higher activity overall than their counterpart in zone 3 (centrilobular).

# Histochemistry and Cytochemistry

Kupffer cells stain positive for macrophage markers, including ED1, E2, and Ki-M2R in rats and F4/80 in mice. Their lysosomes stain positively for acid phosphatase. Kupffer cells can phagocytize other tracer substances, such as carbon, India ink, or latex microspheres, which are helpful in their identification.

# Microscopy, Light

Kupffer cells have a wide range of variability in cell size and shape and have elongated cytoplasmic processes. They are found along the sinusoid on top of the endothelium. They can be seen in contact with various cells, such as endothelial cells, fat-storing cells, collagen fibers, and other Kupffer cells.

# Microscopy, Electron

On electron microscopy, Kupffer cells can be seen adjacent to the sinusoid but not directly attached to the basement membrane. The microvilli from the parenchymal cells and the pseudopods of the Kupffer cells are intertwined.

# Pathophysiology

Kupffer cells are involved in the pathogenesis of liver injury in response to sepsis. The liver macrophages are activated and release IL-1 and TNF-alpha, which activate leukocytes and sinusoidal endothelial cells to express ICAM-1.

# Clinical Significance

Kupffer cells contain the SR-AI/II scavenger receptor, which is involved in recognizing and binding the lipid A domain of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and lipoteichoic acid.

Kupffer cells have been identified to play a key role in developing alcohol-induced liver disease. The intestinal tract of humans contains numerous bacteria, which can lead to the production of gut-derived endotoxin. The gut-derived endotoxins make their way to the liver, then cleared by the Kupffer cells. Studies suggest that these endotoxins activate Kupffer cells.

Kupffer cells activation results in the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as superoxide, leading to oxidative stress in the liver. TLR4 activates interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK-1), which leads to the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB).

Kupffer cells have Fc, C3, and scavenger receptors involved in the phagocytosis of opsonized and nonopsonized materials.