The diagnosis of Tangier disease requires a high index of suspicion. Besides clinical findings which could appear earlier in the first decades or wait till the second or third decades. Blood values remain the mainstay diagnostic tools to make a diagnosis. The patient regularly presented with Low HDL (less than 5 mg/dl ), a low Apo-a1 level below 5, besides Low total plasma cholesterol (less than 150mg/dl). Another blood findings include a normal or elevated Triglyceride level, decreased LDL level as there will be upregulation in LDL receptor expression and thrombocytopenia.

The gold standard for the diagnosis of Tangier disease is ABCA1 molecular gene sequencing. If genetic testing cannot be offered, then tissue biopsy could also be taken on multiple organs of the body: bone marrow, jejunum, liver, and the rectum, which is considered the site of choice for biopsy and they would show huge collections of cholesterol-laden macrophages.

Measurements could be done to assess multiple organ systems involve: Nerve conduction studies and EMG to determine the presence or extent of peripheral neuropathy, ophthalmologic evaluation to assess for any corneal opacities, abdominal ultrasound to assess for hepatosplenomegaly, carotid duplex for any carotid plaques and CT angiography to assess for coronary atherosclerosis.

High-risk individuals include relatives of known diagnostic cases, should be assessed for the presence of a carrier state of the mutated gene. Also, the prenatal diagnosis could be offered. It is also appropriate to follow up people at risk through checking their lipid profile (total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, triglyceride, and calculated LDL-cholesterol) and apo A-I concentration. Heterozygotes carriers usually have no clinical symptoms and are characterized at the biochemical level by half-normal serum levels of HDL.

Antenatal diagnosis is possible, although it is not usually done.