**Formaldehyde Exposure Management**

Formaldehyde exposure management requires interprofessional collaboration to manage this patient population. While there is no antidote for acute overexposure to formaldehyde, symptomatic treatment of these patients is the standard of care. In the case of formaldehyde-induced acute allergic asthma reaction, the specialties of nursing, pharmacy, medicine, and social work all play a role in managing the patient.

Nurses are critical in the initial evaluation and continuous monitoring of the patient’s condition. Clinicians and pharmacists should ensure that appropriate pharmacologic interventions are chosen and administered based on the patient’s condition. Inpatient internal medicine physicians and physician assistants should collaborate in the workup and diagnosis and continue monitoring the patient as they recover. Social work would play a role in addressing the source of formaldehyde exposure. A patient with potential formaldehyde-induced leukemia would involve similar interprofessional collaboration with the addition of radiologists and radiology technicians, oncologists, surgical teams, pathologists, and laboratory technicians in the workup, diagnosis, and treatment of such patients.

The best management of formaldehyde exposure is primary prevention. While minimal exposure is intrinsic to the job description of a healthcare team member working in clinical pathology or gross anatomy laboratory, safety techniques laid out by OSHA and supplemental modalities can reduce exposure and, given the dose-dependent relationship of formaldehyde and adverse events, subsequently minimize health risks.

Formaldehyde is a commonly used substance in healthcare and industrial workplaces. Exposure can cause harmful side effects and potentially deadly diseases, so strict adherence to OSHA guidelines for formaldehyde safety is critical for the safety of all exposed to the substance.