**Management of Ametropias**

Ametropia can be managed by the following methods:

- Spectacle lenses (these can be spherical, cylindrical, or sphero-cylindrical lenses)

- Contact lenses (these can be spherical or sphero-cylindrical lenses)

- Refractive surgery, such as laser-assisted in-situ keratomileusis (LASIK), photorefractive keratectomy (PRK), and laser-assisted sub-epithelial keratectomy (LASEK)

- Other special techniques, such as orthokeratology

**Spectacle Frames**

Spectacle lenses are the most common correction for ametropias. A spectacle prescription consists of a frame and a prescription lens. The frame carries the prescription lenses and gives it balance on the face of the wearer while also protecting the lens from damage. The frame distributes the weight of the lenses on the nose and head of the wearer and holds them up in front of the eye for easy viewing. A frame may consist of the following parts (see Figure of parts of prescription spectacle frames):

- Eye-wire

- Temple

- Nose pad, nose bridge

- Earpiece

A frame with a complete eye-wire surrounding the lens is called a full-rimmed frame. A frame that only covers half of the lens it carries is called a half-rimmed lens, while a frame that does not encircle the lens is called a rimless frame. In rimless lenses, the temples, nose-pads/nose bridges are mounted directly on the lens, usually with small screws and bolts. This makes them extremely fragile and not that stable. Frames can also come in different materials, such as plastic, rubber, metal, wood, or a combination of diverse materials. Monocular frames (monocles) were used in the past; most current frames are binocular.

The determination of what type of frames to dispense for a particular patient will depend on several factors, including;

i. The magnitude and type of refractive error: low-powered lenses can be fixed on full-rimmed, half-rimmed, or rimless frames. Higher powers, especially minus lenses, are better dispensed in smaller lenses with thicker rims. This helps with cosmetic appeal and reduces the weight of the spectacle lens.

ii. Age of the patient: age group-specific frames should be used properly. Studies show that many children wear smaller adult frames that are inappropriate for their age group.

iii. The facial features of the patient: Anthropometric data of the face is important to obtaining a good fit of a potential spectacle frame.

**Spectacle Lens Materials**

There are different materials used to produce spectacle lenses. These had evolved from quartz stones used in the 15th century to correct presbyopia until the 16th century when the first attempts were made to select different strengths of lenses for individual users.

In the subsequent decades, enhanced glass materials became available for spectacle lenses with the development of polishing techniques to make them clear. The early 19th century saw a rapid increase in industrialization and polymer chemistry. This gave birth to the most common material used for spectacle lenses called CR-39, developed from ally diglycol carbonate. Newer plastic materials like Trivex and polycarbonate lenses offer more durability and strength.

Glass is still used today and has gained popularity because it doesn't lose its transparency with age and produces very low aberration. Glass materials range from crown glass to alkaline metal oxides, which are used to create thinner lenses. These thinner lenses created with oxides such as titanium oxide tended to be lighter and have a higher refractive index when compared to crown glass.

Aspheric lenses tend to be regularly prescribed for correcting ametropias because they cause lower aberrations than spherical lenses.

The determination of what type of lenses to dispense for a particular patient also depends on the type of refractive error:

**Hyperopia**

Hyperopia is corrected by dispensing spectacles carrying convex lenses. Convex lenses have a thicker center portion and thinner edges. Convex lenses increase the vergence of light entering the eye, bringing the point focus to a point closer to the anterior portion of the eye than where it was before the correction.

**Myopia**

Myopia is corrected by dispensing spectacles carrying concave lenses. Concave lenses have a thinner center portion and thicker edges. Concave lenses reduce the vergence of light entering the eye, bringing the image to focus at a point farther away from the anterior portion of the eye.

**Astigmatism**

Astigmatism is corrected by dispensing cylindrical or toric lenses. Cylindrical lenses have different powers at different meridians. A spectacle lens can be a combination of a convex lens and a cylindrical lens, as it is used to correct hyperopic astigmatism. It can also be a combination of a concave and cylindrical lens, as it is used to correct myopic astigmatism. Astigmatic lenses change the amounts of vergence in the two meridians by different amounts. This brings the two meridians to a single focus on the retina.