One definition of oxygen consumption within the body is the product of arterial-venous oxygen saturation differences and blood flow. The body consumes oxygen partially through aerobic metabolism. In this process, oxygen is used to convert glucose to pyruvate, liberating two molecules of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). An important aspect of this process is the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve. In the blood, hemoglobin binds free oxygen rapidly to form oxyhemoglobin leaving only a small percentage of free oxygen dissolved in the plasma. The oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve is a plot of the percent saturation of hemoglobin as a function of the partial pressure of oxygen (PO2). At a PO2 of 100 mmHg, hemoglobin will be 100% saturated with oxygen, meaning all four heme groups are bound. Each gram of hemoglobin is capable of carrying 1.34 mL of oxygen. The solubility coefficient of oxygen in plasma is 0.003. This coefficient represents the volume of oxygen in mL that will dissolve in 100 mL of plasma for each 1 mmHg increment in the PO2. A formula then calculates the oxygen content so that Oxygen Content = (0.003 × PO2) + (1.34 × Hemoglobin × Oxygen Saturation). This formula demonstrates that dissolved oxygen is a sufficiently small fraction of total oxygen in the blood; therefore, the oxygen content of blood can be considered equal to the oxyhemoglobin levels.

As PO2 decreases, the percentage of saturated hemoglobin also decreases. The oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve has a sigmoidal shape due to the binding nature of hemoglobin. With each oxygen molecule bound, hemoglobin undergoes a conformational change to allow subsequent oxygens to bind. Each oxygen that binds to hemoglobin increases its affinity to bind more oxygen, meaning the affinity for the fourth oxygen molecule is the highest.

In the lungs, alveolar gas has a PO2 of 100 mmHg. However, due to the high affinity for the fourth oxygen molecule, oxygen saturation will remain high even at a PO2 of 60 mmHg. As the PO2 decreases, hemoglobin saturation will eventually fall rapidly; at a PO2 of 40 mmHg, hemoglobin is 75% saturated. Meanwhile, at a PO2 of 25 mmHg, hemoglobin is 50% saturated. This level is referred to as P50, where 50% of heme groups of each hemoglobin have a molecule of oxygen bound. The nature of oxygen saturation becomes increasingly important in light of the effects of right and left shifts. A variety of factors can cause these shifts.

A right shift of the oxygen saturation curve indicates a decreased oxygen affinity of hemoglobin, which will allow more oxygen to be available to tissues.

A left shift of the oxygen saturation curve indicates an increase in the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin, which reduces oxygen availability to the tissues. Factors that cause a left shift in the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve include decreases in temperature, PCO2, acidity, and 2,3-bisphosphoglyceric acid, formerly named 2,3-diphosphoglycerate.