The history and physical exam serve to eliminate some diagnoses and suggest others. Acute care physicians are well aware of the modes of presentation of these disease entities. The immediate onset of pain suggests a vascular event such as mesenteric ischemia. Syncope hints at blood loss as from a ruptured ectopic or leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). Various causes of an acute abdomen have classic presentations. Appendicitis is supposed to start with dull periumbilical pain that migrates with time to the right lower quadrant. Ovarian torsion is supposed to start with sudden, unilateral, lower abdominal pain that waxes and wanes and is associated with vomiting. Unfortunately, most diseases fail to present classically. A leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm can present exactly like renal colic or as apparently a benign low back pain. The clinician simply has to consider serious diagnoses in patients at risk.

Pain in various quadrants suggests varying diagnoses. Acute diverticulitis usually lives in the left lower quadrant while cholecystitis is usually felt in the epigastrium or right upper quadrant. Diagnosing a patient with a full-blown acute abdomen is easy. It is amazingly difficult to diagnose an incipient abdominal catastrophe in a patient presenting with early, non-specific symptoms.

The past medical history can be important. Hypertension is a risk factor for abdominal aortic aneurysm. The social history regarding alcohol use and possible pancreatitis, helps as well.

The physical exam should be focused and completed in a timely fashion. Abnormal vital signs or the general appearance of the patient including facial expression, skin color and temperature, and altered mentation should alert the clinician that a patient may be in extremis. A complete abdominal exam is essential. Bowel sounds must be assessed. Palpation for masses, pain, guarding and rebound is important. Classic teaching demands a rectal on every patient with abdominal pain. Literature suggests that rectal exam, at least in appendicitis, does not add any useful information. Certainly, a rectal exam is important when gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding or prostate issues are suspected. A pelvic exam should be performed when a gynecologic source of pain is suspected. A young male with abdominal pain needs a testicular exam to exclude testicular torsion. Examination for hernias should be routine.