Proteins serve crucial roles in human biochemistry. The major role is to provide the body's building blocks. They are the precursors of several biologically relevant molecules. Therefore either the excess or deficiency of protein can lead to disease result in nervous system defects, metabolic problems, organ failure, and even death.

Biochemical Functions

Enzymes proteins accelerate a reaction as a catalyst. Catalyzed reactions are one million or more times faster. Enzymes usually have the suffix "-ase" in their name. Exceptions are enzymes discovered before the start of the naming scheme. Each enzyme is regulated by competitive and noncompetitive inhibitors and/or by allosteric molecules. Enzymes can catalyze pathways to produce or break down biological molecules. Changes to enzymes can lead to disease or treatment. Specific amino acids form an enzyme's substrate-binding site. A substrate-binding site is the "active site." This serves in chemical reactions. Substrates can be hydrophobic, hydrophilic, charged, uncharged, neutral, or a combination. Mutations that change amino acids in the active site change the enzyme's activity. A substrate will join an enzyme that is lined with compatible amino acids. If these amino acids change, a substrate may not be able to join, therefore rendering an enzyme non-functional. How a substrate interacts with an active site signifies the "affinity" of that enzyme. Greater affinity means fewer substrate is needed to achieve a reaction. A mutation that changes the active site can raise or lowers the affinity.

Structural Functions

Proteins serve as the structural elements of cells and tissues—the proteins actin and tubulin form actin filaments and microtubules. In muscle, actin provides the "scaffolding" against which myosin can produce muscle contraction.

Kinetic Functions

Motor proteins transport molecules inside a cell, provide movement of certain parts of individual cells involved in specialized function, generate larger-scale movements of fluids and semisolids such as the circulation of blood and movement of food through the digestive tract, and finally provide movement of the human body through their roles in skeletal muscles. Myosin is a protein with a hydrophobic tail, a head group that can attach and detach from actin filaments, and a "hinge" section, which moves the head group back and forth, resulting in movement.

**Channels**

Channels are essential for the transportation of nutrients into and out of cells and for nerve signals and the selective filtration of molecules in the kidneys. This is exemplified in how the mammalian cell has an intracellular potassium concentration of approximately 140 millimoles per cell and sodium of 5 to 15 millimoles. The extracellular environment has a potassium concentration of 5 moles and a sodium concentration of 145 millimoles. potassium specific channels are responsible for regulating these concentrations in their respective compartments.