Urethritis is clinically suspected when any sexually active patient presents with symptoms consistent with urethritis, including pruritus, discharge, or dysuria. Urethritis is mostly a clinical diagnosis based on history and physical examination. However, there are some specific diagnostic laboratory tests utilized.

Neisseria gonorrhea is diagnosed initially with nucleic acid amplification testing with first-catch urine or urethral swab. Urethral swab Gram stain exhibits gram-negative diplococci bacteria. A urethral culture provides essential information regarding antibiotic resistance. Other diagnostic testing includes microscopy for males, culture, urethral culture, antigen detection, and endocervical or urethral swabs used with genetic probe methods.

Chlamydia trachomatis is diagnosable in females based on urinalysis revealing pyuria with no organisms reported on Gram stain or culture. No organisms are generally seen on Gram stain due to the organism being a small gram-negative obligate intracellular parasitic bacteria. In sexually active young female patients with pyuria and no bacteriuria, there should be a strong suspicion of urethritis caused by chlamydia. The laboratory test of choice is the Nucleic acid amplification test with a first-void urine.  Other available tests are urethral culture, vaginal culture, antigen detection, and genetic probes.

Mycoplasma genitalium diagnosis can be difficult; however, the only FDA-approved test is nucleic acid amplification tests which in most clinical settings are widely unavailable.