The exact cause of lipodystrophy is unknown. However, the use of specific thymidine analog nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI), such as zidovudine and stavudine, is associated with the development of lipoatrophy. Switching to newer agents, such as abacavir or tenofovir, has been shown to prevent the progression of this disease. In contrast, although lipohypertrophy sometimes occurs with protease inhibitors (PI), switching or discontinuing PI has not been shown to reverse fat accumulation.

**Lipoatrophy**

As stated above, the leading risk factor for lipoatrophy is using NRTIs. The drugs that are most notorious for causing lipoatrophy include stavudine and zidovudine. An open-label randomized controlled trial comparing abacavir or stavudine, with each group receiving additional antiretroviral therapy with lamivudine and efavirenz, reported 38% incidence of lipoatrophy in the stavudine group versus 5% incidence in abacavir group.

Other antiretroviral classes have been implicated in the risk of this disease as well; however, the evidence is less clear as most of these studies had concurrent use NRTIs. There is some evidence to suggest that the use of culprit NRTI with a protease inhibitor may have a synergistic effect on lipoatrophy.

Other factors associated with an increased risk of lipoatrophy include increased age, coinfection with hepatitis C, higher HIV viral loads, and lower CD4 cell counts at the time of initiation of HIV therapy.

**Lipohypertrophy**

In contrast to lipoatrophy, the risk factors for fat accumulation tend to be host factors. These include advanced age, female gender, and higher body fat percentage at baseline.

There is no evidence to suggest specific antiretroviral agents lead to fat accumulation. However, fat accumulation, specifically central adiposity, has been associated with antiretroviral therapy (ART). Although PI therapy was initially thought to cause lipohypertrophy, randomized controlled trials that substituted PI with alternative ART (e.g., non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors [NNRTIs] or integrase inhibitors) in patients with lipodystrophy did not result in a decrease in visceral fat. Therefore, studies have not been able to definitively report an association between ART, especially PI, and fat accumulation in HIV-infected individuals.