The osseous anatomy of the wrist includes the distal radius and ulna, eight carpal bones, and the five metacarpals (Figure 1). The complexity of this three arc system creates multiple synergistic joints that allow the wrist a dynamic range of motion.

The articular surface of osseous structures is covered with articular (hyaline) cartilage, a connective tissue composed of a dense network of collagen fibers resulting in tissue with tensile strength yet more flexible than bone. Together with synovial joint fluid, the hyaline cartilage provides a low friction surface for movement across joints and aids in shock absorption.

An intricate array of intrinsic (carpal to carpal) and extrinsic (radius and ulna to carpal) ligaments binds the osseous structures and allows for compound motions. Each bone has specific connections to adjacent osseous structures that provide the overall balance of stability and movement for the wrist. Typical nomenclature of the ligaments describes the structures connected and the direction of their attachment either proximally to distally or from the radial to ulnar aspect. For example, the scapholunate ligament attaches the scaphoid with the lunate, referencing the specific carpals spanned from radial to ulnar direction.

The dominant stabilizing structure of the wrist is the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC), located on the ulnar aspect of the wrist. The TFCC is composed of a triangular-shaped articular disc of fibrocartilage, which parallels the articular surface at the ulnocarpal joint with an attachment to the ulnar margin of the distal radius where the disc attaches directly to the articular cartilage of the distal radius.

The carpal tunnel or carpal canal is the space along the volar wrist formed between the arch of the carpal bones, which constitutes the floor, and the flexor retinaculum, which forms the roof. The flexor retinaculum is a connective tissue sheath bridging the gap from the scaphoid tubercle and trapezium to the pisiform and hook of the hamate.

The ulnar or Guyon's canal is another tunnel along the volar wrist. It forms from the volar carpal ligament (roof), transverse carpal ligament (floor), the hook of the hamate (radial border), and an ulnar border comprised of the pisiform, pisohamate ligament, and abductor digiti minimi muscle. The major structures within the canal include the ulnar nerve, ulnar artery, and ulnar vein.

No fewer than one dozen extensor and flexor tendons traverse the wrist joint from their proximal muscle bellies to aid in wrist and hand movement. The flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, and palmaris longus tendons pass through the wrist external to, but tightly associated with, the carpal canal (Figure 2).

Blood supply at the wrist is provided by means of branches from the dorsal and palmar carpal arches formed by the anastomosis of ulnar and radial arteries. Additionally, the anterior interosseous arteries supply portions of the wrist, particularly the articular disk of the TFCC.

Central nervous system communication derives from the median, radial, and ulnar nerves.