**General DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Bipolar and Related Disorders**(American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and StatisticalManual of Mental Disorders 5th edition (DSM-5). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing; 2013)

**BD-I**: Criteria met for at least one manic episode, which might have been preceded or followed by a hypomanic episode or major depressive episode (hypomanic or major depressive episodes are not required for the diagnosis).

**BD-II**: Criteria met for at least one current or past hypomanic episode and a major depressive episode; no manic episodes.

**Cyclothymic disorder**: Hypomanic symptoms that do not meet the criteria for hypomanic episodes and depressive symptoms that do not meet the criteria for major depressive episodes in numerousperiods (at least half the time) for at least 2 years (1 year in those aged ≤18 years); criteria for major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episodes have never been met.

**Specified bipolar and related disorders**: Bipolar-like phenomena that do not meet the criteria for BD-I, BD-II, or cyclothymic disorder due to insufficient duration or severity, ie, 1) short-duration hypomanic episodes and major depressive disorder, 2) hypomanic episodes with insufficient symptoms and major depressive episode, 3) hypomanic episode without a prior major depressive episode, and 4) short-duration cyclothymia.

**Unspecified bipolar and related disorders**: Characteristic symptoms of bipolar and related disorders that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning but do not meet the full criteria for any category previously mentioned.

The symptoms and episodes used to diagnose these disorders must not be related to the physiological effects of a substance or general medical condition.

BD-I and BD-II can be further specified as rapid cycling or seasonal pattern and whether the episodes have psychotic features, catatonia, anxious distress, melancholic features, or peripartum onset. Rapid cycling refers to 4 or more distinct mood episodes during a 12-month period.

Mood-congruent delusions may be present in either a depressive or manic episode, including delusions of guilt or grandiose delusions of power and wealth. Psychotic features, by definition, are absent in hypomanic episodes.

To better account for "mixed features," the current diagnostic criteria implements specifiers. Manic or hypomanic episodes with mixed features meet the full criteria for mania or hypomania and have at least 3 of the following signs or symptoms: depressed mood, anhedonia, psychomotor retardation, fatigue, excessive guilt, or recurrent thoughts of death. Major depressive episodes with mixed features meet the full criteria for a major depressive episode and have at least 3 of the following signs or symptoms: expansive mood, grandiosity, increased talkativeness, flight of ideas, increased goal-directed activity, indulgence in activities with a high potential for "painful consequences," and decreased need for sleep. The mixed features must be present during "most days."

**DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Bipolar I Disorder**

For a diagnosis of BD-I, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for a manic episode. The manic episode may have been preceded by and may be followed by hypomanic or major depressive episodes (hypomanic or major depressive episodes are not required for the diagnosis).

A manic episode is defined as a distinct period of persistently elevated or irritable mood with increased activity or energy lasting for at least 7 consecutive days or requiring hospitalization. The presence of 3 or more of the following is required to qualify as a manic episode. If the mood is irritable, at least 4 of the following must be present:

- Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity

- Decreased need for sleep

- A compulsion to keep talking or being more talkative than usual

- Flight of ideas or racing thoughts

- High distractability

- Increased goal-directed activity (socially, at work or school, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation (non-goal-directed activity)

- Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful consequences, such as engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments

The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or general medical condition.

The symptoms of a manic episode are markedly more severe than those of a hypomanic episode and result in impaired social or occupational functioning or require hospitalization.

**DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Bipolar II Disorder**

For a diagnosis of BD-II, it is necessary to have met the criteria for at least one current or past hypomanic episode and a major depressive episode without a manic episode (see below for major depressive episode criteria).

A hypomanic episode is defined as a distinct period of persistently elevated or irritable mood with increased activity or energy lasting for at least 4 consecutive days. The presence of 3 or more of the following is required to qualify as a hypomanic episode. If the mood is irritable, at least 4 of the following must be present:

- Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity

- Decreased need for sleep

- A compulsion to keep talking or being more talkative than usual

- Flight of ideas or racing thoughts

- High distractability

- Increased goal-directed activity (socially, at work or school, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation (non-goal-directed activity)

- Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful consequences, such as engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments

The episode is an unequivocal change in functioning, uncharacteristic of the person and observable by others. Also, the episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment, is not due to the physiological effects of a substance or general medical condition, and there is no psychosis (if present, this is mania by definition).

**DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for a Major Depressive Episode**

The presence of 5 or more of the following symptoms daily or nearly every day for a consecutive 2-week period that is a change from baseline or previous functioning:****

- Subjective report of depressed mood most of the day (or depressed mood observed by others)

- Anhedonia most of the day

- Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain or decrease or increase in appetite

- Insomnia or hypersomnia

- Psychomotor agitation or retardation

- Fatigue or loss of energy

- Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt

- Decreased concentration or indecisiveness

- Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan

To meet the criteria, at least one of the symptoms must be depressed mood or anhedonia, the symptoms must not be attributable to a substance or general medical condition, and it causes functional impairment (eg, social or occupational).

**Possible Secondary Cause of Bipolar Disorder**

The following characteristics may heighten the clinical suspicion for a possible secondary cause in patients with signs and symptoms associated with bipolar disorder: older than 50 at the first onset of symptoms, abnormal vital signs or neurological examination, a recent change in health status or medications temporally associated with symptom onset, unusual response or unresponsiveness to appropriate treatments, and no personal or family history of a psychiatric disorder.

Recommended initial evaluation for a possible secondary cause includes a urine drug screen, complete blood count with blood smear, comprehensive metabolic panel, thyroid function tests, and vitamin B and folate levels.