The majority of people who are infected with Ancylostoma are from the endemic areas, or they are travelers who visit endemic areas. Healthcare practitioners should take a careful history, including asking whether patients walk barefoot in endemic areas, have contact with domesticated animals, and inquire about nutritional status and growth of pediatric patients to determine the presence of Ancylostoma infection.

Some people can develop an Ancylostoma infection without any symptoms, while others may have mild to severe symptoms. There are 3 phases: invasion, migration, and establishment in the intestine. During the invasion stage, the filariform larvae penetrate the skin causing local irritation, intense itchiness, and vesicular rash lesions that are called ground itch. In some cases, zoonotic Ancylostoma, for which humans are incompatible hosts, the larvae only penetrate and live at the skin causing the condition known as CLM or creeping eruption. During the CLM, erythema and itchy papules are present. These are followed by linear, serpiginous, and elevated ridges due to the larvae tunneling phenomenon. The CLM lesions usually occur on the upper and lower extremities, although they have been reported on some unusual sites such as the abdomen and penis. However, in rare cases, A. caninum can induce eosinophilic enteritis marked by abdominal pain and peripheral blood eosinophilia.

In the migration phase, larvae escape to the lungs and GI tract and produce organ-related symptoms such as a cough, sore throat, and GI discomfort. Loeffler syndrome, the pulmonary hypersensitive response due to A. duodenale larval migration through lung tissue can occur; although, it is rare. Serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) and peripheral blood eosinophilia are elevated during Loeffler syndrome. If A. duodenale infects a person through the oral route (known as Wakana syndrome), they may experience nausea, vomiting, pharyngeal irritation, cough, dyspnea, and hoarseness.

The most serious symptoms of Ancylostoma infection develop during the last phase when the adult worms establish themselves in the human intestine. Using their buccal capsule and teeth, the adult worms attach to the mucosa and rupture capillaries and arterioles to feed, and this results in blood and protein loss. Chronic infection in the intestine results in iron deficiency anemia, accompanied by the loss of appetite, abdominal discomfort, and malnutrition due to protein deficiency. This can cause physical and cognitive impairment.