Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) collected from adipose and bone marrow tissue hold therapeutic value for various bone disease treatments. Current studies demonstrate the benefit of bone grafts based on combinations of MSC, biomimetic scaffolds, and growth factor delivery, which showed an increased osteogenic regeneration rate with minimal side effects. The specific mechanisms of cellular signaling in bone remodeling are essential in understanding the incorporation of newer effective treatment methods for numerous bone diseases.

Various transplant therapies involving osteogenic autologous bone grafts are less frequently used; patient-specific cell therapies involving autologous BM-MNCs (bone marrow mononuclear cells) composed of stem cells, monocytes, lymphocytes, and dendritic cells are rising in popularity for bone pathology treatments. All patients suffering from long-bone pseudoarthrosis attained full bone consolidation when treated with autologous BM-MNCs and allogeneic cancellous bone grafts. Bone marrow aspirate utilized during osteonecrosis treatment via minimally invasive decompression of the femoral head decreased disease progress and yielded overall pain and symptom relief. Bone marrow concentrated injections lead to better osteogenic unions, resulting in complete recovery in post-operative achondroplastic dwarf patients within 2 to 10 months after femoral lightning surgeries. Intravenous BMC injections, mixed with iloprost, proliferate fracture healing in patients with avascular necrosis. Patients receiving Intra-articular BMNc displayed better chewing and maximum interincisal opening with integral pain relief.