**Plain Radiographs**

An x-ray series of the wrist including anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and oblique views are necessary to identify a wrist dislocation. Although carpal instability injuries are frequently missed, the diagnosis should be able to be made using these plain films.

**Gilula's lines**

Gilula described three lines on a AP of the wrist outlining:

1. The proximal aspect of the proximal carpal row (scaphoid, lunate and triquetrum),

2. The distal aspect of the proximal carpal row

3. The proximal aspect of the capitate and hamate

A disruption in Gilula's lines on the AP view should prompt the clinician to have a high index of suspicion for a perilunate injury.

**Intervals between Carpal Bones**

In normal wrist radiographs, the distance between the ulnar border of the scaphoid and the radial border of the lunate is less than 3 millimeters. In scapholunate dissociation, posteroanterior radiographs may demonstrate a widened scapholunate space, commonly referred to as the "Terry Thomas" sign. If the injury is not seen on routine wrist films, the abnormal gap seen may be reproduced by obtaining a grip compression view. When scapholunate ligament instability occurs, the scaphoid rotates to a more transverse position. This results in an increased scapholunate angle to greater than 60 degrees. The scaphoid becomes shortened and develops a dense ring-like image around its distal edge, referred to as the "signet-ring sign."

For perilunate dislocations, the lateral view will reveal the lunate in its correct position aligned with the distal radius, but the capitate will be dorsally dislocated. A perilunate dislocation may obscure associated carpal bone fractures of the scaphoid and lunate.

In the case of lunate dislocations, the lateral x-ray shows the lunate displaced volarly but, the distal radius, carpus, and metacarpals are otherwise in normal alignment. This is frequently referred to as the “spilled teacup” sign. On the posteroanterior view, a lunate dislocation will have a characteristic triangular appearance due to the rotation of the lunate in a volar direction. This is referred to as the “piece of pie sign."