The diagnosis of a wrist sprain is made clinically in most cases. However, imaging can be helpful for cases without a clear diagnosis:

Plain radiographs can be obtained to ensure there is no fracture or dislocation of the carpal bones. Plain radiographs may need to include contralateral wrist views for comparison and/or dynamic views when usual images are negative, but strong suspicion remains. Dynamic views may include imaging with a clenched fist with or without lateral deviations to further evaluate ligament injuries and instability of the wrist. Spacing between carpal bones should be compared to the contralateral side to assess for ligament laxity or tears.

Point-of-care wrist ultrasound has been shown to have 97.2 to 99.1% sensitivity, 96.8 to 97.3% specificity, and 96.9 to 97.9% accuracy and can be an acceptable alternative to MRI with a properly trained technician.

A CT scan or MRI may be obtained, with a preference for MRI over CT if a sprain is suspected. If able, an MR arthrogram using an injection of contrast directly into the joint has better diagnostic capabilities than plain MRI.

Following MRI imaging, TFCC injuries can be further classified using the Palmer classification as follows

- Class 1 - Traumatic injury

- A: Central perforation of the triangular fibrocartilage disc proper
- B: Avulsion of the ulnar attachment
- C: Distal avulsion
- D: Avulsion of radial attachment

- Class 2 - Degenerative changes

- A: TFCC wear with thinning/fraying without perforation
- B: TFCC 2A findings with lunate, triquetral and/or ulnar chondromalacia
- C: TFCC perforation +/- 2B findings
- D: Lunotriquetral ligament perforation +/- features of 2A, 2B, and/or 2C
- E: Any or all of the above with ulnocarpal arthritis

Similarly, Scapholunate Complex injuries can be classified based on arthroscopy using 1996 Geissler classification and the more recent European Wrist Arthroscopy Society (EWAS) classifications as follows

- Geissler classification of scapholunate lesions:

- Grade 1: Moderate radiocarpal involvement of scapholunate ligament, without mid-carpal instability.
- Grade 2: More severe involvement, with ligament fragility or radiocarpal perforation, and palpator passing between the scaphoid and lunate bones mid-carpally.
- Grade 3: Perforation of the scapholunate ligament at radiocarpal joint allowing passage of palpator, and greater instability between the scaphoid and lunate bones at mid-carpal, joint classically allowing passage of palpator and increased interval between the bones on rotary maneuver
- Grade 4: Total ligament tear, allowing passage of arthroscope between the two bones in whichever joint

- EWAS arthroscopic classification of the scapholunate ligament lesions:

- Stage I: No passage of the probe in SL space, but synovitis
- Stage IIA: Volar passage in the SL space without widening
- Stage IIB: Dorsal passage in the SL space without widening
- Stage IIC: Complete passage in the SL space without widening
- Stage IIIA: Volar partial widening at dynamic instability test from MC joint (volar instability)
- Stage IIIB: Dorsal partial widening at dynamic instability test from MC joint (dorsal instability)
- Stage IIIC: Complete widening of the space at dynamic test
- Stage IV: Gap with the passage of the arthroscope from MC to RC joint

Upon making a diagnosis of a wrist sprain, a "four-leaf clover" treatment algorithm for disorders of the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) based on injury severity can assist with prognosis and treatment. The four considerations of the injury are

- Is there a bone deformity?

- Is there a cartilage defect?

- Is there a TFCC injury?

- Is there an unstable extensor carpi ulnaris tendon?