A detailed history and a thorough physical exam are vital. A history of cancer in a patient presenting with symptoms suggestive of LSP should raise the suspicion of neoplastic LSP. The diagnosis is more challenging in patients who had cancers that were treated with radiation to decide if the LSP is neoplastic or radiation-induced in origin. Plexopathy may present with unilateral or bilateral symptoms.

Neuroimaging with CT or MRI of the LSP is useful to evaluate for underlying tumor. MRI is more sensitive to providing anatomic detail and is the preferred modality of imaging. Typically, there is an increased T2 signal in the plexus with tumor involvement and with RILSP. However, when the lumbosacral trunk is involved or if there is Gadolinium enhancement on T1 sequence, Imaging may show enlarged nerves with peripheral, irregular enhancement with accompanying cystic component in contrast to benign causes of LSP, which show smooth peripheral enhancement. If there is a regional tumor noted on clinical exam or by imaging, it may support the diagnosis of tumor plexopathy.

Positron emission tomography (PET) with 2-fluorodeoxyglucose (2-FDG) can be helpful to detect an active neoplasm in the area of the plexus.

Electromyographic studies are useful to localize the involvement of the plexus.

- Nerve conduction studies may show decreased amplitudes of compound motor and sensory nerve action potentials asymmetrically. Conduction velocities are normal or mildly reduced. A prolonged F wave may be present on the affected side.

- Needle electromyography would likely show more extensive denervation compared to the clinical findings. The absence of paraspinal muscle fibrillation with the involvement of muscles from at least two lumbosacral root levels from at least two peripheral nerves would be characteristic.

- EMG would be useful to plan radiation in cases.

- Myokymic discharges may be seen in RILSP.

Nerve biopsy: Rarely a fascicular nerve biopsy may be diagnostic in cases with neoplastic etiologies.

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis: CSF cytology and protein may be elevated in neoplastic causes of lumbar plexopathy.