# Continuing Education Activity

Oral cutaneous fistula (OCF) is a rare extraoral path of infection that communicates the oral cavity and the skin. Chronic dental infections, trauma, dental implant complications, salivary gland lesions, and neoplasms are the most common causes of oral cutaneous fistulas. Affected patients usually seek help from dermatologists or surgeons rather than from dentists. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of OCF and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Explain the etiology of oral cutaneous fistulas.
- Outline the epidemiology of oral cutaneous fistulas.
- Describe the common presentation of oral cutaneous fistulas.
- Summarize the evaluation and treatment of oral cutaneous fistulas.

# Introduction

Oral cutaneous fistula (OCF) is a rare extraoral path of infection that communicates the oral cavity and the skin.

# Etiology

Odontogenic cutaneous fistulas are responsible for most cases of oral cutaneous fistulas reported in the literature.

Cutaneous fistulas and sinuses in the maxillofacial region secondary to osteomyelitis rarely appear in clinical practice.

An additional cause of oral cutaneous fistula is medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw.

Traumatic fistulas may be the result of injury or surgical repair. In a study by Dawson et al., which explored factors associated with the formation of orocutaneous fistulas following head and neck reconstructive surgery, they found that patients who had undergone chemoradiotherapy had a significantly higher probability of developing a fistula than those who had not (p = 0.008).

Complications of dental implants usually result from a combination of infection and host inflammatory responses or a lack thereof. The literature reports a case report of an oral cutaneous fistula associated with an osseointegrated dentoalveolar implant which occurred after three months.

There are also reports of fistulas mimicking a brachial cyst caused by an ectopic salivary gland. In one case, a 24-year-old man presented with intermittent clear drainage on both sides of the middle neck. The lesion underwent surgical excision, and the pathological examination revealed heterotopic salivary gland tissue.

Periapical actinomycosis is among the rarest forms of actinomycosis in the maxillofacial region. Although rare, it can result in an orocutaneous fistula.

More rarely, OCF is secondary to a neoplasm. Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common oral cavity neoplasm. If the fistula occurs, it has a poor prognosis because lymphatic drainage has most likely taken place by the time of diagnosis.

# Epidemiology

In the most extensive study of odontogenic cutaneous fistulas reported by Guevara-Gutiérrez et al., which examined 75 cases during an eleven-year timeframe, the mean age was 45. The most affected age group was 51 years old and over (28%). The female to male ratio was 1.14 to 1.

# Histopathology

The possibility of a neoplastic cause may require a histopathological examination of the oral cutaneous fistula. A biopsy is also helpful for diagnosing actinomycosis, which has characteristic pseudohyphae appearing as clublike projections that stretch out from a central basophilic staining core.

# History and Physical

Dental infection is the most common cause of cutaneous fistulas of the face.

In the series of Guevara-Gutierrez et al., the authors found that the more frequent locations of odontogenic cutaneous fistula were the mandibular angle (36%), the chin (28%), and the cheeks (24%).

The clinical aspect of the odontogenic cutaneous fistula on the skin varies but most commonly appears as a nodule.

Although rare, in some cases, the origin of the oral cutaneous fistula is not odontogenic. In chronic osteomyelitis with drainage, pain may not be a symptom. An intraoral sinus tract may be raised or appear as a red-to-yellow ulcer that bleeds easily and exudes pus. In some cases of actinomycosis, yellow granules are observable at clinical examination. Signs of salivary gland infections include swelling, pain, and trismus if the parotid gland is involved.

# Evaluation

In the case of odontogenic cutaneous fistula, performing pulp sensitivity tests, percussion, and palpation helps identify the affected tooth.

Radiographic examination is essential for diagnosing an odontogenic cutaneous fistula, for which a periapical x-ray, panoramic radiograph, or cone beam CT scan can be used.

# Treatment / Management

Complete resolution of the fistula occurs after appropriate dental treatment of the causative tooth by either an endodontic treatment or a tooth extraction.

A residual skin scar in the form of dimpling or hyperpigmentation usually improves with time but, it may remain after a few months.

In a study by Andrews et al., the authors reported the beneficial use of a negative-pressure vacuum-assisted closure technique (VAC) to facilitate the closure of oral cutaneous fistula (OCF).

# Differential Diagnosis

Because orocutaneous fistulas (OCF) are uncommon, misdiagnosis of those from a dental origin is not unusual. In the study of Lee et al., the majority of patients were misdiagnosed initially. Oral cutaneous fistulas were thought to be an epidermal cyst (24,2%), furuncle (21.2%), subcutaneous mycosis (15.2%), squamous cell carcinoma (9.1%), basal cell carcinoma (6.1%), and foreign body granuloma (6.1%).

# Prognosis

Odontogenic cutaneous fistulas have a very good prognosis after treating the offending tooth, where they usually resolve themselves without more interventions. However, they often leave a scar that needs to be managed surgically to improve the aesthetic appearance.

# Complications

Around 50% of patients with odontogenic cutaneous fistulas of the face and neck are initially misdiagnosed,

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The most effective preventive measure against oral cutaneous fistula (OCF) is oral hygiene. Preventative measures against dental caries and thus dentoalveolar abscess are tooth brushing, flossing, and fluoridation of communal drinking water. A regular dental check-up should be done. In case of a toothache or dental abscess, immediately consult a dentist.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An oral cutaneous fistula frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma. These patients may exhibit non-specific symptoms and highly variable skin lesion morphology, leading to confusion. Although poorly recognized, chronic dental infection is the most common cause of cutaneous fistulas of the face and neck.