There is no curative treatment for XLA. However, management is by preventing, reducing, and treating infections.

The optimal management of patients with XLA includes

- Regular immunoglobulin replacement therapy, using intravenous or subcutaneous infusions

- Therapeutic and prophylactic use of antibiotics to treat and prevent bacterial infections

- Careful monitoring to manage reactions arising from immunoglobulin infusions, complications of infections, or the emergence of clinical disease (e.g., autoimmune, inflammatory, malignant)

- Support (nutritional, social, psychological, and educational)

- Counseling about the importance of receiving all available immunizations except for those containing live bacteria or viruses, e.g., polio (OPV, oral polio vaccine), measles/mumps/rubella (MMR), chickenpox (Varivax), BCG, yellow fever, and rotavirus (Rota-Teq)

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or subcutaneous immunoglobulin (SCIG) therapy requires several considerations:

- A dose of 400 to 800 mg/kg every 3 to 4 weeks has been established to maintain an IgG trough greater than 5g/L.

- Both IVIG and SCIG are appropriate first-line therapies. IVIG may be preferred if a larger infusion volume due to a higher dose requirement is needed. SCIG has been reported to have a lower incidence of adverse reactions and allows for a more stable IgG trough following injection.

- Most adverse reactions are transient and pose no serious threat to the patient. These include immediate effects such as headache, fever, myalgia, hypo/hypertension, nausea, and chest pain. Reactions that resemble anaphylaxis are associated with higher transfusion rates and occur during the infusion. Although IgA deficiency is associated with a risk of anaphylaxis during IVIG infusion, antibodies against IgA are unlikely in XLA patients due to agammaglobulinemia. Reactions may temporarily require cessation of the infusion until symptomatically managed with agents such as NSAIDs (for flushing, pain, and headache), diphenhydramine (for pruritus, rashes, and flushing), ondansetron (for nausea or vomiting) or muscle relaxants (for muscular spasm).

- Delayed reactions are of greater concern, though less common, and include thromboembolism due to hyperviscosity, renal failure secondary to osmotic injury associated with sucrose-containing preparations, pseudohyponatremia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, aseptic meningitis, and neutropenia.

- To avoid adverse reactions, it is appropriate to adhere to a regimen with appropriate premedications and rate of infusion that has been previously well-tolerated by the patient.