Before any surgical intervention, the patient needs to be adequately resuscitated with intravenous fluids, and electrolyte imbalances should be corrected. A nasogastric tube can aid proximal decompression. Decompression of the sigmoid volvulus should be attempted with a soft rectal flatus tube by the bedside, ideally feeding the tube under direct vision through a rigid sigmoidoscope. Flexible Sigmoidoscopy with gentle insufflation is indicated if the bedside decompression fails or if there are concerns about the viability of the bowel wall, as the mucosa can be inspected during the sigmoidoscopy and areas of mucosal ischemia will become obvious.

Those patients who cannot be decompressed or who have progressed to compromised viability of the colon will need surgical intervention. The surgery of choice is a sigmoid colectomy with either a primary anastomosis or an end colostomy, depending on findings during the surgery and the individual patients’ physiological reserves.

A patient presenting with bowel perforation will require aggressive resuscitation and an immediate laparotomy to control the fecal contamination and remove the perforated segment of bowel.

Patients presenting with recurrent episodes of sigmoid volvulus that can be decompressed should have an informed discussion about the benefits and risks of an elective resection of the sigmoid to prevent further episodes of volvulus leading to emergency admission to hospital. In the elective situation, a sigmoid colectomy can usually be performed with a primary anastomosis instead of an end colostomy, unless the patient has significant comorbidities.