Fournier gangrene is a true surgical emergency. The disease process is managed with both surgical interventions and medical resuscitation as patients will often be septic and in shock.

Medical intervention revolves around the initiation of empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics while awaiting culture sensitivities. Antibiotic therapy has historically involved triple therapy in covering gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic organisms associated with Fournier gangrene. These typically include staphylococcus, streptococcus, coliforms, Pseudomonas, Bacteroides, Clostridium, and possibly yeast.

**Current recommended antibiotic regimens for Fournier gangrene include**:

- Carbapenems (imipenem or meropenem 1 g IV every 6-8 hours, ertapenem 1 g IV every 24 hours

OR

- Piperacillin-tazobactam (3.375 g IV every 6 hours or 4.5 g IV every 8 hours)

PLUS

- Clindamycin (600 to 900 mg IV every 8 hours)

PLUS

- Vancomycin (15 to 20 mg/kg IV every 8 to 12 hours)

Daptomycin or linezolid can be substituted for vancomycin.

Alternate regimens include aminoglycosides or fluoroquinolones plus metronidazole.

In patients who have had exposure to fresh or saltwater, doxycycline can be added for coverage of Aeromonas hydrophilia and Vibrio vulnificus.

In addition to antibiotic therapy, fluid resuscitation is of great importance in patients who may present with hypotension and septic shock.

**As critical as these antibiotic and resuscitative measures are, they should not delay emergent, early, and aggressive surgical exploration and debridement, which is the definitive and critical therapy for Fournier gangrene. Any significant delay in initiating the surgery promptly will result in increased patient morbidity and mortality.**

Surgical intervention is based on aggressive, radical, wide resection of all necrotic and gangrenous tissue. The surgical team may be comprised of urology, general surgery, plastic surgery, colorectal surgery, and OB-GYN depending on the particular circumstances of the individual case. If there is any doubt about the specialty to take charge of the case, then all surgical specialties involved should be present in the operating room. If the urethra is involved and a suprapubic tube is needed, or if the gangrene is confined to the scrotum and genitalia, then urology would be expected to be the primary surgical service. If the infection starts in the scrotum but extends well into the lower abdomen and perineum and approaches the rectum, or if a diverting colostomy is required, then general or colorectal surgery must be involved. Regardless, these issues should not delay the initiation of surgical treatment of the patient.

A shorter time from initial hospital presentation to surgical intervention has been associated with improved prognosis; therefore, efforts should be made to minimize this time and avoid delays.

Other specialties that may be involved with these difficult and complex cases include anesthesiology, critical care, emergency physicians, endocrinology, infectious disease, internal medicine (hospitalists), nephrology, and wound care.

The testicles have a separate blood supply through the spermatic cord, so they are typically unaffected, even if extensive scrotal involvement is present.

The penile corpora cavernosa and urethra are usually preserved, although the penile skin may become involved.

Surgical debridement often takes place in stages, with most cases of severe Fournier gangrene requiring three separate procedures.

Following surgical debridement and the formation of granulation tissue, patients will need to undergo reconstructive surgery of the affected area. Skin involvement guides reconstruction effects, which involve one or more of the following: skin flaps or grafts with local tissue, stem cell utilization, and/or split autodermoplasty.

Patients with significant perineal involvement will often undergo a colostomy or utilize a fecal management system for feces diversion to aid local healing. Fecal management systems have their basis around bowel management catheters. The system involves the insertion of the catheter into the rectum with a syringe for irrigation and a collection bag. A diverting colostomy is indicated in patients where the infectious process originated from the anorectal area and subsequently involved the anal sphincter. Other indications include rectal perforation, large rectal wound, or systemic sepsis.

A diverting colostomy is often performed using the Trephine technique. This technique uses a flexible sigmoidoscope to transilluminate and locate the sigmoid colon. The stoma site is determined intra-operatively. A trephine is performed, and while holding the colon, the sigmoidoscope is withdrawn. The colon is delivered into the wound, and an end colostomy is formed. When compared, fecal management systems have been shown to have a decreased length of hospitalization (24.1 days) compared to patients who have received a colostomy (40.5 days).

The use of hyperbaric oxygen, topical therapy, immunotherapy,  and therapeutic plasma exchange are other treatment modalities that are potentially useful for the treatment of Fournier gangrene; however, medical and especially surgical treatment takes priority. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is a supplemental postoperative treatment option that appears helpful.

The premise is that the hyperbaric environment results in the improvement of tissue oxygenation, thereby improving antibiotic delivery and efficacy as well as promoting wound healing.

The application of honey to the affected areas has also been reported to improve wound healing, but no studies have thus far been performed to validate this type of therapy.

**Treatment Summary**

- The basis of successful therapy in Fournier gangrene is early recognition and the rapid initiation of surgical debridement.

- This should be accompanied by hemodynamic resuscitation and broad-spectrum antibiotics but not delayed unduly.

- Imaging and laboratory testing should not delay the start of surgery in obvious or critical cases, as early surgical intervention is the single most significant factor in determining survival.

- Extensive, aggressive, and early surgical debridement is the primary mainstay of treatment.

- After surgery, wounds are managed by sterile dressings and vacuum wound pressure systems.

- The testicles are usually preserved as their blood supply is typically unaffected. They can be placed in subcutaneous pockets, usually on the upper inner thighs or in pudendal thigh pouches.

- If the urethra is involved, a suprapubic tube can be placed.

- If the rectum or anus is involved, a diverting colostomy may be needed or an equivalent fecal management system employed.

- The use of suprapubic tubes and colostomies should be minimized as they have not been shown to improve mortality and are associated with increased patient morbidity.

- Hyperbaric oxygen seems to help reduce morbidity and mortality.

- When fully healed, reconstructive surgery can provide reasonably satisfactory results.