Initial management for dyslipidemia involves lifestyle modifications. This approach should include a diet with an emphasis on the intake of vegetables, fruits, and whole grains within an appropriate calorie requirement. Also, adults should participate in moderate to vigorous aerobic physical activity 3 to 4 times a week for at least 40 minutes. First-line treatment for dyslipidemia is statins that inhibit 3-hydroxy-3methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase.

Patients with clinically significant atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) (acute coronary syndromes, history of myocardial infarction, stable or unstable angina, arterial revascularization, and stroke) and are less than 75 years of age should be put on a high-intensity statin. Patients that are greater than 75 years of age with clinical ASCVD should be on a moderate-intensity statin. High-intensity statin therapy should start if the patient is 40 and 75 years old and has LDL-C greater than or equal to 190 mg/dL or has a history of diabetes and LDL-C between 70 to 189 mg/dL. Patients should be on a moderate or high-intensity statin if age 40 to 75 years old, LDL-C between 70 to 189 mg/dL, and have 10-year ASCVD greater than or equal to 7.5%. The clinician-patient discussion should be undertaken to discuss the introduction of high or moderate-intensity statin in situations such as less than 5% to 7.5% 10-year ASCVD risk.

For primary prevention, statin therapy should lower LDL-C approximately 30% to less than 50% with a moderate-intensity statin and greater than or equal to 50% with a high-intensity statin. High-intensity statins are atorvastatin 40 or 80 mg and rosuvastatin 20 mg. Some moderate-intensity statins atorvastatin 1 0mg, rosuvastatin 10 mg, simvastatin 20 mg or 40 mg, pravastatin 10 mg, etc.

For secondary prevention, as defined by a patient who has coronary artery disease, a target goal is set for LDL-C less than 70 mg/dL after being placed on a high-intensity statin for six weeks. If this goal is not met and LDL-C is significantly greater than 70, then combination therapy should be started in addition to high-intensity statin. If the patient is not high-risk, then the LDL-C goal should remain less than 70 mg/dL. If the patient is a high risk (already had acute coronary syndrome in the last year, familial hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, chronic kidney disease (stage 3 or 4), or atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease event, or the need for revascularization while on a statin), then the LDL goal should be less than 50 and if not met another agent should be added.

Currently, there are two classes of medications that are recommended with statin therapy because they have shown to decrease cardiovascular outcomes. One of these is ezetimibe, which inhibits the absorption of cholesterol. This drug can lower LDL-C an additional 25% in combination with statin therapy.

Another category targets proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), which regulates the LDL receptor. An increase in PSCK9 decreases LDL receptors and therefore increases LDL levels in the blood. PCSK9 inhibitors are monoclonal antibodies that bind PCSK9 and, in doing so, decrease LDL-C levels.

The new agent inclisiran is an interfering ribonucleic acid drug that stops the production of PCSK9 with twice a yearly dosing. This agent may be beneficial in patients who are intolerant of LDL lowering medications. As of this writing, it has not yet received FDA approval in the USA.

Icosapent ethyl is an FDA approved medication that has been shown to reduce cardiovascular risk in patients with elevated triglycerides in addition to maximal statin therapy.

Bempedoic acid is another drug that is an option for people intolerant to statins in combination with ezetimibe. This drug works by inhibiting adenosine triphosphate citrate lyase, which helps make cholesterol in the liver and therefore decreasing levels. Many other new and exciting medications are in current research to help lower cholesterol levels and prevent cardiovascular events.

Other categories of treatment that have not been shown to reduce cardiovascular events but have been useful in dyslipidemia therapy are bile acid sequestrants such as cholestyramine, colestipol, and colesevelam, which decrease bile acid reabsorption, therefore, increasing clearance of LDL-C and decreasing levels. Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates) are peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists. These have shown to increase HDL-C and reduce triglycerides. However, in combination with statins can increase the risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, which can cause generalized muscle pain. Current guidelines recommend against the use of statins and gemfibrozil. Niacin has shown to increase HDL and reduce VLDL, which also decreases LDL but has a significant side effect profile with the greatest being flushing. Taking aspirin can decrease the occurrence of this side effect.