Abacavir is a nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor. Within this class, it is specifically a carbocyclic 2'-deoxyguanosine, also known as a guanosine analog. After oral ingestion, abacavir sulfate is rapidly absorbed and reaches peak concentrations at about 0.63 to 1 hour with an absolute bioavailability of about 83%. Abacavir displays linear pharmacokinetics and possesses dose proportionality over the range of 300 to 1200 mg/day. Taking abacavir with food has not had any clinically relevant effect on exposure to the drug and can be safely ingested in the presence or absence of food. The volume of distribution by parental route is about 0.86 +/- 0.15 L/kg. Plasma protein binding is about 50% and has an independent relationship with the plasma concentration of the drug.

Abacavir is predominantly metabolized by the liver. The remaining bioavailable 2% of the compound gets excreted as an unaltered product in the urine. Two major metabolic pathways are the uridine diphosphate glucuronyltransferase and the alcohol dehydrogenase pathway processes abacavir within the liver. Enzymatic metabolism produces an inactive glucuronide metabolite (361W94, approximately 36% of the dose recovered in the urine) and an additional inactive carboxylate metabolite (2269W93, about 30% of the dose recovered in the urine) — the other 15% of the compound ends up in the urine as minor metabolites, which comprise less than 2% of the orally ingested amount. Elimination through stool makes up about 16% of the original dose. CYP450 metabolism of abacavir does not play a substantial role in abacavir, and no observable drug interactions that alter clinical decision-making exist within recommended doses of methadone, zidovudine, and lamivudine. Also, there appears to be no interaction with ethanol.

The antiviral effect of abacavir is due to its intracellular anabolite, carbovir-triphosphate, which interferes with HIV viral RNA-dependent DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase), leading to inhibition of viral replication.