The choice between shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) and other treatment modalities depends on several factors, including stone size, stone burden, stone composition, etc. Another compounding factor in choosing the treatment modality is patient preference and expectation.

For non-staghorn calculi, renal and ureteral stones less than 2 cm size SWL is considered a viable first-line treatment. Success rates of SWL are considerably lower for stones that are larger than 2 cm.

Stone location is an essential predictor of SWL success rates. Stones in lower calyces (LC) can be fragmented by SWL just as well as those present in other locations, but because of the dependent nature of the lower pole, the clearance of stone fragments after SWL is reduced. Lower pole stones of more than 10 mm size are treated with SWL, have lower stone-free-rates (SFR) outcomes than percutaneous nephrolithotripsy (PCNL) in that same region.

The stone composition, as well as visibility, also has a significant impact on the outcomes of SWL. SWL easily fragments uric acid stones; however, it sometimes cannot be visualized on fluoroscopy since they are radiolucent. Calcium oxalate monohydrate, cysteine, and calcium phosphate stones are considered relatively SWL-resistant

In addition to stone factors, several patient factors determine the treatment of choice for the nephrolithiasis in the given patient. Obesity provides challenges with on-table positioning and radiographic quality. Skin-to-stone distance of less than 10 to 11 cm is an independent predictor of a higher SFR after SWL. Similarly, a higher body mass index (BMI, more than 30 kg/m2) is associated with decreased success. Anatomic abnormalities such as calyceal diverticuli, kidney rotation, and kidney fusion warrant careful assessment and judicious use of SWL.

Retrograde intrarenal surgery (RIRS) is emerging as an alternative to SWL. RIRS has higher success rates as well as lower retreatment rates compared to SWL, especially when treating radiolucent stones.