**Disuse Osteoporosis and Osteopenia**

Patients sustaining SCIs are predisposed to disuse osteopenia from prolonged immobilization and overall decreased mobility and independent functional capabilities. Normal bone physiology relies on a process of active remodeling in a constant cycle of bone formation and bone resorption. In SCI, the generalized loss of mobility and ability to perform normal weight-bearing activities of daily living eventually uncouples the active remodeling process. The first 2 weeks after the initial injury is recognized as the most vulnerable period for decreased bone formation.

**Sclerostin, Vitamin D, P****arathyroid Hormone**

Recent studies suggest that sclerostin plays a critical role in SCI-induced bone loss. Sclerostin is produced primarily by osteocytes and inhibits bone formation via multiple mechanisms, including the up-regulation of receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL) and down-regulation of osteoprotegerin (OPG).

Several studies have demonstrated increased levels of sclerostin in patients afflicted with clinical conditions resulting in disability and immobility. In addition to SCI patients, stroke patients are considered particularly vulnerable and at risk for acute and chronic compromise to BMD levels. Moreover, sclerostin levels appear to be highest during the initial post-injury phase, followed by decreasing levels detected in chronic SCI osteoporosis patients.

SCI patients typically have abnormally low levels of vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels in both the acute and chronic phases of SCI injury and recovery.  Acutely, PTH levels are low secondary to the initial hypercalcemia resulting from the sclerostin-induced bone resorption.

**Long-Term Implications**

After the initial 2 weeks following SCI, studies have suggested that, while bone formation rates can return to normal levels, the regions of the body below the level of the lesion (i.e., sublesion levels) continue to experience a 4% per month reduction in BMD.  In addition, trabecular BMD is decreased by 40% by 2 years after the injury. Similarly, the long bones in the lower extremity undergo appreciable cortical thinning following SCI, predisposing to low-energy impact fractures.

Beyond 2 to 5 years post-SCI, controversy remains in the literature with respect to ongoing decremental BMD rates into perpetuity. Some reports suggest that bone loss plateaus after 3 to 5 years, while others demonstrate a steady decremental loss in BMD.

**Fragility Fractures**

SCIs represent conditions of significant morbidity and mortality.  With respect to osteoporosis, the most obvious and devastating clinical manifestation is the fragility fracture.