PTC: Microscopically, the unique characteristic feature of PTC is papillae formation. A papilla consists of layers of tumor cells surrounding a fibrovascular core. Follicles are typically absent in classic PTC. Typical cellular histomorphology includes cells with large and clear nuclei with finely granular chromatin, often described as ground-glass or "Orphan Annie-eyed" nuclei with nuclear grooving and intranuclear inclusion bodies. Psammoma bodies, which are calcified clumps of cells likely derived from necrosed papillae, are also common.

Some variants of PTC do not form papillae and are termed follicular variants of PTC, provided they still have the nuclear features of PTC. Variants of PTC such as tall cell variant, columnar variant, insular carcinoma, and diffuse sclerosing variant are more aggressive than classic PTC and are termed thyroid cancers with intermediate differentiation.

FTC: The histological features of FTC can be highly variable, from a well-differentiated follicular pattern to a poorly differentiated pattern with marked nuclear atypia, absence of follicles, extensive capsular or vascular invasion, and solid growth. The latter changes are associated with a poor prognosis.

Hurthle cell carcinoma: This is characterized by the occurrence of eosinophilic oxyphilic cells with abundant cytoplasm (oncocytes) and prominent nucleoli.

MTC: Given its origin from the parafollicular C cells, its histological features are the presence of spindle-shaped cells with no follicle formation. Amyloid deposition and calcitonin immunoreactivity are typically present.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: The usual histologic variants are spindle-cell, pleomorphic giant cell, and squamoid variants.