The most effective treatments for onychomycosis are systemic antifungals. Due to an increased risk of subungual ulceration, one also should consider oral antifungal therapy in moderate to severe disease, especially in patients with diabetes mellitus. Combination therapy with topical agents, periodic debridement, or chemical nail avulsion, may produce better results than systemic medication alone. For mild to moderate cases and in patients who prefer to avoid systemic antifungals, the newer topical antifungal therapies have improved cure rates. Meta-analyses have shown the mycological cure rate for terbinafine is 76%, itraconazole pulse dosing is 63%, and fluconazole is 48% effective while topical therapy mycological cure rates are 55% for efinaconazole and 36% for tavaborole or ciclopirox.

The complete cure rate is defined as both negative mycology and 100% clear nail is the gold standard for comparing efficacies. However, it is a very stringent criterion as residual nail dystrophy from chronic infection may scar the nail plate and not allow some results to be considered completely clear even though there may be a significant clinical improvement. On the other hand, the nail unit may be 100% clear, but the post-treatment fungal culture may detect fungal colonization. The complete cure rate for systemic terbinafine is 38%.

Oral therapy is the most effective therapy for severe onychomycosis, but for some patients, it is medically inappropriate. Additionally, many patients have a strong personal preference for a non-systemic approach. Topical therapy would seem to be a good solution to the problem if the efficacy rates were better. Many over the counter and prescription products are available, hinting that there is no clearly effective topical choice. The evidence concludes that complete cure rates for FDA-approved topical therapies have recently improved from 8.5% for ciclopirox lacquer to 18% for an efinaconazole solution. The tavaborole solution has a complete cure rate of 9.1% in mild to moderate distal subungual onychomycosis.

It is important to carefully review the patient history for alcohol use disorder and hepatitis. Ordering alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase hepatic function tests before the beginning of continuous therapy establishes a baseline. If there is a history of living overseas where hepatitis is endemic, one can add a hepatitis antigen screening panel to the workup. Follow-up hepatic function tests at five weeks serve to detect the less than 2% of idiosyncratic reactions. If the follow-up tests are significantly elevated, one can stop the drug and retest.

Additionally, concurrent medications may preclude the use of oral antifungals. Terbinafine may alter the metabolism of a number of drugs, so monitoring is appropriate. Concerns regarding drug-to-drug interactions with statin therapy and systemic antifungal therapy are actually with the azole class of antifungals and not terbinafine. It might be best to avoid systemic therapy in patients on psychotropic medications. Terbinafine carries a contraindication for concurrent use with the phenothiazines and pimozide for increased risk of QT prolongation. Gupta reports one can use terbinafine safely in children as well as the elderly. However, clinicians should always exercise caution in patients with polypharmacy major. It may be best to use an alternative therapy or periodic debridement alone to control symptoms in these cases to avoid adverse drug reactions in patients with essentially benign disease.