Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is a ubiquitous presentation when caring for postoperative patients. The incidence is estimated to be about 30% in the average patient and can rise as high as 70% in the high-risk patient. PONV is a significant concern because it prolongs recovery room time, can lead to increased hospital admissions and unanticipated complications. Additionally, the prevention of PONV is vital to the patient's mental wellbeing.

A patient's risk of experiencing PONV can be reliably anticipated and predicted using several measures, including the Apfel score. In patients with increased risk, a multimodal approach, including the use of multiple antiemetic medications, is the proper approach in the prevention of PONV.

Due to the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the scopolamine patch, it requires application several hours before the start of the patient's surgery. It can also be applied the previous night. The patient's healthcare team must remain vigilant about identifying patients at high risk for PONV. If scopolamine is indicated, there is sufficient time before the procedure to administer the drug effectively.

Scopolamine commonly causes dry mouth, blurred vision, and sedation. As an antimuscarinic medication, scopolamine has the potential to cause anticholinergic symptoms, including tachycardia, urinary retention, and acute angle-closure glaucoma. There are also reports of withdrawal symptoms from the medication. The patient's health care team must be aware of these potential complications to recognize them and begin management as soon as possible; this is especially true for elderly patients who are at increased risk of complications, including falls.

A collaborative healthcare team approach is the best method for addressing PONV. Clinicians need to accurately identify which patients will be candidates for antiemetic prophylaxis or therapy and coordinate with nurses and pharmacists for its delivery. Nurses will be administering the medication and need to fully understand the points discussed in this activity regarding proper administration and handling of the drug, particularly in patch form. The pharmacist should complete a full drug-drug interaction check and verify dosing while also watching for mitigating factors like age that may require therapy modification. Both the pharmacist and nurse will report any issues or concerns to the treating clinician. These points highlight some of how an interprofessional team approach will be most successful in providing PONV care. [Level 5]

Finally, a common mechanism of ophthalmic symptoms from scopolamine is self-contamination by the patient. The interprofessional health care team, including the pharmacist, will counsel the patient on hand washing and proper hand hygiene after touching the scopolamine patch. In addition to the morbidity associated with the actual adverse effect, the clinical signs associated with unilateral mydriasis may often be misinterpreted, leading to misdiagnosis, increased costs, and delay of proper treatment.