Treatment of an aortic injury is a surgical emergency. The survival of patients following a traumatic aortic injury depends on early recognition, rapid diagnosis, and prompt management. Surgical repair of the injured thoracic aorta is associated with high mortality and morbidity. The initial resuscitation includes ABCDE, based upon Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) principles: If any life-threatening condition is identified, it should be immediately treated.

Assessment of associated injuries includes:

- Rapid identification and control ongoing hemorrhage

- Monitoring and controlling the heart rate and blood pressure

- Avoiding over-resuscitation

Management decisions for patients with aortic injury depend on the following:

- Hemodynamic status of the patient: Patients who are hemodynamically unstable should be immediately taken to the operating room. Consider major intra-thoracic injury, if a chest tube drains a large initial rush of bright red arterial blood, or has significant blood (more than 200 ml). Such a patient should be taken to the operating room, immediately.

- The severity of injury: Generally, for type 1 injuries, nonoperative management is suggested. Patients with intimal hemorrhage with and without partial intimal laceration may heal spontaneously. However, the repair is required for type 2, 3, and 4 aortic injuries.

Associated injuries and medical conditions: beware that despite having a contained aortic injury, the patient may be hemodynamically unstable due to hemorrhage from other organs, such as the liver or spleen. Hemorrhage control is still the priority. However, if the aorta is not the cause of active hemorrhage, control of active bleeding should be the priority.

Indications for operative repair are as follows:

- Unstable patient

- Large amount of blood return from the chest tube (more than 200 ml)

- Contrast extravasation on CT scan

- Rapidly expanding mediastinal hematoma

- Penetrating aortic injury.

Surgical treatment is by either primary repair of the aorta or resection of the injured segment and grafting. The repair of the aorta should not be delayed beyond the time required to evaluate and treat other emergent conditions. The aortic repair can be performed by either an open or endovascular method. Since the endovascular technique is not widely available, its role in the treatment of traumatic aortic disruption has yet to be determined.