**General Guidelines for Ventilator Settings**

Before initiating mechanical ventilation in prehospital settings, patients must receive appropriate sedation and analgesia.

- If the patient was intubated for airway protection only, whether for trauma, obstruction, burns, or other reasons, but there was no failure of oxygenation or ventilation, the ventilator should be set to mimic normal physiology as closely as possible.

- If the patient was intubated for hypoxic respiratory failure, the strategy should be to maximize oxygenation while keeping normal ventilation. Acute pulmonary edema or pneumonia are examples where oxygenation is the primary derangement.

- If the patient was hypercapnic but requires minimal oxygen supplementation, the strategy is to augment ventilation to return CO2 to normal and keep excess oxygenation to a minimum. The exacerbation of COPD is an example of this patient.

- In general, the clinician needs to meet the minute ventilation demanded by the patient before intubation. This is especially important to a patient with severe metabolic acidosis that requires markedly high minute ventilation to maintain appropriate respiratory compensation. An example of this would be a patient in DKA with tachypneic, hyperpneic respirations requiring both high tidal volume and a high rate to meet the minute ventilation demand.

**Initial Setup**

There are no prehospital validated data that provide definitive outcomes. Most parameters recommended for prehospital care by EMS are extrapolated from hospital settings. Nevertheless, lung injury from using large tidal volumes can develop quickly in only 20 minutes and is associated with increased mortality.

Choosing a mode of ventilation is somewhat arbitrary (initially, at least) and will most likely depend on provider experience, comfort level with various modes, and/or local policies/protocols. For the purpose of this review, this chapter strictly discusses volume assist/control, as transport ventilators vary widely in their settings, but AC is standard across all.

- Determine tidal volume. The initial setup parameters include tidal volumes of 6 mL/kg of ideal body weight (IBW), a plateau pressure (Pplat) <30 cmH2O, and a driving pressure (Pplat - PEEP) <15 cmH2O. IBW is a predicted weight based on the patient’s sex and height, and the calculation is below. IBW and not actual weight is used because lung volume does not change with body mass. In other words, a 65” tall male weighing 200 kg has the same size lungs as the same height male who weighs 70 kg. Therefore it is important to use actual height using a measuring tape or to ask the family for accurate height.

- Set respiratory rate. Fourteen to 16 breaths per minute is an average starting point for patients with respiratory failure, however, consider higher rates for patients with metabolic acidosis, as discussed above, who will require much higher minute ventilation. Note your initial EtCO2 after intubation and use this dynamic measure as a guide to monitor the adequacy of ventilation.

- Start with PEEP of 5 cmH2O. This is usually just enough to overcome the intrinsic resistance of the ventilator circuit and maintain a physiologic amount of PEEP.

- Titrate FiO2. Most will default to 100% FiO2 initially, but hyperoxemia can be detrimental to the patient long term, so quickly titrate FiO2, the goal being to use as little oxygen as necessary to maintain SpO2 of 92% to 98%.

- Ensure adequate sedation. Ventilator synchrony is essential to maximizing the effectiveness of ventilation, increasing patient comfort, and preventing downstream lung injury. The choice of sedative will vary depending on the local protocol.

- IBW (Men) = 50 kg + (2.3 kg x (height (in) - 60))

- IBW (Women) = 45.5 kg + (2.3 kg x (height (in) - 60))