While the use of colchicine has declined over the past two decades, physicians, nurses, and pharmacists still need to know about the dosing requirements and restrictions. Before administering colchicine to any patient, one must be aware of the current dosing recommendations and the patient's age, renal, and liver function. At least 30% of all colchicine-related medication errors are related to incorrect dosing regimens. Also, it is important to know what else the patient is taking to prevent lethal drug interactions. One should also ensure that the patient knows how to take colchicine and that it is not an analgesic agent. Many errors have occurred with colchicine simply because patients did not know that the drug effects might take 24 to 36 hours to develop, and the patient should avoid taking repeated doses within this period. Further,  patients should understand to discontinue colchicine if they develop gastrointestinal side effects or paresthesias. Finally, all patients require education on how to safely store colchicine in the home, away from the reach of children. Colchicine has a very high mortality rate within a short time when ingesting a high dose.

Given the above, prescribers should work closely with the pharmacist and the nursing staff when initiating colchicine therapy. All three disciplines need to provide patient counseling so that the crucial points receive emphasis. The prescriber and pharmacist should review all patient parameters and make sure dose adjustments are not necessary. Nurses should be familiar with signs of toxicity or adverse events to monitor the patient and inform the prescriber should any issues arise. With an interprofessional team approach, colchicine can still be an effective agent in specific cases. [Level 5]