The main objective of the management of kernicterus is to prevent neurotoxicity by reducing bilirubin levels. The three mainstays of therapy to prevent and treat hyperbilirubinemia are:

- **Exchange Transfusion Therapy**- the emergent and definitive way to remove the already formed bilirubin from the blood. The method requires extracting the infant's native blood (mainly the plasma) and replacing it with citrate phosphate dextrose (CPD) banked blood that does not contain bilirubin. It is indicated when the signs of acute bilirubin encephalopathy are present, and when serum levels of bilirubin are high despite the attempts to reduce it. Serum bilirubin levels greater than 20-25 mg/dL are usually treated with an exchange transfusion.

- **Phototherapy**- refers to the use of light to convert insoluble bilirubin molecules in the body into water-soluble isomers that can be excreted by the body. The infant's eyes should be protected during the procedure as it can damage the retina irreversibly.
- Equal or more than 15 mg/dL in infants 25-48 hours old
- Equal or more than 18 mg/dL in infants 49-72 hours old
- Equal or more than 20 mg/dL in infants older than 72 hours

- **Intravenous Immunoglobulins**(IVIG) - is used in cases with immunologically mediated conditions, or in the presence of Rh, ABO, or other blood group incompatibilities that cause significant neonatal jaundice. Administration of IVIG to newborns with significant hyperbilirubinemia due to ABO hemolytic disease with positive direct Coomb test reduces the need for exchange transfusion without producing immediate adverse effects.

Fluid supplementation in term children presenting with severe hyperbilirubinemia reduces the rate of exchange transfusion and duration of phototherapy.