The primary FDA-approved indications of octreotide, seen by clinical studies, are for the treatment of acromegaly and thyrotrophinomas. In patients with acromegaly, octreotide has been documented to be clinically more effective than bromocriptine through multiple clinical trials comparing both drugs. In the management of carcinoid syndrome, octreotide has been found to be more beneficial over the current treatment options, especially in cases of carcinoid crises, where it has shown to provide improved clinical outcomes. Additionally, in patients with tumors producing increased vasoactive intestinal peptide, such as VIPoma, especially those tumors that have already metastasized and have become refractory to traditional symptomatic therapy, octreotide could be the drug of choice, as evidenced by few clinical trials. Despite limited research, octreotide has proven to be first-line therapy for stool or fistula output reduction in patients with high-output secretory diarrhea, such as those caused by cryptosporidium, especially in patients with AIDS and those with small intestinal fistulas. Initial studies regarding the use of octreotide have provided positive outcomes in various conditions such as hyperinsulinemia induced neonatal hypoglycemia, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, reactive pancreatitis, dumping syndrome, and postprandial hypotension; however,  further studies are required to identify and document the utility of octreotide in the above diseases, before being incorporated in treatment guidelines.

Octreotide also has off-label use, not approved by FDA, in refractory or persistent diarrhea associated with chemotherapy, graft-versus-host disease, and AIDS-associated diarrhea caused by cryptosporidiosis.

**Use of Octreotide in Pregnant and Lactating Patients**

Octreotide is a category B medication, as per FDA, which indicates that no documentation exists of identifiable fetal risk in animal reproduction studies, and studies involving pregnant women are inadequate and ill-defined presently.

Although studies regarding octreotide use during breastfeeding are few, in various case reports with patients receiving the subcutaneous form octreotide, there was a significant level of the drug found in breast milk, almost at similar concentrations in serum.

**Use of Octreotide in the Pediatric Population**

In pediatric patients, especially those under the age of 6 years, evaluation of the efficacy and safety of octreotide remains undetermined due to a lack of well-documented randomized controlled clinical trials. In multiple clinical trials and reports regarding octreotide use in the pediatric age group, especially in children less than two years of age, serious adverse events, including and not limited to hypoxia, necrotizing enterocolitis, and fatal outcomes, have been documented. No well-established relationship between the adverse events and octreotide exists, as most of the patients in the pediatric age group had clinically significant comorbid conditions.

**Use of Octreotide in the Geriatric Population**

Clinical studies involving octreotide have not included sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and older; hence, it has been challenging to establish the response of the geriatric population to octreotide compared to younger adults. However, extreme caution needs to be exercised during dose selection for the geriatric population, with initial lower doses and careful titration after that, considering the higher frequency of decreased cardiac, hepatic, and renal function, and of other comorbid diseases or other drug therapies.