Genetic and epigenetic variations contribute to obesity by influencing the function of metabolic pathways in the body and regulating neural pathways and appetite centers. Subsequently, these variations influence insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, inflammation, hypertension, and ectopic fat deposition-especially in the liver, which are the markers of obesity.

1. Maternal nutrition-both maternal over and undernutrition give rise to epigenetic changes that can affect the fetus and have intergenerational and transgenerational effects. Maternal undernutrition and intrauterine growth retardation are known to be risk factors for permanent changes in fetal insulin metabolism. Although this is a survival adaptation mechanism in fetal life, when these children are born and exposed to a nutrient-rich environment, it predisposes them to develop obesity and type 2 diabetes. This concept is widely known as the thrifty phenotype hypothesis, which was put forth by Hales and Barker 1992, published in the Journal Diabetologia. The new terminology for this concept is the "Developmental Origins of Health and Disease hypothesis."

Human studies that elaborated this concept include-the Dutch Hunger Winter study of victims of the Dutch famine of 1944-1945, which looked at the changes in the IGF2 gene, the Chinese famine study, the Kiang West longitudinal population study in the Gambia, which looked at differences in populations born in the wet and dry season with special focus on the POMC gene. Maternal overnutrition, on the other hand, including low protein and high-fiber diets, have been studied to cause fetal obesity. The effect of maternal diet on fetal health is widely known as the theory of fetal programming.

2.  Maternal exposure to toxins like organochlorides, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, arsenic [which can cause gestational diabetes mellitus and thus fetal metabolic syndrome], and cigarette smoking can cause epigenetic modifications. An example of this is- changes in the GF11 gene seen in mothers who smoke >15 cigarettes a day. Researchers are now terming these factors as "obesogens" or "endocrine-disrupting chemicals."

3. Maternal stress has been associated with diet-induced obesity in rat models. The Quebec Ice Storm Study in humans implied the association between type 2 diabetes and children born to pregnant mothers experiencing grief after the storm.

4. Maternal diabetes, younger maternal age, low pre-pregnancy weight have been studied in association with fetal metabolic derangements and later childhood obesity.

5. Nutritional disturbances in the postnatal environments and early childhood nutrition in twin studies have been linked to childhood obesity and metabolic abnormalities in early adulthood.

6. Altered gut microbial flora with antibiotic use in the first year of life and even in adulthood is linked to obesity and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).

7. Paternal nutrition-overnutrition, prediabetes, and low protein diets are linked to epigenetic modifications associated with fetal obesity. There is a new interest in this field of "Paternal Origins of Health and Disease."

8. A high intake of sugary beverages, fried foods, high saturated fats, sleep disturbances, and a sedentary lifestyle in adulthood has been linked to epigenetic modifications, e.g., DNA methylation of PGC1 alpha encoded by PPARGC1A.

In the laboratory, the mammals used to study epigenetics include sheep, pigs, mice, rats, macaques, and drosophila. The tissues used in human epigenetic studies include peripheral blood-leukocytes and CD4+ T cells, cord blood, liver, pancreas, skeletal muscle, subcutaneous adipose tissue from the abdomen and buttock.