Mycobacterial infections including M. chelonae infections can be categorized into several clinical patterns: pulmonary disease, skin and soft tissue infections, musculoskeletal infections, disseminated disease, catheter-associated disease. and lymphadenitis. Skin and soft tissue infections are the most common presentations of M. chelonae infections. Infections occur in both immunocompetent and in immunocompromised hosts. M. chelonae has a predilection to extremities as it has a tendency to grow at a lower temperature. Nodules, papular rash, and sporotrichoid pattern have been reported. Skin lesions due to M. chelonae in the setting of sclerotherapy, acupuncture tattoos, and other injection procedure have been reported. Skin lesions can progress to pustules, hemorrhagic crusts, and abscess formation. M. chelonae can also present with Nodular lymphangitis (sporotrichoid lymphocutaneous infections), which is characterized by the development of suppurative inflammatory nodules along lymphatic vessels on the extremities  M. chelonae infection particularly if the skin lesions are on the extremities. Skin lesions mimicking lupus vasculitis can occur due to M. chelonae infection. Disseminated disease can present with multiple lesions, complex lesions and in more proximal location. Umbilicated papules, pustules involving the face and upper trunk may be present.

- M. chelonae involving the bone, joints, and muscles has been reported and is common in immunosuppressed patients, deep joint injections, or surgical procedures.

- M. chelonae can be a contaminant in endoscopes. Catheter-related infections, presenting as fever, sepsis, or disseminated skin lesions due to M. chelonae have been described in immunocompromised and pregnant patients.