**Positioning for TEM**

For the rigid platform, the patient needs to be positioned so that the lesion is 'down' relative to the angled stereoscopic optic system, which is fixed to the proctoscope with the bevelling facing downward. Depending on the location of the lesion, the patient may need to be in a prone position for anterior lesions, supine or lithotomy for posterior lesions, and right or left-sided tilt for lateral lesions.

**Positioning for TAMIS**

Less positioning is required in TAMIS as the port allows for 360 degrees of movement and visualization. The patient is placed in the lithotomy position regardless of the orientation and location of the lesion. In certain circumstances, some surgeons may prefer the lithotomy position for distal and mid rectal lesions but the prone position for proximal anterior lesions.

**Resection**

Diathermy is used to mark out a margin of 10 to 15 mm around the lesion. Dissection is typically started on the lower edge of the lesion, working superiorly in a circumferential manner. Malignant lesions require full-thickness excision of the rectal wall down to the mesorectal fat. The defect in the rectal wall is transversely closed with absorbable sutures to prevent lumenal stenosis. The specimen is orientated, kept in formalin, and sent for histological assessment. The risk of entering the peritoneal cavity is much higher for proximal anterior lesions. Perforations can generally be closed without entry into the abdomen. Full-thickness excision is typically recommended even for benign neoplasms as these lesions can harbor an invasive component.