With DVT, the patient presents with a complaint of unilateral limb pain. This pain may be accompanied by physical signs of swelling, warmth, and tenderness to touch. However, physical exam signs for the diagnosis of DVT are of low yield.

With pulmonary embolism (PE), the most common presenting complaint is dyspnea that is sudden in onset. Patients may also demonstrate pleuritic chest pain and cough, as well as hemoptysis in some cases. Massive pulmonary embolism presents with syncope and signs of hemodynamic compromise such as hypotension and shock. Physical examination of patients with PE may reveal hypoxia, tachycardia, and fever. Tachypnea, with a respiratory rate over 18/min, is the most common sign of PE. However, in general, physical exam findings for PE are variable and nondiagnostic. The presence of confounding factors such as sickle cell disease may complicate presentation even further. In these patients, PE usually presents with a chest infection. In older patients, new-onset atrial fibrillation may be the presenting symptom of a PE and requires exclusion in such cases.

In patients with established PE, tachypnea (respiratory rate over 18/min) is the most common physical findings. The pulmonary exam may reveal rales in up to 50% of the cases with an accentuated second heart sound. Tachycardia (heart rate over 100/min) and fever are present in about 45% of the patients. Diaphoresis and an S3 or S4 gallop may be audible in about 30% of the patients. A pleural friction rub may be present in cases with pleuritic chest pain, which suggests a peripheral PE and is often associated with pulmonary necrosis.

Patients with chronic recurrent venous thromboembolism syndromes may present with signs of pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale. Dyspnea will be the most common presenting complaint in these patients. The physical exam may reveal a palpable impulse over the second left intercostal space, a loud P2, a right ventricular S3 gallop, and a systolic murmur on inspiration at the left sternal border from tricuspid regurgitation. Hepatomegaly and dependent pitting edema may also occur.

However, due to the poor sensitivity and specificity of clinical signs and symptoms for DVT and PE, clinical decision-making tools have been developed to identify those with a high pretest probability of VTE; this is possible using the Modified Well’s criteria. The patient suspected of having venous thromboembolism is given points for the presence of predisposing criteria. This includes 3 points for clinical signs or symptoms of DVT, 3 points if an alternative diagnosis is less likely than PE, 1.5 points for heart rate 100 beats per minute or more, 1.5 points for immobilization (over 3 days) or surgery in the preceding 4 weeks, 1.5 points for a previous history of DVT or PE, and 1 point each for hemoptysis and active cancer in the last 6 months. Patients who score less than 2 points have low risk, a score of 2 to 6 points qualifies as moderate risk, and a score greater than 6 equates to high risk according to the original Well's criteria. The Modified Well's criteria simplified the probability using 4 points as the cut-off. Patients with greater than or equal to 4 points are considered to have PE as the probable cause of the presentation.

Patients suspected of having VTE but score low on the pretest probability scoring can undergo assessment via the highly sensitive D-dimer assay due to its high negative predictive value. Those suspected of having VTE and have a high pretest probability of the disease should be evaluated using definitive testing.