The multidisciplinary melanoma team will use this information to determine what further investigations are necessary and which treatment is appropriate. The mainstay of management of melanoma of any kind is excision. The initial excision is a biopsy, which offers a histological report, and guidelines determine the wide local excision margin according to the depth of a tumor. This is the same for subungual melanoma.

The lymph node basins should be clinically assessed, and those with clinically palpable nodes should be further evaluated with imaging and with or without a biopsy and go on to have a lymph node dissection if the disease is detected. According to guidelines, those lesions with a thickness of 1 to 4 mm with no lymphadenopathy should be offered sentinel lymph node biopsies.

Those with tumor thicknesses greater than 4 mm should be considered for pre-operative staging with CT-PET and brain MRI scans.

Management of melanoma patients is a complex and evolving subject. Plastic surgeons should be aware of the recent changes in the field. Excisional biopsy remains the gold standard for diagnosis, although there is no evidence using other biopsy types alters survival or recurrence. Wide local excisions should be carried out with margins as recommended by National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines according to lesion Breslow depth, with sentinel lymph node biopsy being offered to all medically suitable candidates with intermediate thickness melanomas (1.0 to 4.0 mm) and with sentinel lymph node biopsy being considered for high-risk lesions (ulceration and/or high mitotic figures) with melanomas of 0.75 to 1.0 mm.