As with most musculoskeletal injuries, ulnar collateral ligament injuries can be treated acutely with R-I-C-E therapy:  rest, ice, compression, and elevation. Immobilization is also helpful through the application of a thumb spica splint.

If the patient has a bony injury such as avulsion fracture in the setting of ulnar collateral ligament injury, they should be referred urgently to an orthopedic or hand specialist. Similarly, if the physical examination shows significant laxity (greater than 15 to 20 degrees compared to the contralateral unaffected side or greater than 30 degrees absolute), then consultation or urgent referral to a hand surgeon is indicated.

Splinting immobilization may suffice for treating partial tears, but hand surgery evaluation is still prudent. The typical immobilization timeframe recommended is three weeks. Subsequently, these injuries that are treated nonsurgically can then undergo physical therapy and rehabilitation. Therapy includes both passive and active measures, along with strengthening exercises. Immobilization is recommended when the patient is not actively undergoing physical therapy for a period of an additional three weeks, yielding a total of approximately six weeks of immobilization therapy. For those patients that have persistent weakness or pain after this timeframe, surgical referral should be pursued.

In most reported series, those patients who sustain complete ulnar collateral ligament tears who undergo surgery do well without significant complications. Generally, early surgical intervention is required for complete tears to prevent the development of the complication known as the Stener lesion. This complication occurs when the disrupted end of the ulnar collateral ligament migrates superficially and lies on top of the adductor pollicis aponeurosis and muscle. The ligament cannot heal appropriately given this altered anatomy, and surgery is recommended as the definitive treatment.