The GI hormones classify as endocrines, paracrine, or neurocrine based on the method by which the molecule gets delivered to its target cell(s). Endocrine hormones are secreted from enteroendocrine cells directly into the bloodstream, passing from the portal circulation to the systemic circulation, before being delivered to target cells with receptor-specificity for the hormone. The five GI hormones that qualify as endocrines are gastrin, cholecystokinin (CCK), secretin, glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP), and motilin. Enteroendocrine cells also secrete paracrine hormones, but they diffuse through the extracellular space to act locally on target tissues and do not enter the systemic circulation. Two examples of paracrine hormones are somatostatin and histamine. Additionally, some hormones may operate via a combination of endocrine and paracrine mechanisms. These “candidate” hormones are glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), pancreatic polypeptide, and peptide YY. Lastly, neurocrine hormones get secreted by postganglionic non-cholinergic neurons of the enteric nervous system. Three neurocrine hormones with significant physiologic functions in the gut are vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), gastrin release peptide (GRP), and enkephalins.

Gastrointestinal hormones undergo synthesis in specialized cells of the GI tract mucosa known as enteroendocrine cells. Enteroendocrine cells are specialized endoderm-derived epithelial cells that originate from stem cells located at the base of intestinal crypts. These cells are dispersed throughout the GI mucosa, sprinkled in between epithelial cells from the stomach all the way through to the colon. Also, these enteroendocrine cells possess hormone-containing granules concentrated at the basolateral membrane, adjacent to capillaries, that secrete their hormones via exocytosis in response to a wide range of stimuli related to food intake. These stimuli include small peptides, amino acids, fatty acids, oral glucose, distension of an organ, and vagal stimulation.

G cells secrete gastrin in the antrum of the stomach and the duodenum in response to the presence of breakdown products of protein digestion (such as amino acids and small peptides), distention by food, and vagal nerve stimulation via GRP. More specifically, phenylalanine and tryptophan are the most potent stimulators of gastrin secretion among the protein digestion products. The vagal nerve stimulation of gastrin secretion is unique because gastrin and motilin are the only hormones released directly by neural stimulation.

CCK is secreted from I cells in the duodenum and jejunum in response to acids and monoglycerides (but not triglycerides), as well as the presence of protein digestion products.

Secretin is secreted from S cells in the duodenum in response to H+ and fatty acids in the lumen. Specifically, a pH less than 4.5 signals arrival of gastric contents, which initiates the release of secretin.

GIP is secreted by K cells in the duodenum and jejunum in response to glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids. GIP is the only GI hormone with a response to all three macronutrient types, and newer studies suggest that changes in intraluminal osmolarity may be what stimulates GIP secretion.

GLP-1 is also produced in the small intestine and secreted from L cells. The presence of hexose and fat stimulate its release. Pancreatic polypeptide and peptide YY are secreted by protein and fat, respectively, although their functions are still relatively unknown.