Treatment of vestibular dysfunction depends upon the etiology. Symptomatic management is the mainstay for most patients. Options include antiemetics (metoclopramide, ondansetron, prochlorperazine, promethazine), vestibular suppressant medications (diphenhydramine, dimenhydrinate, meclizine), and benzodiazepines (alprazolam, clonazepam, diazepam, and lorazepam). For vestibular migraines, management with prophylactic and/or abortive medications is appropriate.

When autoimmune labyrinthitis or Cogan syndrome is suspected, high-dose oral corticosteroids may be prescribed.

Benign positional vertigo involving the posterior semicircular canal is commonly treated using the Epley maneuver, which involves performing a Dix-Hallpike maneuver while the patient is supine, slowly rotating the head from the vertiginous side through 180 degrees to face the other side while keeping the rest of the body still.

The Semont maneuver involves sitting on the edge of a bed and turning the head 45 degrees away from the side of the lesion, then lying down in the lateral decubitus position without moving the head relative to the body; this should result in the head looking upward. The patient stays in this position for 30 to 60 seconds so that any vertigo can subside. The patient then rolls over, again keeping the head still relative to the body; this should result in the face looking downward. The patient maintains this position for 30 to 60 seconds, again waiting for any vertigo to resolve, then slowly rises back to a sitting position.

The Foster, or half-somersault, maneuver is easier for patients with limited mobility than the Semont or Epley maneuvers. It begins with the patient kneeling while looking upward and holding the position for 30-60 seconds. The patient then tucks his chin to his chest and bends over to touch the floor with his head, waiting 30-60 seconds for any vertigo that occurs to stop. The patient then turns his head to look towards the side that has the vestibulopathy and waits for any vertigo to subside. From there, the patient rises onto hands and knees, maintaining the head position relative to the body and waiting for any vertigo that appears to resolve. Then the patient returns to a kneeling position, again maintaining the position of the head relative to the body and waiting for any vertigo to stop.

Brandt-Daroff exercises begin with the patient sitting upright on the edge of a bed, then turning the head all the way to one side. The patient then lies down on their side so that the nose points upward and holds that position for 30 to 60 seconds, or until any visible vertigo subsides. The patient then sits back up and repeats the maneuver, turning the head to the opposite side.

For cases of horizontal canal BPPV, the Gufoni maneuver may be more useful than those described above.

These maneuvers, as a group, are used to reposition canaliths such that they are no longer interfering with vestibular function.

The goals of treatment for Ménière disease are the reduction in frequency and severity of vertigo attacks, reduction or elimination of hearing loss and tinnitus associated with attacks, alleviation of chronic symptoms, and minimization of disability. Conservative treatment options include lifestyle changes and avoiding triggers. A low sodium diet of 2 to 3 gm per day, limiting caffeinated beverages, alcohol, nicotine, stress, monosodium glutamate, and allergens can all help.

Should these minimally-invasive treatments fail, there are surgical interventions available as well. Like the options above, endolymphatic sac shunting via a transmastoid approach is considered a non-ablative approach because it does not involve a deliberate reduction of function in the vestibular system. The procedure involves identifying the endolymphatic sac between the layers of the posterior cranial fossa dura and placing a silastic shunt to allow endolymph to drain into the mastoid cavity. As with Meniett device use, the efficacy of this option is unclear, although it was the subject of a controversial, blinded study published in 1981 that involved sham surgery as the control arm.

Ablative therapies for Ménière disease include intratympanic injection of the aminoglycoside antibiotic gentamicin, vestibular neurectomy, and labyrinthectomy.