**Psoriasis**

Narrow-band (TL-01) UVB (NB-UVB) can be used as monotherapy to treat all variants of adult psoriasis except generalized pustular and erythrodermic psoriasis, for which PUVA can, however, be considered.NB-UVB is more effective than broad-band UVB (BB-UVB). NB UVB is also recommended for pregnant patients and can be safely augmented with topical retinoids, vitamin D analogs, and steroids.PUVA needs to be considered in those patients who have failed to respond to UVB or whose duration of remission following UVB is consistent with a short duration.

**Chronic****Eczema**

Phototherapy is an effective treatment modality for nodular prurigo, severe generalized atopic eczema,  and can also be considered for localized palmoplantar eczema when other treatment modalities are inappropriate or unable to respond. NB-UVB is usually considered as first-line therapy for generalized body involvement while topical PUVA is the first-line therapy for localized palmoplantar eczema.

**Mycosis Fungoides**

Narrow-band UVB and PUVA have been used effectively for the treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma.UVB is particularly useful for the patch stage and PUVA is preferable for the plaque stage. Increased inflammation may be seen in the early stages of treatment and it settles without stopping therapy. PUVA therapy is used in the tumor phase and can be combined with systemic therapies like PUVA and interferon.

**Vitiligo**

In resistant cases of vitiligo where the disease is not responding to topical modalities**,**Phototherapy is a widely used second-line treatment option. Prolonged courses of  NBUVB therapy leads to complete remission in about 35% of patients, the relapse rates in the future is high in vitiligo.PUVA also has similar efficacy as in vitiligo. Phototherapy has been combined with fractional Carbon dioxide Laser for the treatment of vitiligo. A meta-analysis demonstrated no additional benefits for the fractional CO2 laser to UVB phototherapy for vitiligo patients.

**Polymorphic Light Eruption**

Narrow-band UVB and PUVA are equally effective for desensitization of PLE but the former is used more frequently due to better side effect profile. The provocation of the rash, which occurs in about 50% of patients and it can be managed with topical steroid creams.

**Cutaneous Graft Versus Host Disease**

It can respond to NBUVB, oral, and bath PUVA. These modalities can be used as an effective steroid-sparing agent. Prolonged PUVA therapy can lead to the development of squamous cell carcinoma. Although severe lichenoid GVHD can be treated with extracorporeal photopheresis.

**Generalized Lichen Planus**

The patients who do not respond to systemic immunosuppressive therapy, phototherapy is a good option. Current literature supports the use of both oral /bath PUVA and NB-UVB.

**Other Indications**

Pityriasis lichenoides chronica, generalized granuloma annulare, mastocytosis, chronic spontaneous urticaria, and generalized pruritus.