Weakness associated with a hemiplegic migraine is a manifestation of motor aura. Migraine aura is believed to be caused by a self-propagating wave of neuronal and glial depolarization that spreads across the cerebral cortex, known as cortical spreading depression.

A genetic role has been identified, especially for familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM).

- Mutations in the CACNA1A gene, located on chromosome 19p13, cause FHM1. This gene is responsible for encoding the alpha-1A subunit of the P/Q type calcium channel. The penetrance of CACNA1 mutation ranges from 67 to 89%.

- FHM2 is associated with mutations in the ATP1A2 gene on chromosome 1q23. This gene is responsible for encoding a catalytic subunit of sodium/potassium ATPase.ATP1A2 variants ranges from 63 to 87%.

- FHM3 is associated with mutations in the SCN1A gene on chromosome 2q24 that encodes a transmembrane alpha subunit of the brain sodium channel. The penetrance of this mutation is estimated to be 100%.

- Some studies have associated mutation in the gene PRRT2 with familial hemiplegic migraine. PRRT2 encodes a protein that interacts with synaptosomal-associated protein (SNAP25), which may play a role in THE regulation of voltage-gated calcium channels.

The known genetic mutations do not account for all familial hemiplegic migraine, and at least 25% of these families do not have mutations in the genes presently identified for familial hemiplegic migraine.

Some studies have suggested that 10 to 20% of sporadic hemiplegic migraine may have mutations in the CACNA1A and the ATP1A2 genes.