When an individual is applying for disability or filing a personal injury claim, the insurance company or court will ask for a second opinion, also known as an independent medical examination (IME). An IME is a one-time evaluation by a physician not directly involved in the patient's primary treatment. The IME is to answer questions related to the claim and to make diagnoses relevant to the claim. The information obtained in an IME can be used in litigation.  Considering the nature of disability claims, the legal system is often involved. In these instances, the purpose of litigation is to establish causality and relate the current injury to any pre-existing and underlying conditions.  Two main types of causation include medical causation, which is a cause and effect relationship between the disability claim and injury, and legal causation, which is to establish whether or not an injury would have occurred regardless of the alleged act.  Further, when relating an injury to a pre-existing condition, there are two main categories, aggravation, and exacerbation.

Aggravation is defined as a permanent worsening of an existing condition that never returns to baseline. Exacerbation, on the other hand, is only a temporary worsening of the pre-existing condition as it eventually returns to the baseline level of injury or pain. An important concept when discussing disability is Maximum Medical Improvement (MMI). MMI  is the point at which the individual is not expected to make any further functional improvement after sufficient time was given for physiologic healing and all appropriate modalities were exhausted. Pre-existing conditions need to be taken into account when determining MMI.

It is important for primary care physicians and all physicians alike to understand that certain workgroups have pre-established rights. For example, prolonged high-stress environments have been shown to be a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. As such, employees of law enforcement or fire departments have a presumed risk for cardiovascular disease, and therefore cardiovascular disease in these populations can be considered work-related. This concept applies to many occupations.

The impairment rating system is complex and can be challenging to understand. However, the system is designed to be easily interpreted by physicians who care for patients with disabilities. The American Medical Association (AMA) produced a document called “AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment.” This guide was intended to break down the disability rating system further and is frequently updated to reflect current guidelines and medical standards. An impairment rating is defined as “a consensus-derived percentage estimate of a loss of activity reflecting the severity of a given health condition and the degree of associated limitations in terms of activities of daily living.”  Impairment ratings are further broken down to include: qualitative measurements, which are anatomically based and would include impairments such as amputation, joint ankyloses, neuropathies, and various other deformities; quantitative impairments, which are also anatomically based and are measured on a continuous scale that corresponds to the degree of impairment; and diagnosis based impairment (DBI) which is an ordinal ranking system that categorizes impairment by severity (such as a ligament sprain as least severe to a ligament rupture as most severe). The diagnosis-based impairment method can be seemingly complex and difficult to interpret.

After a diagnosis is made, the diagnosis must be matched with a class on the provided DBI grid (Image 1). The regional body parts are then further subdivided. Once the appropriate grid location is identified, then the grade modifiers are determined to adjust for the level of severity. The grade modifiers include a physical exam (GMPE), functional history (GMFH), and clinical studies (GMCS). The final impairment score is a summation of the grade modifiers.

Accurate diagnosis is important because each body region is subdivided, as previously mentioned. The spine has four anatomic regions: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and pelvis. Each region has its own qualitative rating. The upper extremities are broken down into the digits and hand, wrist, elbow, and shoulder. Each region has a separate grid with adjustments that can be made for peripheral nerve injuries, CRPS, or amputation injuries, to list a few. The lower extremity is divided into three anatomic regions: ankle and foot, knee, and hip. Similar to the upper extremity, the lower extremity regions can have adjustments made for various pathologies.  If there are multiple impairments, the impairments must be combined as described in the AMA guide and not simply summated.