A thorough history and physical should be completed on every neonate that presents with scalp swelling to differentiate caput succedaneum, a benign self-resolving condition, from more life-threatening etiologies of scalp edema that require closer monitoring and further management. Other common etiologies of neonatal scalp swelling that present similarly include but are not limited to:

- **Cephalohematoma**refers to hematoma associated with birth trauma (instrument-assisted delivery, prolonged delivery) that results in rupture of capillaries located inferior to the periosteum. The resulting hematoma is a firm fluctuant mass that does not cross cranial suture lines or midline. This mass size grows during the first day of life and is rarely associated with intracranial hemorrhage and infection, requiring monitoring for hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn. The swelling typically resolves itself between two weeks to six months. Cephalohematoma can sometimes present bilaterally as two separate masses that should be differentiated from a caput succedaneum, a singular mass that crosses the midline.

- **Subgaleal hemorrhage**refers to hemorrhage associated with birth trauma located inferior to the epicranial aponeurosis that can present as edema on the scalp that crosses suture lines and then spreads diffusely. This condition is associated with a high mortality rate and is associated with seizures, skull fractures, and hypotonia. Subgaleal hemorrhage can result in hypovolemia, coagulopathy, and hyperbilirubinemia. Subgaleal hemorrhage is also associated with vacuum and forceps-assisted delivery. The subgaleal space is large, and the fluid collection has the potential to extend behind the orbits and back on the neck as well. In comparison to the edema found in caput succedaneum, both will cross midline as the fluid collection is above the cranial suture lines in both cases. However, subgaleal hemorrhage will be much more diffuse.

- **Subdural hemorrhage**refers to hemorrhage associated with birth trauma that occurs between the dura and arachnoid space.