When CLABSI is suspected, empiric therapy should be based on the most likely organism, host factors, and the overall clinical picture. While awaiting cultures, empiric treatment should be instituted promptly. In general, coverage for common gram-positive and gram-negative organisms is necessary. The local prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns in institutional antibiograms should be considered. The following are some considerations.

- Parenteral vancomycin if methicillin-resistant staphylococci (MRSA) is prevalent. Otherwise, parenteral anti-staphylococcal penicillin or cephalosporins such as nafcillin or cefazolin would suffice. If MRSA isolates, exhibit a minimum inhibitory concentration of > 2 mg/mL for vancomycin or, in the case of vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), daptomycin is the drug of choice.

- The antibiotic choice for gram-negative coverage should be based on the risk of pseudomonal infection and local susceptibility patterns. If the risk of Pseudomonas is low, then a third-generation cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone is appropriate. In patients with a critical illness or high risk for resistant organisms, a combination of a beta-lactam (lactamase inhibitor) and an aminoglycoside is preferred - Cefepime or carbapenem with or without an aminoglycoside. Agents against Pseudomonas aeruginosa are required in the setting of neutropenia, severe illness, or known prior colonization.

- Echinocandins (micafungin, caspofungin, anidulafungin) are preferred agents for suspected candidemia if azole resistance is suspected (prior azole use or prevalent nonalbicans candida such as C.glabrata or C.krusei). Otherwise, intravenous fluconazole would suffice. Antifungal therapy must be considered in femoral catheterization, TPN, prolonged administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics, hematologic malignancy, or solid organ or bone marrow transplant recipients.

Once antimicrobial susceptibility results are available, de-escalation to specific and appropriate therapy is recommended. If blood cultures have no growth, the need for further empiric antibiotic treatment should be reassessed. Suppose unexplained fever or sepsis persisted in a patient with a short-term central venous or arterial catheter and paired peripheral venipuncture and catheter blood cultures have failed to identify CLABSI. In that case, the catheter should be removed, and the tip should be sent for culture.

All non-tunneled catheters causing CLABSI should be removed promptly, sometimes even before it is proven with the above criteria when clinical suspicion is high. Only for long-term catheters, salvage (systemic therapy coupled with antimicrobial lock [heparin + high concentration of antimicrobial agent that is selected based on susceptibility results]) can be attempted in limited instances such as:

- Uncomplicated CLABSI is caused by organisms other than Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacillus spp, Micrococcus species, Propionibacteria, fungi, or mycobacteria.

- The patients with limited vascular access sites or the ones who are solely dependent on central access for survival.

In the case of tunneled hemodialysis catheters, uncomplicated exit site infections can be treated with short-course topical or systemic antimicrobials. All tunnel infections will require catheter removal due to a high risk of CLABSI. Additional indications for removal of CLABSI from hemodialysis access include:

- Persistent symptoms > 36 hours or severe sepsis, hemodynamic instability(shock), and metastatic infection.

- Blood cultures that remain positive > 72 hours of appropriate antimicrobial therapy.

- Difficult to clear organisms (S. aureus, Pseudomonas, or fungi).

- Recurrence of uncomplicated CLABSI (any non-virulent organism) when salvaged for difficult access.

**Duration of therapy**: For patients with uncomplicated CRBSI (e.g., no endocarditis, or metastatic infection), in the absence of risk factors for hematogenous spread (e.g., hardware, immunosuppression) and negative blood cultures 72 hours of catheter removal, following approach for intravenous antimicrobial therapy is recommended:

- S. aureus - 14 days in the absence of endocarditis

- Coagulase-negative staphylococci - 7 days

- Enterococci and gram-negative bacilli - 10 to 14 days

- Candida - 14 days in the absence of retinitis