When evaluating patients with acute hepatitis, it is very important to distinguish between acute hepatitis and chronic hepatitis. The biochemical tests such as AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, GGT, lactate dehydrogenase, bilirubin, PT/INR, and albumin determine the normal functioning of the liver and any abnormalities in these tests is indicative of injury to the hepatocytes from infectious and noninfectious causes as outlined above. The possible etiology and severity of the hepatocellular injury can be determined based on the abnormality of one or more of these biochemical tests that are involved in the performance of a specific liver function

**Markers of hepatocyte metabolic/catabolic activities**

- **Elevated serum bilirubin**: Synthesized primarily in the reticuloendothelial cells from the breakdown of heme-containing proteins. It can be abnormally increased in liver diseases secondary to impaired uptake, impaired conjugation, or secondary to leak from damaged hepatocytes or bile ducts.

- **Elevated ammonia**: increase because the liver fails to metabolize ammonia.

**Markers suggestive hepatocellular injury**

- **Elevation of serum transaminases**such as aminotransferases, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), also called serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), also called serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) is suggestive of hepatocellular injury.
- Marked elevations greater than five times the upper limit of normal or greater than 500 IU/L is suggestive of extensive hepatocellular injury. It is commonly encountered in acute hepatitis, drug-induced liver injury such as acetaminophen overdose, profound ischemia to the liver, hepatic necrosis, or cases of severe autoimmune hepatitis.
- Milder elevations are considered less than five times the upper limit of normal or less than 500 IU/L and can result from a variety of liver injuries or disorders. Some of these disorders can overlap with acute causes but often are associated with more chronic hepatitis or nonhepatic causes, examples of which include smoldering inflammation from autoimmune disorders, hemochromatosis, Wilson disease, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, alcoholic liver disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and drug-induced liver injury.

**Markers of liver injury secondary to cholestasis**

- Elevation in alkaline phosphatase (AP) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) reflect underlying cholestasis secondary to the liver's impaired ability to secrete bile, which can be secondary to various intra-hepatic or extrahepatic causes. Common causes include choledocholithiasis, malignancy, primary biliary cirrhosis, or primary sclerosing cholangitis.

**Markers of synthetic function**

- **Elevated Prothrombin time (PT):**This****occurs when liver injury results in decreased synthetic function of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors (II, VII, IX, X). Prolongation of the international normalized ratio (INR) more than 1.5 is considered a poor prognostic sign and a key component to make a diagnosis of acute liver failure

- **Decreased albumin:**This is not specific to liver injury, and its utility in the diagnosis of acute hepatitis is limited. These tests can become abnormal in a matter of days, making this a better marker for acute liver dysfunction than albumin.

Although liver function tests give an initial idea about the possible etiology and severity of the underlying hepatocellular injury, further evaluation with specific diagnostic tests are recommended to ascertain the etiology of acute hepatitis. Based on the guidelines published by the American College of Gastroenterology(ACG) for the evaluation of patients with abnormal liver function tests

- **Mild elevation in serum transaminases ( <5 times the upper limit of normal):**ACG guidelines recommend checking a****complete blood count, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, albumin, PT/INR, comprehensive hepatitis panel that includes Hepatitis A IgM Antibody, Hepatitis B Surface Antigen, Hepatitis B Core Antibody (IgM), Hepatitis B Surface Antibody and Hepatitis C Antibody, and iron panel (serum iron, total iron-binding capacity, serum transferrin saturation, and serum ferritin) and imaging with an abdominal ultrasound examination.

- **Severe elevation in serum transaminases**(**>15 times the upper limit of normal)**or**massive (ALT over 10000 U/L) elevation**s: ACG guidelines recommend checking for Ebstein-Barr virus(EBV), cytomegalovirus(CMV), ceruloplasmin, autoimmune markers (antinuclear antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, Anti-liver/kidney microsomal antibodies, IgG), drug panel test that includes acetaminophen, and urine toxicology. Guidelines also recommend the performance of a sonographicDoppler study of the hepatic vein, portal vein, and hepatic artery to rule out vascular occlusion, eg. Budd-Chiari syndrome.

- **Imaging:**Abdominal ultrasound examination is the best initial choice of imaging study in patient's presenting with lab abnormalities suggestive of cholestasis. Findings of biliary dilatation are suggestive of extrahepatic causes of cholestasis (gallstones or masses), while the absence of biliary ductal dilatation suggests intrahepatic causes of cholestasis such as drug-induced liver injury, PBC and PSC

- **Liver biopsy:**Although not routinely performed, liver biopsy is indicated if the diagnosis is not clear such as patients presenting with atypical clinical features, coexistent chronic liver disease, inconclusive extensive biochemical workup, fever of unknown origin and abnormalities on imaging studies of uncertain etiology. The commonly performed methods of liver biopsy include percutaneous, CT/ US-guided, transjugular (transvenous), and Endoscopic Ultrasound(EUS) guided biopsies