The management of prerenal kidney failure is dependent on the stage of AKI, underlying etiology, and the setting where it is identified.

In an outpatient setting, patients who stage as 2 or 3 by the KDIGO criteria with AKI should be sent to the emergency department (ED) for further evaluation. Similarly, patients from resource-limited clinics should be sent to the ED for further evaluation.

In the emergency department or the hospital setting, the mainstay of treatment of prerenal AKI is isotonic fluid administration. It is both therapeutic and diagnostic. A downtrend in creatinine after administration of isotonic fluids is the gold standard in diagnosis. The degree of volume resuscitation depends on the degree of volume depletion caused by the underlying condition.

The approach to the management of AKI is two-pronged:

(1) Treat any life-threatening features:

Hypotension and shock should be immediately evident when assessing the patient and require urgent treatment. Unless there are ECG (electrocardiogram) changes or changes in cardiac monitoring, hyperkalemia is unlikely to be immediately apparent. It will only be detected when the chemistry is available.

(2) Identify and treat the cause of AKI:

A thorough history and physical exam should be coupled with investigations to find out the cause of AKI, and the management should be directed towards that cause.

Since AKI is due to hypoperfusion of the kidneys, fluid resuscitation is at the forefront of its management. The optimal resuscitation fluid for this purpose is still debated. Normal saline and 4% albumin have similar outcomes, shown in the recent SAFE study done in the ICUs in Australia and New Zealand, and which negates previous studies suggesting that the use of albumin may be associated with higher mortality.

Due to the risk of life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias, severe hyperkalemia (plasma potassium of more than 6.5 mmol/l) is considered a medical emergency. If the serum potassium is more than 6.5 mmol/l or if any ECG changes (tall peaked T waves, shortened QT interval, prolonged PR interval, wide QRS complex) are present, the treatment of hyperkalemia should be promptly started. By stabilizing the myocardium within a few minutes of infusion, calcium counters the effects of hyperkalemia and produces a more normal ECG trace without affecting serum potassium. If P wave or QRS changes are present, its administration should not be delayed. 10 to 20 ml of 10% calcium gluconate or calcium chloride is given in bolus form intravenously over two to five minutes.

Albuterol binds to β2 receptors and activates the Na+/K+ATPase, thus enhancing intracellular potassium uptake. Combination therapy with insulin and dextrose plus albuterol may produce better results than either treatment alone.

Resonium A (sodium polystyrene sulfate) and calcium resonium (calcium polystyrene sulphonate) are the most frequently used resins. Hypercalcemia and water/salt overload (with calcium and sodium-containing resins, respectively) are common side effects. Hemodialysis is indicated in severe hyperkalemia that is refractory to other treatments. This is the definitive way by which potassium can be removed from the body.

Nephrotoxic drugs should be avoided or dosed according to plasma concentrations to prevent further renal insults. The most commonly used nephrotoxic drugs include NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, Angiotensin 2 receptor blockers (ARBs), and aminoglycoside antibiotics. Iodinated contrast should be used with extreme caution.

Low dose dopamine has been used in renal failure due to its ability to increase renal perfusion, but recent studies have shown that it does not achieve its preset goals and may even worsen renal function.

Dietary modifications are important in patients with any cause of AKI. There are protein catabolism and negative nitrogen balance due to complex reasons. These patients should increase their daily consumption of protein/amino acids from 1 g/kg/day to 1.2 to 1.5 g/kg/day. Glucose intake should not exceed 5 g/kg/day. Lipids consumption should be 0.5 to 1.0 g/kg/day. Water-soluble vitamins should be supplemented, especially in patients requiring any kind of replacement therapy. The preferred route of administration of nutrition is enteral. However, it is not always possible to achieve nutritional goals through the enteral route alone, and the parenteral route becomes necessary.

Renal replacement therapy (RRT) has a vital role in the management of AKI. Indications for RRT are given below:

1.Severe refractory hyperkalemia2. Fluid overload with pulmonary edema (less likely in prerenal kidney failure)3. Uremia (blood urea >30 to 50 mmol/l)4. Severe acidosis (pH <7.1)5. Drug overdose with a dialysable toxin6. Complications due to severe uremia: pericarditis,  encephalopathy, neuropathy/myopathyRRT can be intermittent or continuous. Intermittent therapy is given as intermittent hemodialysis (IHD). Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) is given in several ways that are classified based on the method of accessing the circulation and also depends on how solute removal is achieved.