**Dermatologic conditions:**Koilonychia is seen more commonly with the dermatologic conditions directly affecting the nail bed and therefore is observed frequently in lichen planus (LP) of the nail,

**Systemic conditions:
**

**Nutritional deficiencies**: Koilonychia occurs in approximately 5.4% of iron deficiency patients and it the classic manifestation of the iron store abnormalities.

Patients with poor nutrition as a result of deficiencies in vitamin C, zinc, copper, selenium, cysteine and other amino acids may present with koilonychia.

**Plummer–Vinson syndrome (PVS):**Also known as Paterson– Kelly syndrome, is a rare entity characterized by the triad of iron deficiency anemia, dysphagia, and oesophageal webs. Koilonychia may be the presenting sign and is nearly seen in 37–50% of the cases.

**Hemochromatosis:**Koilonychia has been also noticed in approximately 49% of hemochromatosis patients, an autosomal recessive disorder of iron accumulation (rather than deficiency). Nail findings may not only occur at any time during the disease course but also are the presenting sign of the disease. Phlebotomy has been tried as a treatment option, however, the nail plate deformity does not seem to be rectified by it.

**Endocrine disorders:**Koilonychia has been observed in hypothyroidism, where the spoon-shaped deformity is accompanied by slow growth and brittleness of the nail plate.

**Autoimmune conditions:**Also rarely observed in systemic lupus erythematosus and Raynaud’s disease. spooning is hypothesized to be secondary to vasculopathy-induced hypoxia of the nail matrix.

**Congenital and Early Childhood Koilonychia:**Transient acquired koilonychia, especially of the great toe has been observed in at least 5% of children generally in the first two years of life and 15 is rarely present after the age of nine.

**Familial koilonychia:**Familial koilonychia, is a rare condition, usually transmitted through autosomal dominant inheritance and has been appreciated in several pedigrees with a greater degree of penetrance without any predilection for sex.

**Trauma:**Is a common cause of koilonychia in children, often due to thumb/finger sucking habit and use of tightly fitting shoes. However, with behavior modification, the nail plate growth usually normalizes.

**Occupational Koilonychia:**Koilonychia may be seen in certain occupations, generally where the individual is exposed to mineral oil (petroleum), organic solvents and chemicals causing contact dermatitis and/or repetitive trauma and mechanical stress on the fingers. But with time, these changes become irreversible.

**Regional Koilonychia:**The spoon-shaped deformity has been observed in the 4 or 5 decades of certain populations in India after several years of high-altitude habitation (>3000 meters above sea level).