Decontaminate the patient on initial evaluation if not already performed by the emergency response system. Liquid phosgene may prolong inhalation exposure if it remains present on the clothing. Garments should be removed and double-bagged. Encourage the patient to remain calm if the inhaled concentration is suspected to be greater than 150 ppm/ min, for excessive activity or distress may exacerbate pulmonary edema.

Low-dose morphine or benzodiazepines may be used for anxiolysis. Airway, breathing, and circulation should be assessed on initial evaluation. Patients should be started on noninvasive oxygen supplementation with pulse oximetry readings less than 92% or signs of respiratory distress. Recent animal studies have shown early use of noninvasive positive airway pressure (NIPPV) improves outcomes in those with and without pulmonary involvement.

Early NIPPV is recommended or should be considered in patients with exposures exceeding 150 ppm/min, unknown exposure, or liquid phosgene exposure to the face. Endotracheal intubation may be required following inadequate support with NIPPV, inability to protect the airway, or other contraindications to noninvasive ventilation techniques. There is insufficient evidence to support the use of corticosteroids in treating phosgene ALI. Despite this, their use is left to the discretion of the attending clinician.

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has produced positive outcomes in those requiring prolonged ventilatory support, pulmonary edema refractory to ventilatory techniques, or management requiring unsafe ventilator settings.