**Development of inhibitors and the role of immune tolerance induction and monoclonal antibodies**

The major complication of therapy in patients with hemophilia is the development of inhibitors.

Children and adults should receive frequent screening for the development of inhibitors. For children, there should be screening once every five exposure days until 20 exposure days, every ten exposure days between 21 and 50 exposure days, at least two times a year until 150 exposure days, before surgery, or when switching to a new factor concentrate. They should be measured in all patients who have received intensive treatment lasting more than five days and within four weeks of the last infusion. If post-operative bleeding occurs and response to on-demand therapy is not optimal, then the presence of inhibitors should be assessed. Inhibitors are further sub-classified as low responding and high responding. High responding inhibitors usually persist in time. If not treated for an extended period, the levels may fall or become undetectable, but when infusing the factor concentrate again, they will become active and may render the infusion ineffective. Titers might decrease, but when the patient is exposed again to factor products, titers may rise within 3 to 5 days of the exposure. Low responding titer inhibitors are usually transient, disappear by six months, and would not reappear after the patient is re-exposed to factor products.

Treatment of acute bleeding episodes in patients with the presence of inhibitors starts with a consultation with the hemophilia center as soon as possible. Some treatment modalities include but are not limited to a higher dose of factor, porcine factor VIII, recombinant factor VII activated, and prothrombin factor complex concentrates. Eradication of inhibitors in a patient with hemophilia A is also possible by immune tolerance induction.

**Musculoskeletal Complications**

Another critical complication of hemophilia is hemophilic arthropathies from repeated musculoskeletal bleeding. About 90% of patients with severe hemophilia who have had repeated musculoskeletal bleeds end up having chronic degenerative changes in major joints like ankles, knees, and elbows in their 20s and 30s. The only way to prevent these arthropathies is to prevent spontaneous intraarticular hemorrhage by providing prophylactic treatment; however, subclinical hemorrhages can still occur despite prophylactic treatment. Management of joint bleeds has been discussed extensively in the treatment section.

**Pseudotumors**

Pseudotumor is a life, and limb-threatening condition due to inadequately treated soft tissue bleeds, usually in muscles adjacent to the bones. It is most commonly seen in long bones or pelvis. If not treated timely and adequately, pseudotumors can rapidly enlarge and lead to neurovascular compromise by pressure on adjacent structures. It can also cause pathologic fractures and create fistulas through the skin. Clinical examination and imaging studies are essential in diagnosis. Small pseudotumors can be monitored, while larger ones can receive aspiration or surgical ablation. Factor concentrate infusion is necessary and should occur for at least six weeks, followed by repeat imaging to document a decrease in the size. Large pseudotumors that have failed conservative management and those that are rapidly expanding may require limb amputations. Abdominal pseudotumors require surgery as soon as possible.

**Fractures**

Fractures can occur in patients with hemophilic arthropathy. Immediate treatment of a fracture is replacement with factor concentrate to raise the levels to almost 50% and maintain them at that level for at least 3 to 5 days. Surgical management depends on the location and severity of the fracture, and splints or external fixators may be necessary. Immobilization for a necessary duration with early initiation of physical therapy is crucial.

**Blood-borne Infection-related Complications**

In the 1980s, factor concentrates got contaminated with viruses like HIV and HCV, and patients who received those got infected with HIV and hepatitis C. This resulted in high mortality rates in patients with hemophilia in the 1980s and early 1990s. Today, many studies show that HIV and HCV transmission through factor concentrate has been almost eliminated due to careful selection of donors, screening techniques, viral elimination process during manufacturing, and advancement in diagnostic procedures to detect these viruses early. Higher usage of recombinant factors has dramatically decreased the risk of infection. However, new challenges from non-lipid enveloped viruses and prion diseases are emerging. Also, currently available anti-HIV medications are all safe for use in patients, with no contraindications. For patients with hepatitis C and hemophilia, pegylated interferon and ribavirin are the treatment.