HELLP syndrome should be differentiated from other disorders of pregnancy with similar features.

- Pre-eclampsia with DIC: Usually, patients present in the 3rd trimester similar to HELLP syndrome. Pre-eclampsia with DIC Involves clotting factors and causes increased PT and PTT, unlike HELLP syndrome. Patients will have hypertension and proteinuria similar to HELLP syndrome patients.

- Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFL): This is present in the third trimester, similar to patients with HELLP syndrome. These patients mainly have an obstructive pattern of liver injury. Direct bilirubin is elevated, unlike in patients with HELLP syndrome. Ammonia is elevated in these patients. Hypoglycemia is present, unlike in HELLP syndrome.

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP): patients mainly present in the first trimester, unlike patients with HELLP syndrome. They have a characteristic pentad: fever, altered mental status, acute kidney injury/hematuria, hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Clotting factors are not affected(PT/PTT normal). Patients are typically normotensive without proteinuria. ADAMTS-13 is low with increased VWF multimers.

- Pregnancy-related hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) is caused secondary to congenital syndrome leading to complement activation, unlike traditional HUS related to E.coli 0157:H7. They have a TTP-like picture but without fever or AMS. ADAMTS 13 is not lowered. They have increased WVF multimers. Treatment is eculizumab in these patients.

- Systemic Lupus erythematosus flare-up: They may have thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia. Liver function tests are normal, and jaundice is absent in lupus. Hypertension and proteinuria may be present similar to HELLP syndrome. They have other typical characteristics of lupus-like malar rash, pleuritis, arthritis, and pericardial effusion.

- Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS): They may have hemolysis and thrombocytopenia. Liver function tests are normal. They may have hypertension and proteinuria like patients with HELLP syndrome. Dominant features of APS are recurrent arterial/venous thrombosis and repeated spontaneous abortions <10 weeks gestation or fetal loss. Elevated Lupus anticoagulant, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, and beta2-glycoprotein antibodies are needed for diagnosis.

- Other: Fulminant Viral hepatitis should be considered in the differential. Appropriate testing and history will lead to the diagnosis.