An angioinvasive nature is intrinsic to primary IBC. Normal experimental studies have evaluated the role of hormone receptor status and genetic changes, the p53 tumor suppressor gene, cytokines, and other genetic determinants.

Hormone receptors and other tumor markers: The majority of IBCs are hormone receptor-negative. Breast cancers with negative estrogen receptors (ER) and progesterone receptors (PGR) are generally associated with shorter disease-free survival and poor prognosis than receptor-positive tumors. IBCs also have high proliferative rates and also overexpress human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER 2). These molecular markers may identify patients who have a worse prognosis.

Genetic changes: At least half of IBCs have a loss of heterozygosity. The most frequent lost alleles are 17 q., 13 q., 11 q., 8P, 6P, and 3P.

P53 tumor suppressor gene (TSG): Accumulation of p53 protein or mutation in p53 TSG was reported in 20% to 50% of human breast cancers. These abnormalities are often seen in hereditary breast cancer syndromes like familial breast and ovarian cancers (e.g., Li-Fraumeni syndrome).  Multiple observational study findings showed that patients with P53 gene mutation and nuclear overexpression was associated with the larger tumor size and disseminated disease at the time of diagnosis and had 8.6 fold higher risk of death compared with patients that do not have this mutation.

New gene mutations: The RhoC GTPase oncogene was more often overexpressed (90 versus 38 percent), and WNT1-inducible-signaling pathway protein 3 (WISP3) was commonly lost in the IBCs (80 versus 21 percent).

Cytokines: IBC is a misnomer, it produces negligible levels of most inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-12, interleukin-1, and interferon-gamma. Inflammatory breast cancer tends to be highly vascular because of its angiogenic and angioinvasive potential. They release increased amounts of vascular endothelial growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, and interleukin-6 and 8. These cytokines are increasingly released in human mammary epithelial cells that are transfected with the overexpression of the RhoC GTPase gene, which is specifically associated with IBC. Activation of vascular endothelial growth factor-3, particularly by VEGF-D in IBC, is involved in lymphotactic process through the development of new lymphatic vessels near the tumor.