A vestibular schwannoma or acoustic neuroma may result in the loss of function of the chorda tympani on the ipsilateral side; this is often also associated with paralysis of ipsilateral facial muscles and impaired secretions of the lacrimal, submandibular, and sublingual glands. A complete loss of taste is extremely rare as it would require a bilateral injury to the nerves in the oropharyngeal region. A decreased taste sensitivity or distortions in taste perception can result from drug use and a variety of medications and is even associated with viral infections, psychiatric disorders, and Bell Palsy. Conditions accompanied by inflammation are suggested to be treated with a corticosteroid to reduce the potential damage of any nerve swelling.

A range of conditions that are associated with inflammation of the middle ear can affect or cause injury to the chorda tympani. Various inflammatory middle ear diseases can have damaging effects on the chorda tympani. These conditions include disorders like otitis media and cholesteatoma. These conditions result in structural signs of degeneration that can be observed using light and electron microscopy. This nerve damage has also been demonstrated to result in taste disturbances.

Cholesteatomas are cysts that can be harmful and occur in the middle ear. They can be congenital and arise from embryologic rests of epithelium that are left behind in the middle ear during development. Cholesteatomas can also be acquired and also develop due to eustachian tube dysfunction and chronic negative middle ear pressure. The pressure creates a suction-like effect on the middle ear and causes the eardrum to collapse into the middle ear, ultimately resulting in a cholesteatoma or cyst formation.