The intact fine motor function involves complex coordination between numerous central and peripheral nervous system structures; the underlying etiology of subsequent impairment is therefore vast. Below is a brief synopsis of the etiology of fine motor disability with regards to neuroanatomical areas and more generalized causes escaping precise anatomical causation. The following neuroanatomical areas play crucial roles in fine motor control, and therefore any lesion can cause fine motor disability. Causes of lesions/damage include a space-occupying lesion, infection, stroke, toxins, autoimmune inflammation, metabolic, trauma, and congenital absence or abnormality.

Pre-motor and motor cortex- These are higher cortical centers that initiate movement. Specific damage to these areas can lead to complete paralysis of the specific muscle groups and, therefore, the inability to perform fine or gross motor tasks.

Cerebellum- Vital for coordination of movement, especially in the initiation of complex pre-planned fine motor movements. A cerebellar hemisphere lesion is more likely to lead to limb ataxia and, therefore, fine motor disability compared with lesions of the vermis that lead to truncal ataxia.

Basal ganglia- Essential for coordinated movement and acts as a gatekeeper for voluntary movement. Examples of diseases that specifically affect the basal ganglia are Parkinson's and Huntington's disease. The intention tremor associated with these conditions, as well as rigidity, impedes flowing fine movements required for fine motor tasks.

Descending corticospinal tracts- These carry integrated motor information via the brainstem to synapse with lower motor neurons at the relevant spinal nerve level. Lesions will therefore carry upper motor neuron signs, with spasticity, increased reflexes, and varying levels of gross and fine motor dysfunction dependent on lesion severity. An example of dysfunction may arise in the form of cervical myelopathy secondary to pressure from cervical disc prolapse.

Peripheral nerves- These carry integrated motor information from the spinal cord to the target muscle groups. Depending on which nerve is affected will determine the severity of the disability. An example of dysfunction includes carpal tunnel syndrome with worsening fine motor control in the affected hand due to median nerve compression under the flexor retinaculum.

Visuospatial- Visual feedback is an important part of developing fine motor control but can be developed without any visual feedback. There are numerous examples of professional musicians that were born blind yet have a remarkable fine motor ability in playing the piano, for example.

Sensory system- The hand is one of the most highly concentrated areas of sensory nerves and receptors in the human body. Direct sensory feedback with regards to proprioception, tactile sensation, vibration, and avoidance of noxious stimuli is a key component of coordinated goal-directed fine motor behavior concerning one's environment. Any interruption in this sensory feedback can cause debilitating loss of fine motor control. One example of this is diabetic peripheral neuropathy.

Musculoskeletal- The hand contains over 30 muscles, 20 major joints, and hundreds of ligaments. Fine motor control is dependent on precise joint movement; therefore, any disease process that causes joint inflammation/damage/sarcopenia can cause fine motor disability.

Psychosocial- Any process that interferes with the relay of coordinated motor sequences can limit fine motor control even in well-trained experts. 'Choking' describes the situation of an athlete or musician performing well below their usual level of motor control due to performance-related anxiety. The initiation of the fight or flight response is thought to disrupt the subconscious access to pre-programmed complex coordinated pathways with a more conscious hyper-aware state resulting in poor or clumsy performance.

Neuropsychiatric- Autism spectrum disorder and attentional deficit disorder have both been strongly correlated to developmental delays in fine motor control and has been postulated to be secondary to cognitive development delay.