The neck is anatomically bounded by the inferior border of the mandible, the superior border of the clavicle, the midline, and the anterior border of the trapezius muscle. Two main cervical triangles are described between these limits, anterior and posterior. The posterior triangle is divided into an occipital and a supraclavicular triangle; the anterior triangle contains three paired triangles (muscular, carotid, and submandibular) and one unpaired space: the submental triangle. The neck also harbors the vertebral artery and scalene triangles in its deep layers, and Lesser's, Pirogov's, Farabeuf's, and Béclard's triangles

The boundaries of the anterior cervical triangle include the anterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the midline of the neck, and the inferior border of the mandible submental triangle situates within this region and is differentiated from the other triangles because it is unpaired. The apex of the triangle is the chin, the base is the body of the hyoid bone, and the sides are formed by the anterior bellies of the digastric muscle. Furthermore, the left and right mylohyoid muscles constitute the floor. They insert to the mylohyoid line of the mandible and run medially and downward to attach to the body of the hyoid bone. The submental triangle harbors the submental lymph nodes that drain the mental region, the tip of the tongue, inferior lip, and incisor teeth. Also, the mylohyoid nerve and veins that drain into the anterior jugular
vein traverse this region