Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is an intriguing group of inherited collagen and extracellular matrix protein disorders with a wide array of phenotypic expressions. EDS is most often an autosomal dominant trait, but up to 50% of patients can have a de novo mutation.

There are 13 subtypes described in the 2017 classification system.

Classical EDS involves an autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance pattern, and associated mutated genes include COL5A1 and/or COL1A1, which code for type V and Type I collagen, respectively. Major clinical criteria include atrophic scarring, skin hyperextensibility, and generalized joint hypermobility. Minor clinical criteria include epicanthic folds, skin fragility, soft “doughy” skin, easy bruising, hernia, complications of joint hypermobility, molluscoid pseudotumors, subcutaneous spheroids, and a family history of a first-degree relative who is affected by and meets the same clinical criteria.

Classical-like EDS involves an autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance pattern and is associated with a mutation in the TNXB gene, which codes for tenascin XB. Major clinical criteria include skin hyperextensibility without atrophic scarring, generalized joint hypermobility, and easy bruising. Minor clinical criteria include non-cardiogenic lower extremity edema, mild muscle weakness, atrophy of hand and foot muscles, axonal polyneuropathy, foot deformities, and cavitary prolapse (uterine, vaginal, rectal).

Cardiac-valvular EDS involves an AR inheritance pattern and is associated with mutations in the COL1A2 and/or NMD genes, which code for type I collagen. Primary clinical criteria include skin hyperextensibility, atrophic scarring, easy bruisability, restricted or generalized joint hypermobility, and progressive cardiac-valvular problems. Minor clinical criteria include foot deformities, pectus deformity, joint dislocations, and inguinal hernias.

Vascular EDS involves an AD inheritance pattern and is associated with mutations in the COL3A1 and/or COL1A1 genes, which code for type III and type I collagen, respectively. Major clinical criteria include arterial rupture at a young age, uterine rupture (specifically third trimester with no risk factors), the formation of a carotid-cavernous sinus fistula without trauma, and a family history confirmed via genetic testing. Congenital hip dislocation and spontaneous pneumothorax are two of the minor criteria that should be reasonably identifiable to employ further diagnostic measures.

Hypermobile EDS involves an AD inheritance pattern and has no known associated gene mutation(s) as of the publication of the 2017 classification system. This subtype is entirely a clinical diagnosis that must meet three strict criteria. The specific diagnostic detail of these criteria goes beyond the scope of this review.