Particular circumstances and complications remain and represent major therapeutic problems. This, along with improved mortality rates, has caused clinicians to search for more conservative approaches to therapy.  There also remain areas of improvement necessary for the outcomes of treatment. One study revealed that despite proper medical and surgical treatment, neurologic sequelae had been reported in as many as 44% of patients. More so, half of these reported sequelae were severe enough to alter social or professional activities.

Adjunctive hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been postulated to add additional benefit to the management of intracranial abscess therapy, which can be explained by the physiologic effects that hyperbaric therapy provides. Multiple factors jeopardize a cure by antibiotics alone. First, antibiotics do not readily penetrate the blood-brain barrier, ischemic tissues, and abscesses. Furthermore, the local environment of an intracranial abscess may be too hypoxic and acidic for the proper effect of the antibiotics. The hypoxic environment seen in abscesses can also have a significant impact on immune function.  The low oxygen tension in a bacterial abscess impairs white blood cell phagocytic capacity and reduces the antimicrobial effect of antibiotics.

Fortunately, these physiologic factors are directly addressed with hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Elevated partial pressures of oxygen can correct tissue hypoxia and exert bacteriostatic and bactericidal effects, particularly with anaerobic organisms. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy has also been shown to enhance the effect of antibiotic agents and the neutrophil-mediated phagocytosis of infecting organisms. Lastly, hyperbaric therapy exerts vasoconstrictive and dose-dependent anti-inflammatory benefits, which reduces focal brain swelling, resulting in reduced intracranial pressure.

There are limited outcome data on the efficacy of adjuvant hyperbaric therapy for the treatment of intracranial abscesses. However, one recent retrospective cohort provided beneficial data about the utility of adjuvant hyperbaric therapy. In this study, the control group received surgical aspiration or excision in addition to antibiotics. The experimental group received additional adjuvant hyperbaric therapy. Data showed better outcomes for the patients receiving hyperbaric therapy. These patients had lower morbidity and a lower rate of reoperation to resolve the abscess completely. Furthermore, 80% of the patients receiving adjuvant hyperbaric therapy returned to their pre-morbid states, which is significantly higher than the 40% seen in the non-hyperbaric group.

Hyperbaric therapy has provided clinicians with an effective, non-invasive therapeutic option for patients with intracranial abscesses. While the data provided is very encouraging, only a limited number of cases have been presented. Prospective, controlled studies are unlikely to be done since this condition is so rare. The limited data available have demonstrated the utility of hyperbaric therapy in the treatment of an intracranial abscess and resulted in its use in particular clinical situations.