Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak is the escape of the fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord. It occurs when there is a tear or hole in the dura mater, the meninges' outermost layer that protects the central nervous system, communicating the subarachnoid space and other spaces via meningeal disruption. The most common symptoms are low-pressure (orthostatic) headaches (92%), nausea (54%), and neck pain (43%).

Craniofacial trauma can lead to varied presentations of CSF leak, determined primarily by injury location and mechanism of action. Skull base CSF leaks occur when there is an abnormal communication between the subarachnoid space and air space in the paranasal sinuses, nasal cavity,  middle ear, or mastoid cells.

Iatrogenic CSF leaks occur most frequently as sequelae to functional endoscopic sinus surgery. The cribriform plate and ethmoid bone are the most commonly injured, followed by the frontal and sphenoid sinuses.

Spontaneous CSF leaks occur without an obvious inciting event, often at the spine level, only rarely from the skull base. Spontaneous leaks are typically attributed to underlying conditions resulting in decreased intracranial pressure (ICP), leading to orthostatic headaches, the most common clinical manifestation.

Type 1 - dural tear comprises 26.6% of the CSF leaks. They are subdivided into type 1a.ventral (96%), end type 1b.dorsolateral (4%). These ventral tears are typically vertically oriented along the fibers of the dura and are associated with calcifications at the level of the disc space. Ventral spine CSF leaks tend to become chronic, and if present for many years, they have been associated with various neurologic complications, such as non-aneurismal intracranial subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Spontaneous CSF leaks are also associated with elevated ICP or idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH). These leaks were most likely secondary to an erosion of thin bony structures of the skull base discussed above due to chronically increased ICP.