Schwann cells serve as the myelinating cell of the PNS and support cells of peripheral neurons. A Schwann cell forms a myelin sheath by wrapping its plasma membrane concentrically around the inner axon. While the nucleus remains fixed, the inner turn of the glial cell membrane spirals around the axon to add membrane layers, or lamellae, to the myelin sheath. The plasma membrane of Schwann cells has an extremely high lipid content, and cholesterol is particularly important for assembling the myelin sheath. The compact myelin sheath insulates the axon segment, significantly reducing membrane capacitance and increasing conduction velocity.

Schwann cells are critical in response to PNS axon damage and axon regeneration. Wallerian degeneration will occur distal to the injury site. The distal axon segment dies and Schwann cells, followed by macrophages, clear the dead cell contents, and promote axon regeneration. Schwann cells undergo several phenotypic changes at this time: they activate myelin breakdown, up-regulate the expression of cytokines (including TNF-a) to recruit macrophages to the injury site, up-regulate neurotrophic factors to stimulate axon regeneration and neuron survival, and organize a regeneration pathway along their basal lamina tube to guide axon growth. Axonotmesis and neurotmesis are the main types of PNS nerve injury. In axonotmesis, such as in a crush injury, the axon suffers disruption, but the basal lamina tube of the Schwann cells remain. The lumen of the tube provides guidance cues to the regenerating axon sprout as it grows, promoting highly effective axon regeneration and restoration of function in 3 to 4 weeks. In neurotmesis, such as in a cut injury, the axon, Schwann cell basal lamina, and surrounding connective tissue sheath are disrupted. The regenerating axon and its associated Schwann cells still grow from the proximal to the distal nerve stump. Because of targeting errors in the absence of the basal lamina tube, correct reinnervation and recovery of function are poor in neurotmesis.