Sleep is regulated by an interplay of neurotransmitters and neuropeptide systems located primarily in the hypothalamus and brain stem via two main mechanisms: homeostatic and circadian.

While normal sleep architecture depends heavily on the interaction of the homeostatic and circadian systems, sleep homeostasis appears to depend on the preceding waking period, especially its length and quality.

**Corticotropin-releasing Hormone (CRH)**

Several studies have illustrated the powerful role that CRH plays in sleep regulation and REM sleep rebound.

**Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH)**

Adrenocorticotropic hormone has been identified as a promoter of wakefulness in both light and dark periods of the circadian rhythm.

**Plasma Corticosterone**

Cortisol and other steroid hormones analogs appear to play a role in the regulation of sleep, and multiple studies have shown an association between aberrations in plasma cortisol and sleep architecture. For example, Addison disease patients experience more non-REM sleep and less REM sleep, which is corrected with corticoid replacement therapy, whereas patients with excess cortisol in conditions such as Cushing syndrome display less NREM sleep and more awakening associated with excess cortisol secretion.

**Corticotropin-Like Intermediate Peptide (CLIP)**

CLIP is derived from proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and is associated with inducing long REM sleep episodes.

**Prolactin (PRL)**

Prolactin is an important neurotrophic hormone that prevents stress-induced reduction of neurogenesis and constitutes an important mechanism for stress coping and resilience via REM sleep rebound.

**Serotonin (5-HT)**

Studies of serotonin suggest that it may have a bidirectional relationship with prolactin as studies have correlated the length of REM sleep rebound with increased plasma prolactin and hypothalamic serotonin levels.