Inflamed, uninfected epidermal inclusion cysts rarely resolve spontaneously without therapy or surgical intervention. Treatment is not emergent unless desired by the patient electively before an increase in symptom severity (pain and/or infection). Definitive treatment is the surgical excision of the cyst. Some sources describe an alternative, yet not definitive, minimally invasive therapy for treatment, such as injecting triamcinolone at the dosage of 10 mg/mL for the trunk and 3 mg/mL for the face. The injection should be introduced into the inflamed epidermoid cyst, and it can help resolve the inflammation, prevent infection, and potentially reduce the need for surgical incision and drainage.

The definitive treatment is the complete surgical excision of the cyst with its walls intact; this will prevent reoccurrence. Excision is best accomplished when the lesion is not acutely inflamed. During this period, the cyst wall is friable, and the planes of dissection are more difficult to appreciate, making complete excision less likely and increasing the rate of reoccurrence.

For surgical excision, a local anesthetic, such as lidocaine with epinephrine, can be used. The anesthetic should be injected around the cyst, with care to avoid direct injection into the cyst, injection into the central pore, or rupture of the cyst wall. A small incision is made with a #11 blade on the skin overlying the cyst. The cyst contents are then expressed by exerting lateral pressure on either side of the cyst. With this technique, the cyst wall is often freed from the adjacent tissues and can be completely extracted through the small incision. The minimal incision surgical option provides better cosmetic results than the standard excision technique. Maintaining the incision within the minimal skin tension lines is important for cosmetic results. Reoccurrence rates from 1% to 8% have been shown with the minimal incision technique. A multiple layer subcuticular closure with an additional epidermal closure will yield better cosmetic outcomes.

An alternate surgical option is to utilize a 4 mm punch biopsy with the expulsion of the intact cyst through the defect created in mass. Regardless of the option chosen, removal of the entire cystic wall is paramount to decrease reoccurrence.

In the event of a fluctuant lesion, incision and drainage are often needed with the mechanical destruction of intracavitary loculations. The presence of surrounding cellulitis may necessitate the use of oral antibiotic therapy. Empiric antibiotic therapy can be done with oral agents active against methicillin-sensitive S aureus or oral agents active against methicillin-resistant S aureus in areas of high prevalence. For patients who wish to have a more conservative treatment in the setting of acute infection, the cyst can be drained, and the patient started on oral antibiotics with a plan of surgical excision of remaining contents at a later date for definitive management. This is recommended due to a higher likelihood of reoccurrence without definitive surgical management.