Ancillary tests

OCT (optical coherence tomography)

This is the first line of investigation. The presence of subretinal fluid (SRF) is characteristic of CSCR. The resolution of SRF can be documented on serial OCT. Sometimes band-like fibrin deposits can be seen in the subretinal space.**.**IPCV and CSCR constitute the pachychoroid spectrum and ICGA helps in differentiating the two. Tiny white dots may be seen in CSCR on ophthalmoscopy, which appear as hyper-reflective dots in the outer retina on OCT.

Fundus autofluorescence (FAF)

In acute CSCR, focal areas of hypo-autofluorescence are seen that may correspond to the leak on FFA. In chronic CSCR, hyper-autofluorescent tracks are present due to the accumulation of photoreceptor pigments.

Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA)

Three types of fluorescein leakage patterns are seen in CSCR- inkblot, smokestack, and diffuse. In the inkblot pattern, pinpoint leakage occurs in the early phase, which then concentrically enlarges in the late phase. In smokestack pattern, the leakage starts as a pinpoint and gradually expands to form an umbrella-like (or tree-like) appearance. Inkblot pattern is more common. In the diffuse leak, there are multiple small/inconspicuous leaks in a localized area, which cause an increase in the size and intensity of the area of hyper-fluorescence. In chronic CSCR, patchy areas of hyper-fluorescence are seen corresponding to areas of RPE atrophy. Serous PED shows early hyper-fluorescence with a progressive increase in the intensity, but size remains the same.

Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA)

ICGA is helpful in imaging the choroidal vasculature. It shows hypocyanescence in the early phase denoting choriocapillaris nonperfusion and delayed filling. In mid-phase, hypercyanescence is seen, indicating choroidal vessel hyperpermeability. This hypercyanescence slowly fades in the late phase.

OCT angiography (OCTA)

It is useful in detecting CNVM in chronic CSCR by a non-invasive method. It shows dilated choriocapillaris in most eyes with CSCR.