Several techniques are available for placing someone in spinal motion restriction, one of the most common being the supine log-roll technique outlined below and is performed, ideally, with a 5-person team, but at minimum, a team of four.

**For a Team of Five**

Before immobilization, have the patient cross their arms over their chest.

A team leader should be assigned to the head of the patient who will perform inline manual stabilization by grasping the patient's shoulders with their fingers on the posterior aspect of the trapezius and their thumb on the anterior aspect with the forearms pressed firmly against the lateral aspects of the patient's head to limit motion and stabilize the cervical spine. If available, a cervical collar should be placed at this time without lifting the patient's head off the ground. If one is not available, maintain this stabilization during the log roll technique.

Team member two should be positioned at the thorax, team member three at the hips, and team member four at the legs with their hands positioned on the far side of the patient. Team member five should be ready to slide the long spine board under the patient after they are rolled.

On team member 1's command (typically on a count of three), team members 1 to 4 will roll the patient, at which time team member five will slide the long spine board under the patient. Once again, on team member one's command, the patient will be rolled onto the long spine board.

Center the patient on the board and secure the torso with straps followed by the pelvis and upper legs.

Secure the head by placing either rolled towels on either side or a commercially available device and then place tape across the forehead and secured to the edges of the long spine board.

**For a Team of Four**

Again, a team leader should be assigned to the patient's head and follow the same technique outlined above.

Team member two should be positioned at the thorax with one hand on the far shoulder and the other on the far hip.

Team member three should be positioned at the legs, with one hand positioned on the far hip and the other on the far leg. Note that it is recommended that the arms of the team members cross over each other at the hip.

Team member four will slide the long spine board under the patient, and the rest of the technique is followed as outlined above.