The tongue is formed by eight paired muscles: four intrinsic and four extrinsic. The intrinsic muscles' most particular feature is that they have no insertions in bone - they arise and insert within the tongue.

The muscles of the tongue are separated and surrounded by connective tissue structures, named median septum, paramedian septum, and lateral septum.

**Intrinsic Muscles Of The Tongue**

****The Superior Longitudinal M**uscle**

The superior longitudinal muscle is located immediately underneath the mucosa of the dorsal surface of the tongue

If the superior longitudinal muscle contracts in insolation, the tongue shortens and, therefore, widens. It also participates in the dorsiflexion of the tip of the tongue.

**The Inferior Longitudinal Muscle**

The inferior longitudinal muscle is a thin and oval in cross-section muscle.

Similar to the superior longitudinal muscle, contraction of the inferior longitudinal muscle results in shortening and thickening of the tongue.

**The Transverse Muscle**

The transverse muscles extend laterally from the median septum and more anteriorly and posteriorly when compared to the vertical muscles.

Contraction of the transverse muscles lengthens and thinners the tongue.

**The Vertical Muscle**

The vertical muscle is formed by fibers arranged almost in a vertical direction, which intersect with fibers running transversally (transverse muscle fibers).

The contraction of the vertical muscle flattens the tongue: simultaneous widening and elongation.

**Extrinsic Muscles Of The Tongue**

**The Genioglossus Muscle**

The genioglossus is a large, fan-shaped muscle that makes up the thickness of the tongue posteriorly.

The genioglossus muscle originates from the inner surface of the mandible, more specifically from the superior mental spine of the symphysis menti. From here, it extends posteriorly within the tongue, from the root to the tip.

Contraction of the genioglossus muscle protrudes the tongue.

In addition, the genioglossus muscle is believed to be involved in the depression of the body of the tongue, ventroflexion, and probably, retrusion of the tip of the tongue.

**The Styloglossus Muscle**

The styloglossus muscle arises from the styloid process (a thin bony projection of the temporal bone) and stylomandibular ligament.

The styloglossus is more lateral than the other tongue muscles. Its contraction results in retrusion of the tongue; it also elevates the tongue's lateral margin.

**The Hyoglossus Muscle**

The hyoglossus muscle has a quadrangular shape in its lower two-thirds and a fan shape in its upper third.

Contraction of the hyoglossus muscle results in retrusion and depression of the tongue's lateral margin.

**The Palatoglossus Muscle (Glossopharyngeal Muscle)**

It is the only extrinsic muscle of the tongue that is not innervated by the hypoglossal nerve but by the vagus nerve (CN X).

It originates from the anterior region of the soft palate, extends inferiorly, forms the palatopharyngeal arch, and inserts into the tongue's lateral borders.

**In Summary**

**Intrinsic Muscles**

- The **superior longitudinal muscle**shortens and widens the tongue and curls it upward (dorsiflexion).

- The **inferior longitudinal muscle**shortens and widens the tongue and curls it downward (ventroflexion).

- The **transverse****muscle**elongates and narrows the tongue.

- The **vertical****muscle**flattens the tongue.

**Extrinsic Muscles**

- The **genioglossus muscle**protrudes the tongue.

- The **styloglossus muscle**retrudes the tongue and elevates its lateral margins.

- The **hyoglossus muscle**retrudes the tongue and depresses its lateral margins.

- The **palatoglossus muscle**elevates the posterior tongue, closes the oropharyngeal isthmus, aids in the initiation of swallowing, and prevents the spill of saliva from the vestibule into the oropharynx by maintaining the palatoglossal arch.