The classification of aortic insufficiency, based on the 2017 American Society of Echocardiography guidelines, is as follows:

- In type 1 aortic insufficiency, the valve leaflets are functioning normally, but there is aortic dilation or perforation of the cusp(s). In type Ia aortic insufficiency, the sinotubular junction and ascending aorta are enlarged. In type 1b AR, the sinuses of Valsalva and the sinotubular junction are dilated. In type 1c aortic insufficiency, the aortic annulus is dilated. In type 1d aortic insufficiency, aortic cusp perforation is present.

- Type 2 aortic insufficiency is due to excessive leaflet tissue or commissural disruption that results in aortic cusp prolapse.

- Type 3 aortic insufficiency is due to various processes that result in restriction of the motion of the aortic leaflets.

Chronic aortic insufficiency is classified into four different stages:

- Stage A: Patients at risk for aortic insufficiency.

- Stage B: Patients with progressive mild to moderate aortic insufficiency.

- Stage C: Patients with asymptomatic and severe aortic insufficiency

- Stage C1 patients have a left ventricular ejection fraction of more than 50% and mild to moderate left ventricular dilation with an end-systolic dimension less than 50 mm.
- Stage C2 patients have a left ventricular ejection fraction of less than 50% and severe left ventricular dilation with an end-systolic dimension more than 50 mm or an indexed left ventricular end-systolic dimension more than 25 mm/m2.

- Stage D: Patients with symptomatic and severe AR.

An electrocardiogram would show nonspecific ST-T wave changes, signs of left ventricular hypertrophy, or ST elevations or depressions if a myocardial infarction were associated with the patient's aortic insufficiency. A chest x-ray can show signs of pulmonary congestion or a widened mediastinum suggestive of aortic dissection.

However, the primary diagnostic test of choice for diagnosing aortic insufficiency is echocardiography, as it will provide a wealth of information about the aortic valve leaflets and surrounding apparatus, aorta, and the left ventricle. Echocardiography can identify the underlying cause of aortic insufficiency, the severity of regurgitant blood flow, and estimates of left ventricular size and systolic function. Transthoracic echocardiography assessment with color Doppler is necessary to characterize the regurgitant jet. Transesophageal echocardiography should be performed in cases with concern for aortic dissection or infective endocarditis. Some various echocardiographic measurements with different techniques combined, as mentioned below but not limited to this list, can help in accurately defining disease severity:

**Acute Aortic Insufficiency**

- M-mode echocardiography showing early deceleration time on the mitral flow velocity curve and early mitral valve closure is indicative of elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressure.

- An aortic velocity curve with a short half-time of less than 300 milliseconds indicates that there is rapid equilibration of the left ventricular and aortic diastolic pressures.

**Chronic Aortic**Insufficiency****

Chronic aortic insufficiency is broken down into stages B, C, and D using the following valve hemodynamic information: jet width related to the left ventricular outflow tract, regurgitant blood volume (ml/beat), the regurgitant fraction (%), vena contracta measurement of the effective regurgitant orifice (cm), and effective regurgitant orifice area measurement (cm^2).

In aortic insufficiency patients with little to no symptoms, exercise stress testing can assess the presence of symptoms and their functional capacity. CT imaging, cardiac MRI, and coronary angiography may be useful in certain instances as well. CT imaging can help evaluate aortic disease. Cardiac MRI has a class 1 indication in stage B, C, and D moderate to severe chronic aortic insufficiency patients when suboptimal information is obtained from echocardiography, or the information obtained is discordant with clinical information. Cardiac catheterization can be used when noninvasive diagnostic modalities provide insufficient information, or are unavailable or contraindicated. If no cardiac MRI is available or is contraindicated due to the presence of implanted devices, the catheterization would help to understand the severity of aortic insufficiency.