**Clinical Features of Hemifacial Spasm**

Classically the involuntary tonic/clonic contractions of one side of the face begin with the involvement of orbicularis oculi leading to brief, intermittent, painless, involuntary closure of the ipsilateral eye. This is associated with infrequent elevation of the eyebrow with eye twitching, also known as "other Babinski sign,**"**named after Joseph Babinski, who first described it in 1905. "Other Babinski sign" is pathognomic of hemifacial spasm and helps to differentiate from eye twitching/closure due to blepharospasm, in which it is characteristically absent.

In primary hemifacial spasm, gradually, over several months to years, the irregular tonic/clonic contractions progress to involve lower facial muscles such as perioral muscles (orbicularis oris, mentalis, zygomaticus major, platysma).

In secondary hemifacial spasm, both upper and lower face develop synchronous, intermittent contractions, eventually leading to sustained spasms as the disease progresses. Persistence of contractions during sleep is one of the characteristics of hemifacial spasm distinguishing it from most movement disorders. This may predispose the individual to disturbed sleep and insomnia. In advanced cases, facial deviation/asymmetry and grimacing are evident due to the pull of contracted muscles on one side. There are unusual symptoms such as clicking sound in the ear (due to stapedius involvement), ear pain, and hearing loss reported in some cases of secondary hemifacial spasm. Symptoms are typically worsened by stress, fatigue, eating, and anxiety. Relaxation techniques or simply touching the face subsides the spasm/twitching. Although hemifacial spasm is known for a chronically progressive course, spontaneous resolution can be seen in 10% of cases.

**Association of HFS and Hypertension**

Researchers have reported that 40% of patients with hemifacial spasm have coexisting hypertension.

When a patient younger than 40 years presents with hemifacial spasm, one must evaluate the possibility of multiple sclerosis, although it is very rarely reported to be presented as hemifacial spasm. Demyelinating plaques in the brain stem region can involve the facial nerve roots leading to aberrant signaling that result in hemifacial spasm.