A variety of probiotic strains have implications for use in various ailments. Identifying the strains that produce the most beneficial results is crucial to create a proper treatment regimen for potential patients. Probiotics can alleviate several different problems, which are only effective when adequately implemented.

Not only should clinicians be aware of the possible beneficial outcomes, but other health care professionals, such as nurses and pharmacists, should also be involved, working together as an interprofessional team. Although clinicians are the most influential in this matter, as they are usually the ones to advise patients on what to do next regarding specific disease processes, nurses are also crucial to this team. They can explain the use of this treatment regime while also monitoring the patient's vitals and potential side effects. Furthermore, pharmacists should be knowledgeable in regards to the patient's history and use of probiotics to ensure proper usage and provide efficient guidance. Now that probiotics are readily available in stores and online, the general public (as in the sellers and consumers) must also be aware of the uses and potential side effects. Therefore, to ensure the best possible outcomes for patients, the interprofessional group should be assembled to create a strategic plan for each person. When working as a group to assure excellent patient care and outcome, more patients will be able to attain the adequate care they require. [Level 5]

Studies indicate that most health care providers only have a medium level of expertise on probiotics, displaying the need for increased awareness and education. Since probiotics can treat a wide variety of diseases, it is crucial to better understand the topic to provide the best care to future patients.