The hallmark of acute rhabdomyolysis is elevated CPK levels. In addition, reddish-brown urine from myoglobinuria may be present a 50% of cases. After triage and obtaining vital signs, basic labs including complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, liver function test, CRP, ESR, CPK levels, urinalysis, EKG, and chest X-ray should be obtained.

Normal CPK levels are 20 to 200 IU/L. Elevated levels usually at least five times the upper limit of normal is considered rhabdomyolysis. CPK exists in four significant isoenzymes, CK- MM, CK-MB, and CK-BB. The CK-MM is specific for skeletal muscle, CK-MB 1 and 2 specific for cardiac muscle, and CK BB for the brain. Its half-life is 36 hours. Serum CPK levels begin to rise within 2 to 12 hours after the injury peaks within 1 to 5 days. It declines after 3 to 5 days in the absence of muscle injury. The suspect continued muscle injury and compartment syndrome in cases of Persistently elevated CPK levels

With the release of an excess amount of myoglobin, heme-containing myoglobin is excreted in urine resulting in tea-colored urine. Its half-life is about 2 to 4 hours and is metabolized into bilirubin. Only 50% of patients with rhabdomyolysis may have reddish-brown color urine; myoglobinemia can be detected before the elevation of CPK. Because of the shorter half-life and rapid metabolism, myoglobinuria may not always be detected. Urine dipstick detects hemoglobin and myoglobin as blood; a follow-up microscopic evaluation for RBC should be done to rule out hemoglobinuria. The sensitivity of myoglobinuria in rhabdomyolysis is less than 25%.

Excessive tissue breakdown from rhabdomyolysis causes third spacing of extracellular fluid into myocytes along with electrolyte changes like serum potassium and phosphate levels. Acute kidney injury can be complicated with resistant hyperkalemia. Excessive calcium influx into the myelocytes causes hypocalcemia, and it may be severe depending on the nature of the injury. Excessive cell breakdown causes increased uric acid levels. Rhabdomyolysis also can cause hypovolemia, tissue damage, impaired perfusion, and release of organic acids like lactic acid and contribute to metabolic acidosis with or without anion gap.

EKG may show peaked T waves, prolonged PR interval, wide QRS interval with or without conduction blocks, ventricular tachycardia, asystole secondary to hyperkalemia. Hypocalcemia can manifest as QTC prolongation. Leukocytosis, elevated ESR, and CRP might be present in rhabdomyolysis.

Acute kidney injury can be from hypovolemia, drugs, dehydration, hypoperfusion, pigment induced distal tubular damage. AKI is the most common complication of rhabdomyolysis. The risk of AKI is less in patients with CPK levels less than 20,000 IU/L. Patients with CK levels of more than 40,000 IU/L have an increased risk of acute kidney injury. The best predictors for developing acute kidney injury appear to be a state of hydration, high initial serum creatine, low serum bicarbonate, low serum calcium, and increased serum phosphate. Hypoalbuminemia and increased BUN has also been associated with the development of acute kidney injury.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is another dreadful complication of rhabdomyolysis and is associated with increased prothrombin time, Activated thromboplastin time, INR, D-dimer, and a decrease in platelet count and fibrinogen levels.

Plain radiographs can explain underlying bone fractures, dislocation of the joints and sometimes explain soft tissue swelling. CT scanning of the involved muscle group can identify compartment syndrome.