The eye is an ideal configuration for ultrasound imaging as it is superficial with well-demarcated fluid-filled structures that serve as an excellent medium for ultrasound beam transduction. At least a basic understanding of ocular anatomy is required to perform an ONSUS. Identifying anterior structures will increase success in measuring the optic nerve sheath in the correct plane.

The eyeball rests in a membranous sac called the Tenon capsule, surrounded by periocular fat, soft tissue, and the orbital walls. It attaches via the corneoscleral junction and the optic nerve, with extraocular muscle tendons piercing the Tenon sac, inserting into the sclera, and allowing for eyeball mobility on multiple axes. Two fluid-filled structures that require identification in the study include the anterior chamber (AC) and posterior chamber (PC), which are separated by the lens and both harbor anechoic fluid. Posterior to the PC is the retina with a hyperechoic nervous membrane.

Posterior to the retina and optic disc, one can identify the optic nerve by its anechoic core, flanked by a hyperechoic sheath on the medial and lateral borders in the transverse plane. The optic nerve can be thought of as an outpouching of intact brain tissue with the intraorbital component fully encapsulated by dura, arachnoid, and pia matter, allowing the optic nerve sheath to transmit cerebral spinal fluid and fluctuate in size based on changes in intracranial pressure.

The upper limit of the normal ONSD includes:

- 4 mm in infants.

- 5 mm in children.

- 5 mm in adults.

ONSD shows linear increment till 7.5 mm, after which it plateaus off.