Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is often a diagnostic challenge for physicians as it presents similarly to rapidly progressing dementia.

Recommended initial screening tests for evaluation of rapidly progressive dementia are complete blood count (CBC), a basic metabolic panel including magnesium level, liver function tests, rapid plasma reagin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibody, C-reactive protein, thyroid function tests, vitamin B-12, HIV, Lyme disease titer, autoimmune antibodies, urinalysis, cerebrospinal (CSF) studies including glucose, oligoclonal bands, cell count and differential, VDRL, MRI brain (including FLAIR and DWI) with and without contrast, and EEG. With the summation of clinical presentation and supportive diagnostic studies, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is diagnosable.

In 1998, the WHO published diagnostic criteria for CJD with the diagnosis relying on clinical examination, EEG, and CSF findings. However, due to advances in medicine with newer testing like MRI, genetic testing, and other modern laboratory tests, the diagnostic criteria perhaps need to be updated.

Several tests can help diagnose CJD, including MRI brain, CSF-based tests, and EEG.

For vCJD, brain MRI is a more sensitive and specific test than CSF 14–3–3 protein and was found to be accurate in about 90% of cases. Brain MRI with T2-weighted, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) sequences often reveal abnormalities in the cortical gray matter (cortical ribboning) and deep nuclei in sCJD. MRI with DWI/FLAIR imaging has a sensitivity of 98% and specificity of 93%. DWI typically demonstrates hyperintensities within the basal ganglia, thalamus, and cortex. The “hockey stick” or “pulvinar” sign is indicative of variant (infectious acquired) CJD but also seen in other forms of CJD. For CJD, CSF 14-3-3 is more sensitive, followed by typical EEG findings.

CSF protein biomarkers including 14–3–3 protein, total tau (t-tau), and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) are markers of rapid neurodegeneration, so they assist in CJD diagnosis, but these are not CJD specific. Routine CSF studies, including glucose, total protein, white blood cell count, total cell count, and oligoclonal IgG, are generally unremarkable in CJD patients. In 2012, the American Academy of Neurology recommended ordering CSF 14-3-3 only when CJD is strongly suspected. A recent comparison of these three non-prion-specific CSF biomarkers and MRI found that DWI MRI had a higher diagnostic accuracy of 97%, more than any or all of these three CSF biomarkers like t-tau (79.6%) or 14-3-3 protein (70.4%) or NSE (71.4%). Detection of these traditional surrogate marker proteins is accurate in approximately three-fourths of cases.

The National Prion Disease Pathology Surveillance Center in April 2015 developed a new diagnostic test called second-generation Real Time-Quaking-Induced Conversion (RT-QuIC), which is very sensitive and specific for CJD. RT-QuIC can detect pathogenic prion protein in the cerebrospinal fluid of CJD patients with high accuracy. RT-QuIC directly detects the pathogenic prion protein, whereas the existing indirect markers of rapid neurodegeneration like protein 14-3-3 and tau proteins cannot do this.

A few studies have demonstrated modest sensitivity (>80%) but high specificity (approximately 98%) of CSF RT-QuIC for sCJD. Although it does not have as high sensitivity as MRI, it is often positive in many forms of genetic prion disease (gPrD), some of which usually do not show the classic MRI findings identified in most sporadic CJD cases. RT-QuIC in CSF is more specific than protein 14-3-3, probably NSE and t-tau also. RT-QuIC appears to be a highly specific test for human prion disease and might be more sensitive using olfactory epithelium (from nasal brushings) than CSF. Recent studies have shown that the RT-QuIC technique is the most sensitive and specific diagnostic test that can replace brain biopsy for accurate CJD diagnosis. Because RT-QulC is less invasive compared to brain biopsy, this should be the first test to do in the workup of a patient with suspected CJD. However, the existing CJD guidelines do not include newer, less invasive diagnostic modalities and probably need to be updated.

EEG is the least sensitive test compared to MRI brain or CSF studies, and typical periodic sharp wave complexes can be seen.

Brain tissue biopsy or postmortem exam of the brain confirms the diagnosis of CJD. However, not all areas in the brain are affected by the disease, so neurosurgeons target the areas that are abnormal on imaging studies which are most often in deep-seated subcortical structures. The surgery can be risky, and it may not always obtain the affected brain tissue. As the confirmatory diagnosis of CJD does not change the patient's clinical outcome, a brain biopsy is only indicated when a reversible condition is suspected in the differential.

Few societies and organizations, including the CDC, have proposed updated diagnostic criteria for CJD.

Figure 1 MRI-CJD Consortium criteria for sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.