**Sleep and Fatigue**

The circadian rhythm is mediated by the suprachiasmatic nucleus and plays a crucial role in normal sleep/wake physiology. Shift work is often in opposition to the regular circadian rhythm of workers, requiring them to maintain a sleep/wake cycle that is misaligned with natural physiology. Given this misalignment, shift workers are likelier to report sleep disturbances such as insomnia, poor sleep quality, and insufficient sleep duration when compared to dayshift workers. The prevalence of insomnia in shift workers is between 29% and 38%, compared to approximately 6% in the general population.

In some cases, shift workers may eventually develop clinically significant levels of distress, reduced social function, and impaired occupational performance. Frequent circadian rhythm disturbances may result in insomnia or sleepiness that is also accompanied by clinically significant levels of distress or impairment, known as Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder. When the cause of the circadian misalignment is due to atypical work hours, this is referred to as either “Shift Work Disorder” or “Shift Work Sleep Disorder.”

Shift workers often use days off to recover from reduced sleep. A single night without sleep requires approximately 1 to 2 nights of sleep to fully restore baseline levels of performance. After five nights with 4 hours of sleep per night, performance remained below baseline levels even after seven nights of recovery sleep. Additionally, insomnia, excessive sleepiness, and shift work disorder are associated with time off between consecutive shifts < 11 hours.

**Occupational Performance and Accidents**

Sleep disturbances experienced by shift workers place them at an increased risk for accidents and work-related mistakes. Impaired cognition and decreased job performance are common complications of shift work found across several professions, including nurses, medical residents, pilots, truck drivers, and miners. Individuals frequently lack insight into the level of cognitive impairment that they may be experiencing.

**Physical Health**

A significant body of evidence shows adverse health consequences associated with shift work. Studies show an association between shift work and cardiovascular disease, metabolic syndrome, obesity, type II diabetes, gastrointestinal disturbances, asthma, erectile dysfunction, menstrual irregularities, pregnancy complications, breast cancer, prostate cancer, and colorectal cancer.

The atypical hours demanded of shift workers are associated with poor health habits, including physical inactivity, disruption of regular meal timing, and increased snacking.

The International Agency for Research on Cancer has declared that night-shift work is “probably” carcinogenic for humans. Nurses with ≥ 20 years of rotating shifts and nurses with ≥ 15 years of night shifts demonstrated an increased risk for breast cancer

**Mental Health Concerns**

Mental health and general well-being are adversely affected by shift work. Shift work commonly leads to challenges in maintaining social and family involvement due to scheduling conflicts. The deterioration of family and social involvement, coupled with the effects of circadian misalignment and sleep disruption, sets the stage for many mental health concerns.

Depression is more strongly associated with rotating shift work compared to fixed shifts. The amount of time between shifts and hours worked per week also affects mental health outcomes. Medical students who worked more than 55 hours/week were twice as likely to report suicidal ideations or mental health complications compared to doctors working 40 to 44 hours/week.

Burnout results from improperly managed occupational stress. Emotionally demanding occupations such as nursing and law enforcement are particularly at risk. Burnout causes feelings of reduced energy or exhaustion, depersonalization from or negative feelings related to one’s job, and decreasing in workplace performance. In the case of healthcare workers, burnout has significant implications for the safety and well-being of patients.