Although fibroids are considered a benign diagnosis, they can exert a negative impact on the patient's mental and physical health. Emphasis should be placed on proper patient education while keeping in mind how the patient perceives the disease. In describing fibroids, words such as tumor or neoplasm should be used with caution by all members of the healthcare team to ensure the patient has a good understanding of the disease.

It is essential to identify or rule out more serious causes of abnormal uterine bleeding during the diagnostic workup for fibroids.

Treatment for patients should primarily begin with trials of NSAIDs and hormonal therapy only escalating when symptoms are refractory, or unmanageable by medication. Minimally invasive treatment options performed by gynecologists or interventional radiologists should be an option with the understanding there is promising, but few high-quality randomized controlled trials exist showing the effectiveness and long term outcomes. In cases where the treating clinician attempts medical management, they should consult a pharmacist to discuss agent selection, verify dosing, and avoid drug-drug interactions. Nursing staff can followup with the patient, assess therapy progress, check for medication adverse effects, and provide patient counseling, informing the rest of the team of any concerns.

Hysterectomy is the definitive treatment for leiomyomas and should be on reserve for patients with high severity of symptoms, who desire infertility. Specialized surgical nurses will be crucial in these cases, helping to prepare the patient, assisting during the procedure, and providing post-operative care and evaluation, as well as medication administration. Every member of the interprofessional healthcare team plays a role in the proper education for patients about the risks and outcomes of this major procedure.

Emphasizing interprofessional cooperation and effective communication in all members of the healthcare team will provide the best outcomes for patients with uterine fibroids. [Level 5]