**Hodgkin Lymphoma**

Usually presents with painless, superficial enlarged lymphadenopathy, which involves contiguous lymph node chains in a predictable manner with the spread of the disease. Later in the disease course, hematogenous spread occurs with vascular invasion. The majority of patients present with supradiaphragmatic disease and isolated infra-diaphragmatic disease occurs in only 3-7% of patients. Approximately 60 to 70% of patients present with cervical and/or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy, 30% with the axillary disease, 50 to 60% with mediastinal involvement seen on radiology in the absence of symptoms. Infra diaphragmatic disease involves para-aortic lymph nodes, but the involvement of abdominal organs is uncommon. Only 10-15 % of patients with HL have extranodal disease, and the commonly affected organs are bone, bone marrow, lung, and liver. CNS involvement is very rare, but extension from para-aortic adenopathy into epidural space can result in neurological symptoms.

Approximately 25% of patients with previously undiagnosed HL develop systemic symptoms before the development of lymphadenopathy called B symptoms (fevers, drenching night sweats, and unintentional weight loss). The presence of these symptoms carries a worse prognosis in both early and advanced-stage disease.  Other symptoms include severe pruritis and alcohol-induced pain occurring minutes after alcohol intake and localized to regions of lymphadenopathy. Some rare neurological syndromes, including cerebellar degeneration and stiff-person syndrome, also have been reported.

**Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma**

DLBCL

The most common complaint is symptomatic, enlarging lymph nodal mass either located centrally or peripherally. 20% of patients present with stage I disease, approximately 40% with disease limited to one side of the diaphragm (stage II), and another 20% with involvement above and below the diaphragm and 40% with the widespread disease with extranodal involvement. Common sites of extranodal spread are lung, liver, kidney, and bone marrow. This is in contrast to primary extranodal sites of origin of DLBCL, which are the gastrointestinal tract, thyroid, bone, brain, testis, kidney, liver, breast, and skin.

Approximately 30% of patients will report B symptoms as well as less specific symptoms of malaise and fatigue.

**Follicular Lymphoma**

The most common presentation is subacute, or chronic asymptomatic peripheral lymphadenopathy, which sometimes persists or waxes and wanes over a period of years. Abdominal, pelvic, or retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy can be bulky without causing gastrointestinal or genitourinary symptoms, and nodal masses are not locally invasive and destructive. The lymph node involvement is not in an orderly manner, and early hematogenous dissemination is common.  B-symptoms are seen in less than 20% of patients and should prompt consideration for transformation into DLBCL.

**Marginal Zone Lymphoma**

Presenting symptoms related to the sites of involvement (stomach, lung, ocular adnexa, breast, thyroid, bowel, skin, and soft tissue) and B-symptoms are rare and should raise suspicion for transformed lymphoma.

**Mantle Cell Lymphoma**

70% to 90% of patients present with detectable stage 4 disease. Bone marrow involvement is common, and a leukemic phase is seen as frequently as 75% in some series. The gastrointestinal tract is frequently involved and can present from diffuse lymphomatous polyposis to a normal lumen with microscopic disease seen on biopsy. Other common sites of involvement are the spleen and Waldyer’s ring.

**Burkitt Lymphoma**

Endemic BL presents in children as a tumor of the jaw or facial bones and spreads hematogenously early in the course to extranodal sites, including kidney, testis or ovary, CNS, or meninges. Sporadic BL presents as a bulky abdominal disease involving stomach, caecum, or small intestine with associated ascites. The involvement of kidneys, ovarian or testicular organs, CNS, or meninges is common as well. Immunodeficiency related BL usually presents with lymph node involvement, but can also involve the bone marrow, CNS, or meninges and rarely may present with leukemic phase.