An opiate is derived from the opium poppy plant, while opioids are substances that act on the opiate receptors. Opioids work via the endogenous opioid system by acting as a potent agonist to the mu receptor. This results in a complex cascade of intracellular signals resulting in dopamine release, blockade of pain signals, and a resulting sensation of euphoria. Opioid receptors are located in the brain, spinal cord, and gut. In overdose, there is an excessive effect on the portion of the brain regulating respiratory rate, resulting in respiratory depression and eventually death. The typical symptoms seen in overdose are pinpoint pupils, respiratory depression, and a decreased level of consciousness. This is known as the “opioid overdose triad.”

Opioids may be agonists, partial agonists, or agonist-antagonists of opioid receptors. The currently available opiates lower the perception of pain and in some case decrease the pain stimulus. There are several types of opiate receptors in the central and peripheral nervous system. When these receptors are stimulated, it results in the suppression of the sensation of pain. However, not all opiate receptors have the same analgesic potency when stimulated.  Opioids reduce pain perception by inhibition of synaptic neurotransmission and binding of opioid receptors in the central and peripheral nervous systems.

The main opioid receptors that mediate effects of opioids are mu, kappa, and delta.

- Mu receptors mediate analgesia, euphoria, sedation, respiratory depression, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and physical dependence. Mu receptors cause a medullary diminished response to hypercarbia and also a decrease in the respiratory response to hypoxia, resulting in a decreased stimulus to breathe and development of apnea.

- Kappa receptors mediate analgesia, diuresis, miosis, and dysphoria.

- Delta receptors mediate analgesia, inhibition of dopamine release, and cough suppression.

The role of the sigma and delta opiate receptors has not been as well studied. However, when the sigma receptors are stimulated the individual will develop hallucinations, dysphoria, and psychosis, whereas the delta receptors will produce analgesia, euphoria, and seizures.  Sigma receptors are no longer considered opioid because naloxone does not antagonize them.

Tolerance occurs rapidly with opioids. With overdose, patients often succumb to respiratory failure. Tolerance to loss of the hypercarbic drive takes longer to develop than other euphoric effects, but opioid-tolerant patients do not develop complete tolerance to loss of hypoxic stimulus. This leaves them susceptible to death from overdose.