Influenza viruses belong to the Orthomyxoviridae RNA virus family and classify into three distinct types based on their significant antigenic differences; influenza A, influenza B, and influenza C.  Influenza viruses cause annual human epidemics, seasonal and pandemics. Seasonal influenza epidemics caused by influenza A and B viruses result in 3 to 5 million severe cases and thousands of deaths globally yearly. Influenza pandemics caused by the influenza A virus emerge at unpredictable intervals. The influenza A virus will cause epidemics and pandemics because of its spread from migrating birds, pigs, horses, and humans. Transmission can be human to human from fomites, coughing, and sneezing. Pandemics are responsible for increased morbidity and mortality compared with seasonal influenza. Four such pandemics have occurred in the past century, 1918, 1957, 1968, and 2009. Influenza B causes only human-to-human spread with a particular emphasis on the fact that no other hosts are involved, therefore, not involved in pandemics. Influenza C is a mild disease.

**FDA-approved Indications for Influenza Vaccines**

- Prevention of Influenza A in persons aged six months and above

- Prevention of Influenza B in persons aged six months and above

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends administering an annual influenza vaccine for all persons older than six months of age who don't have contraindications. Influenza vaccination is the most effective method for preventing and controlling influenza. It is most effective in children over two years old and healthy adults. The efficacy of the seasonal influenza vaccine ranges between 10% and 60%. The lowest efficacy occurs when vaccine strains are not well-matched to circulating strains. Both the trivalent and quadrivalent vaccines are FDA approved.

Regarding immunization in pregnancy, a randomized controlled trial conducted in South Africa has shown that when pregnant women receive the influenza vaccine, it halves their risk of developing influenza while reducing the risk of their infants (up to 24 weeks) contracting the illness.

Data shows the trivalent influenza vaccine provides protection in HIV-infected adults without severe immunosuppression, while the effectiveness in HIV-infected children aged <5 years is somewhat uncertain. In certain groups, including the elderly, immune-compromised individuals, and infants, the influenza vaccine is less effective, but it is beneficial by reducing the incidence of severe diseases, like bronchopneumonia, and reduces hospital admission and mortality.

According to Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and CDC, routine annual influenza vaccination is suggested for all individuals aged ≥6 months who do not have contraindications.

**Indications for vaccination**

- All children aged 6 through 59 months.

- All adults ≥50 years.

- Children and adults with chronic pulmonary disease (including asthma), cardiovascular disease (excluding isolated hypertension), renal, hepatic, neurologic, hematologic, or diabetes mellitus.

- Patients who are immunocompromised (by medications or HIV infection).

- Pregnancy

- Children and adolescents (6 months to 18 years) who are given aspirin- or medications containing salicylates which increases the risk of developing Reye syndrome after influenza virus infection.

- Nursing homes residents and residents of long-term facilities.

- Alaska native individuals or American Indian individuals

- Individuals with obesity (BMI ≥40 for adults)

**COVID-19 Considerations:**

- Individuals in isolation for COVID-19 or quarantine for suspected exposures should not be vaccinated if vaccination may pose an exposure risk to others.

- For patients who are moderate to severely ill due to COVID-19, vaccination should be postponed until patients have recovered.

- For patients who are mildly ill or asymptomatic, postponement is suggested to avoid confusing COVID-19 symptoms with postvaccination reactions.