In many jurisdictions, including the United States, an annual medical incapacitation risk of one percent per annum in two-pilot public transportation is used in assessing pilot fitness to fly for many medical conditions. This rule is known as the one percent rule and is applied in evaluating pilot cardiovascular fitness to fly.

When a cardiovascular issue is identified, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) may require a cardiovascular evaluation for aircrew.

This assessment should be performed within 90 days. It should include a personal and family medical history, a clinical cardiac and general physical examination, and an evaluation and statement regarding the applicant's medication. Furthermore, it should include evaluation of functional capacity and modifiable cardiovascular risk factors, a prognosis for incapacitation, and a blood chemistry (fasting blood sugar, current blood lipid profile to include total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, and triglycerides).

**Aeromedical Disposition of Pilot Electrocardiographic Findings**

Depending on a pilot's age and class of medical certificate, a resting 12 Lead ECG is typically required for initial license application and routine medical surveillance of aircrew in most jurisdictions. For example, the FAA requires an EKG for first-class medical applicants at the first application after reaching the 35th birthday and on annual basis after reaching the 40th birthday.

ECG findings for the aircrew population in both military and civilian aviation are somewhat inexplicable especially for aircrew younger than 30 years old.

Boos CJ, et al. investigated abnormalities in medically screened ECGs of 868 healthy military aircrews with an average age of 39.6 years. In 46.3% of the ECGs, results were classified as normal; however, 53.7% were classified as abnormal. Common training-related ECG findings were sinus bradycardia, first-degree AV block, and incomplete right bundle branch block. These findings are considered normal variance in young, healthy aircrew, and further investigations are not required.

Hampton JR, reports that minor abnormalities of the ST segment and T wave are seen in one percent of the normal population. In epidemiological studies, these findings are associated with increased risk of death, and such findings in aircrew during medical assessments for fitness needs to be investigated further with a stress test especially in aviators older than 35 years old. Abnormal ECG findings of aircrew should always be compared with previous ECGs, if available, before making aeromedical decisions.