The most common clinical issues affecting facial musculature are facial paralysis, blepharospasm or hemifacial spasm, and bruxism. Facial paralysis can result from myriad pathologies affecting either the central or peripheral nervous system and from localized or systemic processes.

Blepharospasm is a condition in which the orbicularis oculi muscle twitches periodically and occasionally can spread to involve other midfacial muscles; this condition is termed "hemifacial spasm." Common causes of facial spasms include neoplastic lesions abutting the facial nerve and blood vessels, such as the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, pulsating on the nerve and causing irritation and excitability. Some patients present with congenital hemifacial spasm, and in some cases, the movement disorder is psychogenic.

Bruxism is more common than either of the first two conditions and affects between 8% and 31% of the population, causing teeth grinding that occurs most commonly at night.

From an aesthetic standpoint, facial muscles often contribute to signs of aging and are frequent targets for cosmetic procedures. As mentioned above, hypertrophy of the orbicularis oculi muscles can cause festoons, which contribute to a chronically tired appearance. Removing them surgically is challenging but can be very rewarding for patients. Many facial muscles also contribute to the production of wrinkles, particularly the "crow's feet" lateral orbital rhytides caused by the orbicularis oculi, glabellar "frown lines" caused by the corrugator supercilii muscles, "bunny lines" caused by the nasalis muscle, and "smoker's lines" caused by the orbicularis oris. Transverse forehead rhytides result from chronic frontalis contraction, frequently due to compensation for brow ptosis, and vertical platysmal bands often appear as the medial edges of the muscles separate from each other over time. Excessive tone in the depressor anguli oris muscles can cause the corners of the mouth to turn downwards, resulting in a chronically angry appearance. All of these complaints are frequently treated successfully with botulinum toxin injections.