The ESP block is most often performed between the T5-T7 paraspinal levels, but it can be performed at lower levels as well. The curvilinear ultrasound transducer should be placed in a cephalocaudal orientation over the midline of the back at the desired level. The probe should then slowly be moved laterally until the transverse process is visible. The transverse process requires differentiation from the rib at that level. The transverse process will be more superficial and wider, while the rib will be deeper and thinner. Upon verification of the transverse process, the trapezius muscle, rhomboid major muscle (if performing at T5 level or higher), and erector spinae muscle should be identified superficial to the transverse process. The Tuohy needle should be inserted superior to the ultrasound probe using an in-plane approach in the cephalad to caudal direction. The bevel of the Tuohy needle should point posteriorly and inferiorly, and advance under ultrasound guidance through the trapezius muscle, rhomboid major muscle, and erector spinae muscle and towards the transverse process; once the needle tip is below the erector spinae muscle, a small bolus of local anesthetic should be given through the Tuohy needle. The erector spinae muscle should be visualized, separating from the transverse process. This separation from the transverse process confirms the proper needle position. The local anesthetic should then be injected in 5 ml increments, with aspiration after every 5 ml to prevent intravascular injection. Between 20 and 30 ml of 0.25% bupivacaine or 0.5%, ropivacaine should be used.  After injecting 10 to 20 ml of the local anesthetic solution, the catheter can thread easily into that space. It is prudent to thread 5 to 7 cm of the catheter into the space to avoid inadvertent dislodgement of the catheter. The last 10 to 20 cc can then be injected through the catheter after confirming that the catheter is not intravascular. The ultrasound probe can be moved caudally during injection into the catheter and, often, the local anesthetic can be seen spreading caudally from the catheter.