Patients will often complain of back pain in the lumbosacral region. Radiation down into the sacrum or up the lumbar vertebra can occur — the location of the pain is described as buttock pain, pelvic pain, or groin pain. The patient may endorse a feeling of catching or slipping in the groin when their knee flexed to 90 degrees. Pain and a sense of "catching" in the groin with the knee flexed to 90 degrees suggests a labral tear but also may be seen with iliopsoas tendinopathy.

Given the iliopsoas muscle is a hip flexor, a history significant for back pain with walking occurs with psoas syndrome. Pain often occurs with changing positions, moving from a sitting to a standing position, or difficulty standing upright. Patients may also complain of pain in the gluteal region of the contralateral side of the injury. Symptoms are made worse with activity but improve with rest. The radiating pain often stops at the knee.

Patients can ambulate with a limp or shuffling gait. On exam, hip flexors such as the quadriceps may be hypertonic or tight on palpation. There may be tenderness to palpation on the psoas insertion site at the lesser trochanter. Separately, the patient may have a decreased range of motion in leg extension. Chronic changes can include exaggerated lumbar lordosis.

On exam, the Ludloff sign may be positive. The examiner directs the patient to sit with their knee in extension, then lift their heel of the affected leg. When pain is reproducible with this maneuver, it is a positive sign. Separately a snapping hip sign may be positive in psoas syndrome as well. On exam, have the patient place their affected hip in a flexed, externally rotated, and abducted position. The provider then passively puts the affected hip into extension. The associated pain is a positive test and suggestive of psoas syndrome.