**Dosage Formulations:**Amitriptyline dosage formulations come in oral tablets of 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg, and 150 mg.

**Adult Dosing:**The initial dose recommended for depression is 25 mg per day at bedtime. For off-label use, such as chronic pain, therapy can initiate a much lower dose of 10 to 20 mg per day. It can be increased by 25 mg every 3 to 7 days, with a maximum of 150 to 300 mg/day. If the dose needs to be adjusted, it is preferable to change the bedtime dose. In cases of therapy cessation, the clinician should gradually taper to avoid withdrawal.

**Maintenance Dose:**Amitriptyline maintenance dose is usually 50-100 mg daily, and it can be given in a single dose, preferably at bedtime. When satisfactory improvement is achieved, the dose should be reduced to the lowest amount to maintain relief of symptoms. Once the patient is stable, amitriptyline should be continued for three months or longer to prevent depression.

**Plasma Levels:**Because of the wide difference in the absorption and distribution of amitriptyline in body fluids, it is difficult to correlate plasma levels and therapeutic effects directly. However, determining plasma levels might be useful in identifying patients with toxic effects who might have excessively high levels or in whom and/or noncompliance is suspected. Elderly patients have decreased hepatic metabolism and increased intestinal transit time, so plasma levels are usually higher for any given oral dose of amitriptyline than in younger patients. Monitor elderly patients carefully, and obtain quantitative amitriptyline serum levels as clinically indicated. Clinicians should adjust amitriptyline dose according to the patient’s clinical response and not based on plasma levels.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Amitriptyline is Pregnancy Category C medicine, and it can cross the placenta. There is no causal relationship, but a few reports of adverse reactions, including limb deformities, developmental delay, and CNS effects in infants whose mothers had used amitriptyline during pregnancy. There is a lack of well-controlled clinical studies on pregnant women. Amitriptyline should be used in pregnancy only if the potential benefit to her than the risk to the mother and fetus. American College of Obstetricians (ACOG) and the American Psychiatry Association (APA) have created treatment algorithms for periconceptional and antenatal management.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Amitriptyline can pass into breast milk. Maternal exposure to amitriptyline would usually not cause any adverse reactions in breastfed infants, especially infants older than two months. A safety scoring system finds amitriptyline use possible with caution while breastfeeding.****However, rare sedation is reported in neonates. Therefore, other medicines with fewer active metabolites should be preferred when large amitriptyline doses are required or nursing a preterm infant or a newborn.****

**Pediatric Patients:**Because of the lack of experience using this drug in pediatric patients, it should not be recommended for patients under 12 years.

**Adolescent and Geriatric Patients:**In general, start at lower dosages for these patients. The recommendation is to start with a lower dosage (around 10 mg/day) in the geriatric population.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**There is no information provided by the manufacturer, and in mild to moderate impairment, no dose adjustments are needed.

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**Amitriptyline hydrochloride should be used with caution in patients with impaired liver function.

**Hospitalized Patients:**They may require 100 mg a day initially, which can be increased gradually to 200 mg a day if needed.