Treatment of hypercapnia should target the underlying pathology.  Direct interventions exist to assist in CO2 removal by supplementing ventilation of the lungs. These include Bi-level Positive Airway Pressure (BiPAP) ventilation assist, Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) ventilation, and intubation with mechanical ventilation in severely ill patients. BiPAP is typically preferred in an alert, awake patient who can protect his or her airway as it allows for better air exchange between the alveolar space and atmospheric air by providing alternating levels of positive pressure support to the airway. CPAP is used in patients where there is a need for airway splinting. However, this is inferior for CO2 exchange compared to BiPAP. While technically non-invasive, these treatments are poorly tolerated due to discomfort by many patients and function as a bridging therapy to recover without more invasive measures. Mechanical ventilation is the most invasive of the listed options, but it allows the physician better control of both respiratory rate and tidal volume in addition to FiO2 and pressure support. If a patient is not alert, awake, or able to protect their airway, mechanical ventilation should be strongly considered. BiPAP, CPAP, and intubation are not curative treatments on their own, but they are supportive as stabilizing measurements while the underlying etiology is corrected. Regardless of which support is used, it is essential to optimize oxygenation status maintaining O2 saturation 90% or higher.