The overarching goals of therapy for hypokalemia are to prevent or treat life-threatening complications, replace the potassium deficit, and to diagnose and correct the underlying cause. Therapeutic urgency depends on the severity of hypokalemia, the existence of comorbid conditions and the rate of decline of serum potassium levels. Elucidating the cause of hypokalemia and understanding whether it is secondary to transcellular shifts or a potassium deficit is also essential. Regardless, potassium replacement is indicated in most cases of hypokalemia, especially in those related to renal or GI losses. The presence of concomitant hypomagnesemia should also be investigated and corrected if present. In the presence of hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia can be refractory to potassium replacement alone.

Clinical manifestations do not occur with mild to moderate hypokalemia; thus, repletion is not urgent. Mild to moderate hypokalemia is typically treated with oral potassium supplements. Providing 60 to 80 mmol/day in divided doses over days to weeks is usually sufficient. Oral supplementation can irritate GI mucosa leading to bleeding and/or ulceration but is associated with a lower risk of rebound hyperkalemia. It should be taken with plenty of fluids and food. Potassium chloride is the preferred formulation for replacement therapy in most cases. Increasing dietary potassium is not usually adequate to treat hypokalemia because most of the potassium contained in foods is coupled with phosphate. A majority of cases of hypokalemia involve chloride depletion and respond best to replacement with potassium chloride. Intravenous (IV) repletion is administered if oral therapy is not tolerated.

Replacement therapy must be given more rapidly with severe hypokalemia or when clinical symptoms are present. Potassium chloride of 40 mmol given every 3 to 4 hours for 3 doses is preferred.  Rapid correction can be provided via oral and/or IV formulation. IV administration is preferred in the setting of cardiac dysrhythmias, digitalis toxicity and recent or ongoing cardiac ischemia. Pain and phlebitis usually occur with peripheral IV infusions when infusion rates exceed 10 mmol per hour.  There is also a risk of rebound hyperkalemia when rates exceed a dose of 20 mmol per hour.  In general, 20 mmol per hour of potassium chloride will increase serum potassium levels by an average of 0.25 mmol per hour.  Potassium should not be given in dextrose-containing solutions because dextrose will stimulate insulin secretion which then exacerbates the hypokalemia. Serum potassium levels should be checked every 2 to 4 hours. Potassium repletion can occur more slowly once the serum potassium level is persistently above 3 mmol/L or clinical symptoms have resolved. Regardless of severity, careful monitoring of serum potassium levels is required as the development of hyperkalemia is common in hospitalized patients.

The potassium deficit varies directly with the severity of hypokalemia.  Every decrease in serum concentration of 0.3 mmol/L accounts for a reduction of approximately 100 mmol in total body potassium stores.  Accurate quantification is difficult, especially in instances where transcellular shifts are the cause of hypokalemia. Therefore, careful monitoring is required to prevent hyperkalemia from excessive supplementation.

The goal of potassium replacement in the context of renal or GI losses is to immediately raise serum potassium concentration to a safe level and then replace the remaining deficit over days to weeks. A potassium-sparing diuretic should also be considered when the etiology of hypokalemia involves renal potassium wasting as potassium replacement therapy alone may not suffice.

The presence of an acid-base disorder needs to be established as management may differ for etiologies of hypokalemia caused by redistribution of potassium from the extracellular fluid into cells (redistributive hypokalemia). When paralysis or cardiac dysrhythmias are present, in this setting, potassium repletion should be considered. Rebound hyperkalemia is a potential complication of potassium therapy when redistributive hypokalemia is the cause of hypokalemia. As the initial process causing redistribution resolves or is corrected, the transfer of potassium from intracellular to extracellular fluid in conjunction with potassium repletion can result in hyperkalemia. Potassium repletion in patients with periodic paralysis carries a high risk of rebound hyperkalemia. Regardless of etiology, careful monitoring of serum potassium levels is required due to an increased risk of hyperkalemia during replacement therapy.