**Immediate**

Immediate complications are those occurring within the first 30 days of placement. These include bleeding, air embolism, pneumothorax, wound dehiscence, catheter migration and malposition, cardiac perforation and arrhythmias, and infections. Historically, the most common complication is arterial puncture and subsequent hematoma formation, although this has decreased significantly since the start of more routine ultrasound guidance.

Minor bleeding at the catheter exit site can be expected. Less than 0.1% of patients require transfusion secondary to prolonged oozing. Patients should be placed in an upright position to decrease central venous pressure.

Cardiac complications occur when the catheter tip is placed incorrectly. Placement should be at the cavoatrial junction to prevent cardiac arrhythmias, cardiac rupture, catheter thrombosis, migration. If the catheter is placed too high above this junction, it can potentially flip (spontaneously redirect) into the IJ or brachiocephalic veins.

An air embolism is an extremely rare acute complication of any CVC placement. The negative pressure of the thoracic cavity during respiration has the potential to suck air into the central veins. The occurrence is roughly 0.2%-1% of patients receiving a CVC.

**Long Term**

After 30 days, complications are usually infections or thrombosis. Infection can occur at the skin pocket (in subcutaneous ports), along the tunnel tract, or within the catheter, known as central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI).

CLABSI is a diagnosis of exclusion or by differential time to positive blood cultures. In stable patients with suspected port infection, antibiotic salvage can be attempted. This consists of broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics until a specific organism is determined on culture. An antibiotic lock can be used to augment this therapy, which entails a high concentration of antibiotic-heparin solution infused into the catheter between each use.

The use of antibiotic locks has been associated with decreased rates of CLABSI.

Stenosis and thrombosis generally form secondary to two main processes including vein wall trauma causing stenosis or occlusion of the host vein and intravascular protein and cell wall deposition causing thrombosis of the catheter tip. The second process begins almost immediately after placement.

Trauma to the venous wall can occur secondary to the medications infused through the line, chemotherapy being the most caustic, and/or from the velocity of blood traveling in and out of the vein, such as in the case of HD catheters. A cohort study completed in London followed patients undergoing HD through their entire HD career, an average of 4.7 years. Approximately 4.3% were affected by central venous stenosis. Of those with a history of tunneled CVC, the incidence rate for central venous stenosis was found to be 2.2 per 100 patient-years.

A Canadian cohort study of 1,041 adult patients who initiated outpatient maintenance hemodialysis therapy with tunneled CVCs demonstrated complications of catheter malfunction (15%), bacteremia (9%), and central stenosis (2%) at 1 year. Interestingly, compared to patients younger than 60 years, patients aged 70-79 and those 80 years or older experienced lower rates of CVC complications.