The diagnosis of NBS is clinical. No laboratory or imaging test can help with the diagnosis. The diagnosis of NBS is often missed because of the lack of awareness of its existence. To make the diagnosis one has to make an association between long-term opioid use and the worsening abdominal pain.

The following features should be present to help make a diagnosis:

- Progressive and paradoxical increase in pain despite the use of higher doses of opioids

- Abdominal pain is colicky or burning in nature

- Pain may be accompanied by nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension and constipation

- Eating may exacerbate the symptoms, and early weight loss and anorexia are noticeable

- Use of opioids for at least 3 months

- The dose of morphine or equivalent opioid of at least 50 to 75 mg per day

- Abdominal pain occurring within 14 to 28 days after starting the opioid

The abdominal pain may come on with a varying dosage

In most patients with NBS, the diagnosis is often delayed because of the lack of specific features and unawareness.

**Bloodwork**

Laboratory workup includes the white cell count which is usually normal in people with NBS.

**Imaging**

While imaging is not required to make the diagnosis of NBS, abdominal x-rays are often done to rule out other pathologies like bowel obstruction, perforated viscus or renal calculi. In patients with NBS, one may note the presence of partial bowel obstruction or ileus. Fecal impaction may be seen in many patients as a result of opioid-induced constipation.