The osseous tissue in the growing long bones is created from the cartilage by a process called endochondral ossification. The chondrocytes in the cartilage grow to form the hypertrophic chondrocytes, which then start producing the cartilage matrix. This cartilage matrix is then calcified, which is reabsorbed and replaced with woven bone, which is later replaced by mature lamellar bone.

Calcium and phosphorus are required for the normal matrix mineralization. Reduction in these minerals causes abnormal mineralization.

**Vitamin D levels**are maintained either by endogenous synthesis or dietary intake.

- **Endogenous vitamin D synthesis:**Vitamin D is synthesized in the human skin after exposure to UVB irradiation (radiation with wavelength 290 to 320 nm).

- **Exogenous vitamin sources:**Vitamin D can be obtained from dietary sources such as fish olive oil, egg yolk, and fatty fish. However, regular dietary sources may not be adequate to meet the daily needs of vitamin D without extra supplementation or fortification.

Low serum calcium, either from its low intake or from vitamin D deficiency, causes a compensatory increase in the PTH, which subsequently causes hypophosphatemia. Low serum phosphate, in turn, inhibits the apoptosis of chondrocytes and thereby accumulation of hypertrophic chondrocytes. Eventually, abnormal growth of the cartilaginous epiphyseal plate occurs. This results in many of the clinical manifestations as well as the radiological changes (widening of epiphysis) of rickets.