Arsenic toxicity is a life-threatening condition and mandates aggressive treatment with particular attention to fluid resuscitation, blood pressure support, and cardiac monitoring. Patients requiring hospitalization should be in the ICU for advanced life support monitoring.

Chelation therapy has been shown to improve outcomes if started in minutes to hours after arsenic exposure.

**Do not delay chelation in a severely ill patient for laboratory confirmation**; early chelation is most effective minutes to hours after exposure.

British Anti-Lewisite (BAL): 3 to 5mg/kg q 4hours gradually tapering to every 12 hours.

Dimercaptopropanesulfonic acid (DMPS): 3 to 5 milligrams/kg given IM every 4 hours administered as 5% solution for 2 days followed by succimer or 3 to 5mg/kg IM every 6 to 12 hours (DMPS does not have approval in the USA).

Succimer(2,3-Dimercaptosuccinic acid): 10 milligrams/kg PO every 8 hours for 5 days followed by 10milligrams/kg PO q12 hours.

- The endpoint for chelation therapy is 24-hour urinary arsenic of less than 50 ug/L.

- In the case of ventricular tachycardia or torsades de point, treat as necessary with magnesium sulfate, lidocaine, amiodarone, and defibrillation.

- It is critical to **avoid the use of**IA (procainamide, quinidine, disopyramide), IC and III antiarrhythmics secondary to risk QT prolongation.

- Potassium, calcium, magnesium levels should be monitored and maintained within normal limits to avoid worsening of QT prolongation.

- Treat seizures with benzodiazepine and general anesthesia as necessary.

- Arsenic exposure to the skin is readily removed with soap and water.

The roles of activated charcoal and gastric lavage are uncertain. Activated charcoal should be a consideration with co-ingestion. Gastric lavage may be considered on a per case basis if large radiopaque material presents on an abdominal radiograph.

**Arsine Gas**

There is no antidote to arsine gas toxicity, and chelation therapy has not demonstrated effectiveness.

Arsine poisoning treatment should focus on restoring RBC concentrations, maintaining renal function, electrolyte replacement and aggressive supportive care.

Hemodialysis should be a consideration for patients with AKI, oliguria and or renal failure.

The recommended urine output goal is 1 to 2 ml per kg per hour. Urine alkalization may prevent deposition of broken down RBC products.  Exchange transfusion should be considered to remove nondialyzable arsine.

Patients requiring hospitalization should receive admission to the ICU for advance supportive care and monitoring.