Patients that are treated early on before necrosis occurs can have viable tissue saved. Case studies show that patients who underwent detorsion of the rotated lung were able to have full function returned with the lung re-expanding. Once the lungs go through detorsion, they have to then be fixed in place between the involved lung and the surrounding tissue with sutures or staples.

If it is not possible for the lung to go through detorsion or if detorsion fails, then lobectomy must occur. To save viable lung, detorsion must be performed within the first few hours of diagnosis. Any longer, the lung may already have irreversible ischemic damage, where it may be safer to perform a resection without detorsion. This would prevent the inflammatory markers that build up during the torsion from leaking out into the rest of the body and causing multiorgan failure. For the damaged tissue, it is best to keep the lung rotated until the pulmonary veins have been clamped to prevent the systemic release of the inflammatory markers. Once safely clamped, a clinical decision can be made whether the lung can go through detorsion or if resection should occur.

Delayed treatment can also cause a clot to form, resulting in pulmonary embolism or stroke. Heparin drip can be used as prophylactic measures to prevent this complication. Conservative management was found to have recurrent pneumonia, eventually leading to death. Very few cases had complications of pneumonia, air leaks, or emphysema after fixation. Most procedures occurred without any complications intra-operatively and post-operatively.