The differential diagnosis of this condition is quite broad and encompasses a wide range of neuromuscular disorders from the cerebral cortex to the peripheral nerve.

- Central causes such as a CVA or multiple sclerosis (MS), myelopathies, either cervical or thoracic regions, can also cause foot weakness. However, the patient will have other associated symptoms and signs of upper motor neuron involvement as hyperactive reflexes, increased tone, bladder, and bowel symptoms.

- Lumbar radiculopathy due to disc herniation or spinal stenosis

- Lumbar plexopathies

- Sciatic neuropathy

Other types of gait which require differentiation from steppage gait are:

- Circumduction gait (upper motor neuron involvement in CVA) - can cause weakness of the whole extremity. The patient ambulates with a circumduction gait since the limb is artificially long due to paralysis. To clear the ground, the person would have to circumduct. Other signs of CVA as dysphagia, or aphasia and upper limb weakness, are also evident.

- Cerebellar gait - involvement of the cerebellum leads to balance deficits causing the inability to walk in tandem.

- Ataxic gait - presentation is bilateral. The person will not be able to walk normally. There is a lack of proprioception and position sense due to the involvement of long tracts of the spinal cord, leading to a gait that is remarkable for high steppage and side-to-side sway, as can be seen in persons who misuse alcohol.

- Parkinsonian gait - Due to the involvement of substantia nigra, there is a lack of initiation leading to festinating gait. The smooth transition of the gait cycle phases is disturbed.

- Complications mostly relate to the inability to clear the ground during walking, which leads to falls. The ill-fitting brace can potentially cause skin abrasions by rubbing against anesthetized skin. Parts of braces can eventually become loose due to wear and tear