# Introduction

Bile is a physiological aqueous solution produced and secreted by the liver. It consists mainly of bile salts, phospholipids, cholesterol, conjugated bilirubin, electrolytes, and water

**Formation**

**Bile**

Bile is produced by hepatocytes and it is then modified by the cholangiocytes lining the bile ducts. The production and secretion of bile require active transport systems within hepatocytes and cholangiocytes in addition to a structurally and functionally intact biliary tree. Initially, hepatocytes produce bile by secreting conjugated bilirubin, bile salts, cholesterol, phospholipids, proteins, ions, and water into their canaliculi (thin tubules between adjacent hepatocytes that eventually join to form bile ducts)

Canaliculi empty bile into ductules or cholangioles or canals of Hering. The ductules connect with interlobular bile ducts, which are accompanied by branches of the portal vein and hepatic artery forming portal triads. Bile is subsequently modified by ductular epithelial cells as it passes through the biliary tree. These cells, known as cholangiocytes, dilute, and alkalinize the bile through hormone-regulated absorptive and secretory processes. The cholangiocytes have receptors that modulate the bicarbonate-rich ductular bile flow, which is regulated by hormones. These receptors include receptors for secretin, somatostatin, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), and chloride-bicarbonate exchanger. For example, when secretin stimulates receptors in the cholangiocyte, a cascade is initiated, which activates the CFTR chloride channel and allows the exchange of bicarbonate for chloride. In contrast, somatostatin inhibits the cAMP synthesis within the cholangiocytes, causing the opposite effect. While bombesin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, acetylcholine, and secretin enhance bile flow, somatostatin, gastrin, insulin, and endothelin inhibit the flow

**Bile Acids**

Cholesterol catabolism by hepatocytes results in the synthesis of the two major primary bile acids, cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid. This process involves multiple steps, with cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase acting as the rate-limiting enzyme. Primary bile acids undergo dehydroxylation by bacteria in the small intestine, forming the secondary bile acids deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid, respectively. Both primary and secondary bile acids are conjugated by the liver with an amino acid, either glycine or taurine. Conjugated bile acids are known as bile salts. Bile salts inhibit cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase, decreasing the synthesis of bile acids. Despite the increased water solubility of bile salts, they are amphipathic molecules overall

# Cellular Level

The main steps in the formation of bile are the uptake of bile acids and ions from plasma across the basolateral (sinusoidal) membrane, transport through the hepatocyte, and excretion via the canalicular membrane.

**Basolateral Membrane**

The sodium-potassium ATPase on the basolateral membrane of the hepatocyte maintains sodium and potassium gradients. Because three sodium ions are expelled from the cell in return for receiving two potassium ions, an electrochemical gradient is formed

**Canalicular Membrane**

The transporter proteins found in the canalicular membrane are primarily members of the ATP-binding cassette protein family

# Development

In normal development, the synthesis of bile acids first occurs during weeks 5 to 9 of gestation, with bile secretion occurring at 12 weeks of gestation, and surging after 17 weeks gestation

Abnormal development of the biliary tree can cause congenital liver disease. These primary cholangiopathies include ductopenic syndromes, ductal plate malformation syndromes, polycystic liver diseases, and fibro-polycystic liver diseases

# Organ Systems Involved

**Hematologic**

Bilirubin, the major pigment of bile, is an end product of heme catabolism that travels to the liver bound to albumin. Once inside the liver, the enzyme uridine diphosphate glucuronyltransferase (UDPGT) conjugates bilirubin to form bilirubin glucuronide. The water-soluble conjugated bilirubin is then secreted into bile, providing its characteristic yellow color

**Gastrointestinal/Hepatobiliary**

Liver: Site of bile formation, reuptake of bile acids, and reuptake of urobilinogen

Bile ducts: Modify and transport bile, secrete ions and water into bile

Gallbladder: Stores and concentrates bile

Small intestine:

- Bacteria form secondary bile acids via dehydroxylation of primary bile acids

- Bilirubin glucuronide is converted back to bilirubin

- Bacteria convert bilirubin to urobilinogen

Duodenum: Site of lipid digestion and absorption facilitated by bile

Ileum: Site of reabsorption of bile salts

Portal circulation: Transports reabsorbed bile salts back to the liver

Rectum: Urobilin and stercobilin (compounds oxidized from urobilinogen) are responsible for dark fecal pigment.

**Genitourinary**

Some urobilinogen is excreted in the urine

# Function

The main functions of bile are 2-fold:

- To facilitate lipid absorption and digestion

- To eliminate waste products from the body

**Lipid Absorption and Digestion**

Through the process of emulsification, bile acids break down large lipid droplets into smaller ones, increasing the surface area for digestive enzymes. Emulsification is possible due to the amphipathic property of bile salts

**Elimination of Waste Products**

Cholesterol is eliminated through its conversion into bile acids, allowing the body to maintain cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acid sequestrants, medications intended to lower cholesterol, function by binding bile acids in the small intestine, and increasing their excretion in the stool. Bilirubin is also eliminated through its secretion into bile, where it eventually forms the dark pigment of feces

# Pathophysiology

The decrease or cessation of bile formation or flow is known as cholestasis. Cholestasis can result from the impaired canalicular secretion of bile, ductular disease, or obstruction of bile flow through the biliary tree. Causes of decreased canalicular secretion include drugs, sex hormones, and inherited defects. Ductal diseases include primary biliary cirrhosis and primary sclerosing cholangitis. Bile duct obstruction is most commonly due to gallstones but is also seen with cancers of the bile duct or pancreas

# Clinical Significance

Clinically, symptoms of cholestasis include pruritus, dark urine, pale stools, and steatorrhea. Like bilirubin, other substances that are normally excreted in bile, such as gamma-glutamyl transferase, alkaline phosphatase, and cholesterol, accumulate in the blood. Fat malabsorption may lead to deficiencies of vitamin A, D, E, and K. On examination, non-tender hepatomegaly and scratch marks on the skin due to pruritus may be present. A careful history and exam with appropriate diagnostic testing are necessary to narrow the differential diagnosis of cholestasis and create the proper treatment plan

The principal therapeutic options for symptomatic management of cholestasis are with ursodeoxycholic acid, a hydrophilic bile acid, and cholestyramine, a bile acid sequestrant