The prevalence of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is higher among individuals with acute or chronic severe kidney disease. It is rational to avoid high-risk GBCAs if the eGFR is less than 30 mL/min/1.73 m^2. The management of this disease requires the collaboration of the entire healthcare team. The radiologist should avoid high-risk GBCAs in patients with severely injured kidneys. The primary provider should be aware of this disease if the patients presented with symptoms after exposure to GBCAs. Good history taking, thorough physical examination, and excluding the other differential diagnosis is the cornerstone for making the correct diagnosis. After confirming the diagnosis, nurses, pharmacists, and physical therapists are essential for better health outcomes. Referral to the appropriate specialist should be a consideration if the disease progresses further.

The ACR recommends screening patients by identifying risk factors for compromised renal function (age more than 60 years, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dialysis, kidney surgery, kidney transplant, kidney cancer, or single kidney). If the patient presents one of the risk factors, obtaining serum creatinine before GBCA administration is warranted. According to the ESUR, patient assessment is based on the type of GBCA used. If a high-risk GBCA is to be used, serum creatinine and clinical assessment before contrast medium administration must be performed. For intermediate and low-risk GBCAs, a questionnaire assessment of the renal function is sufficient.