The first four drugs listed are monoclonal antibodies used in the prophylaxis of chronic and episodic migraine.

**Erenumab**: is a self-administrable subcutaneous injection. The recommended dosage is 70 mg subcutaneously once or twice a month in the abdomen, thigh, or upper arm. Alternatively, the dosage of 140 mg may be administered once a month.

**Eptinezumab**: The recommended dosage is 100 mg of eptinezumab, administered as an intravenous infusion after dilution in 100 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride. Infusion is done over approximately 30 minutes every three months. Some patients could potentially benefit from a dosage of 300 mg.

**Galcanezumab**: is administered as a subcutaneous injection. A loading dosage of 240 mg (administered as two consecutive injections of 120 mg each), followed by monthly doses of 120 mg, is recommended. Subcutaneous injection is administered in the abdomen, thigh, back of the upper arm, or buttocks.

**Fremanezumab:**is administered as a subcutaneous injection. The recommended dose is 225 mg monthly or 675 mg every three months, administered as three consecutive injections of 225 mg each. Subcutaneous injection is administered in the abdomen, thigh, back of the upper arm, or buttocks. This drug provides effective prophylaxis against episodic and chronic migraines by reducing the mean number of migraine attacks per month and improvement in the mean monthly Migraine Physical Function Impact Diary (MPFID).

**Rimegepant**: is given for the acute treatment of migraine with or without aura. Rimegepant is administered as an orally disintegrating tablet containing 75mg of rimegepant free base orally/sublingually. Dosage should not exceed 75 mg in a 24-hr period.

**Ubrogepant**: is given orally at a dosage of 50 mg or 100 mg. 2 hours after the initial dose, a second dose may be taken if necessary. The dose should not exceed 200mg in 24 hours. Treating any more than eight migraine episodes in 30 days is not recommended, as its safety has not yet been established. Like rimegepant, ubrogepant is for the acute treatment of migraine with or without aura.