**Legal Ramifications**

Typically patients sign a document, which legally details their agreement to consent to treatment. When the decision to treat becomes involuntary as is the case in most instances of patient restraint and seclusion, the physician is put at risk of common legal ramifications pertaining to topics such as false imprisonment, battery, duty to do no harm, duty to warn, and competence.

To illustrate this topic, picture a scenario where a patient is being emergently evaluated for a serious condition that can alter his level of competency. During the evaluation, the patient is lethargic and unaware of where he is located; he proceeds to become agitated and express a desire to leave. At this point, it is the physician's decision to restrain the patient because the patient is now a danger to himself. All aspects of the decision-making process should be documented to demonstrate the need for restraint. Documentation should include how the situation was emergent, why consent was not able to be obtained, and why the treatment was of benefit to the patient.

The clinician should not permit the patient to leave if he is incompetent and a danger to himself as this becomes an issue of negligence, which is significantly more difficult to defend in court. Additionally, the physician must also be aware of any statement from the patient regarding the impending harm of a third party as there is a duty to warn that party. If the patient leaves without the staff notifying the third party and that third party is harmed, the physician can face legal ramifications. Knowledge of how certain cases can lead to legal consequences can help a physician to appropriately document and take action to avoid liability.