The shoulder girdle is composed of the clavicle and the scapula, which articulates with the proximal humerus of the upper limb. Four joints are present in the shoulder: the sternoclavicular (SC), acromioclavicular (AC), and scapulothoracic joints, and glenohumeral joint.

The sternoclavicular joint is a synovial saddle joint and is the only joint that connects the upper limb to the axial skeleton. It connects the clavicle to the manubrium of the sternum and gets stabilization from the costoclavicular ligament. The acromioclavicular joint is a plane synovial joint that connects the acromion of the scapula to the clavicle. It receives stabilization primarily from the coracoclavicular ligament, and secondary stabilizers are super and inferior acromioclavicular ligaments. The scapulothoracic joint is not a true joint, but rather the articulation of the scapula gliding over the posterior thoracic cage.

The glenohumeral joint is a highly moveable ball-and-socket synovial joint that is stabilized by the rotator cuff muscles that attach to the joint capsule, as well as the tendons of the biceps and triceps brachii. The humeral head articulates with the glenoid fossa of the scapula. It is a shallow articulation, as the fossa accommodates less than one-third of the humeral head. The labrum, a fibrocartilaginous ring, attaches to the outer rim of the glenoid fossa and provides additional depth and stability securing the humeral head. A small number of fluid-filled sacs known as bursae surround the capsule and aid in mobility. These are the subacromial, subdeltoid, subscapular, and subcoracoid bursae.

The major movements at the glenohumeral joint are:

- Abduction: upward lateral movement of humerus out to the side, away from the body, in the plane of the scapula

- Adduction: downward movement of humerus medially toward the body from abduction, in the plane of the scapula

- Flexion: the movement of humerus straight anteriorly

- Extension: the movement of humerus straight posteriorly

- External rotation: the movement of humerus laterally around its long axis away from the midline

- Internal rotation: the movement of humerus medially around its long axis toward the midline

- Horizontal adduction (transverse flexion): the movement of the humerus in a horizontal or transverse plane toward and across the chest

- Horizontal abduction (transverse extension): the movement of the humerus in a horizontal or transverse plane away from the chest