The gastrointestinal system is divided into the foregut, midgut, and hindgut. Respectively, the foregut consists of the mouth to the second portion of the duodenum (part of the small intestine), the midgut consists of the remaining duodenum (third and fourth portion) to about two-thirds the distance of the transverse colon and the hindgut consists of the distal one-third colon to the anus. This is important to remember when it comes to lesions and pathology throughout the colon, as this will help decide future surgical planning, especially with the colon. The part of our gastrointestinal system after the stomach is divided into the small and the large intestine. Going from proximal to distal, the small intestine is further divided into the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. The ileum ends at the ileocecal valve, which opens into the first part of the large intestine. This is called the cecum, which is a pouch-like structure and further continues as ascending colon, followed by the transverse, descending, and the sigmoid colon. The colon opens into the rectum, which terminates as the anal canal. The total distance from the anus to the cecum varies from male to female but can be generalized at around 120 cm to 160 cm. The ascending colon, hepatic flexure, and transverse colon constitute the right colon, whereas the descending colon, splenic flexure, and sigmoid make the left colon. As a general rule of thumb, the diameter of the cecum, transverse colon, and descending colon are 9 cm, 6 cm, and 3 cm, respectively. This is important to remember when navigating through a colonoscopy and identifying the location within the colon.

There are two primary arteries that supply the colon with blood, the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). The SMA and IMA further branch into several other arteries that supply different components of the colon (Media 1 and 2). The small intestines, cecum, ascending colon, and proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon are supplied by the SMA, while the distal one-third, descending colon, sigmoid colon, and proximal rectum are all supplied by the IMA. Again, this is important to know when surgical intervention is required, and appropriate anatomic resections are considered.

The colon, like the small intestine, is made up of various layers (from intraluminal to extraluminal):

- Mucosa

- Submucosa

- Muscularis

- Serosa

While there are several particular notable differences between the large and small intestines, one important difference between the two is the organization of the muscularis layers. The muscularis layer is composed of circular muscle fibers and longitudinal muscle fibers. Unlike the small intestine, where these fibers run throughout the intestinal wall, the longitudinal layer is clustered into three bandlike structures called the taenia coli. In addition, the colon contains outpouchings call haustra. This can be important to remember when performing a colonoscopy as these haustra do make folds throughout the colon that can harbor polyps easily missed if not properly visualized.

The length and diameter of the colon are important when it comes to colonoscopies. The estimated lengths are listed below:

- Anal canal: 4 cm

- Rectum: 15 cm

- Sigmoid colon: 50 cm

- Descending colon: 10 cm

- Transverse colon: 50 cm

- Ascending colon 10 cm

- Cecum: 5 cm

Despite generalized estimates of length, it is the various landmarks and differences in colonic caliber, color tones, vasculature, and anatomy that helps direct location, as the colonoscope can loop on itself and not provide an accurate length measurement.