Many additional factors can get in the way of effective communication with a two-way communication process and they can inhibit “active listening.” The delivery of a sender’s message is just as important as the content of the message. The tone of a message can be misinterpreted very easily, which is why a feedback mechanism is necessary. Verbal communication is written or oral and contains an underlying tone that can have a dramatic outcome on the receiver’s interpretation of the message. This can lead to many conflicts not only in the workplace but also with the patients being cared for. In the operating room, answers are usually required to be very brief and contain the most accurate information but the tone with which that information is delivered is important as well. The tone of the information or feelings behind the words of the sender can cause misunderstandings and miscommunications. The written form of verbal communication can create more negative feelings because of an implied tone compared to communication that takes place face-to-face, which tends to be more straightforward. It is easy to misinterpret a tone simply from the written words; this happens many times in the surgical environment because teams are detailed, task-oriented, and state their messages to only reflect the information wanting to be delivered. Pleasantries are usually left out.

Another factor is nonverbal communication, which includes body language, touch, and silence. The body language applies to both the sender and the receiver; either party can exhibit good or poor body language. A person’s body language can show their true emotions on the subject matter even when their words may be saying something different. Some body language examples include walking abruptly away after receiving or giving information, rolling of the eyes, sighing, shaking heads, lacking eye contact, placing hands on hips, and having a rigid posture. Touch can be used to express empathy or control. In most instances, the action seems innocent but some may find it unacceptable. Personal boundaries must always be adhered to for team members and patients. Finally, silence sends a strong message that may indicate the person is contemplating the message. The message may have left them speechless or in total shock which, in turn, rendered them speechless. During this time, it is important to allow the person to process the message and to give them time to contemplate a response. Dead space does not always need to be filled with idle chatter.