The most important piece of historical information that the physician should obtain is the time of symptoms onset or time last seen normal.  This is critical because it determines the eligibility to receive rtPA or endovascular intervention for stroke.

The stroke exam is a multi-person coordinated rapid exam.  While staff obtain vitals, attach telemetry, and obtain IV access, the physician performs rapid neurological evaluation.  National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) is routinely used to get the baseline evaluation. The exam has to be rapid as “time is brain.”  One must examine the following items:

- The level of consciousness (alert and responsive, arouses to noxious stimuli, comatose…)

- Language (fluency, naming, comprehension, repetition)

- Dysarthria (slurring) which may be picked up in the history

- Motor (subtle arm weakness can be picked up by performing a pronator drift)

- Visual field deficits

- Eye movement abnormalities (in general if a gaze preference is present, the eyes deviate towards the side of the lesion)

- Facial paralysis (asking the patient to smile)

- Ataxia (finger to nose)

With a good history and physical exam, we can localize the stroke. There are various stroke syndromes.

**Anterior Cerebral Artery (ACA) Infarction**

There is significant collateral blood supply in the anterior circulating artery territory. So, pure ACA strokes are rare. The ACA distribution involves mainly Broca’s area, primary motor, primary sensory and pre-frontal cortex. So patients present with motor aphasia, personality issues, and contralateral leg weakness and numbness. Hand and face are usually spared.

**Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA) Infarction**

The middle cerebral artery has the main trunk (M1) and it divides into two M2 Branches. The M1 (horizontal branch) supplies the basal ganglia and M2 (Sylvian branches) supplies part of the parietal, frontal and temporal lobes. As MCA supplies a wide territory it is extremely important to rule out MCA occlusion. The MCA syndrome causes contralateral arm and face numbness and weakness, gaze deviation towards the affected side. Aphasia in the left-sided lesions and neglect in the right-sided lesions.

**Posterior Cerebral Artery (PCA) Infarction**

The posterior cerebral artery mainly supplies occipital lobe, thalamus and some portion of the temporal lobe. The classic presentation of posterior cerebral artery stroke is homonymous hemianopsia. Apart from this hypersomnolence, cognitive issues, the hemisensory loss can be seen when the deep PCA is involved. Some times there is bilateral infarction of distal PCAs producing cortical blindness and the patient is unaware of the blindness and denies it. This is called Anton-Babinski syndrome.

**Cerebellar Infarction**

The patients with cerebellar strokes present with ataxia, dysarthria, nausea, vomiting, and vertigo.