The past two decades have seen the development of many community education-based campaigns to educate the public about opioids. Estimates are that these community preventive programs have averted over 10,000 opioid overdoses. Further, a more recent pilot study reveals that an individual who has received overdose education versus those receiving overdose education in addition to naloxone rescue kits do not differ in overdose rate, opioid use, or response to witnessed overdoses, indicating the usefulness of training regarding opiate overdose.

Unfortunately, the majority of opioid campaigns and education awareness programs are in urban areas, and similar campaigns must be started in rural areas, where the majority of opioid overdoses occur, to make any significant impact.

Even though making naloxone available as an over-the-counter drug is a useful, practical idea, there remain concerns as to who will administer it and how it will be used. Firstly, there is concern that the opioid abuser who may want to self-administer naloxone may not be able to understand the instructions for use, which can potentially lead to misuse of the drug. The second issue pertains to the rapid onset of moderate to severe withdrawal symptoms. In many cases, the intensity of the withdrawal symptoms can be serious and warrant immediate medical attention. Thus, an individual who has overdosed on an opioid may not be able to seek the necessary medical assistance because of impaired judgment, despite the use of naloxone.

Today, both the pharmacist and nurse have been educating the public at large about the consequences of opiate overdose and its management. Nurses have already been offering education in schools, colleges, and the workplace on the signs and symptoms of opiate overdose and when there is an indication for naloxone. More important, pharmacists are now educating the public who obtain narcotic prescriptions on the benefits of having naloxone in the home.

**Outcomes**

Naloxone has been in use in the United States for more than 50 years. It has treated more than 10,000 opioid-related overdoses during that period. Unfortunately, despite its well-proven benefits and safety, the use of NAS naloxone and its availability is not universally accepted in all states. Distributors of naloxone have been reluctant to provide the drug to non-healthcare workers for fear of criminal liability. Plus, there is also a risk of developing withdrawal reactions following naloxone administration. Despite these concerns, naloxone is now quickly gaining acceptance in mainstream American society as a necessity, and the passage of the good samaritan laws has made it readily available as an over-the-counter drug.

While naloxone can reverse an opioid overdose, there is little evidence to suggest that it can prevent the use of illicit drug use. Thus, experts in addiction also recommend education and creating awareness among the public about these drugs and the harm they can cause.