There are 3 types of anthrax infections which include inhalational, GI, and cutaneous. The 3 forms of the disease emerge based on the organism’s mode of entry into the host. In GI anthrax, the spore is consumed, and symptoms emerge after 1 to 6 days of incubation. Anthrax then adheres to the gastrointestinal epithelium where it germinates and creates superficial ulcerations visible on endoscopic examination. This differs from hematogenously disseminated inhalation anthrax where the ulcerations begin submucosally. However, vegetative cells can migrate into the bloodstream from these superficial ulcerations where they can rapidly multiply creating septicemia and progression to severe symptoms. In a minority of patients, they may be entirely asymptomatic. While others may develop fulminant upper and lower GI bleeding, septicemia, and death. Survival provides patients with some natural immunity. In the United States, GI anthrax has not been reported. However, there are 1 to 2 cases annually of cutaneous anthrax.

Similarly, cutaneous anthrax has an incubation period of 1 to 5 days. Clinically, it appears as a papule that progresses to form a large vesicle. The lesion becomes edematous secondary to the release of the exotoxin, and the patient develops associated regional lymphadenitis. Roughly a week later, the lesions rupture, and an eschar develops. While impressive in appearance, the skin lesions are described as non-tender and painless. Over the next couple of weeks, the eschar sloughs off and the patient either has a resolution of illness or develops signs of disseminated disease. If this occurs, untreated mortality is less than 20%. However, treatment with antibiotics decreases the risk of dissemination and death.

Inhalation anthrax is the most lethal of the three types of exposures. Once inhaled the organism is phagocytized by macrophages, the spores germinate within the tracheobronchial lymph nodes and multiply. During an incubation period of 2 to 10 days, the patient develops influenza-like symptoms with malaise, fever, and nonproductive cough. It is important to note that the presentation can be delayed for more than 1 month. Patients can also demonstrate abrupt deterioration and develop shock, hemorrhagic mediastinitis, and airway compromise. Death usually results within 72 hours after symptoms start with an estimated mortality of 50%.