A cramp is a painful contraction of a short duration and can be distinguished from other muscle contractions. Dystonia is a non-painful contraction of central origin, and myotonia is a protracted non-painful contraction as in the case of myotonic dystrophy and dystrophy of Thomsen. Tetany can be painful but seldom involves only one muscle area, like Camurati-Engelmann disease, anorexia nervosa (Russell sign), or in case of hypocalcemia. Myalgias are muscular pains not necessarily accompanied by contraction for several reasons, such as vitamin D hypovitaminosis, drug abuse, or spastic hypertonia following central nervous lesions. Muscle pain in the lower limbs during walking or intermittent claudication is a symptom of peripheral vascular stenosis. In these cases, the cramp could appear if the patient continues to walk. The syndrome of the legs without rest are involuntary contractions of the lower limbs which do not cause cramps, but only soreness and muscular tiredness when the contractile activity ceases. Similar contractions also could be symptoms of Parkinsonism.

A cramp is not a trigger point. The latter can be acute or latent and described in different modes. According to recent research, a referred pain of a small area and a hypersensitive spot can be defined as a taut band. Another important factor is that the trigger point does not necessarily create pain; it can give local or extended sensory disturbances, tingling, a burning sensation, and a dull ache.

For a further differential diagnosis between a cramp of a physiological condition and a cramp in the presence of pathology, the simplest examination is electromyography. More detailed tests such as magnetic resonance imaging or CT scan can identify any neurological lesions.

Another observational evaluation to understand if a cramp is benign is if the localized musculature developed a morphological anomaly: hypertrophy or atrophy. Weakness is another sign that could lead one to suppose that the cramp is a symptom and not an isolated event. If there is a wind phenomenon, further muscle contraction is caused by very light afferents.

When in doubt, blood tests can be performed to look for myoglobinuria, and if there is hyperkalemia (greater than 2 to 3 times standard). The literature emphasizes that muscle biopsy examinations also can be performed to highlight cellular changes, such as atrophy or phenotypic changes.

For the disorder nocturnal leg cramps (NLC) there are seven differential symptoms to compare with other sleep-related diseases: intense pain, a maximum period of 10 minutes of the presence of the cramp, areas located as a calf or foot and with less frequency to the thigh (quadriceps and ischiocrural muscle), soreness that persists after the disappearance of the cramp, alteration of the sleep cycle, and consequent stress.