- Food allergy. In children, Frey syndrome can present during early infancy at the same time as food diversification and be mistaken for food allergies. It can be distinguished from allergies predominantly if there is rapid onset after a meal compared with allergy reactions, specific food triggers (sweet and sour) unrelated to common food allergens, rapid recovery without allergy treatment, symptoms localized to the parotid region, and absence of other atopic symptoms. Frey syndrome should also be suspected if there is a history of instrumentation during delivery.

- Hyperhidrosis. Primary hyperhidrosis is an autonomic disorder that affects 0.6-1% of the population.

- Emotional sweating is activated by emotional stimuli and affects primarily the palms, soles, and sometimes the axilla. It does not occur when the patient is sleeping or sedated.

- Compensatory hyperhidrosis is a sequela of thoracic sympathectomy. Sympathectomy is used to treat primary hyperhidrosis but can disrupt the thermoregulatory function of the sympathetic nervous system; this results in uncontrolled sweating in untreated areas, usually below the level of the sympathectomy.

- Gustatory tearing (also known as crocodile tears or Bogorad's syndrome) presents with unilateral tearing in response to gustatory stimuli. It is commonly associated with recovery from facial paralysis, Duane syndrome, and trauma. It is theorized that damage to facial and glossopharyngeal nerve fibers leads to aberrant nerve regeneration of the postganglionic parasympathetic secretomotor nerve fibers along the greater superficial petrosal nerve, which sends branches to the lacrimal gland. Treatment involves subtotal lacrimal gland excision, anticholinergics, transection of the facial or glossopharyngeal nerves, injection of alcohol to the sphenopalatine ganglion, or botulinum toxin injection into the lacrimal gland.

- Gustatory rhinorrhea has a similar etiology to gustatory tearing. After trauma, the postganglionic parasympathetic secretomotor fibers that innervate the parotid gland undergo aberrant regeneration and grow along the greater superficial petrosal nerve and Vidian nerve, which innervates not only the lacrimal glands but also the glands of the nasal and palatine mucosa. This results in patients presenting with unilateral rhinorrhea in response to gustatory stimuli.

- First bite syndrome is yet another nerve injury syndrome in which damaged postganglionic sympathetic fibers cannot modulate parasympathetic-mediated supramaximal myoepithelial cell contraction, which can cause pain with eating and drinking; the pain is typically most noticeable at the beginning of a meal and fades rapidly after that. First bite syndrome is most commonly seen following parotid and parapharyngeal surgery but may occur in carotid endarterectomy and face lifting as well.