**Isolated Teres Major Tears**

Tears of the teres major are rare and can be either acute or chronic. Patients often present with a sudden onset, sharp pain in the shoulder, proximal upper extremity, and axilla. The pain is exacerbated with physical activity and any activities in which the hand is placed posterior to the back. There will often be swelling and ecchymosis in the inferior posterior axilla. On a physical exam, there may be point tenderness to palpation over the area of the teres major. Additionally, the patient may present with weakness in extension, adduction, and internal rotation of the humerus secondary to their injury.

**Combined Tears**

Injuries to the teres major can either be isolated or combined. Combined tears affect the teres major in addition to the latissimus dorsi. These muscles are often injured together due to their tendons joining at their common insertion point at the lip of the intertubercular groove of the humerus. These combined tears occur similarly to isolated tears and most often occur in young athletes, especially overhead athletes such as baseball pitchers.

The combined tear often presents as acute pain in the upper arm and posterior axilla with tenderness to palpation along the teres major and the latissimus dorsi. On visual inspection, ecchymosis is often present, along with slight asymmetry. The best imaging technique for assessing the injury is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These combined tears are often treated nonoperatively with rest, physical therapy, and oral anti-inflammatories.

**Strain**

Strains of the teres major are also rare but may occur in sporting activities or trauma. Not warming up before exercise is a risk factor for a teres major strain. Motor vehicle accidents and falling onto the lateral border of the scapula have also been implicated in this pathology.

On physical exam, a jump sign may be elicited, which is characterized as an involuntary withdrawal of the muscle with passive internal rotation of the shoulder. The extent of the strain and differentiation from a tear can be further evaluated on a large field view magnetic resonance imaging using a specific protocol to visualize bilateral shoulder girdles. The incidence of teres major injuries may be underreported given that the majority of these injuries cause only minor disability and, therefore, may not be reported or evaluated.