# Continuing Education Activity

High-pressure nervous syndrome or high-pressure neurological syndrome (HPNS) is characterized by neurological, psychological, and electroencephalographic (EEG) abnormalities that are noted during dives deeper than 150 meters that involve breathing helium-oxygen gas mixtures. Signs and symptoms depend on the speed of compression and the hydrostatic pressure attained; the faster the rate of compression rate and the higher the pressure, the more severe the clinical presentation will be. Thus, HPNS is one of the significant limitations of deep diving. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of HPNS and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review high-pressure neurological syndrome.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with high-pressure neurological syndrome.
- Explain management considerations for patients with high-pressure neurological syndrome.

- Identify examples of the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to provide optimal care to patients with high-pressure neurological syndrome.

# Introduction

High-pressure nervous syndrome or high-pressure neurological syndrome (HPNS) is characterized by neurological, psychological, and electroencephalographic (EEG) abnormalities during dives deeper than 150 meters with breathing helium-oxygen gas mixtures. The term “neurological” has been used, preferably

# Etiology

HPNS is thought to result from the increased atmospheric pressure on the central nervous system (CNS), which leads to hyperexcitability of the CNS.N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors giving some hope of future research providing ways of ameliorating the condition.

# Epidemiology

There is no reported epidemiological data about HPNS in the literature.

# Pathophysiology

Although the underlying mechanism has not been proved yet, several theories about HPNS pathophysiology exist.

One of the general assumptions is about the compression effect of pressure, possibly in the lipid component of cell membranes of the CNS.

The roles of neurotransmitters in the pathogenesis of HPNS have also been studied, for example, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), dopamine, serotonin (5-HT), acetylcholine, and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA).

Also, alterations in neuronal calcium ions are another mechanism that has been postulated for HPNS pathophysiology.

On the other hand, intraspecies and interspecies variations of HPNS exist. Some individuals are more susceptible to HPNS than others.

# History and Physical

HPNS is mainly characterized by hyperexcitability of the central nervous system (CNS) that involves neurological, and psychological abnormalities, showing changes in EEG recordings. HPNS should be differentiated from nitrogen narcosis, decompression sickness, and oxygen toxicity.

Tremor, the most characteristic symptom of HPNS, occurs at rest and on movement. Tremors begin at the distal extremities and may spread to the whole body. The frequency of tremors is 8 to 12 Hz.

Clinical presentation may be influenced by breathing gas mixture components, compression rates, and the hydrostatic pressure attained. For instance, adding a certain amount of nitrogen or hydrogen into the helium-oxygen breathing gas mixture ameliorates the signs and symptoms of HPNS.

# Evaluation

In the experimental dives, several monitoring tests were applied during compression to subjects to evaluate their neuropsychological, neurophysiological, and performance responses. Vaernes et al. used a static steadiness test for postural tremors in hands, a finger oscillation test, a dynamometer for handgrip strength, trails test for visuomotor, and coordination.

EEG recordings were also evaluated in several studies. An increase in theta activity and a decrease in alpha waves were demonstrated in the EEG records of divers who suffered from high-pressure neurological syndrome (HPNS).

# Treatment / Management

HPNS is a significant limitation for deep dives.

**Reduction of the Speed of Compression**

Slowing the overall speed of compression or inserting stops during compression to allow for acclimatization can improve or even prevent the symptoms of HPNS.

**Modification in the Breathing Gas Mixture**

Nitrogen has been used to oppose some of the HPNS symptoms due to its narcotic effect.

**Drugs**

In general, there is no pharmacologic treatment for HPNS although anesthetics, barbiturates, and anticonvulsants have been studied to prevent the clinical manifestations of HPNS.

**Diver Selection**

Selecting the least susceptible diver may be another solution.

Some issues have been discussed in controlling HPNS. First, these approaches may be effective only in some manifestations. This may create a new problem where the first signs of HPNS may be more severe. Secondly, delaying the development of HPNS in baboons may cause new symptoms which can involve brain damage. Finally, there might be a risk of symptom-free development of pressure-related tissue injury, which may cause long-term injuries.

# Differential Diagnosis

High pressure is the most challenging issue of human physiology during deep diving. Nevertheless, the high concentration of gases, increased density of the matter, and alteration of the regular properties of heat, sound, and others may also cause neurological signs without being properly HPNS

# Prognosis

The clinical manifestations persist but tend to ameliorate at constant pressure with time.

# Complications

All of the divers who experience only HPNS heal.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Professional diver education should include diving-related diseases, preventive measures, and breathing gas properties. Divers should choose the safest diving protocol, such as a slow compression rate and appropriate breathing gas mixture. The safety rules are the golden prevention methods for diving-related diseases. Thus, medical professionals should also be careful during fitness-to-dive examinations of professional divers in terms of psychological eligibility. Safe diving requires educated divers who obey the rules strictly.

# Pearls and Other Issues

HPNS is one of the major limitations of deep diving. Unfortunately, no drug has been used successfully to prevent HPNS in humans. In general, modifications on breathing gas mixtures and compression profiles and selecting less susceptible divers may be partially beneficial for controlling HPNS. However, these methods are still inadequate for extremely deep dives regarding HPNS. Further studies about HPNS pathophysiology, prevention, and adaptation mechanisms should be performed to widen borders in modern diving for humans.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

HPNS is a significant consequence of modern deep diving. There are several preventive approaches. These approaches should be considered carefully by divers and diving supervisors. In this regard, diving protocols may be designed in tandem with diving experts. Diving supervisors should record any abnormal symptoms or signs during deep dives and consult with a diving expert. The symptoms usually ease after decompression, but some of the symptoms, such as lethargy, may continue for a while.

An interprofessional team, including neurologists, undersea specialists, hyperbaric nurses, and occupational medicine physicians and nurses, are best suited to caring for and preventing HPNS. Initial evaluation by emergency department personnel is crucial. Intensive care and neuroscience nurses care for patients, educate families about the condition, and relay updates to the rest of the team. [Level 5]