The history will include symptoms related to estrogen deficiency. The obvious symptom is the cessation of menses typically heralded by changes in the menstrual cycle.

**Vasomotor Symptoms**

Approximately, 75% of women experience vasomotor symptoms. These symptoms include hot flashes, night sweats, palpitations, and migraines. Hot flashes often last approximately three to four minutes at unpredictable intervals. They may be worsened by alcohol, eating, emotional stress, and exertion. Migraines may change in intensity and severity. Migraines without aura are more common than migraines with aura. Migraines with aura have an increased risk of stroke, especially if women smoke or use oral contraceptives. Other types of headaches such as cluster and tension headaches may also increase with a change in hormone levels.

**Urogenital Symptoms**

Approximately 60% of women experience urogenital symptoms. These symptoms include vaginal atrophy, urethral atrophy, and sexual dysfunction (i.e., a decline in libido).  Vaginal atrophy results in dryness, pruritus, and dyspareunia (painful intercourse). Urethral atrophy results in stress incontinence, frequency, urgency, and dysuria.

**Psychogenic Symptoms**

Approximately 45% of women experience psychogenic symptoms. These symptoms include anger/irritability, anxiety/tension, depression, sleep disturbance, loss of concentration, and loss of self-esteem/confidence.

**Physical Examination**

Should include measurement of blood pressure, weight and height, breast palpation, vaginal examination, and Pap smear.

- Blood Pressure: Elevated blood pressure may be noted resulting from arterial vasoconstriction.

- Weight and Height: Weight gain may be noted, as many women report some degree of weight gain during menopause. The North American Menopause Society stated women gained an average of five pounds over the menopause transitional period. Additionally, a decrease in height may be noted, associated with osteoporosis and spine fractures.

- Breast and vagina: Breast palpation usually notes decreased breast size. The vaginal examination notes vaginal dryness and urogenital atrophy. Abnormal uterine bleeding is an indication to perform a pap smear.