The primary goal of the therapy is to create an environment conducive to the migration and proliferation of regenerating epithelial cells. Multiple factors influence the treatment regimen, including concurrent condition, overall systemic status, prior medication use, and response to therapy. If an underlying infiltrate is noticed, aggressive measures to address the infectious element must be taken. The priority is to control the infectious process from progressing to corneal melt or perforation.

A step-by-step approach is used to manage PEDs, beginning with conservative treatment and progressing to more aggressive options if refractory. The first and most crucial step is to determine the potential etiological factor. Next, the underlying condition must be targeted for local treatment to be effective, such as nerve growth factor for neurotrophic keratopathy, metabolic control in diabetic keratopathy, medication withdrawal in iatrogenic causes, and limbal stem cell transplant for limbal stem cell deficiency.

The standard medical treatment protocol begins with aggressive lubrication using preservative-free artificial tears and sterile ocular ointments.

The next step in the treatment of PED is the insertion of punctal plugs for temporary or permanent occlusion. They increase the retention of lubricants, which supplements normal corneal healing. The retention allows greater availability of growth factors such as EGF, TGF-β, FGF, HGF, fibronectin, calcitonin gene-related peptide, vitamin A and C. Any toxic ocular medication must be stopped before using punctal plugs. Commercially available are silicone and collagen plugs.

Bandage soft contact lenses (BCL) help protect the damaged epithelium from erosion by eyelid blinking, thus aiding re-epithelialization. Secondary infection should be avoided using topical broad-spectrum antibiotics in conjunction with preservative-free artificial tears, particularly neurotrophic keratitis.

Oral tetracyclines are beneficial due to their anti-collagenase activity, which inhibits matrix metalloproteinases from inflammatory mediators and promotes healing. The use of topical corticosteroids is debatable due to the increased risk of infection, tissue destruction, and stromal melting.

In cases where medical management has failed, surgical interventions such as debridement and tarsorrhaphy can be beneficial.

**Treatment of Refractory Cases**

Patients who do not respond to the modalities discussed above are labeled as refractory cases. Amniotic membrane grafting or transplant (AMT) is effective in refractory cases by providing a scaffold for re-epithelialization, anti-inflammatory properties, and decreasing vascularization and scarring.

One potential treatment is the use of autologous serum eye drops (ASE), prepared by centrifuging the patient's serum and diluting it in concentrations of 20%, 50%, and even 100%. Its role in PED healing is attributed to several serum constituents that contribute to multiple steps in the healing process, such as vitamin A, E, EGF, PDGF, TGF-β, nerve growth factor, and insulin-like growth factor. Patients with systemic illness, poor general health, active infection, or diseases with high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the serum are not good candidates for ASE. In such cases, alternative whole-blood derivatives such as umbilical cord blood serum (CBS) tears and platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) tears can be used. Despite promising results, whole-blood-derived products pose a significant challenge due to transportation risks and high supply costs.

A new scleral contact lens, also known as the Prosthetic Replacement of the Ocular Surface Ecosystem (PROSE), has shown promising results.

**Novel Therapies**

Thymosinβ4 is an amino-acid peptide that inhibits the synthesis of transcription factors mediating inflammation.

Topical fibronectin may be beneficial because it is known to promote cellular adhesions in wound healing. However, conflicting reports about its benefits in PED have limited its clinical use.