**Transabdominal (TA)**

The transabdominal technique usually consists of midline sagittal and parasagittal images angled from midline to the periphery of both hemipelves. Transverse plane images start at midline overlying the bladder and angle superiorly and inferiorly to image the pelvis. If there is limited fluid within the bladder, especially in young children, the transducer can be placed over the lateral aspect of the bladder and directed to the contralateral side for imaging. This helps provide a larger amount of fluid for the US beam to traverse and a better working acoustic window.

**Transvaginal (TV)**

TV scans use elongated transducers with higher frequency elements in the range of 7 MHz to 8 MHz, when compared to those used for routine TA imaging (near 3.5 MHz). The transducer is placed into the mid to upper vagina (covered by a condom) to obtain coronal and sagittal views that allow for high-resolution imaging of the uterus and its contents, helpful in obstetrical imaging as well as the analysis of the ovaries and adnexa. With its introduction in the late 1980s, TV US revolutionized the analysis for the presence or absence of ectopic pregnancy. The higher frequency TV transducer can be used because there is no need to traverse a fluid-filled bladder or anterior abdominal wall fat.

**Other Techniques**

Postprocessing software is available for many US machines, which allow three-dimensional reconstruction of typical greyscale ultrasound images to create a surface and volumetric images. This method has been used to reconstruct the vagina, cervix, and uterus for Mullerian Duct system anomalies.

At times the vagina and uterus may be evaluated by transperineal imaging, the placement of a transducer on the labia in the longitudinal or transverse plane.  This has allowed analysis of vaginal obstructions, especially in virginal patients. It has been used for placenta previa analysis when the use of an intravaginal probe is deferred.

**Doppler**

Whether routine color Doppler or power Doppler imaging is used, cystic structures can be analyzed for their degree of vascularity. Color Doppler readily displays iliac vessel flow often in a plane posterior to the ovaries. Spectral Doppler can be utilized to evaluate vessels for abnormalities in venous or arterial flow signals. Pseudoaneurysms, although not typical in the pelvis when compared to the groin, might display the typical neck of the lesion with yin-yang color flow pattern. When evaluating for the presence or degree of vascular flow, power Doppler can also be utilized in situations for which color Doppler may be suboptimal (very low or slow flow).

Color Doppler can reveal dilated or clotted gonadal veins. It can also be used to demonstrate vascular flow to the ovary. However, due to the dual blood supply of the ovary, and the known findings of peripheral and central vascular flow in surgically proven torsed ovaries, the usefulness of color Doppler is limited. The greyscale morphologic findings of the ovary for the diagnosis of torsion are more sensitive than the flow-related findings seen with color Doppler. For the evaluation of testicular torsion, color Doppler is diagnostic.