Varying prevalence and incidence rates of SLE have been reported, with differences mainly attributed to the population differences. The Georgia and Michigan lupus registries reported prevalence of 72.1 to 74.4 per 100,000 persons and incidence rates of 5.6 per 100,000 person-years in primarily Caucasian and African-American populations. African-Americans have the highest rates, which are higher among Asian and Hispanic populations than Caucasians. The disease tends to have an earlier age of onset and is more severe in African-Americans.

SLE predominantly affects women of childbearing age, with a female to male ratio of 9 to 1. The risk, however, decreases after menopause in women, although still is twice as compared to men. Studies have indicated that although rare, lupus in men tends to be more severe. In addition, men tend to have more frequent skin manifestations, cytopenias, renal disease, serositis, neurologic involvement, thrombosis, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, and vasculitis than women.

Age also plays a vital role in SLE, and although the disease is more common in childbearing age in women, it has been well reported in the pediatric and elderly population. SLE is more severe in children SLE in children tends to be more severe than in adults, with a high incidence of malar rashes, nephritis, pericarditis, hematologic abnormalities, and hepatosplenomegaly. However, it tends to have a more insidious onset in older people and has more pulmonary involvement and serositis and less Raynaud's, malar rash, nephritis, and neuropsychiatric complications.