Neuropsychiatric events have been reported in patients receiving montelukast. These events have been noted in adults, teenagers, and younger patients. They include, among others: anxiety, depression, aggressiveness, agitation, attention and memory impairment, sleeping disorders (insomnia, somnambulism, dream anomalies), seizures, paresthesia, hypoesthesia, as well as suicidal thoughts and behavior.

During treatment with montelukast, some patients with asthma may develop systemic eosinophilia, sometimes associated with vasculitis, consistent with Churg-Strauss syndrome (rare). This event may be associated with a decrease in oral corticosteroid doses. However, montelukast is the causative agent of these systemic manifestations has not been established.

Other adverse effects of montelukast include (among others):

- Headaches, fever, fatigue

- Upper respiratory signs (rhinorrhea, pharyngitis, laryngitis, sinusitis, epistaxis)

- Auricular signs: otitis

- Lower respiratory signs: a cough, pneumonia, wheezing

- Ocular signs: conjunctivitis

- Gastrointestinal signs (nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, pancreatitis). Some of these may be secondary to lactose that is compounded with montelukast.

- Infections (influenza, varicella)

- Dermatologic manifestations (pruritus, eczema, atopic dermatitis, angioedema, urticaria, skin rash, bruising, erythema multiforme, erythema nodosum, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome)

- Musculoskeletal signs: Arthralgia, myalgia

- Hypersensitivity manifestations: anaphylaxis, eosinophilic infiltration of the liver

- Hepatotoxicity: In clinical trials, mild elevations in serum aminotransferase levels were found in 1% to 2% of patients taking montelukast chronically, but similar rates are reported in matched placebo recipients. The enzyme elevation pattern is usually mixed, including hepatocellular and cholestatic patterns. Allergic features and autoantibody formation were rare. The injury is usually resolved within 1 to 4 months of stopping the drug. Likelihood score: B (rare but likely cause of clinically apparent liver injury).