**Goiter:**It is a condition where the thyroid gland shows an abnormal enlargement. Goiters are broadly classified into uni-nodular, multinodular, and diffuse types. Each further includes many different types of goiters. Some of the commonest with some of their important features are described below.

**Colloid nodular goiter:**This is the commonest of the non-neoplastic lesions of the thyroid.

**Hyperthyroidism (Thyrotoxicosis):**It is a condition of hypermetabolic state and hyperfunctioning of the thyroid gland resulting in increased T3 and T4 levels. Some symptoms included palpitations, tachycardia, nervousness, etc.

**Graves disease:**This disease is a combination of thyrotoxicosis, exophthalmos, and dermopathy (myxedema). It is especially seen in women in the age group of 20 to 40 years, manifesting in the form of prolonged and violent palpitations.

**Hypothyroidism:**This condition develops due to any functional and structural derangement that leads to decreased thyroid hormone production. This condition clinically manifests as cretinism in infants and myxoedema in adults. Cretinism patients present themselves as short-statured, with coarse facial features, mental retardation, protruding tongue, etc.

**Thyroid cancer**: Thyroid carcinomas arise either from the follicular epithelium or parafollicular C-cells. They are painless nodules and compression, displacing the adjacent structures. The carcinomas of the thyroid can manifest in the form of papillary carcinoma, follicular carcinoma, anaplastic carcinoma, and medullary carcinoma.