Arthrocentesis is both a therapeutic and diagnostic procedure. It can be performed for pain relief from the drainage of large effusions, injection of medications, or to obtain a synovial fluid for testing. Learning an appropriate technique specific to the joint minimizes the risk of complications.

While history and physical exams are helpful adjuncts, the analysis of synovial fluid has the highest effect on the diagnosis of septic arthritis. The likelihood and sensitivity for the diagnosis of septic arthritis are as follows:

- White blood cell count (WBC) of more than 100,000 microliters (positive likelihood ratio 28, sensitivity 13-40)

- WBC more than 50,000 (positive likelihood ratio 7.7, sensitivity 50-70)

- WBC more than 25,000 (positive likelihood ratio 2.9, sensitivity 63-88)

- PMN more than 90% (positive likelihood ratio 3.4, sensitivity 57-92)

- Low glucose (positive likelihood ratio 3.4, sensitivity 38-64)

- Protein more than 3 g/dL (positive likelihood ratio 0.90, sensitivity 48-50)

- Lactate dehydrogenase level (LDH) more than 250 units/L (positive likelihood ratio 1.9, sensitivity 100)

Synovial fluid analysis showing elevated WBC count or a high percentage of polymorphonuclear cells significantly increases the likelihood of a diagnosis of septic arthritis resulting in orthopedic consultation, antibiotic therapy, and admission.Staphylococcus aureus. There is no organism identified in up to 40% of cases, possibly secondary to an inadequate amount of synovial fluid for analysis.

Crystalline arthropathy affects the wrist joint frequently. The presence of crystals in synovial fluid does not rule out septic arthritis. The type of crystal formation can help differentiate between inflammatory joint disease. In gout, synovial fluid is positive for negatively birefringent urate crystals, whereas pseudogout shows positively birefringent calcium pyrophosphate crystals.