Any dressing, splint, cast, tourniquet, or other restrictive covering should be removed for a limb at risk for ACS. The limb should be placed at the heart level to avoid both reductions in arterial flow and dependent swelling. Frequent neurocirculatory checks should be performed every few hours in a limb in with suspected ACS. There are three stages of progression to ACS- ‘suspected,’ ‘impending,’ and ‘established.’ Confirmed (‘established’) cases with symptomatology and abnormal manometrics demand immediate surgical decompression with fasciotomy. However, patients may present with equivocal signs and symptoms and uncertain manometrics. These patients are categorized as ‘suspected.’ Progression of ACS from the ‘suspected stage’ to ‘impending stage’ is based on the worsening of the clinical findings (5’Ps’) and/or intermediate compartment pressure measurements. In the ‘impending stage,’ hyperbaric oxygen (HBOT) therapy can be implemented to prevent possible progression to the ‘established stage.’ The typical treatment regimen consists of 3 HBOT treatments at 2.5 Atm for 90-120 minutes (twice daily on day one, single treatment on day two). However, the use of HBOT should never delay fasciotomy if a patient has progressed to ‘established’ ACS based on manometric confirmation and/or severe symptoms. When fasciotomy is performed, HBO2 can be applied for various post-fasciotomy complications, including ischemic muscle, unclear demarcation of viable and non-viable muscle, massive swelling, prolonged ischemia (>six hours), vascular compromise of flap or graft, and residual neuropathy. HBOT has been shown to increase tissue oxygenation 20 fold. HBOT increases tissue ATP and NADPH oxidase, promoting wound healing by encouraging vascular growth and collagen formation. NADPH also assists in the killing of bacteria by super peroxidation. The three main efficacies of HBOT are to reduce edema, increase tissue oxygenation, and reduce post-reperfusion injury. However, to date, no large scale meta-analysis has been done on the use of HBOT in crush injury and ACS. HBOT is listed as an approved use for ACS from crush injury by the Undersea & Hyperbaric Medical Society(UHMS), but no large concordant double-blind RCTs exist on its use. The European Committee for Hyperbaric Medicine gave HBOT a Grade B recommendation (moderate level of evidence) for open fractures with crush injury, and only a Grade C (low level of evidence) for crush injury without fracture.