Though many factors contribute to obstructive sleep apnea, changes in respiratory dynamics during sleep are the principal essence of the disorder which are influenced by multiple factors. During sleep, there is decreased tonic activity of the laryngeal, supraglottic, oropharyngeal, nasopharyngeal, and lingual musculature, which results in dynamic collapse with respiration.

Obstruction during sleep can occur at various sites within the upper airway. These include the nasal cavity, the nasopharynx, the oropharynx, the base of the tongue, and the laryngeal complex. A patient may have one primary site of obstruction; however, many patients have an obstruction at multiple levels. A thorough evaluation and examination are essential to properly identify the most likely sites of obstruction so that treatment may be tailored appropriately.

An understanding of definitions of respiratory events is imperative in understanding this disorder. An apnea is defined as the cessation of airflow for 10 seconds or more. A hypopnea is defined as either a reduction in airflow for at least ten seconds of 30 percent or more with an associated oxygen desaturation of at least four percent OR a reduction in airflow for at least ten seconds of 50 percent or more with an associated oxygen desaturation of three percent or associated arousal. Respiratory effort-related arousal (RERA) is a sequence of breaths that do not meet the criteria for apnea or hypopnea with increasing effort or with flattening of the nasal pressure waveform that increases for at least ten seconds, which results in arousal.

There is an array of common findings that are characteristic of patients presenting with obstructive sleep apnea. Daytime sleepiness is the most common complaint for patients seeking evaluation and treatment for OSA. Sleepiness is defined as difficulty remaining alert while awake. Patients or their partners will often complain of loud snoring, coughing, or choking during sleep. Though snoring is sensitive for OSA, it has a low specificity and is not useful in diagnosing OSA alone.