Syndactyly can be managed by operative and nonoperative means. Simple syndactyly of the toes is typically managed non-operatively if it is not affecting function. Surgery for cases of isolated syndactyly of the toes in this circumstance is of cosmetic benefit and should only be performed after a thorough discussion of risks with the patient and family. Other indications to pursue nonoperative management include incomplete simple syndactyly and webs associated with superdigits. Superdigits have been classified into two types: Type I is two metacarpals that support one oversized digit, and type II involves a single metacarpal supporting multiple digits.

Operative management is common for syndactyly to produce a more functional hand (or foot). If operative management of syndactyly is warranted, the timing of the surgery is important to discuss. Typically, syndactyly releases are performed around 12 to 18 months of age. Delaying the surgery until the child is older than 18 months reduces the risk of scar contracture and webspace creep as the child grows. However, syndactyly of border digits (small finger and thumb webspace) and syndactyly with multiple fusions should prompt earlier release as the smaller digit tethers the longer digit as the patient grows. Release occurs around 6 months of age, to avoid angulation, rotary, or shortening of the adjacent digit as well as allowing for early development of grip and coordination.

**Surgical Release**

Multiple nuances exist in the surgical release of syndactyly depending on the complexity of the involved digits. With this in mind, we will discuss simple complete syndactyly and describe modifications when more complexities are encountered. It is important to note that loupe magnification or the use of an intraoperative microscope is mandatory to achieve a successful outcome and to limit the risk of neurovascular complications.

Achieving the optimal surgical outcome for patients with syndactyly is multifactorial and consists of multiple goals. Goals include (1) creating new paronychial nail folds, (2) developing the interdigital commissure (skin) of the digits to be separated, and (3) creating a new webspace.

The zig-zag approach to the commissure allows for triangular based flaps to be created to assist with coverage of the digits. Planning the incision should start distally at the fingertips where planning for the paronychial fold begins. The typical technique for the development of these folds involves laterally based triangular flaps that, once released, will be sutured into the respective digit creating a new nail fold.

Other cases to consider include incomplete syndactyly, syndactyly of multiple digits, and complex syndactyly. In incomplete syndactyly, multiple flaps can be considered. The goal of the surgery for incomplete syndactyly depends on the length of the fusion of the affected digits. If one third or less of the length of the digits is involved, a dorsal rectangular flap with volar based triangular flaps can be utilized to reconstruct the webspace successfully.

Finally, when bony fusion is involved (complex syndactyly), additional operative steps are required. When planning on separating fused phalanges, preoperative planning is essential. Synostosis separation needs to be planned to retain as near normal anatomy as possible. In complex cases closing wedge, osteotomies may be indicated to correct for angulation differences. Collateral ligament integrity should be tested intraoperatively to determine if advancement or reconstruction is indicated. In cases of complex and complicated syndactyly, the amputation of a nonfunctional ray may achieve a more functional hand than reconstruction and needs to evaluated by the surgeon on a case by case basis.