Upadacitinib is a second-generation selective Janus kinase inhibitor targeting the JAK1 enzyme. The agent is FDA-approved and indicated to treat active moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis in patients intolerant or unresponsive to first-line therapy methotrexate (MTX). The care and management of rheumatoid arthritis patients require decisive care from an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals. Early clinical analysis and diagnosis can lead to more effective management strategies, further decreasing life-long complications and debilitation and increasing the quality of life. The interprofessional team can include a primary care physician (PCP), a rheumatologist, mid-level practitioners, nurses, a physical therapist (PT), and a pharmacist.

The rheumatologist and PCP should maintain continuous communication of their patient's care and updates on the latest guidelines on treatment. The patient should be thoroughly educated on rheumatoid arthritis and therapy with upadacitinib and its potential adverse effects. The interdisciplinary team should monitor the patient's CBC, liver enzymes, and lipid panel before initiating treatment and routinely afterward. Particular attention should be paid to the lymphocyte count, absolute neutrophil count, and hemoglobin (HB), as lymphopenia, neutropenia, and anemia may ensue during therapy. Treatment should be avoided or halted if the patient's absolute lymphocyte count is below 500 cells/mm3, the absolute neutrophil count is below 1000 cells/mm3, or the HB level is below 8 g/dL.

It is essential for the PCP to check the total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol 12 weeks after starting treatment as increases may occur and prompt management. Every patient initiating treatment should have TB screening with a tuberculin skin test (TST) or interferon-γ release assay (IGRA). Patients with a positive TB test should be treated before starting treatment with upadacitinib.

Patients should be advised about the broad range of adverse effects that may occur while on therapy. Routine follow-ups with the PCP and specialist are requisite to prevent complications, hospitalization, and mortality. New-onset gastrointestinal symptoms must be evaluated thoroughly, as GI perforation has been reported in clinical studies, particularly with concomitant NSAID use. Patients should also be counseled about the increased risk of severe infections, and any new-onset clinical manifestation should be reported and investigated.

In reproductive animal studies, upadacitinib was shown to cause injury to the developing fetus and be present in breast milk. During pregnancy, women should be advised and counseled about upadacitinib use and the likely effects on the fetus and to discontinue breastfeeding while on therapy. Women should also be counseled on contraception use while being treated and four weeks after discontinuation of treatment. Intercommunication between the healthcare team and their patients is imperative to establishing a solid physician-patient relationship. This can further increase medication compliance and decrease disease progression, improving the quality of life.