# Case Presentation

A 26-year-old male with a history of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and previous suicide attempts intentionally ingested 90 tablets of an unknown substance. His wife found him and called EMS. He had several witnessed tonic-clonic seizures and also vomited en route to the emergency department (ED). He was endotracheally intubated. Despite standard treatment with benzodiazepines and a propofol infusion, he continued to seize and was transitioned to a midazolam infusion. His seizures ceased. He also required dexmedetomidine for additional sedation and persistent tachycardia. Per the patient's wife, the patient was not taking any prescribed medications and did not have any recent injuries or infections.

# Initial Evaluation

Laboratory studies demonstrated hypokalemia (2.5 mmol/L), hypocalcemia (7.7 mg/dL), hyperglycemia (285 mg/dL) and an anion gap metabolic acidosis, gap 20 mmol/L, pH 7.24, lactate 9.2 mmol/L, and bicarbonate 16.7 mmol/L. Initial values for blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, creatine kinase, and myoglobin were normal.  Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed tachycardia and non-specific ST-depression anteriorly, elevation in aVR, and prolonged QTc interval without QRS widening.

Supportive measures we used included placing the patient on a propofol infusion for sedation and seizure control; however, this was held secondary to hypotension. Physicians transitioned the patient to a midazolam infusion which provided good seizure control but did not provide enough sedation. Dexmedetomidine infusion was added and provided appropriate sedation. The patient’s hypokalemia was corrected with intravenous potassium. His hypotension, hyperglycemia, and lactic acidosis improved with intravenous normal saline. The patient was initially placed on an esmolol infusion which improved his tachycardia but was subsequently held secondary to hypotension. There was also a concern for possible aspiration pneumonia from vomiting en route to the hospital, and the patient was started on ampicillin/sulbactam.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Atrial fibrillation

- Carbon monoxide toxicity

- Cyanide toxicity

- Delirium tremens (DTs)

- Diabetic ketoacidosis

- Disulfiram toxicity

- Intracranial hemorrhage

- Iron toxicity

- Monoamine oxidase inhibitor toxicity

- Multifocal atrial tachycardia

- Polysubstance overdose

- Septic shock

- Status epilepticus

- Theophylline toxicity

- Thyrotoxicosis

- Ventricular fibrillation

- Ventricular tachycardia

# Diagnosis

The patient was ultimately found to have a massive (18 g) caffeine overdose with an initial serum caffeine level greater than 100 micrograms/mL.

# Management

After consulting with nephrology and poison control, the healthcare professionals decided to give the patient activated charcoal via nasogastric tube and immediate hemodialysis. During his hospital stay, he developed a toxic encephalopathy with left upper and lower extremity weakness that completely resolved as caffeine levels trended down. His serum caffeine improved to 33 micrograms/mL after a single hemodialysis treatment and his caffeine level was 8 micrograms/mL at 24 hours. The patient returned to baseline after only one dialysis treatment and he was discharged to an inpatient psychiatric facility 2 days after ingestion.

Physical exam findings characteristic for caffeine toxicity include fever, tachycardia

Routine serum laboratory evaluations can be useful in drug overdose cases, especially in the setting of unstable vital signs, seizures, or altered sensorium. Venous blood gas determination may demonstrate anion gap metabolic acidosis

An electrocardiogram may demonstrate tachycardia, ST-segment depressions, or T-wave inversions.

Serum caffeine levels can guide prognosis and therapy. Since caffeine is rapidly and nearly completely (up to 90%) absorbed by the stomach with peak plasma concentrations occurring within 20 to 40 minutes, toxic levels can be reached quickly

Fatal caffeine overdose is relatively uncommon and treatment data is limited to case reports and series.

The primary treatment for minor caffeine ingestion is supportive. Hydration may be oral in minor cases, yet severe cases benefit from intravenous (IV) hydration. Beta-blockade with esmolol is useful for tachycardia.

Activated charcoal

Hemodialysis has been effective in severe, life-threatening caffeine ingestions.

Imminent cardiac arrest in caffeine toxicity should prompt intravenous lipid emulsion therapy

# Discussion

Although caffeine consumption is ubiquitous with as many as 85% of Americans consuming caffeine regularly, caffeine can be found in many over-the-counter preparations (energy drinks, appetite suppressants, stimulants, exercise supplements, decongestants, bronchodilators, and mental stimulants)

This case demonstrates some of the classic signs and symptoms associated with caffeine overdose including seizure,

# Pearls of Wisdom

- Caffeine overdose does not have an established standard of the care treatment plan, but toxic serum caffeine levels can be successfully reversed when recognized and treated early.

- Caffeine is available over the counter and can quickly reach toxic levels when taken in excess.

- Seizures are commonly seen in toxic caffeine overdose.

- Activated charcoal is effective at binding caffeine, and multiple doses of activated charcoal may lower serum caffeine via enterohepatic circulation.

- Beta-blockers are the first-line treatment of tachydysrhythmias associated with caffeine overdose.

- Hemodialysis