The approach to the uveitis patient must be comprehensive, as it may be associated with multiple systemic conditions. The diagnosis can be made mostly clinically by direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy, based on the characteristic fundus findings. The method of developing and narrowing the differentials has been called naming and meshing based on the clinical presentation.

Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA): It provides fundus photographs for diagnosis, documentation as well as monitoring the progress of the disease. It can detect whether a lesion is active or inactive, active lesions will show late hyperfluorescence on FFA. It can also detect neovascularization, vasculitis, areas of capillary nonperfusion, and cystoid macular edema.

Indocyanine Green Angiography (ICG) is more helpful in the case of white dot syndromes and other choroidal pathologies, which FFA cannot detect. It can provide additional information in diagnosis along with FFA. The infrared light in indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) penetrates the pigments in the retinal pigment epithelium. So it is better than FFA in delineating choriocapillaris.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a noninvasive imaging technique using near-infrared light interferometry used to evaluate pathological macular changes like cystoid macular edema, subretinal fluid, choroidal thickening, and epiretinal membrane.

B scan ultrasonography for ultrasound imaging of the posterior segment, when the view becomes obscured by small pupillary size or poor view of the fundus due to the opacity of the media.

The basic workup for uveitis depends on the history, clinical features, and anatomical location of the lesion. Always exclude syphilis and sarcoidosis. Lab investigations include intraocular fluid evaluation for polymerase chain reaction or the parasite DNA and serum antibody titers. It aids in differentiating infectious from noninfectious etiology. Serum antibodies can detect whether the infection is recent or chronic. Anti-Toxoplasma Ig M antibodies appear in the first week of infection and then decline in the next few months. Toxoplasma IgG appears within 1 to 2 weeks of infection, peaks within 1 to 2 months, and will remain detectable for the lifetime of the patient. The positive predictive value of the IgG Toxoplasma antibody is low.  A rise in titer in Toxoplasma IgG over three weeks has been useful as an indicator of a recent infection. For detection of infection in the newborn, Ig A or IgM antibodies are used. Maternal IgG antibodies present in the newborn reflect past or recent infection in the mother. In babies, maternally transmitted IgG will disappear within 6 to 12 months.