**Intrinsic Plus Hand**

The treatment of intrinsic contractures is based on etiology. Hand therapy is always the first-line treatment, especially for mild cases.

- Distal intrinsic release: It is used to treat tightness that involves the proximal interphalangeal joint; the goal is to decrease the tension on the proximal interphalangeal joint without affecting the MCP joint. It consists of resecting the intrinsic tendon distal to the transverse fibers. When MCP joint flexion contractures are present, distal intrinsic releases are not adequate. Therapeutic options include Proximal intrinsic release, intrinsic muscle slide, botulinum toxin type-A injections, and ulnar nerve motor branch neurectomy.

- Proximal intrinsic release: Indicated in cases with fibrotic intrinsic muscles with no movement. By releasing the transverse and oblique fibers of the intrinsic mechanism proximal to the MCP joint, the action of the intrinsic muscles is eliminated.

- Intrinsic muscle slide: Indicated in cases with spasticity. It consists of a subperiosteal elevation of the intrinsic muscles, thus allowing the interosseous muscles to slide distally while MCP joints are extended.

- Ulnar neurectomy: Indicated in cases with spasticity. However, it is not effective if there is a fixed contracture of the MCP joint.

**Intrinsic Minus Hand**

As previously mentioned, traumatic etiology is most frequently associated with intrinsic minus posture. An acute ulnar nerve injury merits immediate exploration and primary neurorrhaphy. In case of open contaminated wounds, the repair can be performed in a delayed manner ideally <72h, but up to seven days without any detriment to the outcomes. Prolonged delays increase the chance to need nerve grafting, fibrosis of the stump, and neuron loss.

Non-traumatic or systemic causes of ulnar nerve paralysis should be thoroughly studied.

The palliative treatment of paralysis of the intrinsic muscles should be reserved for manual laborers who persist with poor grip and pinch 12 to 24 months after direct methods of treatment of nerve injuries have failed.

Claw deformity can be classified as “simple” or “complex”. Complications take place at the proximal MCP and proximal interphalangeal joints. When passive correction of the MCP hyperextension allows the patient to extend the interphalangeal joints with the integrity of the extensor mechanism (Positive Bouvier´s test), the claw deformity is classified as a simple claw hand. On the other hand, when the patient cannot actively extend the proximal interphalangeal joints after passive MCP hyperextension correction, extensor mechanism impairment exists (Negative Bouvier´s test), and deformity is classified as a complex claw hand.

In the patients with simple clawing, tendon transfers correct the MCP joint hyperextension whereas, in complex clawing transfer, the active proximal interphalangeal extension should also be provided.

Passive palliative procedures have the objective of preventing MCP hyperextension to allow the extensor communis tendon to extend the interphalangeal joints.

Active palliative procedures are not only intended to correct the claw deformity, but also to bring back some function to the intrinsic muscles.

The choice of palliative technique depends on many factors, including the posture of the hand, the severity of the claw; Bouvier test result, the extent of the paralysis, existence of joint or tendon adhesions, and stiffness.

**Tendon Transfers for Pinch**

The available muscles to restore the adductor pollicis function are the extensor carpi radialis brevis, flexor digitorum superficialis, extensor indicis proprius, and brachioradialis. One of the techniques described are the transfer of extensor carpi radialis brevis, which is lengthened with the palmaris longus autograft and after passing through the second intermetacarpal space, it will be sutured to the adductor pollicis insertion.

**Prevention and Correction of MCP Joint Hyperextension**

In patients with a positive Bouvier´s test, the objective is to correct the MCP hyperextension. It can be achieved by splinting in mild cases if ulnar nerve recovery is anticipated. Otherwise, it will usually be corrected by surgery.

Dorsal knuckle bender splints and the lumbrical bar splints prevent hyperextension of the MCP joints, thus allowing extensor digitorum communis to actively extend the interphalangeal joints.

Surgical procedures to correct clawing hand include tenodesis, soft tissue tightening, and active tendon transfers. Bunnell´s flexor pulley advancement releases the A1 and A2 pulleys allowing the flexor tendons to increase their flexion moment. Zancolli´s procedure advances the volar plate proximally to produce a flexion contracture in the MCP joints.

**Active MCP Joint Flexion and Proximal Interphalangeal Joint Extension**

In patients with negative Bouvier´s test, the objective is to restore active MCP flexion and active proximal interphalangeal extension. Treatment options include tendon transfers or active tenodesis. Modified Stiles-Bunnell transfer uses the third finger´s flexor digitorum superficialis to split it and after passing volar to the deep intermetacarpal ligament, it will be sutured to the lateral bands of the fourth and fifth fingers. The Zancolli lasso procedure also uses the flexor digitorum superficialis tendon, but the tendon is divided between A1 and A2 pulleys and the tendon end is passed through the A1 pulley and then sutured to itself. Flexor digitorum superficialis transfers did not show any significant increase in handgrip strength, but restores active MCP joint flexion and provide interphalangeal joint extension by increasing the tension on the extrinsic extensors.