The first decision in managing prostate cancer is determining whether any treatment is needed. Prostate cancer, especially low-grade tumors, often grows so slowly that frequently no treatment is required, particularly in elderly patients and those with comorbidities that would reasonably limit life expectancy to 10 additional years or less.

**Active Surveillance**

Many low-risk cases can now be followed with active surveillance. Patients in active surveillance are usually required to have regular, periodic PSA testing and at least one additional biopsy 12 to 18 months after the original diagnosis. Active surveillance is appropriate for men with low-grade prostate cancer (Gleason 3+3=6 or less with a PSA less than 20) and limited-sized cancers. Some intermediate-grade tumors (Gleason 3+4=7) may also qualify. The use of active surveillance for selected, lower-risk, intermediate-grade prostate cancers (Gleason 3+4=7 with a PSA less than 10) is controversial but seems reasonable in selected cases. This is where tissue-based biomarkers and genomic testing can offer some real benefits; by reliably estimating and clarifying the true relative risk of tumor progression and aggressiveness in these borderline situations. Genomic testing may be most helpful when the PSA is in the 10 to 20 ng/ml range or with increased tumor volume.

Along with serial PSA levels, an MRI of the prostate can also be used to follow these patients and avoids the discomfort of repeated biopsies. The purpose of close observation is to identify those patients, usually about 25% of the total, who will significantly increase PSA levels, clinically progress, or upgrade to a higher Gleason score. This indicates possible conversion to a more aggressive cancer, and definitive treatment can be offered appropriately while the vast majority are safely spared the costs, inconvenience, side effects, and complications of definitive curative therapy.

No specific biomarker or bioassay has been prospectively tested and validated in active surveillance protocols for prostate cancer, although theoretically, their use would seem appropriate. Serial PSA and PSA density measurements appear useful but are not definitive or as reliable as a biopsy. As a replacement for repeated biopsies every 18 to 24 months, serial prostatic MRIs (for PSA density) and an appropriate bioassay may eventually prove a suitable alternative. Risk calculators for active surveillance have been validated, are generally underutilized, and are very cost-effective.

For patients on active surveillance, certain characteristics tended to have prognostic significance in a large multi-institutional database. High-risk clinicopathological features were associated with an earlier time to cancer progression/upgrading. High tumor volume was also found to have a significant negative prognostic effect as these patients tended to behave more like higher-risk malignancies.

The best option depends on the cancer stage, Gleason score, and PSA level, as well as individual patient preferences, overall health, comorbidities, quality of life, and age. Heritable factors from germline testing may play an important role in patients on active surveillance, but family history alone has not been shown to be a significant prognostic risk factor for progression.

It is estimated that only 32% to 49% of eligible low-risk prostate cancer patients are currently on an active surveillance protocol in the United States.

**The use of imaging in active surveillance**patients may significantly eliminate the requirement for many biopsies in this group. The need for a confirmatory biopsy at 12 to 18 months tends to discourage patients from accepting active surveillance. It is unclear at this time how MRI scans may affect active surveillance protocols, but it has been shown that even negative serial MRI scans and stable PSA levels could not guarantee a lack of progression which occurs in 14% of such patients.

The addition of PSMA-PET scans has not significantly increased the detection rate of clinically significant cancers in patients on active surveillance, but with a reported negative predictive value of about 86%, it has the potential to reduce scheduled routine or confirmatory biopsies by up to 80%.

**Localized Disease**

In localized disease, it should be understood that for the majority of patients, treatment selection makes very little difference in overall survival for at least the next ten years. Therefore, definitive therapy should only be offered to those patients who are reasonably expected to live another ten years or longer based on age and co-morbidities.

Definitive treatment of localized disease now includes radiation therapy (external beam and/or brachytherapy radioactive seed placement), radical prostatectomy, and cryotherapy (usually reserved for radiation therapy failures). Radiation therapy tends to have much fewer side effects (about 50% less) than radical prostatectomy surgery, with very similar overall survival.

**Therefore, for most patients with potentially curable, localized disease, good performance status, reasonably good quality of life, and greater than 10-year life expectancy, the choice of treatment should be an informed patient decision made after discussions including both urology (surgery) and radiation therapy.**

Because definitive therapy can have significant side effects such as erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence, discussions often focus on balancing the goals of therapy (possible cancer cure, the potential for increased survival, psychologically "getting rid of the cancer") with the risks of lifestyle alterations (treatment side effects, complications, cost, possible lack of ultimate survival benefit and questionable quality of life improvement over doing nothing).

**Focal Ablation Therapy for Localized Prostate Cancer**

The use of MRI localization has opened the door for local ablative therapy for selected patients with localized disease since we can now clearly identify the precise location of suspicious or significant tumors.  In many cases, the risks, complications, and side effects of definitive whole-gland therapy outweigh many of the benefits of oncological control. There is a need to find a treatment modality between active surveillance and definitive whole-gland therapy with lower cost and fewer side effects. Focal ablative therapy is potentially the answer.

Focal ablative therapy can use any one of a number of ablative energies, including microwave, cryotherapy, laser, high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), etc., to precisely treat a localized malignant prostatic lesion. Ablative therapies typically have lower costs and substantially fewer side effects than traditional definitive whole-gland therapy.

The unsettled issue is how effectively focal ablative therapy will control or cure localized prostate cancer and which technologies will ultimately provide the best combination of cancer control and minimal side effects. Focal ablative therapies for localized prostate cancer are currently considered investigational in the United States.

- High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound****is a local treatment modality that uses focused ultrasound to heat and ablate prostatic tissue, including isolated malignant lesions. While not specifically approved for prostate cancer use in the United States, it has been used for this purpose in other parts of the world with reasonably good results in selected patients. It is relatively inexpensive, avoids radiation, can be repeated if necessary, and has minimal side effects, but there are questions about its efficacy, particularly its long-term efficacy. Its role in treating prostate cancer has yet to be determined.

- Focal Laser Ablation uses laser fibers to heat and destroys prostatic cancer nodules based on MRI imaging using MRI-Fusion guided targeting. While still investigational, focal laser ablation appears to be a particularly promising minimally invasive treatment modality for well-selected patients with highly localized prostate cancer.

**Hormone Therapy**

In 1941, Urologist Charles Huggins MD from the University of Chicago discovered that androgen deprivation (castration) would cause prostate glands to atrophy and prostate cancer to regress.

While bilateral orchiectomy was originally used to produce castration levels of testosterone, current hormonal therapy is usually done with injectable medications.

Initial therapy with leuprolide, goserelin, and similar luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists should be preceded by anti-androgen therapy, such as bicalutamide, when the PSA level is greater than 10 ng/ml, to prevent any clinical response to the temporary testosterone surge that typically accompanies the initiation of hormonal therapy with these agents. This prophylactic anti-androgen therapy is not necessary with degarelix or relugolix because they are direct LHRH antagonists, and there is no testosterone surge with this class of drug.

Relugolix is an oral LHRH antagonist that is now FDA approved and available. Like injectable degarelix, it is a direct LHRH antagonist and causes a very rapid decrease in serum testosterone. It is quite effective as it caused sustained castrate levels of testosterone in 97% of men tested (compared with 89% of men treated with leuprolide) and appears to have fewer major cardiovascular events as well.

Choosing which anti-androgen hormonal therapy to use depends on the clinical situation, ease of administration, availability, cost, insurance coverage, physician experience, and individual patient preference.

Hormonal therapy has been found to improve survival when combined with radiation therapy but not with radical prostatectomy for intermediate (Gleason 3+4=7) and higher-grade disease. One common plan is to start with leuprolide or similar agents and monitor the PSA level monthly until it becomes undetectable or nadirs, at which time definitive radiation therapy (cyberknife, external beam, and/or brachytherapy seed implants) can be started. The hormonal therapy is usually continued for at least one year and optimally for at least two years after radiation. Intermittent hormone therapy is another option in selected cases to minimize the side effects of sustained, very low testosterone levels. Castration levels of testosterone have historically been considered <50 ng/dL, but newer data suggest that optimal results are obtained when testosterone levels are maintained at less than 20 ng/dL.

Patients with high volume prostate cancer and metastases who are being started on hormonal therapy will benefit from initiating docetaxel at the same time. There does not appear to be a similar survival advantage in low-volume prostate cancers with metastases.

Side effects of hormonal therapy include hot flashes, reduced libido, and loss of bone density resulting in osteopenia or osteoporosis.  There are conflicting reports regarding a possible connection between long-term androgen deprivation therapy and cardiovascular risk and metabolic syndrome. Long-term hormonal therapy for prostate cancer will tend to increase clotting risk, LDL cholesterol, body fat, triglycerides, and insulin resistance while decreasing lean body mass and glucose tolerance. Its most profound and potentially dangerous cardiac effect may be to prolong the QTc interval. These effects can be minimized by aggressively treating comorbidities, reducing cardiac risk factors, and eliminating all other drugs that also tend to prolong QTc interval. Urologic medications that typically increase the QTc interval include levofloxacin, amitriptyline, and imipramine. Patients with significant cardiovascular risk factors or pre-existing heart disease are at increased risk and should be monitored closely by cardiology or primary care. Medical check-ups every three months have been recommended for this particular high-risk group of patients, especially during the first year of hormonal therapy when the risk of an acute cardiovascular event is highest.

The most common side effect of hormonal therapy is hot flashes in up to 80% of men on hormonal therapy. These hot flashes can sometimes be quite uncomfortable and occur up to 10 times a day in some individuals. Other symptoms are occasionally reported, along with hot flashes, including irritability, anxiety, or heart palpitations. Men who develop hot flashes after starting hormonal therapy usually report that they tend to decrease in frequency and intensity over time, and they typically disappear within three to four months of stopping the anti-androgen therapy.

**The most effective preventive therapy for hot flashes**is oral medroxyprogesterone 20 mg/day or cyproterone 100 mg/day.

**A baseline DEXA scan for bone density is recommended**f**or all patients starting hormonal therapy and are expected to remain on it for one year or longer.**It should be repeated every two years while on therapy, according to the National Osteoporosis Foundation (nof.org.faq.590) and NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines. In a Danish study, two-thirds of prostate cancer patients were found to have osteoporosis even before any hormonal therapy had been initiated!

After the DEXA scan, full osteoporosis treatment (calcium citrate and vitamin D supplements and a bisphosphonate or rank ligand inhibitor) is suggested for all patients with a T score <-2.5. Preventive therapy should also be considered for patients with a T score between -1.5 and -2.5 based on age >75, BMI <19 kg/meter squared, glucocorticoid therapy, a history of falls, or other significant risk factors such as cardiovascular disease, dementia, depression or Parkinson disease.

Castrate-resistant prostate cancer patients with bone metastases should receive high dose IV zoledronic acid (bisphosphonate) or denosumab (rank ligand inhibitor) specifically to minimize skeletal-related events such as fractures.

Osteoporosis preventive therapy, including calcium and vitamin D supplements together with a bisphosphonate or rank ligand inhibitor, should be considered in all men on long-term hormonal treatment to prevent or at least minimize bone loss as the vast majority of prostate cancer patients on long-term hormonal therapy will demonstrate osteoporosis, osteoporotic fractures or osteopenia after two years of therapy.