In essence, the anion gap is a mathematical calculation that provides practitioners with the foresight to plan for managing current problems associated with acid-base balance, fluids, and electrolytes.

For reference, a normal anion gap depends on the concentration of phosphate and albumin in the serum and ranges from 4 to 12 mmol/L. An increased or normal anion gap metabolic acidosis is typically due to excess acid and/or decreased base. A reduction in the anion gap is most commonly due to decreased albumin concentration as albumin is the primary unmeasured anion.

To best understand the concept of anion gap, let us revisit the law of electrochemical neutrality. This law states that for any given solution, the net charge after accounting for all cations (positive ions) and anions (negative ions) should arrive at zero. However, at face value, the subtraction between the measured cations and measured anions of the blood does not yield a zero; the 4 to 12 mmol/L range for “normal anion gap.” However, this does not reflect an integral problem in the mathematical derivations, but rather its paramount utility. The resulting positive number in a healthy, asymptomatic patient is a result of the formula accounting only for measured cations and anions, leaving uncalculated cations and uncalculated anions to reach the zero value.

As an example, an anion gap of 8 means after accounting for measured ions (Na+, Cl-, HCO3-, and depending on your institution, K+) we have a net positive charge of 8. However, this gets neutralized by unmeasured anions such as albumin, phosphorus, and miscellaneous proteins. Thus, one can see if the anion gap increased or decreased out of the 4 to 12 mmol/L range, one can expect tangible derangements in measured cations and anions vs. theoretical derangements in their uncalculated counterparts.

Calculation relies on measuring specific cations, Na+ and K+ and specific anions, Cl- and HCO3-. The equation is as follows: (Na+ + K+) – (Cl- + HCO3-) = Anion Gap.

The anion gap formula can be manipulated to expose the presence of unmeasured cations and anions as shown below.

([Na+] + [K+] + [UC]) = ([Cl-] + [HCO3-] + [UA])

Rearrangement shows:

([Na+] +[K+]) – ([Cl-] + [HCO3-]) = [UA] – [UC]

Anion Gap = UA – UC

From this manipulation, a health care practitioner or researcher can see that the 4 to 12 mmol/L range of the anion gap is precisely equal to the difference between the unmeasured anions and cations.