Homonymous hemianopsia involves loss of visual field zones, and patients often present with bilateral field loss, though sometimes they complain of monocular loss or dyslexia. In addition, unilateral lesions in these following anatomical locations do not alter acuity. Further examination of visual acuity should be planned if patients present with visual acuity complaints.

**Optic Tract Lesions**

Optic tract lesions may result in complete or incomplete hemianopsias. The involvement of the optic tract often includes afferent pupillary nerve fibers. This can present as a pupillary defect in the eye contralateral to the tract lesion. Other times, the patient may present with a Wernicke pupil – light shone to the functioning half of the affected eye will cause pupillary constriction. However, light shone to the half with field loss may cause lessened or loss of pupillary constriction. On retinal exams, often characteristic optic atrophy can be visualized. The optic disc of the eye contralateral to the lesion shows a horizontal “bow-tie” about one to one-and-a-half months after injury. The ipsilateral eye may present with diffuse optic disc pallor. Less common are signs of damage to surrounding anatomical structures, such as the hypothalamus and internal capsule. Visual acuity and color perception are often preserved unless there exists bilateral involvement of the anterior extension of the lesion involving the optic nerve or chiasm.

**Lateral Geniculate Nucleus**

The lateral geniculate nucleus has a complex array of neurons and axons correlated with the retinotopic arrangement of the eye. Because of this, defects tend to be variable and incomplete. As stated above, characteristic wedge-shaped field losses (sectoranopia) are seen depending on the involvement of the anterior or posterior choroidal arteries. Unless further involvement of the optic tract occurs, patients present with normal pupillary reflexes. Signs of ipsilateral thalamic or pyramidal tract involvement may also be present.

**Optic Radiations**

The involvement of the optic radiations often causes complete, contralateral homonymous hemianopsia. Injury to the radiations can occur proximally or distally. Because of the anatomical relationship with the posterior limb of the internal capsule near the proximal radiations, corticospinal and thalamocortical nerve fibers are often involved with lesions in this location. Distal injury can involve the temporal or parietal lobes. Defects from injury of the optic radiations in the temporal lobe are more likely to be incomplete, superiorly situated “pie-in-the-sky” field losses. Temporal lobe association may also result in aphasia, seizures, hallucinations, or memory complications (when on the dominant hemisphere). Parietal lobe optic radiations are more often associated with incomplete, inferiorly located lesions. When affecting the nondominant hemisphere, these lesions may produce contralateral hemineglect, differing from dominant hemisphere Gerstmann syndrome (acalculia, agraphia, finger agnosia, and right-left disorientation). The involvement of the parietal lobe may also cause difficulty with smooth pursuit towards the side of the lesion, presenting as nystagmus in that direction. Either hemisphere may involve the primary and association sensory cortices.

**Occipital Lobe**

The most common homonymous hemianopsia deficits are from occipital lobe lesions. These deficits typically present without other associated neurologic symptoms. However, the patterns may vary. Often these lesions include macular sparing as a result of the dual blood supply and bilateral macular representation at the occipital cortex. At the occipital pole, most posteriorly, homonymous scotomas are produced. Most anteriorly, temporal crescent loss and other similar peripheral vision patterns occur. If the lesion extends anteriorly enough to involve the left corpus callosum, patients may present with alexia without agraphia (if the lesion spares the angular gyrus). Bilateral occipital lobe lesions will produce bilateral homonymous hemianopsia of various types. Most notably is Anton’s syndrome involving a complete bilateral homonymous hemianopsia (cortical blindness) with which the patient also experiences anosognosia, being unaware of their blindness. With bilateral occipital lesions, it is possible that visual acuity may be impacted.