# Introduction

The interscalene triangle (sometimes termed simply the scalene triangle) is a region of the neck with fundamental importance to the function of the upper limbs, as the roots of the brachial plexus and the third part of the subclavian artery pass through it. The borders of the triangle are the lateral border of the scalenus anterior muscle, the medial border of the scalenus medius muscle, and the first rib inferiorly. Clinical manifestations of complications relating to the interscalene triangle include thoracic outlet syndrome, which can result in vascular or neurological compromise of the upper limb following compression at the interscalene triangle.

# Structure and Function

The interscalene triangle is a paired structure situated at the root of the neck, with its apex pointed superiorly towards the base of the skull. The horizontal base of the triangle is formed by the superior border of the first rib. The two vertical sides of the triangle are formed by the scalenus anterior and scalenus medius muscles. The anterior covering of the scalene triangle (i.e., the ‘roof’ of the triangle) is the prevertebral fascia of the neck, which extends from the body of the T4 vertebra up to the base of the skull.

The first rib is the broadest and flattest of all the ribs and is also the most curved. Its head articulates with the body of the T1 vertebra, and the medial part articulates with the manubrium sternum. Features along its upper surface include a groove for the subclavian artery, and the scalene tubercle, to which the scalenus anterior is attached. The anterior scalene arises from the transverse processes of the anterior tubercles of C3 to C6, terminating as a narrow tendon at the first rib attached to the scalene tubercle on the upper surface of it. The middle scalene arises from the lateral parts of C1 and C2 (atlas and axis), as well as the transverse processes of the posterior tubercles of C3 to C7, and also inserts into the first rib, at the quadrangular area between its neck and the subclavian groove.

# Embryology

Neck muscles, like the anterior and middle scalene muscles, are derived from the embryonic mesoderm.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The subclavian artery and vein are at the base of the inter-scalene triangle.

# Nerves

Within the upper part of the interscalene triangle lie the anterior rami of the third through fifth cervical spinal nerves. The base of the triangle is the location of the brachial plexus.

The phrenic nerve is oblique to the anterior scalene and passes anteriorly to the subclavian artery (C3, C4, C5). The phrenic nerve controls the diaphragmatic muscles for breathing, and although the phrenic nerve is not within the triangle, it is similar to the subclavian vein in that, because of its relative location to the triangle, it is easily prone to compromise from pathologies affecting the interscalene triangle.

# Muscles

The anterior scalene arises from the transverse processes of the anterior tubercles of C3 to C6, terminating as a narrow tendon at the first rib attached to the scalene tubercle on the upper surface of it. The middle scalene arises from the lateral parts of C1 and C2 (atlas and axis), as well as the transverse processes of the posterior tubercles of C3 to C7, and also inserts into the first rib, at the quadrangular area between its neck and the subclavian groove.

# Physiologic Variants

Variations of the anterior scalene muscle include differing origins from C2 to C6, C3 to C5, or insertion into the second or third rib. Variations of the middle scalene include an origin from C1 (the atlas) and, like the anterior scalene, inserting onto the second rib.

The anterior and middle scalene insertions on the first rib can vary, which creates a narrow space, leading to a higher-than-normal subclavian artery and brachial plexus. This is important to consider during a surgical intervention in this area. Also, in some patients, the middle scalene can insert across the full length of the first rib. In rare cases, the middle and anterior scalene have fused, so the artery and plexus have to pierce through the muscular sheath. The muscles are not the only variants that can occur. The first rib can have structural anomalies that narrow the space, including fusion of ribs, abnormal positioning, and a healed fracture. All variations can make the structures harder to visualize and dictate further treatment, whether surgical or non-surgical.

# Surgical Considerations

Treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome can be via scalenectomy for upper thoracic outlet syndrome, and a first rib resection is an option for lower thoracic outlet syndrome. Both procedures can also be done simultaneously for the best results. Regardless, these are done to give the vasculature and nerves wider access to the rest of the upper extremity.

During the procedure, the scalenus anterior and medius muscles are identified and divided before the first rib is excised; however, using an interscalene approach, it is also possible to complete this without the division of the scalenus anterior.

# Clinical Significance

**Interscalene Block**

After surgery in the postoperative period, nerve blocks may be used to decrease the pain experienced by the patient. One widely used example of such a nerve block is the inter-scalene nerve block, which is used specifically in many upper extremity injuries.

**Thoracic Outlet Syndrome**

Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) is a common syndrome due to abnormal regional anatomy or injuries to the associated structures, with an incidence of between 3 and 8 in 1000 people.

For these reasons, thoracic outlet syndrome has long been considered difficult to diagnose, not least because there is no formal clinical diagnostic test.

In general, the neurovascular structures in the triangle undergo compression. The compression of the subclavian artery is more diagnostic of TOS than the compression of the subclavian vein because vein compression can occur in non-TOS patients.

Diagnostic modalities that may be employed in investigating suspected thoracic outlet syndrome include ultrasonography, chest radiography, CT angiography, magnetic resonance angiography, dedicated venography or arteriography, nerve conduction studies, or needle electromyography.