Hurler syndrome is caused by a deficiency of a lysosomal enzyme, IUDA, which aids in the breakdown of dermatan sulfate and heparin sulfate (GAG). This finally results in the accumulation of large amounts of GAG in the body, eventually causing the cells to become severely dysfunctional leading to death. The deposition of GAG causes enlargement and thickening of various organs like the heart, spleen, liver, muscles, connective tissues, joints, and the central nervous system causing severe functional impairment.

Hurler Syndrome is considered as MPS I. The presentation and course of the disease vary due to underlying IUDA mutations and a consequent residual degree of enzyme activity. MPS I is further subdivided into three subtypes.

- Hurler syndrome (MPS I H): This is the most common and severe form. Patients develop symptoms shortly after birth and progress rapidly. The symptoms include developmental delay, cognitive decline, characteristic coarse facial features, joint stiffness and contractures, short stature, and cardiac and hepatic disease. Patients usually die within the first year of life.

- Hurler-Scheie syndrome (MPS I H-S): This is an intermediate phenotype, typically diagnosed at 2 to 6 years of age. Facial features are less coarse than Hurler syndrome. Achilles tendon contractures lead to toe walking. Hepatosplenomegaly causes respiratory compromise. Patients often develop spondylolisthesis and kyphoscoliosis. The meninges are thickened and cause compression of the cervical spinal cord (pachymeningitis cervicalis), leading to weakness or paralysis.

- Sheie syndrome (MPS IS): This is a rare and mild phenotype. The physical symptoms of Sheie syndrome are similar to Hurler and Hurler-Sheie syndromes, but patients have normal intelligence. Most patients die before the age of 25 to 30 years.