The evaluation of the patients with possible NSIP include:

- Clinical evaluation: Detailed history and physical exam are important. Patients should be asked about exposure to airborne antigens, medication list, history of exposure to radiation, HIV risk factors, CTD symptoms, as well as family history.

- Laboratory test: If CTD is suspected, one should perform an appropriate serological evaluation. One may also consider HIV testing if there are risk factors.

- Pulmonary function testing (PFT): Includes spirometry to determine whether the symptoms are associated with an obstructive or restrictive pattern, lung volumes, diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) to check for gas exchange, and 6-minute walk test to check for hypoxia at rest or exertional hypoxia. Monitoring forced vital capacity (FVC) and DLCO is helpful to monitor for progression and correlate with clinical symptoms as well as to monitor response to treatment and offer additional information on prognosis. Patients with NSIP typically have a spirometric restrictive pattern on the PFTs with reduced TLC and DLCO.

-  Imaging: (1) Chest x-ray may show increased basilar markings and/or interstitial prominence bilaterally; (2) High-resolution Computed Tomography (HRCT) of the chest is the gold standard for imaging diagnosis. Most common findings may include increased reticular markings, traction bronchiectasis, volume loss, and ground glass opacification mainly in the lower zones. Honeycomb changes are more common with UIP and usually absent in NSIP.

- Lung biopsy may assist in definitive diagnosis, though may not always be needed. The need for biopsy must be evaluated within the clinical context, including whether there is an identified underlying process or not, and the severity of lung injury. For example, in the case of an associated CTD or drug-induced NSIP, a biopsy may not be needed. Conversely, in those cases where an associated etiology is not discovered, a lung biopsy may be needed for diagnosis.