Meningioma is a tumor that grows from the meningeal layers, which cover and protect the brain and spinal cord. Most of these tumors are grade 1, which means that they are benign. Some of the meningiomas do not produce symptoms, and many of them are discovered incidentally during imaging studies. A head CT scan or brain MRI is used to diagnose a meningioma. The signs and symptoms depend on the location of the tumor in the brain. Symptoms such as headache, dizziness, visual impairments, weakness, convulsions, speech, or personality changes can occur. There are no specific causes of meningioma, but certain risk factors have been identified.

During pregnancy, meningiomas can grow in size because female hormones influence them. Moreover, other factors such as female hormones, exposure to radiation, use of oral contraceptive pills, hormonal replacement therapy, certain cancers such as breast cancer, some genetic diseases such as neurofibromatosis, von Hippel-Lindau disease, multiple endocrine neoplasias, Li-Fraumeni, Cowden disease, and Gorlin syndrome have been associated.

Small-sized or asymptomatic meningiomas can be managed with observation and regular head CT or brain MRI scans. However, large-sized, symptomatic, or fast-growing meningiomas are usually treated by neurosurgical removal. The recurrence rate of meningioma depends on the histological grade and degree of resection.

Unfortunately, there is no primary prevention of meningiomas has been identified yet. Although meningioma can occur in any individual, some might be at higher risk of developing meningioma. Medical history and neurological examination should be obtained to look for the commonly associated risk factors, including continuous estrogen therapy, exposure to radiation, first-degree relatives with meningioma, and patients with genetic syndromes such as neurofibromatosis type 2. In those high-risk groups of individuals, counseling should be given. Physicians should inform the patients about the chances of developing a meningioma. After the diagnosis of asymptomatic meningioma, regular neurosurgical follow-ups and radiological scans are essential to address the prognosis and outcomes.

One of the risk factors of meningioma, which can be prevented, is obesity. A large prospective cohort study showed a positive association between meningioma and a higher body mass index of greater than or equal to 30, as well as increased waist circumference, both in men and women. Accordingly, prevention can be done by maintaining an adequate weight with exercise and diet. Furthermore, obesity can alter the levels of sex steroid hormones, insulin, insulin-like growth factors 1, and inflammatory response proteins such as interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor. At the same time, there has been no specific association identified between meningioma and altered immunity. Nevertheless, overexpression of insulin growth factor and decreased serum level of immunoglobulin E in patients with allergies had been identified in those with meningioma. Therefore, early secondary prevention can be done by measuring the levels of serum biomarkers.