Protein S deficiency is a rare pathology that can be acquired or is congenital. The most significant morbidity of protein S deficiency is that it predisposes patients to blood clots in the legs, brain, intestine, and lungs. Also, the condition can lead to premature birth and other complications during pregnancy. Because of its varied presentation, the disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes clinicians, specialists, nurses, and pharmacists.

These patients are initially managed by a hematologist and followed up by the primary care provider or nurse practitioner. All healthcare workers participating in the care of these patients should refer to published guidelines and recommendations developed by organizations such as the American Society of Hematology for guidance in treating and managing children with coagulation abnormalities.

Since many patients present with a first-time thrombotic event, the key is to have a suspicion of the disorder to make the diagnosis. Once diagnosed, the pharmacist should educate the patient on anticoagulation compliance; otherwise, there is a risk of devastating thrombotic complications.

Because deep vein thrombosis can lead to post-thrombotic phlebitis, the nurse and pharmacist should coordinate the patient's education on the importance of wearing compression stockings.

Additionally, the interprofessional team should regularly monitor the levels of prothrombin time and INR in patients managed with warfarin. Any deviation from therapeutic levels should be communicated to the hematologist, who should be the only one in charge of changing the dose and frequency. An internist should have input for those on oral anticoagulation who need elective surgery because these patients may require bridge therapy with heparin. Females of childbearing age who want to get pregnant should consult a hematologist first and be closely followed by a hematology nurse practitioner if she decides to conceive.

Only with an interprofessional team approach can the morbidity of protein S deficiency be reduced and outcomes improved. [Level 5]