**Open Repair, Medial Approach**

An incision is made above the knee along the sartorius muscle's anterior border and below the knee just below the medial aspect of the tibia. The greater saphenous vein is harvested in the usual fashion. This is marked for later reversal and stored in heparinized saline. Attention is turned to the above-knee incision. The fascia between the adductor tendon superiorly and the sartorius muscle posteriorly is incised, and the popliteal fossa entered. A self-retaining retractor is placed, and the popliteal artery palpated. The artery is circumferentially dissected and isolated with vessel loops. Attention is then turned to exposure of the below-knee popliteal artery.

The soleus fascia is incised, and the soleus retracted superiorly, and the gastrocnemius retracted inferiorly with a self-retaining retractor. The below-knee popliteal artery is palpated and circumferentially dissected and isolated with vessel loops. A tunnel is created between the two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle. The patient is systemically heparinized to an active clotting time above 250 seconds. The vein is brought through the tunnel in a reversed fashion. Vascular clamps are applied to the proximal popliteal artery, and the distal artery is ligated as close to the aneurysm as possible. An end to end anastomosis is performed with a running 6-0 polypropylene suture.

The graft is flushed, and hemostasis is assured. The vascular clamp is then placed distal to the anastomosis. Vascular clamps are then placed to the below-knee popliteal artery, and the distal artery is ligated as close to the aneurysm as possible. An end to end anastomosis is performed with running 6-0 polypropylene suture. Before completing the anastomosis, the artery is back bled, forward bled and flushed with heparinized saline.

A doppler is brought onto the field, and flow is checked proximal and distal to the anastomosis and in the foot. Some providers open the aneurysm sac from above and below the knee and tie off any patent branch vessels present to prevent persistent flow into the sac despite exclusion. The wounds are irrigated and closed in multiple layers. **Open Repair, Posterior Approach**

An S-shaped incision is made starting on the thigh's medial side and extends along the flexion crease of the knee and ends on the lateral aspect of the calf. The small saphenous vein is examined and harvested if of adequate size. If not, the greater saphenous vein may be harvested from the thigh with the patient prone. This is marked for later reversal and stored in heparinized saline. Injury to the medial sural nerve should be avoided. The fascia is incised just medial to the small saphenous vein. The popliteal artery and vein will be deep and medial to the tibial nerve.

The popliteal vein must be carefully mobilized as it is directly posterior to the artery and swings to the posterolateral side. Dissection of the popliteal artery aneurysm is performed circumferentially to a healthy artery proximally and distally, and vessel loops are applied. The patient is systemically heparinized to an active clotting time above 250 seconds. Vascular clamps are applied proximally and distally, and the aneurysm sac opened on the anterior surface.

Bleeding vessels are oversewn. An interposition graft is performed with the reversed vein previously harvested like above. A doppler is brought onto the field, and flow is checked proximal and distal to the anastomosis and in the foot. The aneurysm sac is closed primarily over the graft. The wounds are irrigated and closed in multiple layers. **Endovascular Repair**

Common femoral access is obtained on the aneurysm's contralateral side (retrograde access) using a micropuncture needle under ultrasound guidance. This is upsized to a small sheath and a standard aortoiliac angiogram obtained with a wire and flush catheter. The ipsilateral superficial femoral artery is selected, and an appropriately sized sheath is placed, ending in the common femoral artery. A dedicated angiogram is obtained of the popliteal aneurysm, proximal and distal landing zones, as well as the runoff to the foot.

The patient is systemically heparinized to an active clotting time above 250 seconds. The popliteal artery aneurysm is carefully crossed with a soft wire (e.g., glidewire), and a catheter is placed distal to the aneurysm in a tibial runoff vessel. A stiff wire is placed through this catheter, and the stent-graft is deployed in the standard fashion over this wire. Care is taken to achieve adequate proximal and distal seal zones with no coverage of tibial branches.

Appropriately sized balloons are used to ensure an adequate seal. With and without the knee bent, repeated angiogram confirms placement of the stent-graft and distal outflow to the foot. Protamine may be given for reversal, and the sheath is removed with the aid of a closure device per surgeon preference. The pressure is held, and hemostasis is achieved.