Since GLP-1 receptor agonists mimic the action of a peptide produced in the GI tract, the majority of reported side effects are gastrointestinal (GI) in nature, which are nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. The GI side effects are dose-dependent, and increasing the dosage should be done slowly.

Although classified as low risk, GLP-1 receptor agonists can be associated with hypoglycemia with no clinically significant difference in incidence among the agents. This risk is potentiated by concomitant use with insulin or insulin secretagogues, such as sulfonylureas.

Exenatide also has a side effect of increasing the INR in patients taking warfarin. For semaglutide, rapid improvement of glycemic control has been associated with a temporary worsening of pre-existing diabetic retinopathy. The effects of long-term glycemic control on diabetic retinopathy complications have not been studied. In a trial for liraglutide, 3.1% of patients taking the medication versus 1.9% of patients on placebo reported an event of gallbladder disease. If cholelithiasis or cholecystitis is suspected, gallbladder studies and workup are indicated.

Antibody formation was rare in patients treated with once-weekly injectables, while a greater percentage of patients developed antibodies to twice-daily exenatide and once-daily lixisenatide. The antibodies produced caused a smaller decrease in HbA1c and reduced glycemic efficacy in patients taking exenatide and lixisenatide. When these patients were switched to liraglutide, their new regimen was unaffected by the antibodies.

Dulaglutide is associated with cardiovascular conduction abnormalities such as sinus tachycardia, PR interval prolongation, and 1st degree AV block. It should be used cautiously in patients with preexisting arrhythmia.