More common adverse effects of minocycline include gastrointestinal distress and photosensitivity. Hyperpigmentation of skin and discoloration of nails is also possible. Staining of teeth and bone growth inhibition is more likely to occur in children than adults, although it has been reported in adults. The prevalence of tooth discoloration due to minocycline is 3% to 6%.

Hepatotoxicity may occur due to minocycline use, and exacerbation of preexisting renal failure is also a risk to consider. Pill esophagitis - symptoms of which present as chest pain, odynophagia, and dysphagia - have also been reported and may be avoided by taking oral forms of minocycline with adequate water and standing upright after intake.

Although side effects are rare, the higher concentrations of minocycline in the CNS than other tetracyclines contribute to the dose-limiting vestibular side effects (such as nausea, vomiting, vertigo, dizziness, or change in hearing).

There is a reported association between systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with minocycline use (risk of 8.8 cases per 100,000 person-years).

As with all antibiotics, minocycline increases the risk of developing Clostridium difficile infection; however, the risk is lower than with other antibiotics.

Minocycline use is associated with dermatological reactions, including drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) resulting in death. If DRESS is recognized while on minocycline, it should be discontinued immediately.

Minerals (calcium, magnesium, folate, or iron): Use of this product or any containing this mineral can decrease the blood concentration of minocycline. If possible, avoid taking at the same time. If coadministration cannot be avoided, give those at least 2 hours before or 4 hours after oral administration of minocycline.