There is no known, definitive treatment that can modify the disease process. However, risk-factor modification and management of symptoms have been proven effective in slowing the disease progression and optimizing the quality of life.

Based on the symptoms and number of exacerbations, we can divide the disease into 4 COPD GOLD stages and modify the treatment accordingly.

**Medical Therapy**

Medical therapy includes using a bronchodilator alone or in combination with anti-inflammatory drugs such as corticosteroids and phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors.

Bronchodilator

The primary mechanisms of action can be divided into two categories: beta2 agonists and anticholinergic medications. They are first-line drugs for COPD and are administered by inhalation. They are known to improve FEV1 by altering the smooth muscle tone of the airways and thus improving exercise tolerance. Bronchodilators are usually given regularly to prevent and reduce symptoms, exacerbations, and hospitalizations.

Short-acting beta2 agonists (SABA) and short-acting muscarinic antagonists (SAMA) are usually prescribed as needed for the management of intermittent dyspnea. Long-acting beta2 agonists (LABA) and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) are used, especially in cases of increasing dyspnea or more than occasional dyspnea. If the symptoms are persistent while on one bronchodilator, another bronchodilator should be added.

Beta2 agonists cause relaxation of airway smooth muscles. SABA, like albuterol, can be used with or without anticholinergics. SABA is the mainstay in COPD exacerbation. LABA includes formoterol, salmeterol, indacaterol, olodaterol, vilanterol, among others. The side effects are arrhythmias, tremors, and hypokalemia. Caution should be taken in heart failure as tachycardia may precipitate heart failure.

Anticholinergics inhibit acetyl-choline-induced bronchoconstriction. SAMA includes ipratropium and oxitropium. LAMA, such as tiotropium, can be given once daily.

Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) is an add-on therapy to bronchodilators in a step-up therapy. ICS includes beclomethasone, budesonide, fluticasone, etc. The common side effects are local infection, cough, and pneumonia. Oral systemic corticosteroids are used for all patients with COPD exacerbation and are avoided in stable patients due to more adverse effects.

Oral Phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors like roflumilast act by reducing inflammation and can be added if there is severe airflow obstruction with no improvement with the above medications.

Triple inhaled therapy (LABA+ LAMA+ ICS) has been recently approved by the FDA and is taken only once a day.

Intravenous alpha1 antitrypsin augmentation therapy for AATD patients. The high cost and lack of availability is the main limitation of this therapy.

**Supportive Therapy**

Supportive therapy includes oxygen therapy and ventilatory support, pulmonary rehabilitation, and palliative care.

Routine supplemental oxygen does not improve the quality of life or clinical outcomes in stable patients. Continuous long-term, i.e., longer than 15 hours of supplemental oxygen, is recommended in patients with COPD with PaO2 less than 55 mmHg (or oxygen saturation less than 88%) or PaO2 less than 59 mm Hg in case of cor pulmonale. Oxygen therapy has been shown to increase the survival of these patients with severe resting hypoxemia. For those who desaturate with exercise, intermittent oxygen will help. The goal is to maintain oxygen saturation greater than 90%.

A major cause of hypoxemia in COPD is due to ventilation-perfusion mismatch (V/Q mismatch), particularly in low V/Q areas. Hypoxic vasoconstriction of pulmonary arteries is to improve overall gas exchange efficiency. Supplemental oxygen can successfully reach the alveoli in these lungs, which prevents this vasoconstriction and thereby increases perfusion and improves gas exchange, thus resulting in the improvement of hypoxemia.

Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) is known to decrease morbidity and mortality in patients with acute respiratory failure. It should be tried as the first mode of ventilation in patients with COPD exacerbation with respiratory failure who otherwise have no absolute contraindication as it improves gas exchange, decreases hospitalization duration, reduces work of breathing, improves VQ matching, and improves survival. If NPPV does not work in a patient with COPD in a hospital setting, the patient should be intubated and put on a ventilator.

Pulmonary rehabilitation for patients with severe symptoms and multiple exacerbations reduces dyspnea and hospitalizations and is recommended for GOLD stages B, C, and D.

Although available from the time the person is diagnosed with COPD, palliative care is typically recommended for GOLD stage D. It is additional care to the patient's ongoing treatment plan. The goal is to provide the best quality of life possible. Not only does it play a role in the assessment and management of the symptoms, but it also helps patients understand their illness and facilitates a discussion about the patient's goal of care, advanced care, and end-of-life care plans. Advance care planning involves communication between patients, their families, and the physician and helps patients formulate their treatment preferences. Reassuring patients with a clear plan to deal with dyspnea in advanced disease and management of depression and anxiety is an important component of palliative care. These can be managed with low-dose opioids, lifestyle modification, and relaxation techniques, respectively. Most patients underestimate the disease, so it is important to look for transition time and discuss advanced care early in the disease. It is also important to explore where the patients want to spend their last days (e.g., home or hospital) and help provide them with as much comfort as possible.

**Interventional Therapy**

- Lung volume reduction surgery reduces hyperinflation and improves elastic recoil.

- Lung transplantation when FEV1 and or DLCO is less than 20%.

Additional Interventions

- Identification and reduction of exposure to risk factors. Counseling about smoking cessation is the single most important intervention that slows the progression of the disease. Reducing exposure to open cooking fires and promoting efficient ventilation also benefits.

- Daily oral opioids for severe COPD symptoms refractory to medical therapy. Nutritional supplementation in malnourished patients with COPD

- Pneumococcal vaccine 23 valent every five years for patients with COPD  older than 65 or with other cardiopulmonary disease and Influenza vaccine for all patients with COPD every year

- Readmission rates can be reduced with counseling on the optimal use of metered-dose inhalers (MDI)

- Exercise for all patients with COPD

**Management of a Patient with COPD Exacerbation**

Beta-blockers and anticholinergics are used simultaneously. Initially with nebulizers and later switched to MDI. Systemic corticosteroids (intravenous or oral) are shown to hasten recovery and decrease hospital stays. Antibiotics are beneficial, especially if a cough productive of purulent sputum is present. Second generation macrolides, extended-spectrum fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, and amoxicillin-clavulanate. NIPPV can be beneficial in patients who can protect their airways and do not have a major acid-base disorder on the ABG. Very often, patients with end-stage COPD with exacerbations are intubated and put on a ventilator. Ventilated patients should be watched for the development of auto-PEEP and its related complications.

**Prevention**

- Smoking cessation

- Vaccination against Pneumococcus and Haemophilus Influenzae.