Treatment of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS) revolves around seizure control and includes medical, dietary, and surgical management. Seizure control is associated with improvement in cognition, mood, alertness, and overall quality of life.

**Medical Management:**The goal of treatment in LGS is seizure control. Medications help, but only to a certain extent. Seizures are usually refractory, are of different types, and need multiple medications. Control of tonic and atonic seizures are usually given priority because of associated falls and accidents.

- Felbamate: Mainly treats atonic and tonic-clinic seizures. Although one of the first medications approved for LGS by the FDA (in 1993); it is also the last one to be used and only if all others fail (has multiple and severe side effects).

- Lamotrigine: Useful for tonic-clonic seizures and can potentially improve mood and behavior along with speech.

- Valproate: Treats multiple seizure types. It is frequently started as the first medication and can be used as monotherapy (since it treats different seizure types) or in combination with other medications.

- Rufinamide: Treats atonic and tonic-clonic seizures.

- Clobazam: It is a long-acting benzodiazepine and was approved by the FDA in 2011 as an adjunctive for the treatment of seizures in LGS patients > 2 years of age.

- Topiramate: Useful in treating tonic-clonic seizures. The FDA approved it as an add-on treatment for seizures in LGS in children >2 years of age.

- Cannabidiol (CBD) oral solution: It has been found useful especially for drop attacks but also treats other seizures.

- Medications like vigabatrin, zonisamide, ethosuximide, clonazepam, levetiracetam have also been used but not well studied in regards to LGS.

- Phenytoin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, gabapentin, lacosamide, phenobarbital are not used as they can aggravate some seizure types associated with LGS.

- There are reports that corticosteroid

**Dietary management:**Seizures in LGS are often refractory to medical management. The next step is dietary modifications. These modifications have been studied in children and adults and can decrease seizures and perhaps reduce medication doses. Different diets that have been tested include Ketogenic diet,

**Surgical management:**If medical management and dietary restrictions fail, the next step in the management of LGS is surgical management.

- Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS): VNS is combined with medical therapy and is most useful for the treatment of drop attacks and tonic-clonic seizures.

- Brain surgery: Surgical options include resection, disconnection (corpus callosotomy), and hemispherectomy. In the past, LGS patients were considered ineligible for surgery, as it was thought to be a generalized epilepsy syndrome. However, patients with secondary LGS can have a resectable lesion (tubers, tumors, malformations) which is the source of seizure activity and can be considered for resection. In LGS, seizures tend to affect both sides of the brain and disconnection by a corpus callosotomy is thought to stop the spread of the seizures from one side to the other. Corpus callosotomy is helpful with atonic, tonic, and tonic-clonic seizures.