Neuroendocrine tumors (NET) are a heterogeneous group of malignancies characterized by various presentations associated with indolent biological behavior. These tumors arise from neuroendocrine cells that are distributed in several areas of the body. This review will discuss the disease state information on gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors and treatment updates, focussing on lutetium (LU 177 dotatate therapy or peptide receptor radioligand therapy [PRRT]). Secondarily material has also been presented concerning the application of LU177 in NET of the prostate gland.

Neuroendocrine tumors account for less than 1% of all malignancies and comprise a diverse family arising throughout the endocrine system, including the GI tract, bronchi, thymus, and adrenal glands. The most common locations are gastrointestinal [carcinoid] and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. These are classified based on the degree of differentiation into well, moderately, or poorly differentiated tumors. Well-differentiated NETs arising within the digestive system are referred to as carcinoids. Gastrointestinal (GINETS) and pancreatic NETs (PNETs) may have similar characteristics by histology but has variable clinical behavior and biology.

Pancreatic NETs have a relatively worse prognosis than GINETs and respond differently to therapies, with most agents demonstrating relatively higher responses with PNETs than those with GINETs.

Patients with the symptomatic disease will be treated initially with somatostatin analogs that are highly effective in controlling the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome and also control tumor growth. The treatment decisions are based on the patient's clinical presentation with hormonal symptoms and the type of treatment received before the progression. All NET patients need staging evaluation with dotatate gallium-68 imaging to assess the somatostatin receptors.

Cu-64 is a PET isotope similar to gallium-68 that can be produced in quantities to meet the clinical needs of imaging centers without the supply shortages of nuclear generator-based PET isotopes. Cu -64-DOTATATE has advantages over Ga-68-dotatate in detecting significantly more NET lesions than Ga-68-dotatate. The shelf life of Cu-64 is over 24 hours, and the scanning window of at least 3 hours makes Cu-64-dotatate logistically more favorable to use in the outpatient clinical setting.

A subset of patients with clinical or radiological progression after somatostatin analogs are managed with debulking palliative surgery, liver-directed interventions such as chemoembolization, or systemic radiolabeled somatostatin analogs such as  Luthathera (Lu177-dotatate).[

Lu177-dotatate has efficacy in treating NET in other non-endocrine organs, such as the prostate.