**Physiology of Collagen Induction Therapy**

Micropunctures are created, which produce a controlled skin injury without causing any significant damaged to the epidermis. These microinjuries lead to minimal superficial bleeding and set up a wound healing cascade with release of various growth factors such as platelet derived growth factor, transforming growth factor alpha and beta, connective tissue activating protein, connective tissue growth factor, and fibroblast growth factor.

In the treatment of scars, the needles breakdown the scar strands and allow it to revascularize. Neovascularization and neocollagenesis is initiated by migration and proliferation of fibroblasts and laying down of intercellular matrix.

A fibronectin matrix forms after 5 days of injury that determines the deposition of collagen resulting in skin tightening persisting for 5–7 years in the form of collagen III. The depth of neocollagenesis has been found to be 5–600 µm when a 1.5 mm length needle is used for the procedure. Histological examination of the skin treated with 4 microneedling sessions 1 month apart shows up to 400% increase in collagen and elastin deposition at 6 months postoperatively, with a thickened stratum spinosum and normal rete ridges at 1 year postoperatively.

**Physiology of Drug Delivery**

Microneedling enhances the delivery of various drugs across the skin barrier as it bypasses the stratum corneum and deposits the drug directly up to the vascularized dermis. It has also been shown to cause significant widening of the follicular infundibulum by 47%, which may contribute to the increased penetration of the medication across the skin barrier.