**Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies**

Patients with cervical radiculopathy will often present with pain, numbness, and tingling in the upper extremities. In most radicular processes, the sensory nerve action potential will be normal in amplitude and latency. This occurs because the compression at the nerve root occurs proximal to the sensory dorsal root ganglion.

Most common sensory conduction areas evaluated:

- Median thumb C6

- Median index C6–C7

- Radial thumb C6–C7

- Ulnar little finger C8

**Motor Nerve Conduction Studies**

Compound muscle action potential amplitudes are a measure of motor fiber activation upon muscle stimulation. Latency is a measure of the speed of the fastest muscle fibers. As with sensory NCS, the motor NCS will be normal in cervical radiculopathy. This is because only a fraction of nerve fascicles within the nerve root are affected.

Most common motor conduction areas evaluated:

- Axillary (deltoid) C5–6

- Musculocutaneous (biceps) C5–6

- Ulnar (hypothenar) C8

- Median (thenar) T1>C8

**Electromyography Needle Study**

Electromyography is useful in localizing cervical radiculopathy and predicting prognosis. Only sensory changes and demyelinating components are usually found in early cervical radiculopathy; thus, EMG will not detect acute radiculopathy. As discussed earlier, if severe radiculopathy occurs, Wallerian degeneration may occur. This will show fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves on an EMG due to muscle fibers spontaneously firing. This has a characteristic visual appearance and a distinct auditory sound as well. Spontaneous activity is the most objective evidence of a nerve lesion. Fibrillation potentials are seen first at the more proximal muscles (paraspinal muscles), and then at the limb muscles.

Spontaneous activity of the paraspinal muscles is often seen on EMG within the first five to seven days.

Specific muscle testing is essential for cervical radiculopathy. The selection of muscles is critical to determine if a lesion is at the root, plexus, or peripheral nerve entrapment. The physical exam is important in selecting muscles, particularly muscles that appear weak on the exam. To definitively diagnose cervical radiculopathy, one paraspinal muscle and two muscles from a different peripheral nerve innervated by the same root must have positive EMG findings.

Most common muscles tested:

- Brachioradialis C5

- Deltoid C5–6

- Biceps C5–6

- Flexor carpi radialis C6

- Triceps C6–7

- First dorsal interosseous C8-T1

- Flexor pollicis longus C8

- Abductor digiti minimi C8-T1

Each root will have specific muscles to be tested and with typical NCS.

- C5 Radiculopathy: Primary innervation of the deltoid and biceps is from the C5 root with secondary innervation from the C6 root. Sensory NCS can not reliably assess the C5 nerve root. If the rhomboids show EMG changes on the exam, the C5 root is probably affected as the C5 root primarily innervates it with a small contribution from the C4 root.

- C6 Radiculopathy: The C5 and C6 nerve roots provide nearly equal innervation to the brachioradialis. The C6-C8 roots supply the triceps. The median-innervated thumb and lateral antebrachial cutaneous are examined for sensory NCS recording. There is no reliable motor NCS to be recorded.

- C7 Radiculopathy: The triceps, flexor carpi radialis, and pronator trees are typically affected with C7 radiculopathy. There is no reliable motor NCS to be recorded.

- C8 Radiculopathy: The abductor digiti minimi and flexor pollicis longus are typically affected with C8 radiculopathy. The first dorsal interosseous has a more substantial contribution from the T1 nerve root. The motor NCS recording is performed from the first dorsal interosseous.

- T1 Radiculopathy: The first dorsal interosseous, abductor pollicis brevis, and opponens pollicis are affected with T1 radiculopathy.