The spinal cord is a nervous tissue bundle from the medulla oblongata in the brainstem to the lumbar region, and the vertebral column protects it. The vertebral column consists of seven cervical, 12 thoracic, five lumbar, five sacral, and three to five coccygeal vertebrae. The cervical vertebrae are numbered C1 to C7 from the base of the skull to the thoracic vertebrae. The structure of C1, C2, and C7 have distinctive properties compared to C3 to C6. A cervical disc separates each cervical vertebrae. The composition is of inner nucleus pulposus of mucoprotein gel and outer annulus fibrosus. This composition allows for flexibility and mobility of the cervical spine. There is increased the risk of injury in the cervical spine compared to the more fixed thoracic spine. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of cervical discopathies, and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanisms of injury behind cervical discopathies and the accompanying pathophysiology.
- Review the necessary elements for an examination to assess for cervical discopathy, including necessary imaging studies.
- Summarize the treatment options available for cervical disc injuries, including both conservative and surgical care.
- Explain modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by cervical disc injuries.