The structure and composition of ABs have been studied in various studies using biochemical methods, light or electron microscopy. Calcium associated phospholipids are proposed to be the major components of ABs based upon the findings like elemental detection of calcium and phosphorus using energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis and the intense reaction of ABs with lipid statins.

Feldman et al. in 1967 used thin layer and gas chromatography to reveal the composition of ABs to be sphingomyelin, ceramide dihexoside, cholesterol, cerebroside, cholesteryl esters, with trace quantities of triglyceride and lecithin.

March and Shoch, in 1975, utilized the x-ray microanalyzer to show that phosphate, probably as appetite, was a major constituent of ABs.

Streeten in 1982 did an ultrastructural analysis of vitreous and found that large ABs were composed of intertwined ribbons of multilaminar membranes with a 6-nm periodicity characteristic of complex lipids, especially phospholipids, lying in a homogeneous background matrix.

Winkler and Lunsdorf in 2001 used electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy (EFTEM) to reveal that asteroid hyalosis is composed of calcium, phosphorus, and oxygen with an elemental similarity to hydroxyapatite. Using fast Fourier transform analysis, these investigators revealed that a fine, parallel-oriented line divides each 7-nm periodicity of asteroid lamellar stacks, separating each 7-nm layer into two halves of 3.5-nm thickness.

Komatsu et al. 2003, did a chemical analysis of vitreous fluid with an energy- dispersive X-ray microanalyzer and reconstructive studies of hydroxylapatite in simulated body fluid. ABs appeared as "snowballs" under the scanning electron microscope covered with the clotted matrix of vitreous substances superficial to pumice stone-like structure. They inferred that AH was produced not only by changes in ionic tension but also from changes in the vitreous extracellular matrix during aging and disease.

Lin and colleagues in 2007 identified carotene by confocal micro- Raman spectroscopy, which was verified by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).