When identified, unilateral vocal fold paralysis must be thoroughly evaluated, as there are a number of possible causes. Any pathology along any point of the neuromuscular pathway from the brainstem to the laryngeal muscles can cause paralysis. In the past, iatrogenic injury to the RLN during thyroid surgery was noted to be the most common cause of UVFP. However, given improvements in techniques, rates of iatrogenic injury have decreased. More recently, non-laryngeal primary malignancies (such as lung) have been reported to be the most common cause. Idiopathic UVFP, which some postulate to be a post-viral syndrome, is also a common cause. Central causes, such as previous cerebral vascular accidents, brain stem or high skull-base tumors, as well as peripheral neurologic etiologies, must be entertained in the differential. Lastly, a mechanical issue such as cricoarytenoid joint dislocation must be considered, especially in the setting of recent laryngeal trauma.

In 1991, Stanford University conducted a study and reviewed the literature regarding cases of UVFP from 1970 through 1991. Their review identified 1019 patients with UVFP. The most common etiology was neoplasm (35.5%), of which 54.8% were of lung origin. The second most common cause of UVFP in this group was post-surgical (24.6%), of which thyroid surgery was the cause in 55.4% of these cases. An idiopathic cause was the next most common, with a total of 14.3% of cases, while 13.3% were related to medical/inflammatory causes, 6% were related to traumatic events, and 6% were related to central causes. Because these are all known causes of UVFP, guided differential diagnosis and workup can be performed.