The administration of TNF alpha antagonists such as adalimumab requires an interprofessional healthcare team with thorough knowledge and working experience with these drugs. A few points to be kept in mind are:

- Ensure that the agent is truly indicated in the situation.

- Thorough investigations for fitness at baseline need to be performed, with a complete blood count, liver, and renal function tests. Ensure the patient is not in or at risk of congestive cardiac failure.

- It is essential to rule out any underlying infections, as these are known to flare up after therapy with TNF alpha antagonists. In tuberculosis-endemic countries, the risk of flaring up of a quiescent focus of tuberculosis is very common. Thus a chest X-ray and a Mantoux test is of great value before starting therapy.

- Monitoring the patient throughout treatment to follow up and track the development of any side effects is paramount.

When clinicians prescribe these drugs, including adalimumab, they should coordinate their activity with a clinical pharmacist to cover potential interactions and ensure the patient is a good candidate for tolerating the drug. Both nurses and pharmacists can explain dosing and administration, particularly if the patient will be self-administering the pen. All interprofessional team members need to inform each other of any changes in status, both positive and negative, during the course of therapy. This type of care coordination will result in improved patient outcomes with fewer adverse effects. [Level 5]