The breach rhythm, also known as the breach effect, is a benign EEG pattern with an epileptiform morphology, caused by a skull abnormality. A focal skull defect, like after a craniotomy, can cause an increase in the amplitude of alpha, beta, and mu rhythms, leading to the breach effect. Breach rhythm and epileptiform activity in the same area can be challenging to differentiate. Breach rhythm typically has sharp contours and irregular morphology, usually have a frequency of 6 to 11 Hz but may be associated with faster or slower wave activity. It may sometimes be hard to differentiate from actual epileptiform activity in the same area, which can lead to under or overdiagnosis of epilepsy and thus can have significant clinical consequences.

**EEG Features of Breach Rhythm**

An electroencephalogram (EEG) is a noninvasive test for providing neurophysiological activity of the brain. It is usually done by placing electrodes over the scalp which measures the activity of neurons.

Breach rhythm typically is a focal, asymmetrical, high-voltage activity. It often has arch-like waveforms, sometimes having spiky morphology. It can manifest as an irregular rhythm sometimes associated with sharp activity. Breach rhythm is most prominent when recorded over central and temporal regions. Breach rhythm can be identified easily when it occurs in serial trains. Single, spike-like, or sharp-contoured waveforms are more likely to be mistaken for epileptiform activity. These waveforms should be compared with waveforms of the rhythmic activity constituting breach rhythm to determine if these are distinct waveforms or similar to those constituting the breach rhythm. The absence of after coming slow-wave components and lack of spread to other areas is characteristic of breach rhythm. Brain damage should be suspected if breach rhythm is associated with polymorphic delta activity. If the breach rhythm is located over the central region, it can be blocked by physical movement due to the presence of an underlying normal mu activity. Breach rhythm can sometimes persist during sleep. It can manifest as a voltage increase in spindles in stage 2 of sleep.