Some of the psychopharmacological considerations for patients of varying backgrounds are listed below.

African Americans tend to receive more diagnoses of schizophrenia compared to other populations. When presenting with affective disorder, clinicians often misdiagnose them as having schizophrenia. African American clients also receive higher doses of antipsychotic medications and can be more sensitive to the effects of these medications. They are also less likely to receive second-generation antipsychotics and have twice the likelihood of tardive dyskinesia compared to Caucasians.

Hispanic Americans tend to focus more on somatic complaints when depressed compared to other populations. They also require half of the dose of anti-depressants compared to Caucasians in treatment. The Hispanic population is also more prone to experience anticholinergic side effects of psychopharmacological agents.

Like Hispanics, Asians will often deny depressed mood but present with more somatic rather than psychological complaints. Asians are also at higher risk of extrapyramidal side effects of psychotropic medications. Research has shown plasma haloperidol levels to be 52% higher in the Chinese than in other populations.

Caucasians have lower serum haloperidol and prolactin levels than Asians (both American and foreign-born). Studies have found a  correlation between a genetic marker, the human leukocyte antigen HLA-B*1502, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome induced by carbamazepine in certain groups of the Chinese population.

Alcohol metabolism differs in cultures. Eighty percent of Asians, particularly women, and 50% of native Americans exhibited the flushing response to alcohol which is explained by the genetic polymorphism of the isoenzymes alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ADHD), enzymes that are critical for the metabolism of alcohol.

The cytochrome P450 enzyme system plays a key role in the metabolism of psychotropic and non-psychotropic drugs. Genetic defects in the isoenzymes of this system are present in certain ethnic groups that can put them at risk of being poor metabolizers and thus make them more vulnerable to the toxic effects of drugs.