Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an excellent modality for prostate imaging due to its better contrast resolution. MRI can differentiate anatomical zones and their abnormalities. Prostate MRI is performed with a pelvic coil and is sensitive in detecting malignancy and assessing its local extension. The use of an endorectal coil provides more information and better resolution. With recent advances like multiparametric MRI (mp-MRI), functional MRI, and an MRI-guided biopsy, MRI is increasingly useful in detecting low-grade or low volume prostate carcinoma. Necessary MRI sequences include T2 weighted, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) along with an apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and dynamic intravenous contrast-enhanced (DCE) imaging. DWI analyzes the diffusion of water molecules at the cellular level. ADC is a qualitative measure of average water diffusion per voxel. DWI is particularly important in the diagnosis of prostate carcinoma and prostatitis, including abscess.

**Normal Anatomy**

The peripheral zone is homogeneously hyperintense on T2 weighted imaging (T2WI) with the hypointense capsule. The transition zone shows heterogeneity while seminal vesicles appear uniformly hyperintense on T2WI.

**BPH**

MRI delineates zonal anatomy, its elements, and gland volume as well as zonal volume. BPH appears as heterogenous TZ on T2WI. Due to glandular or stromal tissue enlargement, enlarged nodules in BPH show increased or decreased signals on T2WI. Glandular enlargement appears as bright signals on T2WI, while fibromuscular and stromal elements are dark on T2WI. Estimation of stromal and glandular ratio helps to choose appropriate medical therapy.

On MRI, BPH can be divided into seven types. Type 0= no/little zonal enlargement. Type 2= retrourethral. Type 3= retrourethral+ bilateral TZ. Type 4= pedunculated (multiple or solitary). Type 5= pedunculated + bilateral TZ +/- retrourethral. Type 6= subtrigonal or ectopic enlargement. Type 7= other combinations. Besides diagnosing BPH, MRI plays an important role in identifying carcinoma when a patient with BPH has increased PSA and suspicious or at high risk for developing prostate cancer.

**Prostate Infection**

Bacterial prostatitis is acute or chronic and is more common in the peripheral zone. Acute prostatitis appears T2 hyperintense with increased contrast enhancement. Chronic prostatitis is usually hypointense on T2 and shows poor contrast enhancement. Chronic prostatitis demonstrates increased diffuse restriction due to inflammatory cell infiltrate. These findings mimic prostatic carcinoma. However, the degree of diffusion restriction is lower than carcinoma. Non-necrotic granulomatous prostatitis also appears hypointense on T2 with diffusion restriction, but on the contrary to chronic prostatitis, there is no enhancement on postcontrast imaging. The necrotic area of granulomatous prostatitis shows an increased signal on T2WI. In patients with extra-prostatic extension of the granulomas, it's challenging to differentiate them from carcinoma.

Prostatitis may progress into abscesses, which is hyperintense on T2, hypointense on T1, and shows peripheral contrast enhancement. The abscesses show diffusion restriction and low ADC value.

**Prostate Malignancy**

Prostate carcinoma is related to high morbidity and mortality worldwide. MRI, specially mp-MRI, is useful for cancer detection and helps to avoid unnecessary biopsy. Pre-biopsy MRI and MRI guided biopsy is more superior to the TRUS guided biopsy.

MRI is also used to assess metastases that are not visualized on the bone scan or CT. It's also used to evaluate pathological fractures and associated complications.

PI-RADS- Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System is a standardized classification based on mp-MRI findings updated in 2015, known as PI-RADS version 2 = PI-RADS™ v2. According to it, the presence of clinically significant carcinoma is categorized into the following:

- PI-RADS 1- Highly unlikely-Normal T2WI and DW/ADC.

- PI-RADS 2 – Unlikely-Circumscribed heterogeneity on T2WI and hypointensity PZ on DW/ADC.

- PI-RADS 3 – Equivocal- Heterogenous lesion with obscured margin on T2WI; hyperintense on DW & hypointense on ADC.

- PI-RADS 4 –Likely- Non circumscribed </= 1.5 cm lesion, moderately homogenously hypointense on T2WI; hyperintensity on DW & hypointense on ADC.

- PI-RADS 5 – Highly likely- similar to PI-RADS 4 but lesion > 1.5 cm or extra-prostatic extension.