The possible causes of the symptoms should be investigated in order to exclude pathologic or anatomic contraindications to UAE (as discussed above).

**Cancer Screening**

The patient should be current in her gynecologic screening for cervical cancer.  American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) recommendations include HPV testing at age 30 thereafter every 3 years if a woman is HPV-positive and every 5 years if HPV-negative.  Papanicolaou smears are not recommended after age 65 unless there is a special reason to continue.  Women with any endometrial abnormalities on imaging, particularly women over age 45, should undergo endometrial biopsy before UAE, because UAE is not an approved therapy for the treatment of endometrial cancer.

**Serum Parameters to Evaluate**

- Electrolytes

- Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)

- Complete blood count (CBC)

- Platelet count greater than 50,000 per microliter

- International normalized ratio (INR) less than or equal to 1.5

- Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin for pregnancy exclusion

**Imaging**

MRI provides a significant amount of additional information compared with ultrasound (size and position of fibroids, adenomyosis status) and should be performed prior to UAE.

**Informed Consent**

The 2009 SIR guidelines stress the importance of informed consent before UAE:

"Any and all treatment options should be presented with the understanding that, for patients interested in gynecologic alternatives, additional consultation will be required. Choice of embolic agents, routes of vascular access, and the anticipated use of an arterial closure device should be discussed. Descriptions of the expected process of admission to the hospital (and by whom), the immediate post-uterine artery embolization recovery period, convalescence and medications at home, and the time expected away from work should also be made.

Written materials given at the time of consultation can enhance this process. Contact information should be given to patients so they can access a responsible physician on a 24-hour availability basis if they perceive that a problem has arisen." [15]

The 2014 SIR guidelines state:

"Interventional radiologists should inform patients about...the possibility of a missed diagnosis of cancer and a delay in definitive treatment."

These recommendations are set with the intention to preserve patients' rights of autonomy.

**Pre-Procedure Care**

Blood-borne pathogens can colonize UAE-induced necrotic tissue.  The 2018 SIR guidelines recommend that antibiotics, such as 1 g cefazolin or 500 mg levofloxacin, be given IV to reduce the chance of abscess development.

Some physicians prescribe pain medication (e.g., ketorolac 30 mg IV) prior to the procedure.

If the patient has risk factors for a difficult-to-intubate airway (e.g., screens positive on a sleep apnea questionnaire), then precautions should be taken (e.g., having the patient monitored by capnography at all times) to prevent arrest from respiratory depression from sedation.  Some states have laws requiring capnography, and the 2013 SIR standards of practice recommend it.

**Post-Procedure Care**

There are a number of clinical factors that may need to be addressed after the procedure.

**Pain
**

Options for management include NSAIDs and/or opioids.

One regimen includes:

- Ketorolac 30 mg given before the procedure and after, then 30 mg every 6 hours intravenously (IV) as an inpatient

- Ibuprofen scheduled during post-procedure observation and opioid of choice available PRN for several days after discharge

Puncture site pain or leg pain is common, which can be from injury of the medial femoral cutaneous nerve.  It usually responds to NSAIDs and time.  For severe pain thought to be related to nerve injury, gabapentin can be prescribed.

If a patient has persistent (longer than 1 week) abdominopelvic pain, then imaging workup for non-target embolization should be considered.

Chronic pain syndromes (such as inflammatory bowel disease) may worsen after UAE.

**Pulmonary Emboli Prevention**

Sequential compression devices and prophylactic enoxaparin should be considered.  Patients have developed and died from pulmonary emboli after UAE.

**Bleeding**

Vaginal bleeding in the first week after therapy could indicate a developing endometrial infection.  A patient with endometritis should have flu-like symptoms and fever.  Bleeding after the first week with cramping could indicate that there is a sloughing or sloughed fibroid.

**Nausea**

Nausea can be treated with ondansetron 4 mg IV after the procedure continued every 6 hours until discharge.

**Hypertension**

Blood pressure often increases in the short term after embolization.  Potential sequelae of hypertension include pulmonary edema, myocardial infarction, and stroke.

**Post Discharge Communication**

Communication between the patient and the physician or physician representative should continue during the first week.  Physicians may wish to schedule a return clinic visit at 1 to 3 months.