# Continuing Education Activity

Technetium 99m sestamibi (MIBI), also known as 99m Tc-methoxy isobutyl isonitrile, is a radiopharmaceutical used to evaluate pathology within the cardiac, breast, and parathyroid tissues. Sestamibi is part of the radioactive diagnostic agents class of medications, characterized as a lipophilic cationic radiotracer. This activity illustrates the indications, mechanism of action, and contraindications for sestamibi as a valuable diagnostic agent. Furthermore, this activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the diagnosis of patients with cardiac conditions, hyperparathyroidism, and breast cancer.

**Objectives:**
- Summarize the mechanism of action of technetium 99m sestamibi.
- Identify the indications for the use of technetium 99m sestamibi.
- Outline the common adverse events associated with technetium 99m sestamibi.
- Describe the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to ensure appropriate selection of candidates for the use of technetium 99m sestamibi to enhance the delivery of care and improve outcomes for patients experiencing cardiovascular events.

# Indications

Technetium 99m sestamibi is a cationic radiotracer with FDA approval as a nuclear myocardial perfusion agent to visualize the blood flow through the heart. Also, sestamibi allows simultaneous assessment of exertional and resting left ventricular ejection fraction. Myocardial perfusion imaging using sestamibi is less invasive than coronary angiography and shows strong evidence for testing for irreversible or reversible ischemia. The American College of Cardiology recommends stress testing using myocardial perfusion imaging for patients with negative biomarkers, nondiagnostic electrocardiography, and chest pain that is not recurrent.

Another FDA-approved indication for sestamibi is in the setting of scintimammography, a complimentary second-line agent in breast imaging for breast cancer when the breasts are mammographically dense or mammography is inconclusive.

Additionally, sestamibi is frequently used in the noninvasive intraoperative localization of hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissues and adenomas in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism.

Finally, a non-FDA-approved use of sestamibi is in the detection of multidrug resistance in cancer that is mediated by P-glycoprotein and multidrug resistance-related protein-1.

# Mechanism of Action

Sestamibi is characterized as lipophilic and cationic. It is also characterized as a transport substrate for multidrug resistance-related protein-1 and P-glycoprotein.

# Administration

To use technetium 99m sestamibi, it must be prepared ahead of time using the water bath method. A variety of techniques have been proposed to heat sestamibi, but the main goal is to heat the compound to a boil. Following this preparation process, there is a six-hour period where the vial must be administered.

For myocardial perfusion imaging, sestamibi is introduced intravenously, using aseptic technique, in small amounts when the heart is at rest and one minute into maximal stress. Exercise is the preferred way to induce stress, but adenosine receptor agonists, namely dipyridamole, can be used in those with limited exercise capacity.

In preparation for parathyroid surgery, a dose of 740 to 925 megabecquerel of sestamibi is injected intravenously approximately 2.5 to 3 hours before the surgery to localize the adenoma to be removed. Furthermore, to ensure that the radiotracer is not taken up by thyroid parenchyma, the thyroid gland function is inhibited by administering five drops of Lugol's iodine solution every twelve hours four days before the procedure and the day of the procedure. By suppressing the thyroid function, sestamibi uptake will be isolated to the hyperfunctioning parathyroid adenoma on the day of the surgery.

The standard dosing used in molecular breast imaging is approximately 300 megabecquerel of sestamibi using dual-head cadmium zinc telluride cameras. In this setting, the imaging is gathered immediately after the injection of the radiotracer.

# Adverse Effects

A severe but rare adverse reaction associated with sestamibi injections is allergic reactions. Allergies can range from a mild pruritic maculopapular rash to angioedema and anaphylaxis.

# Contraindications

Technetium (99mTc) arcitumomab if pregnant or known allergies or hypersensitivity to mouse proteins. Women should not breastfeed for 24 hours after the application of the drug.

# Toxicity

The average effective radiation dose of myocardial perfusion imaging is approximately 12 millisieverts, which is equivalent to the radiation dose of performing 923 posteroanterior chest radiographs. Sestamibi is superior to thallium in terms of toxicity profile due to the lower radiation dose. It is comparable to the radiation dose of coronary CT angiography while being less invasive.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The proper use of technetium 99m sestamibi requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that includes a nurse, pharmacist, and a number of physicians in different specialties. Although improper usage of sestamibi in itself is not very dangerous, adverse clinical outcomes manifest secondary to missed diagnoses leading to insufficient medical management. With proper utilization, myocardial perfusion defects can be accurately identified, thus reducing the morbidity and mortality of cardiovascular events. Patients who present with chest pain need rapid diagnostic stratification to rule out myocardial infarction. In the outpatient setting, a nurse can inject the radiotracer in a patient presenting with chest pain to be later imaged by the cardiologist. The prognostic information derived from the proper utilization of sestamibi includes predicting clinical outcomes in the outpatient setting and determining stress parameters for very long-term outcomes in patients with limited exercise capacity.

The American College of Radiology rated myocardial perfusion imaging with an appropriateness criteria score of eight on the nine-point scale for the setting of intermediate and or high probability of myocardial infarction.