Today, with the epidemic of drug overdoses, nurses, pharmacists, and physicians need to be aware of flumazenil. This competitive antagonist of benzodiazepines can rapidly reverse benzodiazepine overdose. Despite the initial hype about the drug, many experts believe that its risks may outweigh its benefits. The problem with flumazenil is that its effects are not consistent or predictable. Not everyone with benzodiazepine overdose will respond to it. The drug may precipitate seizures and withdrawal in patients who have been using benzodiazepines for a medical disorder. Additionally, all healthcare workers need to know that this drug should not be used in patients with a history of seizures, head injury, or those who have ingested a tricyclic antidepressant. The ideal circumstance for flumazenil is when a naive benzodiazepine individual has overdosed. The nurse and the pharmacist should educate the patient on the use of benzodiazepines, their potential to cause addiction, and physical dependence.

**Outcomes**

In general, patients who overdose on benzodiazepines alone rarely have significant mortality. The problem arises when the individual has co-ingested alcohol or other illicit drugs. In most isolated cases of benzodiazepine overdose, supportive management may prove useful. A few patients may develop rhabdomyolysis and aspiration pneumonia. Overall, the use of flumazenil to manage benzodiazepine overdose is diminishing as the drug may cause more harm than good.

Normally flumazenil overdose is handled by emergency department physicians. Emergency department physicians should rapidly stabilize the patient. Hospital pharmacists should ensure proper dosing of flumazenil. Critical care physician consultation is required in severe poisoning with respiratory depression. In addition, medical toxicologist consultation is often required for multiple-drug ingestions. As depicted above, clinicians(MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) should collaborate to improve patient outcomes. An interprofessional team approach would help achieve maximum efficacy and minimize potential risks associated with flumazenil therapy. [Level 5]