Lobular capillary hemangiomas show frequent ulceration and bleeding, which is the usual cause that warrants treatment. Clinical trials are limited; hence, there is no accepted standard of care for treating these lesions. Different treatments have variable degrees of success and variable rates of recurrence. No matter the treatment, the patient should be counseled about the risk of recurrence.

In non-visible areas, complete excision is the preferred method of lesion removal because of its lower rates of recurrence, and it provides an excellent specimen for histopathologic characterization. The excision is performed under local anesthesia. For sessile or recurrent lesions, surgical excision with suturing is preferred and results in less postoperative bleeding with a lower recurrence rate.

Shave excision or curettage followed by electrocautery may be used for cosmetic areas, but recurrence is more common with these modalities.

For small lesions in cosmetically sensitive areas or lesions in children, practitioners may consider non-operative management with pulsed dye laser, CO2 laser ablation, or electrocautery if laser therapies are not available.

Medical management is generally not recommended. A variety of topical or intralesional treatments have been used with variable responses. These include topical imiquimod cream, alitretinoin gel, timolol, propranolol, and even phenols for periungual lesions.

In cases of pregnancy or medication-induced lobular capillary hemangiomas, the recurrence rate after treatment is higher. Medication should be discontinued if possible. For patients on antineoplastic medications, where stopping the medication is not possible, management is symptomatic. For example, in the case of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor-related lesions, the Multinational Association for Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC) Skin Toxicity Study Group has published guidelines preventing and treating lobular capillary hemangiomas, recommending weekly chemical cauterization, electrodesiccation, or nail avulsion.