The embryonic mesoderm leaflet, already visible from the second week of gestation, gives rise to the skeletal musculature.

The mesoderm differs in four areas in the medial-lateral direction:

- The chordomesoderm, which makes up the notochord.

- The paraxial mesoderm is organized in two slings, lateral to the notochord and longitudinal course, which, thanks to the formation of transverse grooves, are fragmented into metameric small masses.

- The intermediate mesoderm, adjacent to the somites, in the cervical, thoracic, and caudal regions.

- The lateral mesoderm furthest from the notochord and delaminated in two parallel sheets.

During embryonic development, the median cellular cord forms the notochord, which represents the first axile apparatus of the embryo, with a short life but responsible for the phenomena of induction towards the surrounding areas. Starting from the cephalic end of the embryo, the mesoderm on the sides of the notochord (paraxial mesoderm), due to the formation of transverse grooves, is fragmented into two series of cylindrical thickenings with a spiral organization called somitomeres.

The segmentation in somitomeres begins in the most cranial region of the mesoderm with a more marked metamer in the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal regions.

The first seven pairs of somitomeres have a slightly accentuated segmentation and form the striated muscles of the face, of the jaw, and of the neck, all subsequent forms of segmental units called somites.

About 42 to 44 somites form, of which the first corresponds to the eighth somitomere.

The first four pairs of somites form in the occipital region, where they contribute to the formation of occipital and facial bones as well as of the eye and tongue muscles.

Eight pairs of cervical somites follow: the first contributes to the formation of the occipital, the other seven form the cervical vertebrae, the muscles, and the dermis associated with them.

In succession, we find 12 pairs of thoracic somites (which form the vertebrae, the musculature, and the bones of the rib cage, and enter the upper limb formation), 5 of lumbar somites (which form the lumbar vertebrae, the muscles, and the abdominal dermis), 5 of sacral somites (which form the sacrum with the associated muscles and dermis), and 3 to 5 of coccygeal somites (which form the coccyx).