**History**

Generally involves acute trauma, and it is important to ask about the mechanisms of injury. It is typically a fall onto an outstretched hand (FOOSH) injury, with the wrist being in extension or twisting with ulnar deviation. Some common complaints are listed below.****

- Painful clunking

- Swelling and or deformity

- Pain in the push-up position

- Weakness in grip

- A sensation of the wrist giving-way

- Paresthesia, along with the distribution of median nerve

**Examination**

- Snuffbox tenderness

- would indicate a possible scaphoid fracture

- Dorsal intercalated segment instability (DISI) tests

- Pain with extreme extension and radial deviation
- Dorsal wrist pain with loading
- Tenderness distal to Lister tubercle (scapholunate disruption)
- Watson Test:

- Pressure on the volar part of the scaphoid subluxes the scaphoid dorsally out of the scaphoid fossa of the distal radius while deviating from ulnar to radial, and a clunk is sensed as pressure is released when the scaphoid decreases back over the dorsal rim of the radius (DISI).

- Volar intercalated segment instability (VISI) tests

- LT Shuck test (ballottement test):

- The lunate is balanced, and the wrist is then taken by radial and ulnar deviation, both active and inactive. If there is discomfort or clicking at the lunotriquetral joint, the test is positive.


- Lunotriquetral compression test:

- During radioulnar deviation, the triquetrum is displaced ulnarly, causing discomfort.

- Carpal instability nondissociative (CIND) tests

- The sudden shift of proximal row into extension with ulnar deviation of the wrist.

- Distal radioulnar joint instability

- Painful compression of ulna against radius
- Piano Key Test:

- The piano-key examination includes pronating the hand and depressing the distal ulna from dorsal to volar. As compared to the contralateral wrist, a favorable effect is characterized by painful laxity of the affected wrist (DRUJ)

- Generalized ligamentous laxity may be present.

- Positive Tinel sign may be elicited if the median nerve is compressed.