PAD, historically known as “milk leg,” presents with the classic triad of edema, pain, and blanching without signs of cyanosis or tissue involvement. The onset of symptoms has proven to be unpredictable. They may be gradual over the course of days or fulminant with severe progression in a matter of hours. In 50% to 60% of patients, PAD will precede PCD.

PCD presents similarly with pain and massive swelling due to fluid sequestration. Its most pathognomonic feature is the presence of cyanosis. As cyanosis and worsening venous congestion progress, patients will develop skin changes such as bullae and necrosis, and ultimately may experience paresthesia and motor weakness if edema causes severe arterial compromise and compartment syndrome. Cyanosis begins peripherally where it remains the most intense but may spread to involve the entire extremity. Gangrene will develop in about half of patients with PCD. In 10% to 20% of patients, this remains superficial with the preservation of arterial inflow. However, in more severe cases of venous gangrene, the deep musculature will be involved, and arterial pulses are absent.

Although much less common, upper extremity phlegmasia has been reported with the presence of ischemic venous thrombosis and gangrene. At least two of the following symptoms have been associated with upper extremity involvement: hemodynamic compromise secondary to impaired cardiac output, occlusion or thrombosis of central veins often associated with central venous catheterization, and occlusion of the peripheral veins.

Pulmonary embolism is another clinical manifestation of phlegmasia as this disease process is highly emboligenic and has been shown to have increased incidence when tissue necrosis is present.