Indications for a TURP include failure of medical management for lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) or bladder outlet obstruction (BOO), obstructive nephropathy, recurrent bladder stone formation, two or more episodes of urinary retention, prostate abscesses, difficulty with clean intermittent catheterization, recurrent gross hematuria, incomplete emptying, and obstructive azoospermia.

Generally, men with BPH seek medical help when they experience bothersome lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). Patients presenting with LUTS are usually initially started on medical management, such as an alpha-adrenergic blocker and/or 5 alpha-reductase inhibitors. Should they fail medical management, they can then proceed with a TURP.

If a patient is found to have a bladder stone, it indicates that the patient is not completely emptying his bladder and may benefit from medical BPH treatment or a TURP to relieve the obstruction. Medical therapy is usually preferred initially.

The size of the prostate alone is not considered an indication for surgery. There should generally be a finding of real or potential permanent harm to the kidneys or bladder. Subjective or objective evidence of bothersome symptoms not adequately controlled by other means would also constitute a surgical indication.

A relative indication would be a sizeable intravesical median lobe, especially if it appears to be causing a ball-valve effect which is unlikely to be relieved by medications or alternate surgical procedures as transurethral resection is particularly effective in eliminating these types of obstructions that are resistant to medical therapy.

A prostatic abscess that requires drainage, which is superficial and easily accessible via the urethra, can easily be unroofed with a TURP. Difficulty with catheterization in a patient with continuing retention or incomplete emptying can also be indications for a TURP, as this may decrease the difficulty in placing a catheter. If a patient is found to have obstructive azoospermia at the level of the ejaculatory ducts, these can be resected transurethrally.

Surgeons should not attempt a TURP in prostates larger than they can reasonably resect in 90 minutes of operating time to minimize postoperative complications. For most resectionists, this is typically about 75 to 80 grams, although particularly skilled and experienced surgeons can manage prostates of 100 to 150 grams in size. Very large prostates that require surgery and are deemed too big for TURP can generally be managed by simple open prostatectomy or laser enucleation (HoLEP).