The American Cancer Society has issued the following guidelines (2020) for cervical cancer screening:

- Cervical cancer screening should begin at age 25 years.

- Women aged 25 to65 years should have a primary HPV test every 5 years. If primary HPV testing is not available, screening should be done with either co-testing (pap smear and HPV DNA) every 5 years or pap test alone every 3 years.

- Women aged >65 years who have had regular screening appointments in the past 10 years with no history of serious diagnosis in the past 25 years can stop screening.

- Women who underwent hysterectomy with removal of uterus and cervix, except if the hysterectomy was done for cervical cancer can stop screening. Women whose cervix was not removed should undergo regular recommended cervical cancer screening.

A quadrivalent HPV vaccine has been approved in the United States and Europe, is effective against 4 HPV subtypes (6, 11, 16, and 18), and is reported to be effective in preventing cervical cancer.

The USPSTF (United States preventive services task force)'s recommendations for cervical cancer screening, published in 2018, include

- Screening with cervical cytology alone every 3 years in women aged 21 to 29 years

- Every 3 years with cervical cytology alone or every 5 years with cervical cytology and high-risk HPV combined testing or every 5 years with high-risk HPV testing in women 30 to 65 years old.

The USPSTF recommends against screening for cervical cancer in women younger than 21 years and >65 years who have had prior normal cervical screenings and are not otherwise at high risk for cervical cancer.