By definition, a central catheter is a venous access device that ultimately terminates in the superior vena cava (SVC) or right atrium (RA). They can be inserted centrally (centrally inserted venous catheter; CICC) or peripherally (PICC). PICCs are placed through the basilic, brachial, cephalic, or medial cubital vein of the arm.

The right basilic vein is the vein of choice due to its larger size and superficial location. Additionally, it has the straightest route to its destination, as it courses through the axillary vein, then through the subclavian, and finally, settles in the SVC. Other factors that have been thought to make the basilic vein the superior choice for PICC lines are that it has the least number of valves, better hemodilution capabilities and has a shallower angle of insertion compared to other veins.

The median cubital vein usually offers the second best insertion site because it is prominent in the antecubital fossa and courses directly to the basilic vein and onward into the SVC. However, given its location in the antecubital fossa, constant bending at the elbow increase the risk of complications such as mechanical phlebitis.

The cephalic vein is another option for PICC-line placement but, in addition to being smaller than the basilic vein, its course through the upper arm can be very tortuous. PICCs placed through this vein are thought to have a higher incidence of mechanical phlebitis, and its sharp angle of insertion makes it difficult to advance the catheter.

The brachial vein is another option due to its larger size; however, it is smaller and runs deeper than the basilic vein. It also courses close to the brachial artery and median nerve, and therefore, it usually requires ultrasound guidance for access.