The treatment and management of paraphilias and paraphilic disorders pose extreme difficulty due to a multitude of factors. Despite the egosyntonic and egodystonic dual nature of paraphilias in general, the overall majority of patients rarely seek treatment voluntarily. Many individuals may feel indignity, culpability, or discomfiture, while others focus on the difficulty and lack of desire to halt efforts to achieve intense sexual pleasure and ultimate satisfaction. Furthermore, many may fear the legal repercussions of coming forward for treatment. Those patients in treatment or seeking treatment are often either mandated legally or convinced by family, friends, or sexual partners.

The management of paraphilic disorders falls into two main categories, incorporating both psychological and biological constituents. The psychological approach, which includes psychotherapy, but more importantly, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), yields an overall positive outcome in terms of efficacy, regardless of the type of diagnosed paraphilic disorder.

The three main classifications of pharmacological agents used in managing paraphilic disorders involve selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), synthetic steroidal analogs, and antiandrogens. Despite limited support in the literature and the demand for further definitive research, treatment algorithms for varying severity of illness have been devised, offering useful and rational approaches to treating paraphilic disorders. The therapeutic choice depends on previous medical history and medication compliance, along with the intensity of both the sexual fantasy and the risk of sexual violence.

Literature suggests that each of the three drug categories mentioned above helps to target diverse physiological pathways and subsequent psychological attributes through their unique mechanism of action. Studies have shown SSRIs to be particularly useful in the adolescent population and milder paraphilias, including exhibitionism and patients suffering from comorbidities of obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD) or depression. SSRIs have also been used to alleviate hypersexuality, but strong evidence of actual efficacy has yet to be established. Antiandrogens, particularly gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogs, have been shown to considerably reduce the frequency and intensity of both deviant sexual arousal and behavior. GnRH analogs are also considered to be among the most promising pharmacological management for those sex offenders at high risk of particularly violent acts, particularly serial rapists or those individuals with pedophilic disorder. Of note, informed consent is obligatory before initiating antiandrogenic therapy.