Thrombocytopenia affects 7 to 11% of all pregnancies. However, less than 1% of pregnancies experience a drop in platelet count below 100 x 10^9/L.

- Gestation thrombocytopenia: Overall, gestational thrombocytopenia is the reason for low platelets in nearly 75% pregnancies presenting with thrombocytopenia. It is the most common cause of low platelets in the third trimester of pregnancy.

- Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP): ITP is the most common cause of low platelets in the first trimester of pregnancy. Overall it affects 1 to 4% of all pregnancies and affects 1 to 2 per 1000 pregnancies each year.

- Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA): 

- Pregnancy specific TMA

- Pre-eclampsia (PEC): Throughout the world, PEC affects 2% to 8% of all pregnancies and accounts for 20% of patients developing thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.
- HELLP (Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets): HELLP syndrome affects 0.2 to 0.8% of all pregnancies. However, it is one of the rare causes of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.
- Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP): It is a rare cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy, which is estimated to affect 1 in 5000 to 20,000 pregnancies.


- TMA not specific to pregnancy: These are amongst the rarest causes of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy.

- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP): TTP is estimated to affect 1 in 200,000 pregnancies, but 10 to 30% of all adult related TTP is obstetric.
- Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS): Atypical HUS is seen in up to 1 in 25000 pregnancies and presents with MAHA and renal failure, either at near-term or post-partum.

- Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC): DIC occurs in up to 0.35% of all pregnancies.

- Hereditary thrombocytopenia: It is a rare cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy that is commonly diagnosed in the first trimester of pregnancy, although it can present during any trimester.

- Others: Bone marrow failure, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, PNH, autoimmune conditions, and type II VWD are amongst the rare causes of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Less than 1% of patients develop thrombocytopenia secondary to 'other' causes listed.