Ziprasidone is a widely used antipsychotic drug. A psychiatrist usually starts the drug, but the follow-up of patients is generally done by a primary care provider, nurse practitioner, pharmacist, or physician assistant. Ziprasidone is an effective drug for schizophrenia, but it also has several side effects that require monitoring. Healthcare workers should obtain regular ECGs and blood work and assess the patient for movement disorder. Many of these patients also gain weight rapidly, and thus patients should be urged to exercise and eat a healthy diet. If tardive dyskinesia is suspected, the patient should receive a referral to the psychiatrist for other treatment options.

As with any medication, ziprasidone therapy should be under the guidance and care of an interprofessional team. Clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) will be the prescribers and determine dosing and titration schedules as applicable. Nursing staff should counsel patients on proper medication use and answer any questions the patient may have regarding their therapy. To reduce the risk of overdose and suicide in patients with psychotic illness, clinicians should write prescriptions for ziprasidone for the smallest quantity of capsules, along with a management plan to monitor and address possible adverse effects. Therapeutic drug monitoring can be used if adherence is suspected. Pharmacists can verify dosing, check for drug-drug interactions, and counsel the patient. If adverse events manifest, this needs to be communicated to all team members. This interprofessional approach will yield the best therapeutic results with the fewest adverse events. [Level 5]