Screening for infection with M. tuberculosis is indicated as a part of baseline TB risk assessment or for evaluating symptoms consistent with TB. Screening tests include the TST and IGRA, as described above. Screening tests are not recommended as a part of routine healthcare and should be performed in high-risk populations to detect latent or active TB disease.

According to 2017 guidelines for the diagnosis of active or latent TB, published by the CDC, American Thoracic Society (ATS), and Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), TB screening should be performed in patients with an increased risk of new TB infection and those with an increased risk of reactivation disease.

Patients with an increased risk of new TB infection are those with known exposure to M. tuberculosis, those with close and casual contact with a patient with untreated, active respiratory TB, individuals with LTBI and an increased risk of disease progression, employees and residents of homeless shelters and correctional facilities, and some healthcare workers. Certain healthcare workers, including pulmonologists and respiratory therapists, require serial testing, given their high risk of exposure.

The risk of reactivation is six times higher in individuals with severe immunocompromise, such as chemotherapy or organ transplant, HIV infection, lymphoma, leukemia, head or neck cancer, those with evidence of healed TB on chest radiograph, silicosis, renal failure requiring hemodialysis, and those receiving treatment with tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) inhibitors. Therefore, all individuals meeting these criteria should have a single test to rule out TB infection.

The risk of reactivation is three to six times higher in individuals with diabetes mellitus and those on systemic glucocorticoid therapy (greater than 15 mg/day for more than one month). Testing should be limited to those with an increased prevalence of TB, including those living homeless, those who use injection drugs, contacts of those with active TB, and those born outside the US who emigrated from countries with an incidence of TB greater than 100/100,000.

The risk of reactivation is 1.5 to three times higher in individuals weighing less than 85% of ideal body weight, those who smoke cigarettes, and those with evidence of small granulomas on chest radiography. Testing should be individualized for this group, with particular consideration for those living homeless, those who use injection drugs, contacts of those with active TB, and those born outside the US who emigrated from countries with an incidence of TB greater than 100/100,000.

Screening test selection should be based on CDC, ATS, and IDSA guidelines. The PPD skin test is preferred over the IGRA test for serial testing of individuals who should be tested regularly. This is because repeat IGRA test results are difficult to interpret. An IGRA is preferred over the PPD skin test when there is a low to intermediate risk of progression from latent to active disease. An IGRA is also the preferred screening test when the patient is unlikely to return to have the PPD test read, has a history of prior BCG vaccination, or has a previous history of non-tuberculous infection.

The PPD test may be an alternative when IGRA is unavailable or too expensive. In addition, either test may be used if there is a high risk of progression to active disease.

Dual testing with IGRA and PPD (in any order) is performed in low-risk individuals if the initial test is positive. The law requires latent TB infection testing; however, it is not indicated medically. A positive PPD test is followed by IGRA testing to confirm the presence of infection. IGRA testing should be done within three days of initial test placement. LTBI treatment is offered to individuals who are positive for both tests.

In 2019, the CDC updated guidelines for PPD screening and testing recommendations indicated in healthcare personnel. In the setting of a previously negative TB test and no prior history of TB disease, testing with TST (PPD) or IGRA should occur. If IGRA testing is positive or the TST is greater than five mm, the patient should be considered as having a new TB infection. If the initial test is negative, retesting should occur eight to ten weeks after known exposure to TB. The repeat TST is positive if induration is greater than ten mm and the measurement has increased from the first test by greater than six mm. Serial testing with IGRA in healthcare personnel is undefined, mainly secondary to increased rates of false conversion.

A documented prior positive TST does not require retesting but rather a TB symptom screen. However, if symptoms are present, further evaluation should occur. Screening should include individual baseline TB risk assessment. Routine annual screening should not be done without occupational risk or exposure.

In 2020, the World Health Organization released its guidelines for diagnosing and treating TB infection. The PPD skin test or the IGRA may be used to diagnose TB, without preference for either.

In 2021, the National Tuberculosis Controllers Association (NTCA) released its guidance for screening, diagnosing, and treating TB infection. IGRA testing is preferred for most patients born outside the US who were vaccinated with or may have been vaccinated with BCG. For others, either IGRA testing or a PPD TST may be used. Routine use of testing with both the PPD TST and IGRA is not advised but may be considered for those who may have a decreased immune response to the tests, those at risk for severe disease, and those in whom there is a high index of suspicion of infection. In addition, the PPD TST or IGRA may be used for low-risk patients requiring testing. Confirmatory retesting with either method should be performed if the test is positive.