Hemoglobin (Hgb or Hb) is the primary carrier of oxygen in humans. Approximately 98% of total oxygen transported in the blood is bound to hemoglobin, while only 2% is dissolved directly in plasma.

The body maintains adequate oxygenation of tissues in the setting of decreased PO or increased demand for oxygen. These changes are often expressed as shifts in the oxygen dissociation curve, representing the percentage of hemoglobin saturated with oxygen at varying levels of PO. Factors that contribute to a right shift in the oxygen dissociation curve and favor the unloading of oxygen correlate with exertion. These include increased body temperature, decreased pH (due to increased production of CO2), and increased 2,3-BPG. (Figure) This right shift of the oxyhemoglobin curve can be viewed as an adaptation for physical exertion. Regulation of the unloading of oxygen from the red blood cells to the target tissues is mainly by the concentration of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG) within erythrocytes. 2,3-BPG preferentially binds to and stabilizes the deoxygenated form of hemoglobin, resulting in a lower affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen at a given oxygen tension and a subsequent increase in the availability of free oxygen for consumption by metabolically active tissues.

Another aspect of oxygen transport is the delivery of oxygen to the tissues each minute. This oxygen delivery depends on both cardiac output (CO) and the arterial oxygen content (CaO):

- DO2 = CO * CaO

Note: the CaO calculation is given later in this article. Thus, changes in cardiac output, hemoglobin saturation, and hemoglobin concentration all affect oxygen delivery.