Patients with ADPKD may present with a variety of medical conditions, including hypertension, flank pain, abdominal masses, urinary tract infections, renal failure, nephrolithiasis, and cerebrovascular accidents. Hypertension is the most prevalent initial clinical presentation, occurring in 50% to 70% of cases, and is the most common feature directly associated with the rate of decline to ESRD and cardiovascular complications.

Multiple extra-renal manifestations are often present. Cerebral aneurysms occur in about 5% of young adults, and as many as 20% of patients over the age of 60. The risk of a cerebral aneurysm or subarachnoid hemorrhage is highest in patients with a family history of the same.

Extrarenal cysts are common in ADPKD. Hepatic cysts are often noted in these patients, and the prevalence increases with age. As many as 94% of patients over the age of 35 have been reported to have hepatic cysts. Total cyst prevalence and volume is higher in women versus men. Hepatic cysts in ADPKD patients rarely cause liver dysfunction. Rarely, patients develop pain from an acute cyst infection or hemorrhage.  In addition, about 7% to 36% of ADPKD patients develop pancreatic cysts, with a higher prevalence in ADPKD patients with PKD2 mutations.

Cardiac valvular disease has been noted in 25% to 30% of ADPKD patients. Cardiovascular complications, particularly cardiac hypertrophy and coronary artery disease, are the leading causes of death in patients with ADPKD.

Additional complications include colonic diverticula, which are noted in ADPKD patients requiring maintenance dialysis. Abdominal wall hernias are noted in as many as 45% of ADPKD patients, likely related to additional abdominal girth related to increased kidney size.