Treatment of actinic cheilitis should depend on the size, location, and severity of the lesion, along with the patient’s other comorbidities. The goal of therapy is to reduce the risk of malignant transformation from AC to SCC while maintaining functionality and cosmesis of the lips. A variety of therapies targeted at removing the dysplastic epithelium have been used to manage AC, including both surgical and medical options.

Surgical/destructive options for treatment include excisional vermilionectomy, cryotherapy, electrocautery, and pulse-dye or CO2 laser. However, these procedures are invasive, and patients may experience adverse effects such as pain, delayed healing, infection, scarring, edema, and paresthesias.

Non-surgical treatments for AC include topical therapies such as 5-fluorouracil, imiquimod, trichloroacetic acid, ingenol mebutate, diclofenac, phototherapy, topical DNA enzyme repair creams, photoprotection, and curettage with methyl aminolevulinate cream/daylight PDT.

A systemic review and meta-analysis of 283 patients showed surgically treated lesions compared to medically managed lesions had a higher remission rate (92.8% vs. 65%) and lower recurrence rates (8.4 vs. 19.2%) than non-surgical treatment.

It is difficult to directly compare efficacy across the numerous treatment options available for actinic cheilitis since many of the published studies, the severity of actinic cheilitis, and treatment regimens are not consistent or controlled across studies. However, the following options may be an option when deciding management for actinic cheilitis.

Summary of Treatment Options:

- **Laser treatment:****preferred non-surgical intervention**(efficacy 93%, low recurrences)
- CO2 Laser: 10600 nm
- Erbium Laser: 2940 nm
- Adverse effects: pain, hypertrophic scarring (managed with corticosteroids)

- **Vermilionectomy/Surgical excision:**preferred treatment for**severe/refractory cases**(efficacy near 100%, low recurrences).
- Adverse effects: pain, delayed healing, infection, scarring, edema, paresthesias, may be cosmetically disfiguring compared to other treatment options

- **Topical Treatments:**preferred treatment for patients with large areas of sun damage or those**preferring medical intervention**
- Various treatment regimens studied, examples range from applying to affected area once daily for 1 to 4 weeks depending on patient's tolerability (Efficacy for 5-FU at one week 69%, increased to 91% efficacy at four weeks)  
- Adverse effects: pain, crusting, inflammation, reduced patient compliance
- Summary of Topical Options and Their Mechanism of Action

- 5-FU: impairs pyrimidine thymidine synthesis and DNA replication
- Imiquimod: nucleoside analog and immunostimulator
- Ingenol mebutate: induces cell death and neutrophil-mediated antibody-dependent immune response to clear tumors
- Trichloroacetic acid: induces cell necrosis
- Diclofenac: anti-inflammatory, induces apoptosis by inhibiting COX 1 and COX2

- **Phototherapy:**while actinic cheilitis results from by UV light damaging epithelial DNA, light therapy at an increased intensity level that causes reactive oxygen species to destroy damaged skin cells and was found to be an effective treatment in some cases (efficacy 68%,12% recurrences). Efficacy increases when used in conjunction with other treatment options, including topical treatments.
- Adverse effects include pain, recurrence

- **Cryotherapy:**liquid nitrogen physically destroys abnormal cells
- Adverse effects include pain, crusting, scarring, reduced efficacy compared to other treatment options

- **Electrocautery/Curettage:**physical destruction of the abnormal cells
- Adverse effects include pain, scarring

- **Photoprotection:**reduce the progression
-  Dependent on patient compliance