Patients presenting with ocular irritation and discomfort symptoms should be assessed for floppy eyelid syndrome, particularly if these are chronic and resistant to medical management. The examination of these patients is comprehensive and includes a thorough ophthalmological exam focusing on testing the eyelid laxity of the patient and screening for OSA.

Different methods have been developed to evaluate and quantify upper lid laxity in FES patients, but no gold standard exists. McNabb’s approach, commonly regarded as the most reproducible technique, is easily performed in the clinic. The examiner distracts or vertically pulls the upper eyelid by placing a thumb on its outer one-third and brings it superiorly and laterally. The maximum difference between the upper eyelid’s resting position and maximal displacement is measured. A difference ranging between 15 to 25 mm strongly suggests floppy eyelids.

Alternatively, in their upper horizontal distraction test, Iyengar and Khan quantified the distance between the anterior corneal surface and the anteriorly displaced upper eyelid to diagnose FES.

Once diagnosed, the FES severity can be graded. One grading system, in particular, has been used in several clinical trials. In this method, the upper eyelid is distracted up as the patient is asked to look down. The amount of visible conjunctiva during this maneuver determines the severity of FES. If no conjunctiva is visible, the patient does not have FES and is assigned Grade 0. In mild FES, or Grade 1, less than one-third of the upper conjunctival is visible. In moderate FES, or Grade 2, one-third to one-half of the conjunctiva is observed. Lastly, more than half of the tarsal conjunctiva is visible in severe FES, or Grade 3.

Another commonly employed grading system is based on the amount of horizontal lid distraction from the corneal surface. This amount is measured in millimeters and converted into a grading scale of 0 to 4. If less than 6 mm, this is considered a Grade 0, 6 to 8 mm a Grade 1, 9 to 11 mm Grade 2, 12 to 15 mm a Grade 3, and greater than 15 mm a Grade 4.

The evaluation of FES should also include a full ophthalmological evaluation. Consideration must be given to related conditions such as keratoconus and dry eye. Given the high association between obstructive sleep apnea and FES, patients must be screened for OSA as part of the FES evaluation. A clinician can easily accomplish this by utilizing the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, which provides a quick way to screen FES patients. In those patients with a score greater than 10, a polysomnography test is indicated to diagnose OSA. Similarly, patients diagnosed with sleep apnea must also be evaluated for FES.