Patients will present with a variable amount of clinical manifestation of the underlying disease process, ranging from insidious mild limited disease to an acute fulminant systemic process. As such, the diagnosis is usually clinical with some laboratory findings to aid in treatment regimens. The following are pertinent laboratory findings important to mortality and morbidity:

- Leukocytosis in the CBC, evidence of renal and/or hepatic dysfunction (via CMP +/- UA, denoting possible MOF or pre-existing comorbidities)

- Positive blood cultures, and

- Peritoneal fluid analysis

Fluid analysis most importantly for the Dx of SBP, with the most sensitive indicator being a neutrophil count greater than 250 cells/microliter. The fluid should also be analyzed for glucose, protein, LDH, cell count, Gram stain, and aerobic and anaerobic cultures. The SAAG (serum-ascites albumin gradient) is used to determine the composition of the ascitic fluid (transudative vs. exudative), with the DDx depending on the gradient, a gradient greater than 1.1 g/dL is indicative of a transudative fluid related to increased hydrostatic pressures, such as portal-HTN and/or thrombosis, CHF, and Budd–Chiari syndrome to name a few. A low SAAG (less than 1.1 g/dL) indicating fluid associated with an increase in portal pressures, e.g., infections (tuberculosis, SBP), neoplasms, nephrotic disease, and other inflammatory processes such as pancreatitis and serositis.

The severity of the illness is managed with careful consideration of sepsis protocols, including monitoring parameters reflective of end-organ tissue perfusion mean arterial pressure, lactate level, evidence of end-organ damage such as encephalopathy, renal dysfunction, and evaluation for the necessity of supportive care measures like ventilatory or pressor support.