**Oral Candidiasis**

Oral candidiasis is the most common oral fungal infection. It is associated with extremes of age, newborns, and the elderly. Almost 5-7% of infants develop oral candidiasis.

**Aspergillosis**

Aspergillosis is the second most common oral mycosis. Primary invasive aspergillosis is uncommon in the oral cavity.

**Mucormycosis**

Mucormycosis is the third most common oral mycosis and a possibly fatal opportunistic fungal infection, notably in individuals with diabetes mellitus, hematological malignancies, and those under deferoxamine therapy.

**Histoplasmosis**

Histoplasmosis is the most common systemic fungal infection in the United States.

Histoplasmosis mainly affects the lungs; although possible, oral lesions are rare. The oral cavity can be affected as part of disseminated histoplasmosis, as the initial presentation of disseminated form, as a localized lesion, or as the only manifestation. Oral histoplasmosis most frequently occurs in the tongue, palate, and lips and is more prevalent in men.

**Blastomycosis**

Blastomycosis is endemic in Central and Southern North America, and, unlike histoplasmosis, it frequently affects immunocompetent individuals. Oral lesions present as a result of dissemination or local inoculation.

**Cryptococcosis**

Cryptococcus neoformans causes infection in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent individuals, but Cryptococcus gattii infects immunocompetent hosts. Cryptococcus neoformans causes 95% of cryptococcal infections, whereas only 4% to 5% are caused by Cryptococcus gattii.

**Paracoccidiomycosis**

Paracoccidiomycosis is endemic in Latin America.

**Geotrichosis**

Geotrichosis is rare in the nails, skin, and oral cavity. Pulmonary infection is the most common form of the disease.