Despite the longstanding awareness of this condition, the etiology of alveolar osteitis is not fully understood. It is most commonly noted as a premature fibrinolytic breakdown of the early platelet clot, exposing the underlying bone in the extraction socket.

Birn first hypothesized in 1973 that AO develops from a complete absence of a blood clot or development of an initial clot that is successively lysed soon after creation.

The immune system's response to tooth extraction is comparable to any other tissue trauma. The inflammatory response in the alveolus involves pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Studies have primarily focused on the effects of IL-6. IL-6 has a dual role in bone formation and bone resorption, which could contribute to the fibrinolysis in alveolar osteitis.

Investigating biomarkers such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), osteocalcin, and runt-related transcription factor 2 has also been suggested. These physiologic mediators could help create an enhanced understanding of the pathologic process of alveolar osteitis.

Focal fibrinolytic activity influenced by bacteria has also been investigated. The microbiota in alveolar osteitis was significantly different from the patients who presented without postoperative complications. Prevotella, Fusobacterium, Parvimonas, and Peptostreptococcus were the most common bacteria detected in patients with alveolar osteitis in one systematic review.

Another found Treponema denticola, a known red-complex periodontal pathogen, could be a likely culprit in the pathogenesis of AO. For a bacteria to be a causative agent of alveolar osteitis, it needs to be capable of fibrinolysis but must not induce swelling, purulence, or erythema. They must also be isolated from a post-extraction socket and conducive to proliferation. These bacteria thrive with poor oral hygiene. The bacteria are limited to the bone's surface, and thus alveolar osteitis is not categorized as a true infectious process.