Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) is a radiographic technique used to diagnose, stage, and survey hypermetabolic tissue, primarily cancer. PET is used primarily to assess physiology, while CT is used primarily to assess anatomy. Combining these two methods can but does not always improve outcomes, such as survival or selecting the least invasive treatment method.

This paper focuses on the use of PET-CT for head and neck cancer. The term 'head and neck cancer' (HNC) includes several types of cancers based primarily on anatomic distributions (discussed below). HNC has several pathophysiologic types. The majority of HNC is due to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and most HNC SCC emerges from the oropharynx. Most HNC is associated with tobacco and alcohol use and with a mucosal primary lesion.

High-risk strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) are the next most common cause of oropharyngeal cancer.  This type of cancer has a different natural history: it is more likely to be found in young patients and has better outcomes than HNC not caused by HPV. Another category of HNC develops in lymph nodes without another discernible primary lesion (but is SCC and not lymphoma). Lymphomas, glandular adenocarcinomas (e.g., of the thyroid and salivary glands), and skin cancers are less common types of HNC, and all have different natural histories and treatment regimens. They are not covered in this article but are reviewed in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines.