One must first make the distinction between large-scale mutations, where a whole chunk of a chromosome is lost, relocated, or rearranged, vs. point mutation. A point mutation is typically a change in just one base pair in a DNA molecule, and a difference of even only one nucleotide can be enough to cause significant problems in the body.

If this occurs outside of a gene, it is unlikely to have any effect, because these portions of the chromosome do not code for anything, but if this happens within a gene, it can lead to different results. If the resulting change in the template strand results in a new mRNA codon that translates for the same amino acid as before, which is possible since multiple codons can sometimes code for the identical amino acid,  termed a silent mutation. In this case, even though the gene changed, the resulting protein will not be any different. If the change in the mRNA codon translates for a new, different amino acid, that is called a missense mutation, which is the most common point mutation.

Among other reasons, this can be true if the amino acid that changed was the critical residue in supplying the catalytic activity of an enzyme. The active site might change shape due to new interactions, rendering it unable to bind its substrate. Or it is possible the side chain on this residue was specifically needed to interact chemically on the substrate, which now cannot take place in its absence, and if that enzyme is unable to do what it normally does, it could represent a significant problem for the cell. So missense mutations, while often benign, have the potential to be extremely harmful. Lastly, it is possible that substitution of this nature could cause the corresponding mRNA codon will not be able to code for an amino acid but to become a stop codon instead; the term for this is a nonsense mutation, which means that instead of the ribosome translating the rest of the mRNA strand it will just stop entirely, resulting in a partially complete protein. Unless the new stop codon is exceptionally close to the intended stop codon, it is highly unlikely that this protein fragment will be able to perform its intended function.