The list of causes of keratoconjunctivitis is extensive. A general classification scheme is helpful, dividing cases into infectious and non-infectious causes. Under the infectious category, viral and bacterial etiologies are by far the most common, with viral infection accounting for the majority of all-comers suspected of an infectious etiology. Non-infectious keratoconjunctivitis can be allergic, toxic, or immune-mediated. It is often also useful to further divide keratoconjunctivitis into unilateral or bilateral, and hyperacute (onset less than 1 week), acute (onset under 3 to 4 weeks) or chronic (lasting longer than 4 weeks).

Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC)– viral keratoconjunctivitis caused by the adenovirus, a ubiquitous, nonenveloped, double-stranded DNA virus. The primary targets of human adenovirus are the eyes, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, and genitourinary tract. Research ash found human adenovirus types 8, 19, 37, and 54 as the strains responsible for outbreaks of epidemic keratoconjunctivitis.

Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis (VKC)– Severe allergic conjunctivitis for which the exact etiology is still unclear. Suspicions are that there is a strong allergic component as the immunoglobulin E (IgE) mast cell-mediated pathway plays an important role in symptomatology. The theory is that there is a combination of immune system, genetic, and environmental factors (including air pollutants/allergens).

Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis (SLK)– Chronic inflammatory condition, though the etiology is unknown. One leading theory suggests that the inciting component to the development of superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis is constant friction between the superior bulbar and tarsal conjunctival interfaces causing chronic microtrauma.

Keratoconjunctivitis sicca – Also colloquial known as dry eye syndrome (DES), various underlying etiologies have been identified as well as associations with several, primarily autoimmune, systemic conditions. Regardless, the final common pathway is shown to be abnormalities in the pre-corneal tear film and lymphocyte-mediated inflammatory changes in the ocular surface, including conjunctiva and cornea.