In addition to protecting the eye from outside infiltrates and ultraviolet radiation, the cornea is responsible for approximately 65% to 75% of the refraction of light as it passes through the eye. The cornea performs the initial refraction onto the lens, which further focuses the light onto the retina. Tears spread across the surface of the eye laterally in the blinking process. With their lipid, aqueous, and mucin components, tears are important to the maintenance of corneal health as they keep the cornea moist and clean.

The epithelium includes epithelial cells and a basement membrane. The primary functions of the corneal epithelium are twofold: to prevent the entrance of foreign objects or substances, and to accommodate the absorption of nutrients such as oxygen from the tears that pass over its surface.

Bowman's membrane is comprised of a thin, transparent layer of collagen. Trauma or injury can disrupt this collagenous film, which may cause scarring that impairs vision, depending on its location and extent.

The stroma is the thickest layer of the cornea. The stroma is made up primarily of water and collagen and is vital to the maintenance of the spherical shape of the cornea, which is critical to the proper passage and refraction of light into the eye.

Descemet's membrane is another thin layer that has relative strength due to the collagen fibers which comprise it. The corneal endothelial cells produce this collagen. Descemet's membrane is capable of repairing itself with relative ease following injury. It is crucial to protecting the internal structures of the eye from infection and trauma.

The innermost layer of the cornea is the endothelium. This thin layer plays a vital role in maintaining the clarity of the cornea as the endothelial cells pump excess fluid from the stroma. Endothelial cells do not appear to regenerate appreciably, and their destruction can cause lasting dysfunction.