Necrobiosis lipoidica has an increased prevalence in individuals with diabetes, although this association is currently challengable. The incidence among people with diabetes is only 0.3% to 1.2%. Necrobiosis lipoidica precedes diabetes in up to 14% and appears simultaneously in up to 24%, and occurs after diabetes is diagnosed in 62% of cases. There is no proven connection between the level of glycemic control and the likelihood of developing necrobiosis lipoidica.

Although it may present in healthy individuals with no underlying disease, other commonly associated conditions are thyroid disorders and inflammatory diseases, such as Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis, and sarcoidosis. In one series, researchers found surprisingly lower rates of arterial hypertension than in the standard population, while obesity and fatty acid disorders were at a standard rate. No evidence for the induction of necrobiosis lipoidica by infection or underlying malignancies was found among those patients.

There appears to be a predominance of 77% in females.

A study by Hashemi et al. observed that in patients having necrobiosis lipoidica, those with diabetes had a median age of 45 years as opposed to 52 years in patients who were not suffering from diabetes.

Erfurt-Berge et al. carried out a retrospective study on 100 patients having necrobiosis lipoidica and found that female sex and middle age were characteristic in patients with the condition. The investigators also published that ulceration, which was seen in 33% of patients, was most prevalent in men and in patients suffering from diabetes mellitus, and thyroid problems occurred in 15% of all patients.