Understanding the metabolism of lactate and briefly reviewing its biochemistry and physiology is important to recognize the specific benefits of Ringer’s lactate utilization. Lactate is the compensatory base of lactic acid. Under aerobic physiologic conditions, the metabolism of glucose leads to the production of pyruvate into cellular respiration. However, there is always a small state of anaerobic metabolism taking place at any given time, causing pyruvate to undergo an oxidation-reduction reaction with NADH which leads to oxidation of NADH to NAD+ and the formation of lactate via the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). This reaction maintains NAD+ levels, even in anaerobic metabolism, to allow further glycolysis to occur in the absence of oxygen. Normally, through cellular respiration, there is always a balanced ratio of NADH/NAD+ with the transfer of protons and electrons to finally make ATP, water (H2O), and carbon dioxide (CO2) as the final products. If this aerobic system shuts down, the protons have nowhere to go. Lactate is formed and shuttled out of the cells to keep the NADH/NAD+ ratio constant. The increased production of lactate, in turn, acts as a buffer system as it takes up the H+ forming lactic acid. Furthermore, lactate can be metabolized back into pyruvate via LDH and cellular respiration, forming CO2 and H2O. This CO2 and H2O form carbonic acid (H2CO3) via carbonic anhydrase, rapidly dissociating to form HCO3. Lactate can be metabolized to form bicarbonate.

Administering a liter of Ringer’s lactate does two important things:

- Volume resuscitation: In that intravascular volume expands, increasing preload and thus, perfusion

- Provides the body with sodium lactate: Sodium lactate is a bioenergetic fuel that the human body is designed to metabolize under ischemic conditions, thus decreasing cellular death from ischemia.

Volume kinetics is a complex topic but can be simplified with the following fluid characteristics: osmolarity and tonicity. By way of review, the intracellular fluid compartment is about 67% of total body water, while the extracellular fluid compartment is about 33%. The extracellular fluid compartment can further be broken down into the interstitial fluid, approximately 75% to 80% of the extracellular compartment, and intravascular, approximately 20% to 25% of the extracellular compartment. Osmolarity among all fluid compartments at any given time will remain equal or actively equalizing, as water-free flows between all compartments. Tonicity is a measure of the osmotic (water) gradient between 2 fluids across a semipermeable membrane and is a relative concept between these two fluids. When describing a fluid in terms of tonicity, in other words, hypotonic, isotonic, or hypertonic, tonicity refers to the osmotic gradient between the intracellular and extracellular compartments. Thus, isotonic fluid is given intravenously (IV) does not move across into the intracellular compartment but does distribute across the entire extracellular compartment (interstitial and intravascular), usually proportionally to the compartment volumes (interstitial 75% to 80%, intravascular 20% to 25%).