Adenocarcinomas are easily diagnosed and distinguished from other cancer histologies by a light microscopy examination. The diagnosis is usually based on the identification of glandular structures under the light microscopy. As these features are shared by all types of adenocarcinomas, it is impossible to diagnose the primary site of origin of these tumors, especially in a metastatic setting. Also, with poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas, where the minimal glandular formation is seen on light microscopy or no glandular formation but stain for mucin, immunohistochemistry (IHC) is an important tool to help further diagnose the type of adenocarcinoma.

- Positive staining for CK-7 along with TTF-1 (+/- napsin), which is a pneumocyte marker expressor, is highly suggestive of adenocarcinoma of the lung. Adenocarcinoma of the lung also tend to have mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), and c-ROS oncogene 1(ROS-1), which are important to diagnose, as targeted therapies are available for treatment. PD-L1 IHC assays are also performed in advanced lung cancers to help with treatment selection with immunotherapy. The College of American Pathologists recommends obtaining the above testing on all patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the lung.

- Positive staining for CK-7, GATA -3 ( GATA-binding protein 3), and gross cystic fluid protein 15 is suggestive of breast adenocarcinoma.

- Positive staining for prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is specific for adenocarcinoma of the prostate. P63 a nuclear basal protein helps to differentiate from normal prostatic tissue and adenocarcinoma of the prostate.

- Positive CDX-2 or cytokeratin-20 (CK-20) positive with CK-7 negative is suggestive of colorectal adenocarcinoma.

- Positive staining for CK-7, PAX 8, and WT-1 is suggestive of ovarian adenocarcinoma.

- Positive staining for thyroglobulin and thyroid transcription factor-1 is suggestive of adenocarcinoma of thyroid.