It is important to first and foremost decide the appropriate level of care and whether the patient should be hospitalized or treated on an outpatient basis. The basis for decisions regarding treatment should be on multiple factors such as the patient's presenting symptoms, socioeconomic stability, the presence of supporting individuals or family, and the presence of homicidal or suicidal ideation. Because of the limited number of clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of specific treatment modalities in patients with brief psychotic disorder, current recommendations for treatment of BPD rely on pharmacological and psychotherapeutic interventions known to be effective in patients with other psychotic disorders.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Antipsychotics, especially second-generation, are the first-line treatment for brief psychotic disorder. Although BPD characteristically shows complete resolution of symptoms within one month of symptom onset, it is suggested to continue treatment with antipsychotics for one to three months after symptom remission. Although oral formulations are preferable as first-line treatment for BPD, intramuscular formulations may have to be used in patients during immediate assessments and treatment, especially in emergency settings.

- Second-generation or atypical antipsychotics: Quetiapine, paliperidone, olanzapine, risperidone, aripiprazole, ziprasidone, and clozapine are the medications that are classified as second-generation and preferred because of their better side effect profile in terms of extrapyramidal symptoms. Olanzapine may be more favorable in lactating mothers as compared to the other drugs from the same class.

- First-generation or typical antipsychotics: Trifluoperazine, fluphenazine, haloperidol, chlorpromazine, and thioridazine are the medications that are classified as first-generation. Extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) such as acute dystonia, akathisia, cogwheel rigidity, and tardive dyskinesia are some of the more prominent side effects to keep in mind within this drug class. Anticholinergic medications such as benztropine and biperiden may be added to the treatment regimen to treat the EPS.

- Benzodiazepines: Medications within the benzodiazepine class may prove helpful to ameliorate symptom manifestation in acutely combative or agitated individuals.

**Psychotherapy**

As expected, a brief yet major psychotic episode can be highly disruptive to the livelihood and functioning of an individual and his/her family and friends. Psychotherapeutic management of BPD would involve medically informing the patient and his/her family about the condition and treatment modalities employed for the particular patient. Along with emphasizing reintegration into the societal milieu, it is essential to focus on managing comorbid disorders or stressors and improving overall coping skills.

During the treatment process, the patient should be monitored on a long-term basis to assess for relapse or the presence of residual symptoms that may necessitate referral to a specialist. It is essential to support the patient to maintain medication adherence as a lack of adherence may facilitate symptom relapse. The overall treatment plan for BPD should ideally include both pharmacological and psychosocial interventions. The biological, psychological, and social dimensions of the patient's life should in unison dictate the eventual treatment decisions made.