**Asymptomatic Patients**

Patients without significant symptoms or laboratory abnormalities such as severe cytopenia or significant hypogammaglobulinemia are observed without treatment for signs of progression since there is no evidence to support clinical benefit. Rather treatment initiation in asymptomatic patients is associated with a risk of toxicity without clinical benefit.

International prognostic score (IPS-E) risk stratification, based on three risk factors: absolute lymphocyte count greater than 15,000/microL, presence of palpable lymph nodes, and unmutated IGHV, is a valuable tool in predicting the likelihood of treatment initiation in asymptomatic patients. Patients with no risk factors are considered low risk and have less than one percent likelihood of requiring treatment at one year and eight percent at five years. Those with one out of three risk factors are considered to be an intermediate risk, with three percent expected to require treatment by one year and twenty-eight percent at five years. Finally, those with two or three risk factors are considered high risk. It is expected that fourteen percent will need treatment at one year and sixty-one percent at five years.

**Symptomatic Disease**

Treatment for CLL is indicated in patients with significant clinical symptoms from CLL or in the presence of laboratory abnormalities such as significant cytopenia and symptomatic hypogammaglobulinemia. The International Workshop on Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (iWCLL) requires the presence of at least one criterion to diagnose the active disease: signs of worsening marrow failure, such as progressive or new thrombocytopenia, anemia, splenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy that is symptomatic or progressive, autoimmune anemia or thrombocytopenia not responsive to steroids, extranodal involvement, and constitutional symptoms such as weight loss, severe fatigue, fevers or night sweats.

Multiple treatment combinations are available, but with limited evidence directly comparing the treatment options. Following are the important classes of drugs commonly used in the treatment of CLL: BTK inhibitors (Bruton tyrosine kinase), including ibrutinib and acalabrutinib, BCL2 inhibitor venetoclax, anti-CD-20 monoclonal antibodies rituximab, ofatumumab, obinutuzumab, alkylating agents such as chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, bendamustine and purine analogs such as fludarabine and pentostatin

Factors affecting the treatment selection include stage, molecular and cytogenetic characteristics of the disease, patient fitness, and goals of care for treatment. Some important molecular and cytogenetic considerations impacting treatment selection are discussed below.

The presence of del 17p or TP53 mutations is associated with poor response to cytotoxic chemotherapeutic regimens, including purine analog-based regimens. However, there is clinical evidence supporting the efficacy of BTK inhibitors such as Ibrutinib and acalabrutinib and BCL-2 inhibitor venetoclax as monotherapy or in combination with anti-CD 20 monoclonal antibodies.

Another molecular factor predictive of treatment response is the IGHV mutation status. Unmutated IGHV is a marker of aggressive disease, and similar to TP53 or del 17p mutations, BCL-2 inhibitors and BTK inhibitors are effective in the presence of unmutated IGHV compared to purine analog-based regimens.