**Targeted Nerve Blocks**

**Retrobulbar****Block**

A retrobulbar blockade provides anesthesia and akinesia through the infiltration of the intraconal space. The technique is frequently performed prior to intraocular surgery and is favored by many surgeons for its quick onset and longer duration. Knowledge of the orbital anatomy and meticulous technique is important to avoid potential vision- and life-threatening complications, including retrobulbar hemorrhage, damage to the globe, optic nerve, extraocular muscles, and central spread with brain stem depression.

For this reason, extra caution is advised in patients with orbital pathology, high axial myopia, or coagulopathies. Mixtures containing epinephrine are generally avoided due to the risk of vasospasm and retinal ischemia. To start, the inferior lid is prepared with an alcohol swab or povidone-iodine. The inferior orbital rim is then palpated, and the globe is displaced superiorly to expand the space between the orbital floor and globe. With the needle bevel-up (to reduce the risk of globe perforation), the needle is inserted into the skin at or just superior to the level of the inferior orbital rim. The needle is advanced along the orbital floor until the first “pop” is felt, signifying passage through the orbital septum. The needle is then redirected approximately 45 degrees medially and superiorly and advanced through the second “pop,” signifying passage through the muscular cone and entry into the intraconal space.

It is important to draw back the syringe to ensure the needle is not in a vessel. Approximately 3 to 5 ml of anesthetic is injected into this space, paying attention to the expected anterior displacement of the globe, signifying injection of anesthetic into the intraconal space, and palpation of the globe to assess for posterior pressure. The needle is then withdrawn, and pressure is applied to the globe using gauze for 60 to 120 seconds to tamponade potential retrobulbar hemorrhage.

**Supraorbital Block**

The supraorbital nerve arises from the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve (V1). The nerve courses through either a supraorbital notch (73.8%) or foramen (26.2%) and divides into a superficial medial branch and a deep lateral branch.

The location of the supraorbital notch or foramen can be approximated by measuring 2 cm from the midline of the face. The notch is often palpable, and marking this site helps ensure proper positioning and targeted blockade. The needle is inserted from an inferolateral position 0.5 cm below the supraorbital notch/foramen and advanced with care taken to avoid penetration of the foramen.

**Supratrochlear Block**

The supratrochlear nerve, another branch of V1, exits the supraorbital margin medially to the supraorbital nerve. This location is approximated by identifying the supraorbital margin 3 mm medial to a vertical line from the medial canthus. The block is performed by placing the needle at the site where the supratrochlear nerve emerges at the supraorbital margin and slowly advancing along the course of the nerve.

**Nasociliary Block**

The nasociliary nerve branches off the ophthalmic nerve within the orbit. The nerve further branches supply the mucosal surface of the sphenoid, ethmoid, frontal sinuses, and the anterior septum, lateral nasal cavity, ala, and apex of the nose. An anesthetic block is optimally aimed toward the anterior and posterior ethmoidal foramina, which additionally delivers the anesthetic to the infratrochlear nerve.

**Infratrochlear Block**

The infratrochlear nerve, another branch of V1, runs along with the medial rectus muscle within the orbit. It provides sensation to the inferior portion of the medial canthus, lateral nose, medial conjunctiva, and caruncle.

The external location of this nerve, which is palpable below the trochlea, enables targeted blockade via infiltration at the superomedial orbit. This block is often used during nasal surgery or skin laceration repairs in this anatomic location.

**Anterior Ethmoid Block**

The anterior ethmoid nerve supply is composed of internal and external nasal branches innervating the anterior part of the septum, the lateral wall of the nasal cavity, the nasal bone, and skin to the tip of the nose.  The anterior ethmoidal foramen is located medially from the halfway point between the posterior palpebral fold and the eyebrow and at a depth of 1.5 cm. A small gauge needle (25–27 G) is used to complete the block, completing a continuous injection while removing the needle. Needle insertion 9 mm superior to the superior border of the medial canthal tendon will prevent injury to the lacrimal sac.

**Infraorbital Block**

The maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve (V2) courses along the inferior orbit within the infraorbital groove before emerging through the infraorbital foramen, located approximately 1 cm below the inferior orbital rim. The infraorbital nerve and its branches provide sensory innervation to the lower eyelid, lateral nose, upper lip, and maxillary teeth. This nerve block is therefore useful for a variety of lower eyelid and maxillofacial procedures.

The block is performed through either an intraoral or extraoral approach and requires careful landmark identification. The intraoral approach is accomplished by inserting a needle into the mucosa superiorly parallel to the upper second bicuspid and advancing it toward the foramen. Careful palpation is necessary to prevent injection into the foramen. The extraoral approach is straightforward. However, adjunctive vasoconstrictive medication is not recommended, given the proximity of the facial nerve.

**Zygomaticofacial and Zygomaticotemporal Nerve Blocks**

The zygomatic nerve originates from V2 as it exits the pterygopalatine fossa. The zygomaticofacial branch emerges onto the face within the zygomatic bone and innervates the overlying skin. It can be targeted by injecting laterally at the inferolateral orbital rim. The zygomaticotemporal branch enters the temporal fossa through a foramen and innervates the overlying temporal skin. Additionally, the zygomaticotemporal nerve provides secretomotor fibers to the lacrimal nerve.

**Facial Nerve Blocks**

Facial nerve blocks may be used in ambulatory surgery as a single technique or combined with general anesthesia or intravenous sedation. The facial nerve block for ocular surgery targets the periocular branches of the facial nerve with the aim to prevent excessive blinking during surgery via orbicular muscle akinesia. The three classic techniques include the O’Brien’s block, Atkinson block, and van Lint block.

The utilization of local anesthesia alone is ideal for patients who would not be optimal candidates for general anesthesia. Advantages include a conscious and alert patient, the avoidance of general anesthetics, and its associated risks of systemic complications such as postoperative confusion, gastrointestinal upset, and cardiovascular compromise. Using a facial nerve block as a local anesthesia technique may be preferable in a number of ophthalmic surgeries, including cataract surgery, pterygium excision, keratoplasty, dacryocystorhinostomy, glaucoma procedures, and minor oculoplastic surgeries. The akinetic blocks may be used in conjunction with general anesthesia in cases requiring more complex intraocular and periocular procedures.

- 
**O'Brien Technique**

The O’Brien block achieves temporary palsy of the orbicularis oculi muscle at the facial nerve trunk. The original version of this block is completed proximally at the level of the mandible near the condyloid process. The modified O’Brien block uses a posterior and inferior position along the most superior palpable aspect of the mandible ramus, approximately 3 cm above the mandible angle. This modified technique provides a highly effective nerve block and lid akinesia at a site closer to the stylomastoid foramen.

Either form of this technique leads to akinesia of the facial/temporal and zygomatic branches of the facial nerve that supplies the motor function to the orbicularis oculi.

- 
**Atkinson Technique**

The Atkinson block injection site is located at the inferior margin of the zygomatic bone; this provides blockade of mostly the facial/temporal branch of the facial nerve and the zygomatic branches depending on the patient’s facial nerve anatomy.

- 
**Van Lint Technique**

The van Lint block provides a more peripheral blockade, achieving effect at the facial, temporal, and zygomatic terminal ramifications at the rim of the orbit.

- 
**Upper and Lower Eyelid Blocks**

The eyelid blocks involve infiltration of local anesthesia directly into the eyelids to achieve akinesia of the orbicularis oculi. The upper eyelid block is completed at 1cm above the medial canthus, and the lower eyelid block is performed 0.5 cm below the medial canthus.

**Comparison of Facial Nerve Blocks**

Variable success at orbicularis muscle akinesia has been reported between the three blocks. One study comparing the effectiveness of O’Brien, Atkinson, Van Lint, and eyelid blocks during cataract surgery found that the modified O’Brien and Lid blocks provided the best akinesia with nearly no muscle activity recorded post-injection.