Graves eye disease requires an interprofessional team approach. This includes the primary physician (whether hospitalist, primary care physician or the first point of contact with the patient), endocrinologist to render the patient euthyroid and assess the best treatment modality with an individualized approach, ophthalmologist to adequately examine the eye, track the progression and distinguish those who need orbital decompression surgery, pharmacist to assist with dosing of steroids and other immunomodulators, nursing staff to administer treatment when patients require hospitalization as well as counsel the patient as shown below, and finally a radiologist to interpret necessary imaging studies. This interprofessional team approach will ensure maximum patient benefit with minimal downside. [Level V]

Graves eye disease can be distressing to most patients. Important patient education includes smoking cessation as this is a significant risk factor for Graves orbitopathy, and also the importance of local measures, especially eye patches and lubricating eye drops to help prevent corneal complications. Patients require education to understand that little is known about the natural history of the disease and that regular follow up with both ophthalmology and endocrinology specialists is of vital importance to track progression and see if escalation of treatment at any point is necessary. Patients should understand that if they notice any change in their vision, or develop any new symptoms such as pain with eye movement, they should seek urgent medical attention.

Additionally, not to forget, the appearance of Graves eye disease can be emotionally distressing and physically debilitating depending on the disease severity. Social worker consult may be of benefit not only for the patient to be able to talk with someone, but also if the disease is sight-threatening, to coordinate any additional assistance that is available to them. Social workers would also be helpful ascertaining if the patient has strong psychosocial support and adequate follow-up potential as this disease process can be unpredictable.