Glucagon may be necessary for the treatment of a variety of conditions, as discussed above, with hypoglycemic shock being the most common indication. The emergent nature of many of these indications necessitates the involvement of an interdisciplinary team led by various specialty physicians, advised by a pharmacist, administered by nurses and paramedics, and monitored by lab technicians. Without intervention, morbidity and mortality from hypoglycemic shock and beta-blocker and calcium channel blocker overdoses are substantial.

The interprofessional healthcare team can enhance outcomes by coordinating care when clinicians (including mid-level practitioners), nurses, laboratory technicians, and pharmacists work together to identify at-risk patients that may benefit from glucagon administration, often after failed first-line therapies or when first-line treatment is not immediately available. Pharmacists should be available to guide in deciding to utilize glucagon and at what dosage, particularly given the high-stress environment in which this medication may be necessary. Pharmacist consultation has demonstrably increased the availability of glucagon to patients taking insulin.

Coordinated care of an interdisciplinary team would include:

- Clinicians ordering and nurses and technicians obtaining blood glucose levels

- Nurses and clinicians monitoring the patient for signs of hypoglycemia, including tachycardia, diaphoresis, tremors, altered mentation, or coma.

- Ensuring the patient has ingested carbs and protein capable of preventing rebound hypoglycemia once capable of protecting their airway.

- Note:  tachycardia may be absent in beta-blocker and calcium channel blocker overdoses.

- Consulting a pharmacist regarding glucagon infusions in the setting of overdose.

- Consulting a toxicologist for all glucagon therapy in the setting of overdose, additionally, engaging a toxicologist if an overdose of glucagon is suspected.

Patients requiring prompt intervention with glucagon resulting from hypoglycemia, overdose, or imaging can be encountered throughout the hospital system and in the general public. Once the acute intervention has stabilized the patient, it is crucial to prevent a relapse of the condition as glucagon's duration of action is likely shorter than the underlying cause of the emergency. Diabetic patients experiencing hypoglycemic shock will likely require hospitalization but should also have a prompt follow-up with their endocrinologist or managing physician shortly after discharge. For cases suspected to be intentional overdoses, a caseworker and psychiatrist should be brought on the case. A coordinated interdisciplinary approach to patient care is generally necessary to continue improving patient safety and access and is essential in the safe treatment of patients with glucagon.