The initial patient encounter should always begin with an evaluation of the airway, breathing, and circulation. Once all of these have been secured and addressed, continue with the history and physical exam. A neurologic exam and Glasgow coma scale (GCS) are necessary.

The severity of the patient presentation varies depending on the PaCO2 accumulation in the blood. Initially, with mild hypercapnia, the patient may only present with non-specific headache, mild dyspnea, tachypnea, and/or somnolence. As higher levels of CO2 accumulate, patients can become delirious, confused, bradypnea, and can ultimately progress to coma once the patient develops a depressed level of consciousness, known as CO2 narcosis. Acute hypercapnia initially increases the respiratory drive (tachypnea), but over time reduces the respiratory drive (bradypnea).

CO2 narcosis is classically considered in patients with a history of sedative use or chronic lung diseases that increase dead space, such as COPD. However, there is a wide range of etiologies that can contribute to CO2 narcosis. Identifying a risk factor or underlying disorder can help with its identification. Perhaps the patient is known to be a drug user or smokes tobacco. In the latter, be on the lookout for clubbing or wheezing. When evaluating the patient, look at the patient's body habitus. Evaluate for thoracic cage abnormalities or obesity. Inquire about a known history of neuromuscular disorders. If the patient just had surgery with anesthesia, consider that the patient was in a state of hypoventilation. An important point to note is that the patient does not need to be hypoxemic to be hypercapnic. If the patient is on supplemental oxygen and has an acceptable oxygen saturation due to hypoventilation, the patient may retain CO2. This situation can exist in COPD. Patients may be compensating with increased work of breathing, allowing them to have an acceptable PaO2, but as a consequence of the tachypnea, there is less time for exhalation, contributing to the hypercapnia. When the patient develops sufficient hypercapnia, the respiratory drive can decrease with subsequent hypoventilation and a decreased level of consciousness. Additionally, giving a hypoxic patient supplemental oxygen in COPD or another hypoventilation state can worsen the hypercapnia.