From a clinical perspective, understanding obesity has gone through a paradigm shift. Previously, clinicians would broadly interpret this disease process as a behavioral issue. The problem with this theory, it creates misplaced blame where the patient may feel inappropriately judged or stigmatized.

Now that we know obesity is a multifactorial disease process, we can build on our knowledge to empower patients to understand obesity through collaboration to explore options for reversing the disease course. It often necessitates a multidisciplinary approach focusing on gradual, sensible lifestyle modifications rather than abrupt weight loss or excessively short-term goals.

Physicians, dietitians, physical therapists, social workers, psychologists, and nurses must collaborate to manage this chronic illness and provide individualized patient care through their unique skills. The doctor is generally a patient's primary source of health information, and their guidance may promote patient motivation.

Routine doctor appointments often fail to address patients' concerns about weight, diet, and physical activity, which might alter the patient's perspective about these conditions. A brief 3-minute lifestyle interview may offer doctors an understanding of patients' eating habits, weight-loss motivation, and mental and physical difficulties.

By stressing diet and obesity-related lifestyle variables, the doctor may urge patients to follow medical advice and consider obesity a serious but manageable health condition. Larger food portions are the main contributor to increased energy intake and obesity; thus, nutritionists may educate patients on the proper portion size, information about the calories and glycemic index in different food items, the unique calorie needs per physical effort, and misconceptions surrounding various fad diets through easy strategies and also to prevent feeling hungry, which may lead to binge eating.

Comprehensive weight reduction counseling must also include methods for both eating less and eating healthier. Patients who consume more low-fat, whole foods (such as fruits, vegetables, legumes, and whole grains) are more likely to consume more nutrients overall. The water content of fresh vegetables is very high, increasing weight and volume to maximize fullness without adding calories.

Diet and exercise together are the most effective obesity treatments. Physical therapists (PT) may urge patients to include non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT), such as standing while using the phone and using stairs instead of elevators, as it can account for a 2,000 kcal difference per day in active vs. inactive adults.****

Walking can be a simple exercise, and PT can lead patients toward incremental, manageable objectives, such as adding one minute to a 10-minute walk, ascending one more flight of stairs, or adding 100 steps at a time to a day's total. The physical therapist's role is even more important for patients with musculoskeletal disorders; the therapist may instruct them in exercises that do not need great physical effort and can be as simple as rolling their legs while seated. Knee issues are most prevalent in obese patients; hence, therapists are of the utmost significance to increase physical activity among this patient group.

Numerous mental illnesses may cause weight gain and obesity because eating may be a coping mechanism for depression, despair, stress, and anxiety. Studies have shown that depression, in particular, can lead to unhealthy weight gain due to poor dietary and lifestyle choices, such as choosing to stay inactive out of a lack of motivation or consuming sweet or salty foods to feel good. Psychiatric problems and obesity may form a vicious cycle, with depression/anxiety leading to weight gain and vice versa.

Psychologists may play a crucial role in detecting and treating these underlying issues, and weight reduction can increase confidence and self-esteem substantially. A social worker may aid with allocating resources such as weight loss medications assistance, food stamps, enhancing mobility by supplying walkers and wheelchairs, and locating low-cost gym membership locations such as the YMCA and safe shelters. The nurse is the essential patient contact, may educate patients and follow up weekly in person or by phone to check patient's compliance, making her a crucial element of the multidisciplinary team.