Any new palpable lump in the breast requires prompt investigation with a triple assessment, including clinical examination, imaging, and cytologic or histologic assessment when needed.

**Ultrasound**

Patients are usually lactating mothers with dense breasts; hence, an ultrasound is ideal after clinical examination. Ultrasound finding of galactocele is generally a solitary, well-defined, anechoic lesion with thin, echogenic walls and some distal acoustic enhancement.

The following findings are seen depending on the chronicity and the site of the lesion:

- Site:

- Central location - A simple cyst is more common, characterized by an absence of loculation and no echogenicity of the cyst. 
- Peripheral location - A thin-septated multilocular cyst is a typical feature.

- Chronicity:

- Acute - As the internal contents of the galactocele are a fluid suspension, it appears more homogeneous with medium-level echoes.
- Chronic - As the contents are inspissated material, the appearance is heterogeneous with internal fluid clefts and anechoic fluid rims. Internal echogenic foci with acoustic shadowing are also seen. The internal echogenicity results from their contents, milk products containing about 10% solids, fat, and desquamated epithelium. The distal acoustic enhancement is due to the fluid-filled cyst. The intensity of hypoechoic echo increases gradually due to the interface between the fat and water components.

It is pertinent to note that a heterogeneously echoic, irregular margined collection is suspicious of abscess formation and should be correlated clinically with signs such as redness, tenderness, and warmth.

Colour Doppler investigation may be of some benefit in cases of galactocele. Complex cysts presenting as galactocele can be carefully differentiated from intracystic carcinoma or intraductal papilloma, as blood flow will be absent on the Color Doppler in the case of galactocele.

**Mammogram**

Mammography should only be used in certain circumstances as a problem resolving technique, limiting radiation exposure of the breast. Mammography may show an indeterminate mass or a circumscribed mass with high radiolucency due to high-fat content and water-fat level. The various mammographic findings of galactoceles are described below.

- Pseudolipoma: When galactocele has a high-fat ratio to protein in breast milk, the lump seen in a mammogram is radiolucent. Since it mimics a lipoma, it is called a pseudolipoma.

- Cystic mass with fat-fluid level: This is seen with a low concentration of fat content, which floats above, in the cyst filled with breastmilk. It is better appreciated in the mediolateral oblique view of mammography.

- Pseudohamartoma: The radiodensity of fat and water are mixed as the lipid and liquid are not separated. It is similar to the radiologic findings seen in a case of a hamartoma that contains high viscosity of breast milk. Hence, galactocele with such characteristics seen on mammograms is called Pseudohamartoma.