**Maintain Accurate Medical Records Regarding Opiate Prescriptions**

All clinicians should maintain accurate, complete, and current medical records, including:

- Records of prescriptions for controlled substances

- Record instructions provided

- Detailed history, physical, monitoring, and reasons prescribed

**Federal and State Laws**

Several regulations and programs at the federal and state level to reduce prescription opioid abuse, diversion, and overdose. These laws require:

- Immunity from prosecution for individuals seeking assistance during an overdose

- Pain clinic oversight

- Patient identification prior to dispencing

- A physical examination prior to prescribing opioids

- Prescription limits

- Prohibition from obtaining controlled substance prescriptions

- Tamper-resistant prescriptions

**Federal Laws**

The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) sets national standards for controlled substances. Drug scheduling was mandated under The Federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. The law addresses controlled substances within Title II. The DEA maintains a list of controlled medications and illicit substances that are categorized from scheduled I to V. The five categories have their basis on the medication’s proper and beneficial medical use and the medication’s potential for dependency and abuse. The purpose of the law is to provide government oversight over the manufacturing and distribution of these types of substances. Prescribers and dispensers are required to have a DEA license to supply these drugs. The licensing provides links to users, prescribers, and distributors.

The schedules range from Schedule I to V. Schedule I drugs are considered to have the highest risk of abuse while Schedule V drugs have the lowest potential for abuse. Other factors considered by the DEA include pharmacological effect, evidenced-based knowledge of the drug, risk to public health, trends in the use of the drug, and whether or not the drug has the potential to be made more dangerous with minor chemical modifications.

- "High abuse potential with no accepted medical use; medications within this schedule may not be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples of include marijuana (cannabis), heroin, mescaline (peyote), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), and methaqualone.

- "High abuse potential with severe psychological or physical dependence; however, these medications have an accepted medical use and may be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include fentanyl, oxycodone, morphine, methylphenidate, hydromorphone, amphetamine, methamphetamine (meth), pentobarbital, and secobarbital.

- Schedule II drugs may not receive a refill

- "Intermediate abuse potential (i.e., less than Schedule II but more than Schedule IV medications)"

- Examples include anabolic steroids, testosterone, and ketamine

- "Abuse potential less than Schedule II but more than Schedule V medications"

- Examples include diazepam, alprazolam, and tramadol

- "Medications with the least potential for abuse among the controlled substances."

- Examples include pregabalin, Diphenoxylate/atropine, dextromethorphan

It is essential to understand the DEA controlled-substance scheduling both to ensure adequate caution when prescribing medications with high abuse potential and also to ensure against prescribing outside of one's authority.

The Controlled Substances Act has great potential to improve patient safety by providing federal oversight for drugs with a high potential for abuse. Providers of scheduled substances (physicians, dentists, podiatrists, advanced practitioners) may have links to the distribution of these substances. They are required to have a DEA license and record prescription of scheduled drugs. This licensing prevents overprescribing and obligates providers to be wary of potential drug-seeking patients. The dispenser must also be aware of a patient's medication history and be mindful of the potential for polypharmacy if a patient seeks multiple providers. The current opioid epidemic is a time where federal oversight and interdisciplinary coordination have the potential to reduce harm to patients prescribed scheduled drugs drastically. It will, however, take further time and evaluation to know if drug scheduling actually reduces abuse, addiction, and overdose.

See Table 1 for information regarding registration, records, prescriptions, refills, distribution, security, and theft or significant loss of controlled substances.

See Table 2 for information regarding DEA forms 106, 222, 224, and 224a.

**Summary of Kentucky Laws on Opioid and Controlled Substance Prescribing**

**KASPAR (Kentucky All Schedule Prescription Reporting)**

KASPER is a controlled substance prescription monitoring system designed to assist practitioners and pharmacists with providing medical and pharmaceutical patient care using controlled substance medications. KASPER provides an investigative tool for law enforcement and regulatory agencies to assist with authorized reviews and investigations. KASPER is not intended to prevent patients from receiving needed controlled substance medications.

**Who requests KASPAR reports?**

- Practitioners and pharmacists for medical or pharmaceutical treatment of their patient, and for reviewing data on controlled substances administered or dispensed to the birth mother of an infant being treated for neonatal abstinence syndrome or prenatal drug exposure.

- Law enforcement officers for drug-related investigation.

- Commonwealth's attorneys.

- Licensure boards for an investigation of a licensee.

- A Medicaid program for utilization review on a recipient.

- A grand jury by subpoena.

- A judge or probation or parole officer administering a drug diversion or probation program.

- A medical examiner engaged in a death investigation.

**Who is required to upload controlled substance information to KASPAR?**

- Pharmacies and dispensing practitioners within one business day of administering or dispensing a controlled substance (KRS 218A.202 and 902 KAR 55:110)

**How do you set up a KASPAR account?**

- Go to the Kentucky Online Gateway website or call KOG Help Desk at 502-564-0104)

**What does a KASPER report show?**

- Schedule II through V controlled substance prescriptions a patient has received and a list of prescribers who prescribed them and dispensers who dispensed them.

**What can be done with a KASPAR report?**

- Practitioners, pharmacists, or employees may share the report with the patient or authorized representative and include it in the medical record; discuss it with other health professionals treating the patient, or with law enforcement, if there is just cause.

- Unauthorized disclosure is beyond that allowed in KRS 218A.202 is a class B misdemeanor.

**When are KASPER reports available?**

- 24/7, however, Kentucky dispensers have one business day from date of dispersion to report to KASPAR.

**What should a health provider do if they suspect controlled substance diversion after review of KASPAR?**

- Report to the proper law enforcement authorities

**Prescriber and Dispenser Communication**

**When may a clinician order and pharmacist dispense a Schedule II controlled substance oral prescription? (902 KAR 55:095 Sections 1 and 2)**

- Hospice or long-term care facility for immediate administration

- Limited to minimum quantity need to immediately treat the patient

- Must be communicated by the prescriber

- Contains all elements of a written prescription except a signature

- Within 7 days, the prescriber must send a written prescription for the emergency quantity verbally authorized

**When may a clinician order and a pharmacist dispense a Schedule II Controlled Substance faxed prescription? (902 KAR 55:095 Section 3)**

- Compounded Schedule II narcotic for the direct administration via parenteral, intravenous, intramuscular, subcutaneous, or intraspinal infusion

- Hospice or long-term care facility

- The facsimile serves as the original prescription and a written follow-up prescription is not required

**When may a clinician order and a pharmacist dispense a Schedule III-V Controlled Substances oral prescription? (KRS 218A.180(6))**

- All oral, verbally authorized prescriptions for Schedule III-V controlled substances shall be immediately reduced to writing, dated, and signed by the pharmacist.

**When may a clinician order and pharmacist dispense Schedule III-V Controlled Substance faxed prescriptions? (902 KAR 55:105, Section 4(4))**

- Written on a green security prescription blank

- “FAXED” written or stamped on the face of the original prescription with the date and the person’s name or initials responsible for faxing

- The practitioner must file the original prescription in the patient’s chart

**What if a faxed Schedule III-V controlled substance prescription does not meet the requirements? (902 KAR 55:105)**

- The pharmacist must exercise due diligence to verify the prescription such as telephoning the prescriber’s office and taking the prescription as a verbal authorization from the prescriber or their agent.

**What E-prescribing of Controlled Substances is allowed? (KRS 218A.171, KRS 218A.182)**

- All controlled substance prescriptions, Schedule II-V, are allowed to be e-prescribed as long as the e-prescribing software system meets DEA requirements

- All controlled substance prescriptions must be e-prescribed with few statutory exceptions

**What are the telehealth rules for prescribing Controlled Substances during the current state of emergency?**

- If in the opinion of the physician they are unable to fulfill the professional standards, it should be documented thoroughly.

**Controlled Substance Regulation**

**What is the restriction of dispensing Schedule II and Schedule III Controlled Substances containing hydrocodone? (201 KAR 9:220)**

- Clinicians may only dispense up to a 48 hour supply unless it is done as part of a licensed narcotic treatment program.

**What documentation is required for prescribing or dispensing a Controlled Substance? (201 KAR 9:260)**

Document relevant information in the patient’s medical record in a legible manner and in detail. If unable to conform to the prescribing and dispensing standards document justification for non-conformance in the patient’s record.

**What patient education is required of a patient receiving a Controlled Substance? (201 KAR 9:260)**

- Educate on dangers such as overdose and addiction potential.

**When does the Controlled Substance prescribing and dispensing regulations not apply to patients? (201 KAR 9:260, KRS 216.510)**

- Hospice, end-of-life, cancer treatment, disaster, mass casualties, or if a single dose for a procedure.

- If classified as a Schedule V controlled substance.

- Hospitalized inpatient, outpatient, or observation patient (If prescribing or dispensing of Schedule II Controlled Substances and Schedule III Controlled Substances containingHydrocodone, the hospital or clinician must query KASPER within 12 hours of admission and place a copy of the KASPER report in the patient’s chart.

- Long-term-care facility (If prescribing or dispensing of Schedule II Controlled Substances and Schedule III Controlled Substances containing hydrocodone, the long-term care facility or clinician must query KASPER within 12 hours of admission and place a copy of the KASPER report in the resident’s chart.

- Prescribing or administering no more than a 14-day supply following an operative or invasive procedure or delivery

- Prescribing or dispensing a substitute prescription within 7 days of the initial prescription (refills to the initial prescription should be canceled and the patient is required to dispose of any unused medication)

- Prescribing or dispensing to the same patient for the same condition by a partner in a practice with (initial prescriber or other coverage arrangement) within 90 days of the initial prescription

- Prescribing or dispensing to a research subject enrolled in an IRB-approved drug study a study that covered by the National Institutes of Health certificate of confidentiality

**What are the requirements for an initial prescribing or dispensing of a controlled substance for pain or associated with the same primary complaint? (201 KAR 9:260 Section 3)**

- Appropriate medical history and physical exam

- Obtain KASPER report for the previous 12 month periodPrescribe or dispense only what is medically appropriate

- Do not prescribe or dispense long-acting or controlled-release controlled substances for acute pain not directly related to or close in time to surgery

- Explain that the medication is being prescribed to treat an acute medical complaint for time-limited use, and that is should be discontinued when the condition has resolved

- Explain how to safely/properly dispose of the medicine

- If Schedule II Controlled Substance or Schedule III Controlled Substances with hydrocodone: 1. Make a written plan stating the objectives of the treatment and further diagnostic examinations required; Discuss the risks and benefits of controlled substance use; and 3. Obtain written consent for treatment

**What are the requirements for commencing long-term treatment (>3 months) for pain associated with a medical complaint for patients 16 years old or older? (201 KAR 9:260 Section 4)**

- Appropriate history and physical, past medical history including substance use and prior treatment, family history of substance use, and psychosocial history

- Baseline assessment to evaluate progress over time

- Obtain written informed consent

- If a reasonable likelihood of substance abuse, psychiatric, or psychologic condition, refers to a treatment program or specialist

- If a risk of diversion, enter into a Prescribing Agreement

- Obtain baseline drug screen

- If evidence controlled substance will be or likely used for a non-therapeutic purpose, do not prescribe

- Document attempt of a trail of noncontrolled modalities or lower doses by a clinician before prescribing long-term controlled substance

- Standards may be met by multiple prescribers in a group if: 1. Each has lawful access to the medical record; 2. Compliance with all applicable standards; and 3. Acting within their legal scope of practice

**What are the requirements for maintaining long-term treatment (>3 months) for pain associated with a medical complaint for patients 16 years old or older? (201 KAR 9:260 Section 5)**

- Annual preventive health history and physical

- Monthly evaluation until the controlled substance is titrated, without unacceptable side effects, and sufficient monitoring to minimize the likelihood of improper use or diversion

- History and physical at regular intervals and document measurable examinations

- Interval evaluation and modification of diagnosis and treatment plan to determine if improved functionality or any change in baseline measures

- Consult specialists as needed, particularly if poor response

- If a risk of diversion or improper use of controlled substance discontinue prescribing or justify continued use in the record

- If no significant improvement in function despite treatment obtain consultative assistance

- If mood, anxiety, psychiatric or psychological symptoms, obtain a psychiatric consult

- If “breakthrough” pain, identify triggers and preferable treat with non-controlled substances only prescribe additional controlled substances in the minimal amount needed taking steps to minimizeimproper/illegal use

- KASPER review every 3 months, or immediately if any concern not taking prescriptions as directed, diverting, or improper use; if more than one prescriber, notify co-prescribers

- Conduct random pill counts and random drug screens (if noncompliant controlled taper, stop dispensing/prescribing, refer to addiction, mental health, or drug treatment program)

- Stop prescribing and refer to an addiction specialist, if no response or lack of improvement where medically expected, significant adverse effects, or inappropriate drug-seeking or diversion

- Standards may be met by multiple prescribers in a group if: 1. Each has lawful access to the medical record; 2. Compliance with all applicable standards; and 3. Acting within their legal scope of practice

**What are the standards for prescribing Controlled Substances in the emergency department? (201 KAR 9:260 Section 6)**

- Comply with Sections 3 and 8

- If prescribing more than a 7 day supply, document rationale

- Shall not

- Administer an IV controlled substance for acute exacerbations of chronic pain, unless only appropriate route
- Provide replacement prescriptions for those that are destroyed, lost, or stolen
- Provide replacement doses of methadone, buprenorphine, and naloxone
- Prescribe or administer long-acting or controlled-release medications, or meperidine
- Prescribe or dispense more than the minimum amount necessary until follow-up by primary treating or other physician

**What other conditions should prescribers and dispensers be aware of in providing Controlled Substances? (201 KAR 9:260 Section 7)**

- Prior to the initial prescription of any controlled substance for conditions other than pain:

- Perform a history and physical exam, if appropriate a psychiatrist or other mental health exam
- Obtain and review KASPER report
- Medically appropriate decision to prescribe or dispense
- Only prescribe what is medically necessary
- Explain medication is for a time-limited use, to discontinue when the condition has resolved, and how to properly dispose of the medicine
- Discuss risks and benefits

- If ongoing prescribing or dispensing, comply with the accepted and prevailing standards of medical practice for the treatment of that medical complaint and use of Schedule II Controlled Substances and Schedule III Controlled Substances with hydrocodone, also:

- Make a written plan stating objectives of the treatment and required further diagnostic examinations
- Obtain written consent for the treatment from the patient

- If requests from established patients to prescribe or dispense a controlled substance to treat a single event/nonrecurring episode of anxiety/depression:

- Obtain KASPER report for prior 12 months
- Make a deliberate decision to prescribe or dispense that is medically appropriate the minimum amount of controlled substance to treat the situational anxiety or depression

**What happens if a health professional fails to follow the KBML controlled substance prescribing and dispensing professional standards? [KRS 311.595(9)(12)]**

- Disciplinary sanctions by the KBML.