The natural history of the entity has an inherent potential for recovery even without surgery.

Patients with central cord syndrome recover substantial neurological function after the injury; their capacity to walk recovers in most cases. However, some neurological deficits remain.

Recovery generally plateaus at two years post-injury.

A European multicenter study comparing 110 patients with central cord syndrome with other incomplete spinal cord injury patients revealed that central cord syndrome patients tended to have greater improvement in their ASIA Impairment Scale (AIS) grade as well as better ability to ambulate after one year. However, central cord syndrome patients had lower “self-care” scores from injury onset up to one year based on the Spinal Cord Independence Measure (SCIM), likely due to impaired hand function.

A national database study from 2009 through 2012 showed fall as the predominant cause, with a mean age of involvement of 60 years. 55% of cases were managed conservatively, 39% with cervical fusion surgery (62% anterior decompression and fusion), and 6% underwent laminoplasty.

Early decompression and stabilization have been advocated for cohorts presenting with instability and major or worsening neurological deficits.

No difference has been observed in the overall outcomes between early and late surgical interventions.

Lower preoperative Japanese Orthopedic Association (JOA) score, long segment signal changes, and impingement connote poor prognosis.

The neuroanatomical–functional paradox observed among patients with central cord syndrome is due to the interplay between motor synergy encoding (MSE) neurons, as well as lesion-affected and recovery-related networks.

Diffusion tensor imaging is a promising radiological armamentarium.