Although the typical presentation is in the form of a single, unilateral, hyperpigmented or tan-colored macule over the shoulder or pectoral area, BM has been reported to manifest in various atypical presentations.

Associated abnormalities include unilateral hypoplasia of the breast which can vary in magnitude, affecting the whole breast area or the nipple/areola alone. Supernumerary nipples can also occur as an association with aplasia of the ipsilateral pectoralis major muscle, ipsilateral limb shortening, localized lipoatrophy, spina bifida, scoliosis, pectus carinatum, quadriparesis, osteoma cutis, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and accessory scrotum. BM has been found to occur in association with phakomatosis pigmentovascularis and neurofibromatosis. BM occurring in association with nevus depigmentosus has been described as a possible example of twin spotting. A case report has mentioned the occurrence of basal cell carcinoma occurring on the site of BM in a sun-protected area. Hypohidrosis associated with BM has been reported. Pityriasis versicolor localized to the area of BM has been described.

Multiple and bilateral lesions have rarely been reported. A case of giant, bilateral Becker melanosis simulating the armor of a gladiator's arm has been described. The same patient also had marginal osteophytes over the cervical vertebrae. Becker melanosis associated with short stature, skeletal deformities, and mental retardation. Bilateral, congenital BM has been described. There are reports of Becker melanosisBM occurring in siblings. Atypical sites of involvement include the lower limbs. Many cases may present with later age of onset and absence of hypertrichosis.