**Actinic Keratosis**

Clear guidelines for managing AK do not exist given their propensity for spontaneous resolution; however, given the risk for malignant transformation, the clinician should not ignore these lesions. A review of practice patterns in 2012 regarding periocular AKs found that 60.2% of surveyed surgeons treat AKs <2mm with local excision and permanent pathology.

Given the proximity of periorbital AKs to the globe, treatments such as cryotherapy, topical chemotherapy, photodynamic therapy, and laser therapy may present additional risks. They should be used on a case-by-case basis in conjunction with an ophthalmologist.

**Basal Cell Carcinoma**

The primary treatment modality for BCC of the eyelid remains surgical excision, typically Mohs micrographic surgery or local excision with 3 to 4 mm surgical margins. The resulting defect is then repaired by the Mohs surgeon or oculoplastic surgeon. If the extensive orbital invasion is identified, orbital exenteration has been performed in the past. More recent studies have shown the use of neoadjuvant vismodegib before surgical excision to avoid disfiguring orbital exenteration.

The SINS trial is a landmark study comparing excisional surgery and topical 5% imiquimod to treat BCC. Though the trial was not specific to eyelid tumors, it found that surgery was superior to imiquimod. While most imiquimod failures were limited to the first year of treatment, there were sustained benefits shown for other groups.

**Squamous Cell Carcinoma & Keratoacanthoma**

Due to the difficulty in clinically differentiating SCC and KA, most physicians will opt for biopsy. If confirmed as KA, ophthalmologists may choose to either monitor or excise the lesion depending on size and location. In contrast, for non-eyelid KAs, excision is generally preferred due to a low risk for complications.

If SCC is confirmed on pathology, treatment is primarily surgical excision. This most commonly involves Mohs micrographic surgery with histopathologic clearance of surgical margins. The resulting defect is then repaired by the Mohs surgeon or an oculoplastic surgeon. If the SCC shows perineural invasion into the orbit, the patient should have further consideration of neoadjuvant treatment, globe-sparing or total orbital exenteration (depending on the extent of spread), and sentinel lymph node biopsy.

While surgical excision remains the standard of care for SCC, it is not always clinically possible; in such cases, radiation remains a viable option.

Topical imiquimod, a topical immunomodulatory agent of the imidazoquinoline family, functions by activation of the innate and adaptive/acquired immune systems. In 2010, Ross et al. were the first to utilize imiquimod to treat moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the eyelid successfully.

Following successful surgical excision, patients should be counseled on proper sun protection, including sunscreen, UV-blocking sunglasses, wide-brimmed hats, long sleeve clothing, and other protective clothing, and to limit sun exposure, particularly in the middle of the day.

**Sebaceous Carcinoma**

Although there is no well-defined standard of care for the treatment and management of SC, the Committee on Invasive Skin Tumor Evidence-Based Recommendations (CISTERN) has recently published recommended guidelines for the management of SC.

- Biopsy of suspicious eyelid lesions does not require depth for diagnosis. Atypical chalazia or chronic unilateral blepharitis in patients >60 years old should raise concern.

- A complete cutaneous exam and adjacent lymph node exam should be performed. Ocular motility, proptosis, and pupillary abnormalities should be assessed.

- The 8th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system for eyelid carcinoma may be used.

- Ultrasonography (US) or CT scans of the nodal basins may be used. Enlarged lymph nodes should be biopsied. Sentinel node biopsy can be considered for periocular sebaceous carcinoma. This differs from systemic cutaneous SC, where it is not recommended.

- Evaluation of distant metastasis with CT or PET scan should be used for confirmed nodal metastasis.

- Genetic testing for MTS with a Mayo Muir-Torre syndrome risk score of ≥ 2 is recommended.

- Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS) or complete circumferential peripheral and deep margin assessment (CCPDMA) should be the primary management for periocular SC. Positive surgical margins may be treated with adjuvant double freeze-thaw cryotherapy or topical mitomycin.

- If MMS or CCPDMA is not feasible, staged wide local excision can be performed; however, this may increase morbidity.

- Extensive orbital involvement may be treated with orbital exenteration or radiotherapy as a monotherapy. However, the literature shows orbital exenteration appears to have improved mortality rates.

- Adjuvant radiotherapy may be considered in SC with perineural invasion.

- Surveillance every six months for the first three years after treatment is recommended before moving to annual follow-up. Periodic lymph node basin US may be considered.

**Melanoma**

Primary treatment of local malignancy consists of local, wide skin excision. Different extents of safety margins exist, typically based on the Breslow thickness of the melanoma. Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SNLB) may aid in managing patients with eyelid melanoma. One study found that 21.4% of patients with eyelid melanoma had positive SNLB.

The most common locations of positive SNLB in the setting of ocular adnexal melanoma are the preauricular, intraparotid, and submandibular nodal basins.

For patients presenting with metastatic disease, surgical excision is not curative. Dacarbazine, an imidazole carboxamide chemotherapeutic agent, has been the first drug therapy for metastatic melanoma since 2006.

Biologic immunotherapies (e.g., interleukin-2 and interferons), vaccination strategies, and adoptive cell therapy are all immunotherapies that have been employed to combat metastatic malignant melanoma. Most notably, immune checkpoint inhibitors (i.e., ipilimumab, nivolumab, and pembrolizumab) are the newest and fastest-growing area of investigation in treating metastatic melanoma. Their discussion should be reserved for a separate article.

**Merkel Cell Carcinoma (MCC)**

Before treatment of MCC, staging of the tumor should be performed using the AJCC staging system. Given the aggressive nature of MCC and associated high mortality rate, sentinel lymph node biopsy (SNLB) should be considered. Surgical excision, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and immunotherapy have all been used to treat MCC. For surgical excision, wide excision with 5mm margins is recommended. Additionally, given the radiosensitivity of these tumors, adjuvant radiotherapy may be warranted.

Chemotherapy is efficacious in treating MCC as a first-line treatment for disseminated or metastatic disease rather than as a local or adjuvant treatment.