Communication with the diagnostic laboratory is essential to making the diagnosis. When M. marinum infection is suspected, the laboratory team will utilize Lowenstein-Jensen agar cultures which can be incubated at 28 to 32 degrees C, in addition to incubating at 37 degrees C. Cultures will need to be observed for six weeks. The positivity rate of cultures ranges from 70% to 80%. Lesions have a very low concentration of microorganisms; hence cultures should be obtained even in the absence of microscopic evidence of bacilli. Typical tuberculoid granulomas are seen only in two-thirds of the cases, and the histopathology of nodules can be confused with rheumatoid nodules. One in five nodules may not appear to be of infectious origin in histology. Samples from the deeper parts of the nodule or skin or synovial biopsy may provide information at times, and repeating a biopsy can be helpful. M. marinum infections can mimic other histopathological patterns, such as a sarcoid-like granuloma or granuloma annulare as well.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification techniques using Mycobacterium genus-specific primers can help diagnose M. marinum infection directly in the biopsy sample. Ziehl-Neelsen stain of biopsy specimens or yellowish discharge is rarely positive since the number of mycobacteria in clinical specimens is low.

M. marinum infection can also be opportunistic in patients treated with anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and other biological drugs.M. marinum infection. Tuberculin skin test using purified protein derivative is positive in 67% to 100% of cases. Quantiferon-TB Gold and the enzyme-linked immuno-spot assay may also be positive in M. marinum infections but are unhelpful for diagnosis. Positive blood culture findings have also been reported in disseminated infections. Recently in vivo imaging to monitor long-term anti-mycobacterial therapy has been proposed, and such diagnostic tools are being developed.