The differential diagnosis of constipation includes anatomic abnormalities like anal atresia and presacral masses, metabolic conditions like hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis, lead intoxication, and neurologic conditions meningomyelocele and Hirsprung disease. Toxins like botulinum toxin (sometimes found in honey) and medications like opiates can cause constipation as well. In older children, irritable bowel syndrome is also a consideration.

**Red Flags Concerning For an Organic Disorder**

- Systemic symptoms such as fever, abdominal distention, weight loss or poor weight gain, decreased appetite, and bloody diarrhea

- Onset before one month of age

- Delayed passage of meconium

- Failure to thrive

- Intermittent diarrhea and explosive stools

- Abnormal neurological examination such as low tone, loss of cremasteric reflex, and decreased lower extremity reflexes.

- No response to treatment

In most cases, a thorough history and physical exam will rule out most of these conditions. A history of lower extremity weakness or loss of bladder continence raises concern for a neurologic cause. Children who are less than one year, who are not growing well, or who do not respond to treatment often warrant additional testing. The physical exam should devote special attention to the abdominal exam and lower extremity neurologic exam. A spinal exam should look for signs of neural tube defects like hemangiomas and large dimples with hair tufts in the midline. The anus should be inspected to ensure it is normal in appearance and location. A rectal exam can be uncomfortable but can assess rectal tone, the presence of hard stool in the vault, and a large presacral mass. Growth curves should be reviewed, looking for signs of growth failure or changes in the growth curve.