# Continuing Education Activity

Post-traumatic hand stiffness is a common complication. Evaluating and treating the stiff hand requires an understanding of the anatomy of the hand as well as the mechanism of the injury. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of post-traumatic hand stiffness and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of post-traumatic hand stiffness.
- Identify the risk factors for developing post-traumatic hand stiffness.
- Describe the typical presentation of a patient with post-traumatic hand stiffness.

# Introduction

The human hand is made up of skin, soft tissues, bones, tendons, ligaments, and muscles, which work together to enable the fine motor function required to carry out daily tasks such as writing, dressing, and washing, as well as highly skilled tasks such as operating machinery and playing musical instruments. It is this highly precise function that means even minor injuries to the hand can risk causing significant handicap to the individual.

Following trauma to the hand, developing stiffness is a common finding and can have a significant effect on a patient's ability to work and overall quality of life. Evaluating and treating the stiff hand requires an understanding of the anatomy of the hand as well as the mechanism of the injury. These together with an understanding of the different modalities and timings of treatment can lead to successful management of the stiff hand. This article reviews the etiology, diagnosis, and treatment of post-traumatic hand stiffness.

# Etiology

There are multiple different causes of hand trauma. Common causes include falls, sports-related injuries, machine-related injuries, gunshot injuries, crush injuries, high pressure, and thermal and chemical injuries. These injuries can lead to burns, lacerations, limb amputations, tendon and ligament damage, fractures, and dislocations.

Following an injury to the hand, damaged structures will repair through a cascade of processes, aiming to restore the original tissue integrity.

Post-traumatic hand stiffness can be further influenced by the development of chronic regional pain syndrome (CRPS). CRPS is due to an abnormal inflammatory response following trauma due to sustained sympathetic activity. This can lead to stiffness, as well as pain, swelling, vasomotor disturbance, and trophic skin changes.

Rarely, hypertrophic ossification following trauma can be seen in the hand following trauma; this leads to the formation of atypical bone in tissues, contributing to stiffness.

# Epidemiology

Around 20% of attendances to the Emergency Department are due to injuries to the hand and wrist.

# Pathophysiology

When the soft tissues of the hand are damaged due to trauma, subsequent wound healing has 3 phases; inflammatory, proliferation, and maturation.

Fractures of the hand due to trauma will heal via primary or secondary bone healing dependent on the fracture reduction and level of stability present. Primary (direct) bone healing occurs when there is anatomical reduction; secondary bone healing is more common and results in callus formation. Fractures can lead to hand stiffness through inflammation and immobility (from pain and or splinting). Fractures of the hand are often associated with concurrent soft tissue, tendon, or ligament injury.

# History and Physical

The clinician’s objective is to identify factors that may be contributing to the hand stiffness. A detailed history from the patient should be sought including age, occupation, hand dominance, comorbidities, and drug history. The mechanism of the initial injury is important and will help to guide on-going management. Outline any management for both the initial injury and subsequent hand stiffness.

The hand should be examined thoroughly using a systematic approach. Firstly inspecting, then palpating for any skin changes, swelling, contractures, or deformity. The neurovascular status of the hand should be fully assessed and documented. Range of movement of the wrist, hand, and phalanges should be tested both actively and passively and any tender regions noted.

# Evaluation

Clinical signs of inflammation can be seen on examination of the hand, such as edema, erythema, pain, and reduced range of movement. Scars and contractures on the dorsum of the hand are more likely to cause a restriction in flexion, whereas injury on the volar side causes a restriction in extension. Differences between active and passive movements can help to differentiate between a joint versus a musculotendinous cause of the joint stiffness. If the active and passive motion is the same, it’s more likely to be the joint itself restricting movement; if the passive movement is greater than the active movement, movement is likely to be restricted due to a musculotendinous reason.

Hand stiffness can usually be successfully evaluated through history and physical examination alone. Further evaluation of the hand stiffness may be indicated with plain radiographs, Magnetic Resonance Imaging, CT, ultrasound, and nerve conduction studies if required.

# Treatment / Management

Following acute trauma to the hand, simple preventative measures such as elevation to reduce swelling and appropriate splinting can help reduce the extent of stiffness that occurs. If splinting is indicated acutely for pain relief and to allow for healing, the hand should be placed into a position of safe immobilization with the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints at 70 to 90 degrees of flexion, interphalangeal (IP) joints in full extension, and the wrist in 0 to 30 degrees of extension.

Once the hand has become stiff, treatment options include non-operative measures such as range of motion exercises, static and dynamic splints. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can be used to reduce inflammation and, therefore, the risk of developing stiffness. The principle for splinting is that of low-load with prolonged stress.

Operative intervention is required if non-operative management has failed to provide an acceptable restoration of function. The potential for patient benefit from an operation needs to be balanced with the generation of further scar tissue and the potential devascularization, which comes with surgery.

# Differential Diagnosis

Neurologic injury may present with a reduced range of movement of the joints in the hand. For example, in Klumpe palsy, due to damage to the brachial plexus, the wrist and MCP joints will be extended, with flexion at the IP joints. Dupuytren disease can present with benign non-traumatic contractures in the palm of the hand. Osteoarthritis presents with pain, reduced range of motion in the joints of the hand. This can be a complication after a traumatic hand injury or unrelated. Inflammatory arthritis presents with painful joints in the hand, with swelling and erythema due to inappropriate immune responses.

# Prognosis

The degree of hand stiffness is proportional to the severity of the initial injury.

Early and appropriate management of hand trauma can reduce the extent of resultant stiffness. Non-operative outcomes depend on patient adherence to splinting and physiotherapy. It has been reported that 87% of stiff hand joints respond successfully to exercise and dynamic splinting, avoiding the need for surgical intervention.

# Complications

Stiffness is the most common complication seen following hand trauma.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

The most common causes of hand trauma include falls and work-related injuries.

Post-traumatic injury, patient education is vital to achieving optimal results. Adherence to splinting and range of motion exercises will lead to better patient outcomes. Multi-disciplinary team input is vital to promote patient education and motivation to achieve this.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Post-traumatic hand stiffness is a common presentation to healthcare professionals. These patients will present with a spectrum of different signs and symptoms that require a multidisciplinary team approach to achieve optimal outcomes. Following acute trauma, the patient will usually be seen assessed in the Emergency Room. Depending on the type and the severity of the injury sustained, different specialists' input will be required. Nurses play an important role in the Emergency Room, ensuring that the patients’ vitals are taken and analgesia given and taking a role in the management of acute injury to the hand with the reduction of fractures and splinting. Radiologists are required to facilitate the diagnosis of bony injuries. These professionals will then refer patients to Orthopaedic or Plastic specialist teams as appropriate.

Management of the stiff hand requires co-ordinated care between surgeons, specialist nurses, and hand therapists to aid in patient education and treatment adherence. Impairment of hand function can significantly impact a patient’s quality of life and ability to work; therefore, the psychological impact of such injuries needs to be recognized. A systematic review found that people with lower incomes and levels of education are more likely to take longer to return to work.