Metronidazole is one of the mainstay drugs for the treatment of anaerobic bacterial infections, protozoal infections, and microaerophilic bacterial infections. It is cytotoxic to facultative anaerobic microorganisms.

Metronidazole is FDA-approved for treating protozoal infections such as Trichomoniasis vaginalis, Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia, blastocysts, and Balantidium coli. It is also FDA approved to treat anaerobic bacterial infections caused by Bacteroides species, Fusobacterium species, Clostridium species, Gardnerella vaginalis, Helicobacter pylori, Prevotella species, Porphyromonas species, and Biophilia Wadsworth.

Topical metronidazole is indicated for rosacea. It is used intravaginally for bacterial vaginosis

Metronidazole has additional off-label uses in the management of other conditions and infections, including balantidiases, bite wound infections, animal and human bites, Clostridioides (formerly Clostridium difficile), Crohn disease, post-surgical resection management, perianal fistulas, Dietamoeba fragilis infections, giardiasis, Helicobacter pylori eradication, periodontitis, post ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (pouchitis), and tetanus.

Metronidazole has rapid bactericidal effects against anaerobic bacteria with a killing rate proportional to the drug concentration. Concentration-dependent bactericidal properties have been demonstrated against Entamoeba histolytica and Trichomonas vaginalis.Bacteroides fragilis, and Clostridium perfringens more rapidly than treatment doses of clindamycin. It also penetrates the blood-brain barrier.