**Hormonal Impact on Bone Remodeling**

**Parathyroid Hormone (PTH)**

PTH is a polypeptide hormone secreted by the chief cells of the parathyroid glands, which acts to raise calcium levels in the bloodstream. PTH directly acts on bone and the kidney and indirectly acts on the intestines via the influence of vitamin D. The parathyroid hormone has a physiological negative feedback loop influenced by the amount of calcium in the blood. When there is a decreased plasma calcium concentration, there is less binding to calcium-sensing receptors (CaSR) on the parathyroid gland. This will lead to an increased release of PTH to raise calcium levels.

PTH has an indirect action on the osteoclasts by increasing the receptor activator activity of nuclear factor-kappa ligand (RANKL), which regulates the osteoclastic activity of bone resorption and leads to more calcium released into the plasma. In contrast, high levels of plasma calcium bind to the CaSR on the parathyroid gland and inhibit PTH release. Stimulating the CaSRs causes a conformational change of the receptor and stimulates the phospholipase C pathway. This ultimately leads to higher intracellular calcium, thereby inhibiting exocytosis of PTH from the chief cells of the parathyroid gland. This details only one piece of the calcium homeostasis puzzle because PTH also acts at the kidneys and intestines to regulate calcium and phosphate levels.

**Estrogen**

Estrogen deficiency leads to increased bone remodeling, where bone resorption outpaces bone formation and decreases bone mass. Based on animal studies, it is believed that estrogen may influence local factors that regulate the precursors of osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Estrogen may block the production and action of interleukin-6 (IL-6), hindering bone resorption. Also, it is believed that osteoclast survival thrives in the deficiency of estrogen, where the degree of bone turnover would be more significant.

**Calcitonin**

Calcitonin, a polypeptide hormone, is released from thyroid C cells in response to elevated calcium levels. Calcitonin binds to calcitonin receptors on osteoclasts to inhibit bone resorption. Calcitonin is believed to not play a prominent role in calcium homeostasis in adults, but it may be more critical in skeletal development throughout childhood. Calcitonin may be used clinically as a treatment option to treat osteoporosis.

**Growth Hormone**

Growth Hormone (GH), a peptide hormone secreted by the pituitary gland, acts through insulin-like growth factors (IGF) to stimulate bone formation and resorption. GH acts directly and indirectly via IGF to stimulate osteoblast proliferation and activity. It also stimulates osteoclastic bone resorption activity; the cumulative net effect of this dual activity favors bone formation.

**Glucocorticoids**

Glucocorticoids decrease bone formation by favoring osteoclast survival and causing osteoblast cell death. There is an increase in RANKL action and a decrease in osteoprotegerin (OPG). OPG is a cytokine receptor and member of the tissue necrosis factor superfamily that acts as a decoy receptor for RANKL, so it typically hinders RANKL-RANK interaction and activity.

**Thyroid Hormone**

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), thyroxine (T4), and triiodothyronine (T3) stimulate osteoblastic activity and cause bone elongation at the epiphyseal plate of long bones through chondrocyte proliferation. In states of hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, the degree of bone turnover is low and high, respectively. The rate of bone turnover is due to the effect of T3 and T4 on the number and activity level of osteoblasts and osteoclasts. For example, the increased metabolic state of thyrotoxicosis causes increased osteoblast function and increased osteoclastic number and activity, leading to a higher bone turnover.