The carotid sinus is very sensitive to touch and pressure. Carotid bifurcation is a prevalent site for the formation of atheromatous plaque, which leads to thromboembolic stroke. During the intervention for its correction, anatomical variation in the location of the carotid sinus in different individuals can lead to an increased risk of injury to carotid sinus or stimulation of carotid sinus by angioplasty stent or balloon. Damage to carotid sinus during surgery leads to postoperative hemodynamic instability. Carotid sinus stimulation during intervention predisposes to coronary vasospasm and resultant myocardial infarction. During carotid endarterectomy surgery, the surgeon will usually desensitize the carotid sinus by injecting a tiny amount of lidocaine into the carotid adventitia to prevent the baroreceptor stimulation during the procedure.

Some individuals develop carotid sinus hypersensitivity (CSH) or carotid sinus syncope.carotid sinus syndrome.

Diagnosis is possible by performing a carotid sinus massage, which is the external stimulation of baroreceptors. The patient in the supine position with the neck flexed, gentle pressure is applied for 5 to 10 seconds on one carotid sinus. Head-up tilt test is more effective than carotid massage. HR and BP changes are monitored with a beat-by-beat HR/BP monitor system during the procedure. The response elicited can be cardioinhibitory (more than 3 seconds of pause in HR), vasodepressor (more than 50 mmHg decrease in BP), or mixed.

**Treatment:**

Asymptomatic patients with normal response to carotid sinus massage do not require any intervention. Patients must understand that they need to avoid positions or movements which might accidentally stimulate carotid baroreceptors.

In symptomatic patients with a cardioinhibitory response or mixed response, clinicians achieve permanent cardiac pacing by implanting a permanent cardiac pacemaker (dual-chamber pacing is the favored approach). In patients with abnormal vasodilator response, vasoconstrictor drugs such as midodrine are an option.