The nasopalatine nerve is a division of the maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve. As the trigeminal nerve is sensory, the nasopalatine nerve is also a sensory nerve. It courses into the nasal cavity through the pterygopalatine ganglion to enter the sphenopalatine foramen. It passes inferior to the ostium of the sphenoid sinus to reach the septum, lying between the periosteum and the mucous membrane where it provides sensation to the nasal septum. From here, it courses inferiorly to pierce the hard palate anteriorly through the nasopalatine canal, which links the nasal and oral cavities. Other structures in this canal include the terminal branch of the nasopalatine artery, a small amount of fat, and palatine glands. The inferior opening of the nasopalatine canal is called the incisive foramen.

The anterior palatine nerve innervates the gingivae and the structures of the maxillary teeth as far forward as the canines, while the nasopalatine nerve primarily innervates the mucosa surrounding the incisive papilla and the gingival margins of the maxillary incisors.

The territory of the nasopalatine nerve also differs depending on the age of the subject in question. From data of nasopalatine nerve resection during the removal of supernumerary teeth, younger patients have been shown not to have sensory deficits, while the adolescent and adult groups did. This finding led to the conclusion that the nasopalatine nerve assumes the function of the anterior palatine nerve around age fourteen years.