**Four Phases of Migraine Attacks**

Four phases have been identified in migraine attacks.

**Prodrome:**premonitory symptoms associated with hypothalamus activation (dopamine)

- Around 77% of patients suffer prodromic symptoms for up to 24 to 48 hours before headache onset. It is more common in females than males (81 to 64%).

- Frequent symptoms are yawning (34%), mood change, lethargy, neck symptoms, light sensitivity, restlessness, difficulties in focusing vision, feeling cold, craving, sound sensitivity, sweating, excess energy, thirst, and edema.

**Aura:**changes in cortical function, blood circulation, and neurovascular integration occur in about 25% of cases

- It can precede the headache, or it can present simultaneously.

- They are typically gradual, less than 60 minutes in duration, more often visual, and have positive and negative symptoms.

- 
              
- Positive symptoms are caused by active release from central nervous system neurons (bright lines or shapes, tinnitus, noises, paresthesias, allodynia, or rhythmic movements).
              
              
- Negative symptoms indicate a lack or loss of function (reduction or loss of vision, hearing, sensation, or motion).

- They have to be fully reversible.

- It usually consists of tingling sensations on one side of the face or a limb. They are considered paresthesias.

- The most common positive visual symptom is the scintillating scotoma (an area of absent vision with a shimmering or glittering zigzag border).

- The most common negative visual symptom is visual field defects.

- Visual auras are the most frequent ones.

- Sensory auras are also common. They can follow visual symptoms or occur without them.

- Language auras are not frequent. They consist of transient dysphasia.

- Motor auras are rare. They consist of complete or partial hemiplegia involving limbs and the face.

**Headache:**additional changes in blood circulation and function of the brainstem, thalamus, hypothalamus, and cortex

- Often unilateral, generally with a pulsatile or throbbing feature and increasing intensity within the first hours.

- The intensity can correlate to nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, rhinorrhea, lachrymation, allodynia, and osmophobia.

- It can take place over hours to days.

- Patients may seek relief in dark places, as the pain usually resolves in sleep.

**Postdrome:**persistent blood changes with symptoms after headache termination

- This phase consists of a movement-vulnerable pain in the same location as the previous headache.

- Common symptoms can be exhaustion, dizziness, difficulty concentrating, and euphoria.