Calculation of an operative risk is not sufficient for shared decision making. Prediction of the potential benefit of an intervention is another important part of the risk/benefit ratio estimation. The risk of mortality of 10% is inappropriately high for any patient undergoing an elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy and does not favor surgical treatment. However, mortality as high as 70% may still be acceptable for a patient with multiple comorbidities and a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm. The potential benefit from surgery is better estimated based on the published data on immediate and long-term results or surgery department audit and evaluation reports. The surgeon’s personal experience is also important to consider, but it is biased by definition unless the outcomes were verified within a formal research project. The art of medicine, however, will always play an important role in decision making, especially in complex cases. Despite being subjective, the physician’s feeling of a possible unfavorable outcome has a reasonable predictive value.

Surgery is a highly dynamic field with continuously improving outcomes due to advances in technology and better intraoperative and postoperative care. Elaboration of high-volume centers contributes to better outcomes for some complex procedures. Progress in surgical education also aims to minimize the risks of surgery performed by an inexperienced physician-in-training. However, these processes may be at different stages of development, even within the same geographical region. Hence, there is always some discrepancy between predicted and observed mortality and morbidity. Every surgical department and surgeon must make an effort to log and track immediate and long-term outcomes to compare predicted and observed morbidity with the national average.