Children with delays qualify for Early Intervention, which are programs that can help the child catch up to development typical for their age. These interventions may include speech therapy, physical therapy, and occupational therapy. The earlier delays are identified and addressed, the more positive the prognosis.

Once a delay in development is identified, the clinician must try and find the etiology for the delay. A child with a speech delay may have an underlying hearing problem, whereas, children with visual problems may have delays in motor development. Genetic and metabolic conditions can also precipitate developmental delays, often global in nature. Children with cerebral palsy will also present with global delays. A thorough workup should include hearing screening, thyroid function testing, lead testing, and a microarray.

In disorders such as autism, one may begin to see deviations in development, especially in the social/emotional and verbal areas, as early as six months of age. The importance of detecting this early on is that the earlier a child has interventions in place the more likely a child is to become more functional. The older a child gets without the detection of these delays, the therapies, while still useful and worth the effort, may become less effective. Unfortunately, many children with an autism spectrum disorder do not receive a diagnosis until after age 5. Many pediatric offices use screening tools, the most well-studied of which is the Modified Checklist for Autism Screening in Toddlers (M-CHAT), and subsequent variations of this screening tool.