The prevalence of thyroid eye disease is approximately 50% among GD patients in the Caucasian population. The annual incidence is 16.0 in 100,000 for females and 2.9 in 100,000 for males in the US population.

**Risk Factors**

- Ethnicity: The African-American population exhibits the maximal risk, followed by the White race and Asian populations.

- Age: TED shows a bimodal peak incidence. It occurs in age groups of 40 to 44 years and 60 to 64 years in females, and ages of 45 to 49 years and 65 to 69 years in males.

- Gender: There is a female preponderance due to a higher risk of autoimmune diseases. Males cases have more severe ocular involvement and worse outcomes.

- Genetics: CTLA-4, HLA-DRB-1, and TNF-a genes - are most often associated with TED.

- Systemic associations: Autoimmune disorders like pernicious anemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, Addison’s disease, vitiligo, coeliac disease, and rheumatoid arthritis - a higher risk of TED.

- Environmental factors: Smoking is strongly associated with the TED incidence.

- Dysthyroid status: At the time of diagnosis, 90% of TED cases are hyperthyroid, 6% euthyroid, 3% have Hashimoto thyroiditis, and 1% are hypothyroid

- Radioactive iodine therapy (RAIT): causes exacerbation in 24% of TED cases.

- Stress: Psychological stress can aggravate TED by rebound immune hyperactivity following prolonged corticosteroid-induced immune suppression.

- Pregnancy: New onset or worsening of TED occurs in 30% of GD cases in the post-partum period.

- Others: Trauma can be a stimulus for activating an autoimmune cascade in the orbit. High serum cholesterol may also be a risk factor for TED.