HCs can be classified into Infectious and Non-infectious. The first includes Benign, Neoplastic, and Traumatic. The latter is divided into Parasitic (Echinococcus and hydatid cyst) and Non-parasitic (pyogenic and fungal abscess).

**Simple Cyst**

It's the most common form of hepatic cysts. The underlying etiology of pathogenesis is not fully understood. Most simple cysts are congenital and usually arise from hyperplastic biliary ducts that are not connected to the biliary system.

**Polycystic Liver Disease (PCLD)**

There are two mechanisms suggested for cysts development in PCLD. The first is thought to be due to retained abnormal bile ductules detached from the biliary tree and dilated progressively, forming cysts. Another suggested mechanism is an impairment of cilia within the biliary tree, leading to hyperproliferation of cholangiocytes and the generation of cysts. PCLD is congenital and is usually associated with Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD). Mutations in these patients have been identified in (PKD1 and PKD2 genes).

PCLD develops exclusively in patients with ADPKD. However, isolated PCLD was identified and reported as a separate illness in 1950 and had its genetic confirmation definition in 2003. Two genes are often found to be mutated (PRKCSH and SEC63). Despite these differences in genotype, patients with Isolated PCLD and ADPKD are similar phenotypically in liver involvement.

In Autosomal recessive Polycystic kidney disease, patients tend to die shortly after birth due to pulmonary complications. However, those who survive tend to have liver fibrosis rather than a cyst.

Gigot Criteria for PCLD relies on imaging findings and consists of 3 types:

- Type I: the presence of less than 10 large hepatic cysts and less than 20 cm in diameter maximum.

- Type II: diffuse involvement of liver parenchyma by multiple cysts with remaining large areas of patent liver parenchyma.

- Type III: diffuse involvement of liver parenchyma by different-sized liver cysts with slight areas of normal liver parenchyma.

Qian's classification relies on the number of cysts and used mainly for family members screening and consists of 5 grades:

-  Grade 0: no cyst.

-  Grade 1: 1-10 cysts.

-  Grade 2: 11-20 cysts.

-  Grade 3: > 20 cysts.

-  Grade 4: > 20 cysts and symptomatic hepatomegaly.

**Neoplastic**

Biliary cystadenoma (BCA) is a slow-growing neoplasm arising from the bile ducts. The pathogenesis is that these lesions are still unknown—suggestion of theory of superficial injury and reactive process. Alternatively, it is a congenital disease arising from ectopic remnants or aberrancy of embryonic bile ducts. Another theory is that these neoplasms are secondary to implantation, explaining the ovarian-like stroma, overexpression of estrogen and progesterone receptors. It has a heterogeneous mixture with septations occupied with either mucinous (95%) or serous (5%) components.

Biliary cystadenocarcinoma (BCAC): differentiation between BCA and BCAC can be made through certain features, including demographic data, liver function tests, mass size, and presence of mural nodules. CA 19-9 are moderate predictors of BCAC. In conclusion, there are no definite reliable criteria to differentiate BCA from BCAC, and the definitive diagnosis is often made following surgery.