**Treatment**

The treatment for initial caries lesion (even when active) is managed through non-operative care, including remineralization therapy, behavioral changes, and using fluoride-containing products. Remineralization is aimed at stopping the progression of the lesion or, ideally, reversing it.

Behavioral changes mean educating patients regarding the importance of diet, oral hygiene, and regular dental checkups. We as dentists should explain the rationale behind reducing sugar consumption and the action of saliva. The indication of a toothbrush and hygiene technique should be done based on an individual assessment. Generally, oral hygiene recommendations include tooth brushing twice a day (after breakfast and after dinner). Still, another time can be added if the patient has a high caries risk, usually after lunch. We should always motivate our patients to maintain the new habits gained (behavioral changes) over time with regular checkup appointments - at least twice a year.

**Fluoride Mechanism of Action**

Fluor (F) must be present in the right place and at the right time to interfere with demineralization and remineralization events. However, even low ppm values are sufficient to fulfill its effect. When pH drops up to 4.5, fluorapatite (FA) is formed while hydroxyapatite (HA) is dissolved. If F is present, the enamel dissolution decreases because the enamel recovers those lost minerals as fluorapatite. Furthermore, the action of F is complemented by its natural effect on remineralization, enhancing the redeposition of calcium and phosphate present in the biofilm fluid when the pH rises.

Fluoride used at high concentrations, more than 2500 ppm, can penetrate the dental biofilm, deliver fluoride to the tooth surface, and concentrate in incipient lesions. Thus, fluoride decreases enamel demineralization and increases remineralization. A higher fluoride concentration also prolongs the fluoride retention in the oral cavity by forming a fluoride reservoir (calcium fluoride-like deposits) on the tooth surface and in dental biofilms. It is worth noting that very high fluoride levels have a transitory bactericidal effect. However, they usually require frequent professional applications, which is impractical for both patients and professionals.

**Fluoride Therapy**

The method with the highest level of evidence to prevent, reverse, or arrest the early stages of dental caries is topical fluoride - the topic effect of fluoride is superior to its systemic action. Fluorides can be delivered topically either as gel or varnish by a dental professional or in the form of toothpaste or mouthwash at-home settings.

**Self-applied (at-home) Topical Fluoride**

**Fluoride toothpaste:**Tooth brushing with fluoride toothpaste significantly reduces dental caries prevalence in primary and permanent dentition.

**Professionally Applied topical Fluoride**

**Mouth rinses:**The fluoride compound most commonly used in mouth rinses is sodium fluoride (NaF). They are available in two presentations: for daily use, with 230 ppm of fluoride, and weekly use, with 900 ppm (0.09%). The latter is indicated for patients over 11 years old with a high risk of caries.

The most commonly used agents for professionally applied fluoride treatments are 5% sodium fluoride varnish and acidulated phosphate fluoride.

**Gels:**They contain acidified phosphate fluoride at a concentration of 1.23%, which means 12,300 ppm of fluoride ion and acid pH (3.5).

Before applicating the gel, dental cleaning is advised to take better advantage of its benefits. Some topical fluoride gels are marketed with recommended treatment times of less than four minutes. As for the frequency of application, it will depend on the patient's risk. In a low-risk patient, twice per year would be sufficient, while in a high-risk patient, four times per year.

Fluoride gel is principally indicated in patients older than six years old. Under this age, the risk of experiencing adverse effects when accidentally swallowing the gel, particularly nausea and vomiting, outweighs the potential benefits of using this agent.

**Varnishes:**More than 30 fluoride-containing varnish products are on the market today, and they have varying compositions and delivery systems. 5% sodium fluoride varnish (NaFV) and 2.26% sodium fluoride varnish are the most commonly used.

Because of the low risk of experiencing harm in children younger than six, 2.26% fluoride varnish is the only topical fluoride agent recommended for this age group, even though other topical fluorides may be beneficial.

**Non- fluoride Remineralization Agents**

New phosphate-based agents with anti-caries potential have been studied as a method of promoting remineralization of initial caries lesions. The calcium- and phosphate-based delivery systems increase the saturation of these ions in the oral cavity. Casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate (CPP-ACP) can release calcium and phosphate in the dental biofilm to maintain a supersaturated state, favoring the remineralization process.

Cyclophosphates, other phosphate-based agents, act as a barrier against acid diffusion into the dental substrate and as nucleators of calcium phosphate apatite-like. One example is sodium trimetaphosphate (TMP).

The action of TMP and CPP-ACFP potentiates the effect of toothpaste containing fluor in the remineralization of the enamel, especially for those patients with high risk and caries activity.

Regardless of the remineralizing agent chosen (with or without fluoride), the ideal properties should be as follows:

- Rapidly precipitate mineral deposition on the tooth surface with a partial loss of minerals (non-cavitated lesions).

- Rapidly transform deposited minerals into a more stable apatite.

- Rapidly diffuses across the surface and into subsurface lesions to complete remineralization.

- It needs to achieve this even in a patient with high caries risk.