Eyelid hygiene remains the mainstay of treatment and is effective in treating most cases of blepharitis. Warm, wet compresses are applied to the eye for 5 to 10 minutes to soften eyelid debris, oils, and also to dilate meibomian glands. Immediately following this, the eyelid margins should be washed gently with a cotton applicator soaked in diluted baby shampoo to remove scale and debris. Care should be taken not to use too much soap since it can result in dry eyes. Individuals with posterior blepharitis, benefit from a gentle massage of the eyelid margins to express oils from the meibomian glands. A cotton applicator or finger is used to massage the lid margins in small circular patterns. During symptomatic exacerbations of blepharitis, eyelid hygiene needs to be performed two to four times daily. In patients with chronic blepharitis, a lid-hygiene regimen needs to be maintained daily for life, or irritating symptoms will recur. In addition, eye makeup needs to be limited and all triggers removed. Underlying conditions should be treated.

Topical antibiotics should be used in all cases of acute blepharitis and cases of anterior blepharitis. They have been found to be useful in symptomatic relief and eradicating bacteria from the lid margin. Topical antibiotic creams like bacitracin or erythromycin can be applied to the lid margin for 2 to 8 weeks. Oral tetracyclines and macrolide antibiotics may be used to treat posterior blepharitis not responsive to eyelid hygiene or associated with rosacea. These oral antibiotics are used for their anti-inflammatory and lipid regulating properties.

Short courses of topical steroids are beneficial in patients with ocular inflammation. Recent trials have shown that antibiotics and corticosteroids can produce significant improvements in symptoms. These often are prescribed as a combination topical treatment in patients who have failed eyelid hygiene treatment.

In patients who are felt to have significant Demodex infestations, tea tree oil eyelid and shampoo scrubs have been shown to be beneficial when used for a minimum of 6 weeks.

Recent new therapies have become available for the treatment of blepharitis. Thermal pulsation therapy (LipiFlow device) applies heat to both the anterior and posterior surfaces. Pulsations gently remove debris and crustings from the meibomian glands. MiBoFlo is a thermal therapy applied to the outside of the eyelids. BlephEx is a rotating light burr used to remove debris from meibomian gland orifices. This allows better flow of oils and improved response to heat therapies. The Maskin probe is a stainless steel probe applied to an anesthetized meibomian gland orifice. A light electrical current is applied to the gland to facilitate oil secretion. While some small trials have shown promise, further clinical trials are needed to establish the efficacy of these treatments.