Drug-induced esophagitis management involves the discontinuation of culprit medicine and other supportive treatment and lifestyle modification to protect the esophagus from further injury.

- Discontinuation of the causative drug - When possible, discontinue potentially caustic oral medications. If possible, the medication preparation should change to a liquid formulation

- Short-term treatment with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and antacids. PPIs are found to be very useful with their acid-inhibiting properties as gastric acid reflux may contribute further to the worsening of esophageal injury.

- Oral sucralfate - It forms a local protective barrier and has cytoprotective effects.

- Clinical features may persist for weeks to months in some patients. They can receive a topical application of lidocaine to alleviate symptoms.

- In patients with difficulty swallowing, parenteral nutrition for a short duration can be considered but usually is not needed.

- Avoid irritating food such as very hot or cold or acidic items.

**Preventive Measures**

- Take medication with an adequate amount (at least 200 to 250 ml) of water.

- Avoid the prone position while taking the drug.

- Take pills at least 30 minutes before going to bed.

- Eat a meal after taking medicine.

Medication-induced esophagitis is usually transient and improves in 1 to 2 weeks after discontinuing culprit medication. In a study, when patients were followed up after two days to 2 months with endoscopy, they showed normal esophageal findings or well-healed scars in the esophagus.