Pathogen characteristics: GBS is a gram-positive, catalase-negative organism that appears as cocci in pairs and chains on gram stain.****When grown on blood agar, they appear as small colorless colonies that cause beta-hemolysis or complete hemolysis. This is becauseS. agalactiae forms a toxin known as, which causes complete lysis of the hemoglobin in RBCs.

The group B specific cell wall carbohydrate antigen is common to all strains of GBS, and a surface capsular polysaccharide allows classification into types Ia, Ib, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, and IX (Lancefield classification scheme). A surface protein antigen, C protein, with alpha and beta components, is common to all Ib strains, to 30% of type Ia strains, to 60% of type II strains, and to some type IV, V, and VI strains.

Another surface component is a pilus that facilitates attachment to mucosal surfaces. The hypervirulent clonal complex ST-17 of type III has a tropism for meninges and typically is present among invasive but not colonizing neonatal isolates.

Virulence: Streptococcus agalactiae has several virulence factors that help it attach to the host cells and evade the immune system.

- This bacterium is encapsulated by a polysaccharide layer rich in sialic acid, which is a substance also found in human cells. Thus, inexperienced immune cells in a newborn may confuse S. agalactiae for self-cells, allowing them to survive inside the body. A type-specific capsular polysaccharide is released from cells, and the amount elaborated has been correlated with virulence.

- The capsule also has pili, which are hair-like structures that help the bacteria attach to a host cell.

- Furthermore, S. agalactiae makes beta-hemolysin, a pore-forming toxin that destroys the host’s red blood cells resulting in hemolysis.

- GBS produces several bacterial products. Most strains possess C5a-ase, an enzyme of the serine esterase class that inactivates complement component C5a.

GBS colonization: GBS can be found colonizing normal gastro-intestinal and genitourinary flora in up to one-third of healthy asymptomatic women. Several factors associated with a higher risk of colonization include African American ethnicity, obesity, multiple sexual partners, male-to-female oral sex, frequent sexual intercourse, tampon use, and infrequent hand washing. Pregnant women colonized with GBS can spread the bacteria to their infants before or during childbirth. The acquisition of neonatal GBS presumably occurs either by ascending transmission through ruptured membranes or from contact with the organism in the genital tract during vaginal deliveries.

Research has also described horizontal transmission from mothers or other nosocomial and community contacts.

In addition to newborn infants, GBS can also cause invasive infections in those with a weakened immune system, such as pregnant women or immunocompromised adults with malignancy, diabetes mellitus, or HIV. Also, patients with either asplenia or functional asplenia, such as those with sickle cell disease, may be at risk for invasive GBS infection, given the spleen’s important role in neutralizing encapsulated organisms.