Every interprofessional health care team member plays a crucial role in managing patients receiving ipilimumab. This includes all clinicians (physicians and mid-level practitioners, specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists. The oncologist and other clinicians should be tasked with properly delegating these tasks and informing his team members. This ensures that the clinician is aware of the changes in the patient and can be prepared for any changes. Additionally, the clinician needs to be mindful of the various common and uncommon adverse effects of ipilimumab and continuously monitor the patient for these changes. It bears mention that there have not been many studies to determine specific indications or adverse effects of the drug, and the alert physician should be continually be looking for improvements to treatment and can consider different options in therapy, such as reduced drug dosage, increased duration between doses, or combination therapy with other medications.

At the level of the pharmacist, proper dosages of medications and appropriate intervals between dosages should be verified to ensure patient safety and avoid and/or minimize toxicity and adverse effects, along with thorough medication reconciliation to prevent any potential drug-drug interactions. In cases requiring ipilimumab, an oncology-specialized pharmacist should be part of the therapeutic team. Also, medications should be prepared and ready to use, commonly used in conjunction with ipilimumab, such as other immune modulators (nivolumab) or corticosteroids. Nurses and other health care workers who generally supervise the patient while receiving medical therapy and administering the medication should be trained and informed to look out for changes in the baseline from the patient, including examining for new rashes, observing for signs of endocrinopathies, and questioning for changes in bowel movements. ALl interprofessional team members share in the responsibility of patient education and counseling.

These interprofessional strategies can optimize ipilimumab therapy and minimize adverse reactions and interactions, resulting in better patient outcomes and reduced adverse events. [Level 5]