There are different lenses for use with the slit lamp. They are either high-magnification or wide-angle lenses used to visualize in great detail or map a large area in a single view. The image formed is either virtual and erect (as with the central lens of Goldmann) or real and inverted (as with the +90D lens).

The power of a lens determines how far the lens should be held from the patient's eye to obtain a clear retinal image. Some lenses can be used in dilated pupils (most lenses) and others through small pupils (including 90D and SuperPupil XL lens). The cornea has a high refractive power; thus, it is possible to see only the anterior one-third of the eye using a slit-lamp biomicroscope.

There are two basic optical principles to view the retina. These principles are combined in certain lenses, like the Rodenstock contact lens.

- The first approach is to nullify the corneal power using a high-power minus lens or a contact lens. These include the Goldmann 3-mirror contact lens, Goldmann fundus contact lens, Zeiss 4-mirror goniolens, and Hruby lens (**Figure**).**Figure**). It has a central lens and three mirrors. The central lens has a magnification of 1.08x and is used to examine the central 36 degrees retina. The larger trapezoidal mirror has a declination of 73 degrees and is used to view up to the mid periphery. The smaller rectangular mirror has a declination of 67 degrees and is used to view the peripheral retina. The smallest semicircular mirror has a declination of 59 degrees for examining the vitreous body, ora serrata, and gonioscopy. The main disadvantage of the Goldmann lens is its limited field of view which requires rotation of the lens to visualize the fundus.

- The second method uses the eye's refractive power (power of the cornea and the crystalline lens) as a convex lens component of an astronomical telescope (Keplerian telescope), similar to that used by the indirect ophthalmoscope. Lenses used in this method include the +60 D, +78 D, and +90 D funduscopic lenses (**Figure**). The +90D is a popular fundoscopy lens. It is the gold standard lens for retinal examination.**Figure**) use this mechanism.

These auxiliary slit lamp lenses are used to examine the retina. Most of these lenses have a double aspheric design to minimize peripheral image distortion and improve the depth of the field.