**Primary MR**

Degenerative:

The underlying pathophysiologic basis for degenerative mitral regurgitation is most commonly related to myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve, resulting in mitral valve prolapse (MVP). MVP can occur either as a primary, non-syndromic process or a secondary, syndromic process. In primary MVP, advancing age is the driving factor responsible for disease progression. Connective tissue diseases such as Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, MASS phenotype, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), osteogenesis imperfecta, and pseudoxanthoma elasticum lead to secondary MVP, causing MR.

Congenital:

Conditions like isolated cleft of the mitral valve

Infectious/Rheumatic:

With an estimation of over 15 million cases worldwide, rheumatic heart disease (RHD) is extremely common in developing countries due to a lack of medical resources and vaccinations.

**Secondary MR**

Left ventricular dilation due to ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy secondarily impairs leaflet coaptation of a structurally normal MV, resulting in secondary MR. Dysfunction and remodeling can lead to apical and lateral papillary muscle displacement, resulting in leaflet tethering, dilation, and a flattening of the mitral annulus, and lower valve closing forces.

Papillary Muscle Rupture:

Papillary muscle rupture is a very rare condition seen in 1% to 2% of patients after myocardial infarction (MI) or infective endocarditis. It leads to severe mitral regurgitation due to dysfunction of the papillary muscles.

Ischemic MR (IMR):

IMR results from prior MI associated with normal mitral valve leaflets and chordae. Ischemia of the segments underlying the papillary muscles results in remodeling. This phenomenon causes papillary muscle displacement, which results in a more apical position of the leaflets known as a “seagull sign.”

The degree of exercise-induced increase or decrease in MR relates to changes in LV remodeling and valvular deformation and also to changes in LV and papillary muscle synchronicity.

Congestive heart failure (CHF) Associated:

In a study of 558 patients form a heart failure clinic with severe congestive heart failure (EF less than or equal to 35%), MR was severe in 4.3%, moderate to severe in 12.5%, moderate in 21.9%, mild to moderate in 11.8%, mild in 39.1%, and absent or present in 10.4%.

Atrial Fibrillation Associated:

A retrospective cohort study found atrial fibrillation (AF) to cause increased atrial and valve annular size, resulting in functional MR. Of the patients studied, controlling AF, and restoring sinus rhythm resulted in an increased reduction of functional MR.

Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy:

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) can also lead to MR. HCM is defined by severe left ventricular hypertrophy, which causes increased papillary muscle mass, bringing them closer together. This phenomenon causes the mitral valve leaflets to become elongated and floppy and pulls the leaflets closer to the left ventricular outflow tract causing regurgitant retrograde flow.