The goal of treatment is to regain full range of motion of the affected finger. Treatment options include both surgical and nonsurgical modalities. Splinting is a nonsurgical treatment and involves immobilizing the affected joint to allow for PIP flexion(straightening) to occur. This also allows the tendon to heal and not continue to volarly separate. Splints are usually maintained for 3 to 6 weeks depending on the patient’s age and severity of the injury.

The treatment options for a boutonniere deformity if it represents a chronic sequela of rheumatoid arthritis. The classes of medications to treat rheumatoid arthritis are disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), biologic response modifiers, glucocorticoids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs), and analgesics. DMARDs are used to delay the progression of rheumatoid arthritis. DMARDs have different mechanisms of action and are often used in combination therapy. Although the mechanism of action varies, they have a similar impact on the disease process. Biologic response modifiers are genetically engineered and work by interrupting a patient’s immune system signals that are responsible for tissue damage. Most of these medications attempt to interfere with the activity of tumor necrosis factor. Glucocorticoids are used to reduce inflammation and also to curb the autoimmune activity. They are often used in conjunction with DMARDs. NSAIDs can aid with pain control, swelling, and inflammation, but do not affect slowing the disease process. Analgesics are used to control pain only.

If nonsurgical measures are unsuccessful, surgical joint replacement may be necessary. Joint fusion is another surgical procedure that involves fusing the two joint surfaces of the affected digit together. The benefits of joint fusion are pain improvement, increased the stability of the joint, and prevention of worsening joint deformity. After surgery, patients are instructed to wear a splint or brace for several weeks to keep the proximal interphalangeal joint straight.