The evaluation of craniopharyngioma requires an interprofessional approach with evaluation by an endocrinologist, neuro-opthalmologist, and neurosurgeon.

**Imaging**

Craniopharyngioma is diagnosed with computerized tomography (CT) and or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) during the evaluation of visual symptoms. MRI is the standard of care in identifying craniopharyngiomas or any other pituitary tumors as it provides better information on the tumor, its location, and association to the surrounding structure. The cystic area is visible on both modalities, but calcification is primarily seen with CT imaging. Craniopharyngioma is heterogeneous in texture; the combination of solid, cystic, and calcification components is a clue to its diagnosis on imaging modalities. ACP is primarily large irregular with 90% calcification and a cystic area, while PCP is mostly solid and rarely with cysts and calcifications.

**Visual Exam**

A complete visual exam, including acuity and visual field, should be done by a neuro-opthalmologist in patients with visual disturbances.

**Endocrine Evaluation**

All patients should be evaluated for hormonal deficiencies. Laboratory tests should include fasting morning cortisol, ACTH, TSH, free T4, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), estradiol (females), testosterone (males), GH, insulin-like growth factor-1, prolactin, serum sodium, and urine specific gravity and osmolality. Dynamic testing like a cosyntropin stim test can be done in selected patients where morning cortisol is equivocal or indeterminate.