There are numerous endothelial keratoplasty (EK) techniques used to treat disorders of the corneal endothelium. They include deep lamellar endothelial keratoplasty (DLEK), Descemet stripping endothelial keratoplasty (DSEK), Descemet stripping automated endothelial keratoplasty (DSAEK), Descemet membrane endothelial keratoplasty (DMEK), pre-Descemet endothelial keratoplasty (PDEK), Descemetorhexis without endothelial keratoplasty (DWEK), Descemet stripping only (DSO), and the proposed technique Descemet membrane endothelial transfer (DMET). The procedures involve the removal of the endothelium and Descemet membrane of the cornea through a corneal incision and possible placement of a circular graft from the inner lining of a donor cornea. The goal of these procedures is to restore corneal endothelial function, leading to improved vision and corneal clarity. This activity describes the evaluation and etiology of corneal endothelium disorders and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients who undergo treatment for endothelial dysfunction and its complications.

**Objectives:**
- Review endothelial disorders and the relevant pathophysiology.
- Describe the various surgical techniques of endothelial transplantation and preparation of the transplanted tissue.
- Identify common complications of the different types of endothelial keratoplasties and their management.
- Explain the importance of communication among the interprofessional team workers for the appropriate selection of candidates for these procedures and the improvement of postoperative management.