Treatment of HFCS coincides with the management of PID. The goals of treatment are to relieve symptoms, eradicate the infection, and minimize risks of long-term sequelae (infertility or ectopic pregnancy). As the diagnosis of PID may be challenging and the potential for serious complications is great, the CDC advises that physicians maintain a low threshold for aggressive treatment. Antibiotics are successful in up to 75% of cases, and most patients with PID can be managed as outpatients. Antibiotic therapy should be geared at covering the most common organisms, Chlamydia trachomatis, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae, as well as gram-negative organisms, anaerobes, and streptococci.

Depending on the degree of suspicion, antibiotics regimens can be tailored for each patient. Most commonly, ceftriaxone and azithromycin are adequate for the control of gonococcal and chlamydial infections.

Hospitalization should be considered for patients with the following conditions:

- Uncertain diagnosis

- Pregnancy

- Severe illness

- Pelvic abscess on imaging

- Inability to tolerate anything by mouth

- Immunodeficiency

- Failure to improve after 72 hours of therapy

Patients with persistent symptoms of fever, chills, or cervical motion tenderness after 72 hours of treatment should be reevaluated for possible surgical intervention. Diagnostic laparoscopy is warranted in the setting of HFCS for symptomatic adhesiolysis and PID with goals of conserving reproductive potential with abscess drainage or unilateral adnexectomy if necessary. Laparotomy is usually reserved for patients experiencing surgical emergencies (ruptured abscesses) and patients who are not candidates for laparoscopic intervention.