Athletes commonly incur injuries to the hand or wrist; reports indicate that sporting activities account for approximately 22% of all hand fractures in adults. Of all hand fractures in adults, carpal fractures are the least common (12%) compared to metacarpal fractures (34%) and phalangeal fractures (54%).

Scaphoid fractures commonly present with radial-sided wrist pain and tenderness in the anatomical snuffbox, on axial loading of the thumb, and during pincer grasp. They are generally diagnosed with radiographic imaging but may require a CT scan to identify the fracture configuration. However, in specific cases, non-displaced fractures can be missed either due to subtle fracture lines or even the irregular contour of the bone. In these cases, MRI or bone scintigraphy may be used to confirm the diagnosis.

Treatment of scaphoid fractures depends on their location and whether bone displacement has occurred. Distal pole scaphoid fractures can be treated conservatively whereas proximal pole fractures must undergo surgical repair. Displaced fractures have an increased risk of nonunion, thus require surgery with headless compression screw fixation, which offers the fastest recovery and a return to sports. Management of non-displaced fractures is with cast immobilization.

Other carpal injuries include hook of the hamate fractures and lunate dislocation:

**Hook of the Hamate Fracture**

- These fractures are caused by direct blows usually from "grounding" a golf club or "checking" a baseball bat. They typically present with hypothenar pain and paresthesias in the distribution of the ulnar nerve. They are diagnosed with radiographic imaging and confirmed with CT scan if initial x-ray findings are negative. The current standard of care remains to excise the hook of the hamate fragment which has produced successful results with a return to sports in 6 weeks.

**Lunate Dislocation**

- Due to the lunate’s proximity to the median nerve, anterior displacement of the bone may cause mechanical compression of the median nerve within the carpal tunnel and produce signs and symptoms consistent with median nerve neuropathy such as paresthesias of the first three digits and radial half of the fourth digit and weakness and atrophy of the thenar eminence.

Besides, the anatomic relationship of the carpal bones can also get disturbed by ligament injuries, thereby producing two types of instabilities, dorsal intercalated segmental instability (DISI) and volar intercalated segmental instability (VISI).