Patient positioning should be such that they are comfortable throughout the procedure. The patient’s neck should not be in a twisted posture, and their legs should remain uncrossed. The patient should be advised to take shallow breaths to reduce movement of the head. Proper orientation of the head is crucial to guaranteeing correct docking and centration. The patient should be advised to stay calm, maintain fixation, and avoid squeezing the eye. Patient cooperation through the procedure is of the utmost importance.

Initial docking requires the use of a disposable curved contact glass. The surgeon should verify that proper docking has occurred before initiating corneal contact with the contact glass interface. The patient is then instructed to fixate on a green blinking light to achieve centration. After that, suction is initiated and maintained throughout the procedure. The femtosecond laser generates four sequential photoablative incisions that form an intrastromal lenticule, as well as a small 2.5 mm incision along the superior or superotemporal aspect of the cornea for lenticule access and extraction. The total time for the formation of all incisions by the femtosecond laser ranges between 20 and 35 seconds regardless of the magnitude of refractive error. The surgeon may then use a manual spatula to separate the residual lenticular appendages along the anterior and posterior plane and forceps to extract the lenticule.

Lenticule extraction is often the most challenging step for inexperienced surgeons. Incorrect identification of the tissue plane may result in adherence of the posterior lenticule surface to the stromal surface of the cap.

Occasionally, the lenticule may be retained in the stromal bed. This intraoperative complication can be addressed immediately by conversion to a FLEx procedure if the entire lenticule remains intact. Alternatively, customized surface ablation is a surgical option, though this has limitations with postoperative haze, which may cause poor visual outcomes.

Medications typically administered during the postoperative period include topical steroids (dexamethasone 0.1%) and topical fluoroquinolone eye drops (moxifloxacin 0.5%) several times daily. These medications, as well as lubricating eye drops, may be recommended for one to two weeks postoperatively. Patients should be closely followed by their ophthalmologist in the weeks to months immediately following SMILE.