Testing for congenital toxoplasmosis in the fetus should take place when the mother has confirmed infection, or there are suggestive sonographic findings such as intracranial calcifications or cerebral ventricular dilation. Positive PCR for T. gondii DNA in the amniotic fluid confirms the diagnosis in the fetus.

Congenital toxoplasmosis should be suspected in the newborns in the following situations:

- Primary maternal infection with T. gondii during pregnancy

- Immunocompromised mothers with prior T. gondii infection

- Newborns with clinical features indicative of congenital toxoplasmosis

- Newborns with positive newborn screening for toxoplasma

The diagnosis results from a combination of clinical and laboratory findings.

Serological tests

Toxoplasma specific antibodies (IgG, IgM, and IgA) require testing in all cases of suspected infection. The half-life of Toxoplasma IgM and IgA antibodies is 5 and 10 days. When there is a concern for false positives due to maternal contamination of fetal blood during labor, repeat serological testing should be done 10 days after birth. T. gondii DNA by PCR is also possible in CSF, urine, or peripheral blood.

The diagnostic criteria for confirmed infection are one of the following:

- Presence of Toxoplasma specific Ig M and/or Ig A antibodies 10 days after birth

- Persistent or increasing IgG titer without treatment in infants at or beyond 1 year of age

- Positive PCR for T. gondii DNA or positive Toxoplasma IgM or Ig A antibodies in the CSF

Positive IgG is indicative of prior or current maternal infection. In the presence of other suggestive features but negative IgM and IgA antibodies, toxoplasma IgG testing requires repetition every 4 to 6 weeks until complete disappearance.

Negative IgM and IgA antibodies do not exclude the infection. If the mother is affected later in her pregnancy, there is a delay in the production of antibodies in the newborn.  When an infection is suspected, the antibodies should be repeated every 2 to 4 weeks until at least 3 months of age.

The interpretation of the serologic tests is complex. So they should be sent to the National Reference Laboratory for Toxoplasmosis (Palo Alto, CA) or the Toxoplasmosis Center (Chicago, IL) for confirmation.

Imaging

The main findings on cranial sonography or computed tomography of the head include diffuse intracranial periventricular calcifications, brain atrophy or hydrocephalus.

Other tests

CSF will be abnormal with high protein levels (over 1 gm/dl) and mild elevation of WBC with monocyte predominance. A complete blood count may demonstrate anemia or thrombocytopenia. Other tests that can be done as a baseline to look for other signs of systemic involvement are hepatic and renal function tests.