Patients are required to fill out a screening form prior to an MRI procedure, asking about any foreign substance that might interfere or create a health risk with image acquisition. Objects that may create a problem or health hazard during an MRI clinical evaluation include:

- A metallic foreign body within or near the eye (these objects could be seen on an x-ray; metal or machine shop workers have this problem)

- Some implanted or external medication pumps (insulin delivery, analgesic drugs, or chemotherapy pumps)

- Ferromagnetic metallic vascular clips placed to prevent bleeding from intracranial aneurysms

- Some neurostimulation systems

- Some cochlear (inner ear) implants

- Catheters with metallic components

- Bullets, metal shrapnel or another type of metallic fragment

- Certain cardiac pacemakers or implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs)

It is important to note that some items, such as certain neurostimulation systems, medication pumps, and cardiac pacemakers are acceptable for MRI. However, the radiologist and MRI technologist must know the appropriate type that patients have in order to ensure safety.

Patients and other individuals must remove the following items before entering the MRI scanner room:

- Any article of clothing that has metallic fibers or threads, metallic zippers, buttons, snaps, hooks, or underwire

- Hair barrettes, hairpins

- Beepers and cell phones

- Hearing aids

- Paper clips, coins, pens, keys

- Belt buckles, shoes, safety pins

- Watches, metallic jewelry

- Purse, money clip, wallet, cards with magnetic strips, credit/debit cards

The following objects, if near to the areas being imaged, may interfere with the image quality generated:

- Dental fillings (may distort images of the brain or facial areas; the same is true for orthodontic retainers and braces)

- Plates, screws, pins, or metallic mesh used in repairing a joint or bone

- Some tattoos or tattooed eyeliner (these distort MR images, and there is a chance of skin swelling or irritation of which black and blue pigments are the most troublesome)

- Metallic jewelry including those used for body modification or body piercing

- Joint replacement or prosthesis

- Makeup, another cosmetic with metallic components, nail polish

- Metallic spinal rod

If patients are suspected to be pregnant or pregnant, the MRI technologist and/or radiologist should be informed of this during the screening process, conducted prior to the MRI procedure. There is no known adverse effect of using MRI without gadolinium-based contrast agents, in pregnant patients to date. Nonetheless, MRI without gadolinium-based contrast agents, is used in pregnant patients only to address suspected abnormalities or very important problems. It has been observed in clinical studies, MRI without gadolinium-based contrast agents, is safer for the fetus than with computed tomography (CT) and x-rays modalities.

Patients about to undergo MRI study, should inform radiologists and MRI technologists if and whether breast-feeding at the time of MRI procedure scheduling, in case gadolinium-based MRI contrast agent is required for the evaluation. If this situation arose, patients may pump and save breast milk before the study. Patients may resume breast-feeding about 24-48 hours following the injection gadolinium-based contrast material. Patients who are breast-feeding should request for additional information from the radiologists regarding this issue.

**Side Effects:**

Atomic Gadolinium is very toxic, but tolerated during MRI by surrounding chemical “clathrate.”

Gadolinium is one of the metals in the lanthanide series of the periodic table that have a general depressant activity on all systems. Death is usually due to cardiovascular collapse and respiratory paralysis.

- Cardiovascular: Hypotension, hypertension, tachycardia, migraine, syncope, vasodilatation, pallor.

- Gastrointestinal: Abdominal discomfort, teeth pain, increased salivation, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea.

- Nervous System: Agitation, anxiety, thirst, somnolence, diplopia, loss of consciousness, convulsions (including grandmal seizure), paresthesia.

- Respiratory System: Throat irritation, rhinitis, sneezing.

- Skin: Rash, sweating (hyperhidrosis), pruritus, urticaria (hives), facial edema.

- Special Senses: Conjunctivitis, taste abnormality, dry mouth, lacrimation, eye irritation, eye pain, ear pain.

- The effects of Gadolinium deposition in the brain are still unknown, although lawyers are now bringing suit.  The actor, Chuck Norris, is suing for $10 million for the “poisoning” of his wife by MRI Gadolinium!!  We tend to use Macrocyclic Gadolinium-Based agents, since these agents appear not to deposit much in the basal ganglia (Kanda, et al., AJNR Letter to the Editor, Feb 26, 2016).

**Postmarketing Experience:**

The following additional adverse reactions have been identified during postmarketing use of Gadolinium-based contrast agents. Because these reactions are reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size, it is not possible to reliably estimate the frequency or establish a direct causal relationship to drug exposure.

- Anaphylactic shock, respiratory distress, and laryngeal edema [see Warnings and Precautions]

- Cardiac/respiratory arrest, shock

- Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis [see Warnings and Precautions]

The most frequently reported adverse reactions in the postmarketing experience were nausea, vomiting, urticaria, and rash.