The thyroid follicular cells within the thyroid gland respond to the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) released from the thyrotrophs of the anterior pituitary. TSH release from the anterior pituitary is modulated by the release of thyroid releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus.

In primary disease, the disease originates in the thyroid gland. If the thyroid gland is secreting high levels of T3/T4, this will provide negative feedback on the anterior pituitary and thus, decrease the secretion of TSH. If the thyroid gland is secreting low levels of T3/T4, the absence of negative feedback on the anterior pituitary will increase TSH secretion from the anterior pituitary.

For secondary disease or central hyperthyroid or hypothyroid disease, the disease originates in the anterior pituitary. If a tumor in the anterior pituitary is secreting excessively high TSH, this will stimulate the thyroid follicular cells to secrete high levels of T3/T4. If the anterior pituitary is secreting low TSH levels, such as in pan-hypopituitarism, this lack of stimulation of thyroid follicular cells will cause them to secrete low levels of T4.

To assess whether thyroid disease is primary or secondary, one must assay the TSH in conjunction with T3/T4 levels. If TSH and T3/T4 both increase or both decrease together, this indicates either secondary (central) hypothyroidism or secondary hyperthyroidism. However, if the TSH and T3/T4 change in the opposite directions, this indicates primary thyroid disease.