In 2001, human metapneumovirus was first identified in the Netherlands causing clinical symptoms in children, however serological studies demonstrated that this pathogen was already circulating in the Netherlands in 1958. Although infections with HMPV may be reported year-long, peak infection of HMPV in the northern hemisphere occurs in late winter and early spring, but infection can be found globally across all continents. The four different subgroups A1, A2, B1, B2 have not been known to cause varying levels of severity of infection compared to one another. In addition, there is not a predominance of one strain versus the others.

HMPV is more commonly found in the pediatric population, predominately in children less than 2 years of age with an average age of 22 months. Approximately 90 to 100% of children are infected by HMPV by the age of 5 to 10 years old according to seroprevalence studies. About 5 to 10% of pediatric hospitalizations are a result of HMPV causing acute lower respiratory tract infections. On average, children who are less than 6 months of age with HMPV infection were three times as likely to be hospitalized compared to children between the ages of 6 months to 5 years.

Re-infection may occur due to different viral genotypes or insufficient immunity acquired from the initial infection. Although adults typically only experience mild flu-like symptoms, complications can be seen in the elderly, immunocompromised, or those individuals with chronic lung diseases.