Patients will often present with rapid onset of ocular pain or periocular pain, pain on eye movement, redness, photophobia or light sensitivity, floaters, decreased vision, or blurred vision, and constriction of the visual field.

History of the following should be taken- risk factors for AIDS, immune status, any systemic or ocular therapy/ surgery, systemic diseases, and any previous herpetic infection including encephalitis. A thorough review of previous medical documents should be done.

An ocular examination that evaluates the anterior chamber and vitreous cells, intraocular pressure, as well as a dilated retinal examination with indirect ophthalmoscopy and scleral depression, need to be completed. A physical exam often reveals focal, well-demarcated areas of peripheral retinal whitening suggesting retinitis or retinal necrosis. A physical exam can also reveal occlusive arteritis and prominent inflammatory reaction in the vitreous and anterior chamber. The posterior pole is usually spared in the early course of the disease. Additional findings can include conjunctival injection, scleritis, increased intraocular pressure, sheathed retinal arterioles, retinal hemorrhage, optic disc edema, and retinal detachment.

A typical patient has severe anterior segment inflammation with fibrin with or without posterior synechia. The media is usually hazy due to haze in the anterior segment, vitritis with or without cataracts. The fundus examination may reveal disc edema and peripheral yellowish areas of retinitis which subsequently become confluent. Retinal hemorrhage, if present is usually not very prominent.

Kyrieleis' periarteriolar plaque may be seen in ARN.