Exogenous cardiac pacing utilizes an external power source to deliver electrical impulses to the myocardium, directly stimulating myocardial depolarization and ventricular (or atrial) contraction and allowing the physician to manipulate the electromechanical conductance of the heart.

In normal physiology, an electrical impulse is generated at the sinoatrial (SA) node, is transmitted through the atrioventricular (AV) node, and then down the His-Purkinje system leading to sequential ventricular depolarization and contraction. In bradydysrhythmias, a variety of pathologic processes can affect any point in the conduction system, leading to an insufficient heart rate and, therefore, cardiac output. When used for bradydysrhythmias, exogenous pacing generates extrinsic electrical impulses that bypass the affected conduction system causing direct ventricular depolarization. The physician can then stimulate ventricular contraction at a rate greater than the native ventricular or junctional rate, increasing cardiac output to meet demand.

In contrast, refractory tachydysrhythmias have varied pathophysiology. In supraventricular tachydysrhythmias, there is often a reentrant pathway that bypasses the AV node or an ectopic and unregulated pacemaker. Anti-tachycardia pacing (ATP) attempts to correct this by disrupting the reentrant circuit or over-riding the ectopic pacemaker with an external electrical impulse at a rate of 10 to 20 BPM greater than the native rate, changing the pattern of repolarization. In refractory monomorphic ventricular tachycardia, ATP prevents abnormal ventricular automaticity by changing the pattern of ventricular depolarization and creating more uniform repolarization. In refractory polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, increasing the rate of ventricular depolarization decreases the ventricular refractory period, thereby reducing susceptibility to the R on T phenomenon.

Temporary transcutaneous pacing (TTCP) uses external pads to transmit an electrical impulse through the skin, subcutaneous soft tissue, and chest wall to stimulate ventricular depolarization. Adherent cutaneous pads are used in either the anterior-posterior or anterior-lateral positions, with the former being preferred.

Temporary transvenous pacing (TTVP) uses central venous access, typically via the right internal jugular or left subclavian vein, to pass an electrode into the right ventricle (RV). Electrical impulses are then delivered to the RV endocardium, depolarizing it first, resulting in a left bundle branch block (LBBB) pattern on an electrocardiograph (ECG).

Epicardial pacing is most often deployed intraoperatively during cardiac surgery. Pacing electrodes get placed on the epicardium at the right atrium (RA) and RV, or RA, and both ventricles.

Transesophageal pacing occurs through placing an electrode in either the mid-esophagus, stimulating the RA, or in the gastric fundus, stimulating the RV through the diaphragm. Transesophageal pacing is not common due to difficult lead placement and patient discomfort.