**Structure of the Primary Auditory Cortex:**

The primary auditory areas are regions of the cerebral cortex located bilaterally in the temporal lobes. The primary auditory area is housed within Heschl gyrus, a region that is positioned posteriorly in the superior temporal lobe within the supratemporal plane. This cortex, along with associated auditory areas, is clustered surrounding the posterior aspect of the Sylvian fissure or lateral sulcus of the cerebral cortex, which separates the temporal lobe inferiorly from the parietal and frontal lobe superiorly. Heschl gyrus cannot be visualized from a lateral view of the cerebral cortex since it is located deep to the superficial temporal lobe structure and is within the lateral sulcus. It runs towards the center of the brain in a medial-posterior fashion. The left Heschl gyrus in the majority of individuals is significantly longer when compared to the right gyrus, suggesting a correlation between left-hemisphere language dominance and associated differences in anatomical structure.

**Pathway of Sound from Peripheral to Central Auditory Structures:**

The path sound takes from the external environment to the primary auditory area and associated auditory areas, is complicated by many synapses, decussations, and inputs to brainstem nuclei bilaterally and both cerebral hemispheres. As sound waves travel through the air and are collected by the pinna of the ear, they are transmitted down the external auditory canal where they will produce vibrations of the tympanic membrane. This vibration of the tympanic membrane is translated to movement and vibration of three ossicles present in the middle ear, the malleus, incus, and stapes, to further transmit vibrations to the oval window of the inner ear. Vibrations then travel to the cochlea and are sensed by inner and outer hair cells of the organ of Corti, which function to transmit the mechanical energy present in vibrational sound waves into the electrical energy transmitted along the auditory nerve.

The auditory nerve then transmits the signal to the cochlear nucleus located between the pons and the medulla in the brainstem. The signal then travels to the superior olivary nucleus in the pons, up through the lateral lemniscus pathway, then to the inferior colliculus of the midbrain, and onto the medial geniculate nucleus of the thalamus, and finally synapsing in the primary auditory cortex. During this travel, information decussates or crosses to the contralateral side of the brainstem. This crossing establishes both ipsilateral as well as contralateral input, with the majority of the fibers taking a contralateral pathway from each ear, which assists in localization and interpretation of sound quality. If the individual hears a sound from a location directly in the midline, the sound will reach both ears simultaneously. However, if sound production is from one side of a person’s midline, the sound will reach the closer ear before the other ear and will be of a louder intensity due to the individual’s head acting as an “acoustic shadow” to dampen the noise received by the far ear. In addition to ascending input pathways that the peripheral system provides to the primary auditory cortex, there are descending and output pathways that travel from the cerebral cortices down to brainstem nuclei. This top-down signaling pathway from the cerebral cortex allows for modulation of peripheral structures that respond to the attention of the individual as well as the relevance of the auditory stimulation that will dictate the individual’s behavioral response to that sound.

**The Primary Auditory Cortex and Associated Auditory Areas:**

The primary auditory cortex can further subdivide into different regions based on structural and functional properties. These regions differ based on their cytoarchitecture, the number, organization, and type of neuron, myeloarchitecture, the amount and arrangement of myelinated fibers going to and coming from the cortex, as well as the chemoarchitecture, which is the differences in neurotransmitters and proteins expressed in that region of the brain. The structure of the primary auditory cortex is composed of a central core region (area 41), which is surrounded by a belt region that is subsequently surrounded by a parabelt region. Each of these regions differs based on their cellular architecture, response to stimuli, as well as their input and output pathways.

The major inputs to the core area of the primary auditory cortex are the various regions of the medial geniculate nucleus of the thalamus, respectively, the ventral, dorsal, and the magnocellular components. The associated connections of both the inputs and outputs of the auditory cortical area are structured in a serial and parallel fashion. Serial connections proceed from the core region to the belt region, to finally the parabelt region. The belt and parabelt regions then form connections to various auditory associated regions in the cerebral cortex, namely regions surrounding the superior temporal sulcus. Parallel connections occur due to multiple outputs from each region of the medial geniculate body to more than one region of the auditory cortex. These various regions of the auditory cortex receive complex signals from multiple sources allowing them to integrate the information into meaningful information that can be relayed to other areas of the cerebral cortex.

Once the information reaches the auditory cortex, more complex integration and interpretation of the stimulus can take place. Each primary auditory cortex has connections within the same cerebral hemisphere as well as between cerebral hemispheres. The main associated auditory areas that receive projections from the primary auditory cortex are regions of the superior temporal lobe surrounding Heschl gyrus, inferior parietal lobe, inferior-posterior frontal lobe, insula, amygdala, and basal ganglia. The destination of the outputs from the primary auditory cortex determines what higher-order and more complex cognitive functions take place with the incoming acoustic information. For example, auditory information traveling to the amygdala has profound impacts on the emotional and behavioral response of an individual, whereas information destined for the premotor cortex will be utilized for planning and controlling speech.

**Organization of the Auditory System:**

The organization of the auditory system, and thus the corresponding function, depends on the hemisphere it is in, the location of the sound-sensitive neurons in that hemisphere, as well as what pathway through which the information is traveling. For example, acoustic stimulation in one ear produces a higher rate of cortical firing in the contralateral primary auditory cortex when compared to the ipsilateral cortex, suggesting a higher number of fibers crossing over in brainstem pathways. This observation has also been demonstrated in individuals with temporal lobe damage, including the primary auditory area and their associated difficulty localizing sound in their contralateral ear.

A common theme present in the organization of the auditory system is that the arrangement of neurons is in a tonotopic manner. This theme originates in the cochlea, with high frequencies located at the base of the cochlea closest to the oval window, and lower frequencies present at the apex of the cochlea.