A thorough history and physical examination are paramount prior to performing this procedure as these will generally elucidate the cause of priapism, allowing proper recommendations and long-term treatment. The clinician must discuss how long the erection has been present as well as associated penile pain. The physician needs to learn if this has happened to the patient previously. One also needs to determine if there has been recent trauma. Determining medication and recreational drug use is also important. A history of blood abnormalities or cancers, including leukemia, should be discussed.

The physical exam includes the abdomen but primarily should focus on the genitalia. It also must involve the evaluation of blood pressure, as treatment can cause dangerous elevations of blood pressure. The rigidity of the penis and glans needs to be noted. The tenderness of the penis to palpation requires assessment. If phallus is rigid and tender, this suggests ischemic priapism, where semi-rigid and less tender phallus palpation is suggestive of non-ischemic (high flow) priapism.

Laboratory evaluation is required both with a complete blood count (CBC) and a blood gas taken directly from the corpora cavernosa. If the initial aspiration of corpora blood is dark and thick, this suggests ischemia, while brighter red blood suggests non-ischemic priapism. The blood taken from the corpora is the best way to diagnose ischemic vs. non-ischemic priapism. Ischemic priapism will have a pH of less than 7.25, the partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) less than 30 mmHg, and partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) of greater than 60 mmHg. Non-ischemic priapism will have a pH of 7.4, pO2 greater than 90 mmHg, and a pCO2 of less than 40 mmHg.

No imaging is acutely required, but if malignancy is suspected, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan is typically the most ideal imaging to evaluate invasion. A penile Doppler can also be used to assess for elevated arterial flow in the setting of high flow priapism.