C difficile is not only an annoying infection it can be associated with high morbidity and mortality. Today the emphasis is on prevention. All healthcare workers including nurses and pharmacists need to play a proactive role in preventing C.difficile colitis. When dealing with patients with C.difficile colitis, one should wear gloves and proper washing techniques. All staff and visitors need to be educated about hand hygiene. All hospital surfaces and inanimate objects need to be disinfected including thermometers, bedpans, doorknobs, and sinks. Patients who have a severe infection should be isolated. The pharmacist should regularly assess the need for antibiotics and gastric acid suppressants as these have been associated with severe C.difficile colitis.

**Evidence-based Outcomes**

Patients with mild C.difficile colitis usually recover and have a good prognosis. Many of these individuals will only require supportive therapy like hydration. However, those with severe colitis can develop dehydration, electrolyte deficiencies and persistent diarrhea that may last several weeks. In these patients, treatment is recommended. When treatment is initiated with metronidazole or vancomycin, the majority of these individuals will improve in 7-10 days. About 20% of patients with C.difficile colitis will relapse after treatment has been completed. Patients who relapse tend to have recurrent episodes. In severe cases of C.difficile colitis, the hospital stay is prolonged and some develop complications that require immediate surgery. Mortality rates of 3-7% have been reported in many centers.