# Continuing Education Activity

Monitoring the depth of anesthesia is very important during any procedure, as anesthesia that is too deep can cause hemodynamic changes. Anesthesia that is too light carries the risk of recall or awareness during anesthesia. Awareness during anesthesia is a very serious complication with potential long-term psychological sequelae such as anxiety and post-traumatic disorder. When the bispectral index (BIS) value is maintained below 60, it decreases the incidence of anesthesia awareness. Several neuro monitors based on the processed electroencephalogram or evoked potentials have been developed to evaluate the anesthetic depth. The BIS monitor is the first method that is FDA approved to assess the hypnotic effects of drugs. This activity describes the role of the BIS, its indications, contraindications and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients undergoing general anesthesia.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the clinical relevance of bispectral index.
- Identify the equipment needed for bispectral index monitoring.
- Summarize the complications of bispectral index.
- Review the importance of improving care coordination among interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients undergoing general anesthesia with bispectral index monitoring.

# Introduction

Monitoring the depth of anesthesia is very important during any procedure, as anesthesia that's too deep can cause hemodynamic changes. Anesthesia that is too light carries the risk of recall or awareness during anesthesia. Awareness during anesthesia is a very serious complication with potential long-term psychological sequelae such as anxiety and post-traumatic disorder.

# Equipment

**BIS Monitoring and Principle**

The bispectral index monitor processes electroencephalographic signals to obtain a value, which reflects the level of consciousness of the patient. The bispectral index (BIS) monitor collects raw EEG data through its sensors and uses an algorithm to analyze and interpret the data. The data displays as a number on the BIS view monitor. BIS values range from 0 to 100. A value of 0 represents the absence of brain activity, and 100 represents the awake state. BIS values between 40 to 60 represent adequate general anesthesia for a surgery, values less than 40 represent a deep hypnotic state. BIS value is usually maintained between 40 to 60 to prevent awareness under anesthesia.

# Technique or Treatment

BIS monitoring involves the application of four electrodes on the forehead. The skin on the forehead is cleaned with an alcohol swab, and 2 to 5 seconds of digital pressure applied over the sensor leads.

The BIS view monitor displays:

- BIS number

- Trend graph of BIS values over time

- Raw EEG waveforms in real-time

- Various signal quality indicators as SQI, EMG

- Alarm indicators and messages

The signal-quality-index (SQI) bar predicts the reliability of the signal; the higher the SQI, the more reliable is the BIS number. The electromyographic (EMG) bar indicates EMG activity, which reflects muscle stimulation caused by an increase in muscle tone or muscle movement.

# Complications

**Limitations/ Factors Affecting BIS Monitoring**

- Anesthetic Agents: The anesthetic agents used affect BIS values. The patient anesthetized with one anesthetic drug may be more sedated than another patient with the same score anesthetized with a different combination of drugs. BIS monitor is unreliable with certain anesthetics, such as ketamine and nitrous oxide (N2O). In 2017, Mishra et al. studied the effect of nitrous oxide on the bispectral index and found out that the BIS value increases with the addition of nitrous oxide. This effect could be due to the decrease in the suppressant effect of the inhalational anesthetic agents on EEG with the use of NO and the neuro-stimulant properties of NO. NO increases cerebral blood flow velocities along with an increase in cerebral consumption of oxygen (CMRO).

- Age: It is difficult to titrate anesthetic agents in infants younger than 6 months of age with BIS; this could be due to a difference in EEG in this population than older children as brain maturation and synapse formation occur during that period. In 2001, Bannister et al. found that there were no significant differences between the standard practice and BIS groups in anesthetic use or recovery measures in the children 6 months to 3 years of age.

- Hypothermia: Doi et al.

- Neurological impairment: Neurological impairment alters the ability of the BIS to monitor the depth of consciousness; it is not a reliable tool to assess the level of consciousness in this patient population. Generally, BIS values are lower in patients with neurological impairment. BIS values reflect the activity of the cortical structure of the brain but do not reflect the activity of subcortical structures such as a spinal cord.

- Interference with medical devices: Interference from the medical devices causes artifacts and impairs the ability of the BIS monitor to assess the changes in the depth of anesthesia accurately. Chan et al. found that SQI decreases during the use of electrosurgical cautery.

# Clinical Significance

**Alternative Technologies**

Alternative technologies to monitor the depth of anesthesia are as follows:

- SNAP EEG monitor system

- Auditory evoked potential monitor

- 4-channel processed EEG

- EEG monitor

- Spectral edge frequency 95

- Automated responsiveness test

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**Current Evidence of BIS Monitoring**

BIS is in current use in the operating rooms, ICUs, and some emergency departments. In 2007, Carlos et al. found that time to extubation and discharge from the operating room and PACU is reduced with the use of BIS monitoring. The risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting was decreased by 12% in patients monitored with BIS.

So far, there is no gold standard to span the entire spectrum of anesthetic effect on the central nervous system. BIS is one of the most studied monitors derived from EEG used nowadays. BIS has been shown to have a positive cost-benefit ratio and lower morbidity than more invasive monitoring methods.