Although the pathophysiology of each type of chronic headache varies, shared features include sensitization of the trigeminal system, alterations in brain structure and function, and environmental factors.

Modifiable risk factors, including sleep disorders, obesity, and high caffeine consumption, increase the chance of headache transformation from episodic to chronic headaches.

Serotonin, which has vasoconstrictive and anti-inflammatory effects, is a therapeutic target of triptans in migraines.

Serotonin, released from the brainstem serotonergic nuclei, may play a role in migraine; however, the exact role of its mechanisms remains a matter of controversy. Most likely, serotonin levels are low between attacks because it may cause a deficiency in the serotonin pain inhibition system, therefore helping the activation of the trigeminal system. It could mediate by acting directly over the cranial vessels, in central pain control pathways, or by cortical projections of brainstem serotonergic nuclei.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide is abundant in trigeminal ganglion neurons. It is released from the peripheral and central nerve terminals and secreted within the trigeminal ganglion. When released from the peripheral terminals, it initiates an increased synthesis of nitric oxide and later sensitization of trigeminal nerves.

Medication overuse headaches share much of the pathophysiology of migraine and tension headaches as functional and structural changes in the central nervous system. Changes in the serotonergic neuromodulatory system and upregulation of vasoactive and pro-inflammatory mediators also contribute.

Trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias, cluster headache, SUNCT, SUNA, and hemicrania continua, have complex pathogenesis. Severe pain and autonomic symptoms are attributed to the trigeminal autonomic reflex via pain-producing innervation and cranial parasympathetic activation.