PDA is not an uncommon finding in neonates. The majority of patients with a PDA are young children and the care of this congenital anomaly has changed over the years. Since most infants are managed in the NICU, a healthcare team is usually involved in the care. A pediatrician, intensivist, cardiac surgeon and interventional radiologist are usually consulted on the best treatment approach. Initially, premature infants are managed with ibuprofen, and if that fails, surgery is an option. Today endovascular procedures are also available to close the ductus. However, the care of an infant with a PDA is always done by a nurse. These patients need close monitoring because often they have other comorbidities. The pharmacist should be fully aware of the dose of ibuprofen and other drug options available to close the ductus. Only through a systemic approach to congenital heart disorders can the morbidity and mortality be lowered.

**Outcomes**

The outcome for the majority of patients in whom the PDA is ligated or medically treated is good. However, in most of these infants, it is the presence of other disorders that dictate the prognosis. Spontaneous closure of the ductus is very rare after the first three months of birth. Further, even in infants treated medically with ibuprofen, sometimes the ductus may reopen and require surgical closure. In all adults, the presence of a ductus requires surgical closure. In fact, before the ductus is closed in the adult population, the status of the pulmonary vasculature must be determined. Thus with mild pulmonary hypertension have a normal life expectancy. The surgical mortality for ductus varies from 2-20% depending on the infant age and other co-existing comorbidities. If left untreated, the mortality rate increases with age.