A molecule of DNA is made up of two long polynucleotide chains consisting of subunits known as nucleotides. A nucleotide comprises a nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar, and at least one phosphate group (Figure 1a).

A nucleotide can incorporate four main nitrogenous bases, two of which are purines and two that are pyrimidines (Figure 1b). Both purines and pyrimidines are heterocyclic aromatic compounds, as they contain nitrogen atoms in their carbon-based ring, which are essential for the hydrogen bonding that holds the two strands of the DNA molecule together. However, while pyrimidines are six-membered rings, purines consist of a five-membered ring fused to a six-membered ring. The two pyrimidines found in DNA are thymine (T) and cytosine (C), while the two purines are Adenine (A) and Guanine (G). The purines and pyrimidines differ slightly in structure, but their functional groups are attached to the same basic heterocyclic form. These nitrogenous bases are covalently bonded via a nitrogen atom to the 1’ carbon of the deoxyribose sugar in a nucleotide (Figure 1a).

Although four major nitrogenous bases make up the nucleotides of DNA, other uncommon non-primary or modified bases have been found to exist in nature.

Each strand of DNA is made up of a string of nucleotide subunits linked at their sugar moieties (Figure 2a). Specifically, nucleotides in a DNA strand are bound together via ester bonds between the phosphate group attached to their 5’ carbon and the hydroxyl group on the 3’ carbon of an adjacent nucleotide. This bond is known as a phosphodiester bond, and it forms via a condensation reaction during DNA synthesis. As a result, each strand of a DNA molecule has a series of nucleotides with their 5’ phosphate and 3’ hydroxyl group participating in phosphodiester bonds. Each strand of a eukaryotic DNA molecule has a “free” 5’ phosphate group on one end, not bonded to a hydroxyl group, and a “free” 3’ hydroxyl group on the other end, not bonded to a phosphate group. This asymmetry has led to the adoption of the convention where DNA is read in a particular direction, from its 5’ end to its 3’ end. The sequence of nucleotides that make up a molecule of DNA is referred to as its primary structure.

A DNA molecule consists of two chains of polymerized nucleotides running side-by-side, joined together by hydrogen bonds forming between their nitrogenous bases (Figure 2a). Notably, the nucleotides bond in a particular fashion, with A pairing with T and G pairing with C; A and T pairing is by two hydrogen bonds, and C and G by three. These specific pairings result in about a 1 to 1 ratio of pyrimidines and purines in any given cell, a concept known as Chargaff’s rule. This pairing scheme is called complementary base-pairing and is the most energetically favorable pairing possible. DNA is structured so that the sugars of each strand are on the outside, while the bases hydrogen bond on the inside, resulting in what is known as the sugar-phosphate backbone. Thus, two chains of sugar-phosphate backbones run side-by-side with complementary paired nitrogenous bases hydrogen bonding between them. Notably, the two strands of a DNA molecule run in an antiparallel fashion so that the 5’ end of one strand is the 3’ end of the other.

The three-dimensional shape of a DNA molecule, or its tertiary structure, is a right-handed double helix (Figure 2b). The hydrogen-bonded bases on each strand are stacked in parallel and run perpendicular to the sugar-phosphate backbone. As indicated by its x-ray diffraction pattern, the bases are regularly spaced at 0.34 nm apart along the axis of the helix.

A notable property of DNA is the ease of reversible separation of its two strands due to hydrogen bonds being relatively weak compared to covalent bonds. This is important because fundamental cellular processes such as DNA replication and RNA transcription rely on proteins accessing individually separated strands of DNA. Thus, during these processes, proteins known as helicases move down the DNA molecule and unwind the two strands by disrupting the hydrogen bonding between bases. However, when the cellular processes requiring strand separation are complete, the complementary strands can easily re-anneal. This property of reversible separation can be experimentally induced via the heating and cooling of a DNA molecule and is referred to as denaturation or “melting.”

One notable structural phenomenon of DNA tertiary structure is supercoiling, or the coiling of the larger, already coiled DNA molecule. Specifically, in a DNA molecule that has its ends fixed, such as in the circular DNA found in prokaryotes or the smaller DNA segments that make up a larger chromosome in eukaryotes, separation of the individual strands of DNA during cellular processes causes the DNA to twist-up past the points of strand separation, leading to strain on the larger DNA structure.