DNA damage plays an integral part in the development of cancer and other diseases. The mediators of DNA damage are both exogenous and endogenous. Endogenous damage occurs within the cell as a result of normal cellular processes such as errors caused during DNA replication such as incorrect nucleotide insertion or mismatches, DNA instability resulting from depurination (cleavage of bonds between the deoxyribose sugar and the purine base) or due to free radicals formed during oxidation-reduction reactions such as deamination of DNA and proteins.

Most of these errors are corrected by DNA polymerase during replication with its inherent proofreading mechanism via its 3'-exonuclease activity. This mechanism allows for the polymerase to read the most recently placed base before adding the next one. If the base does not pair correctly with the base on the template strand, then the exonuclease mechanism of DNA pol III cuts the phosphodiester bond holding that section of the strand and releases the nucleotide. This process is not perfect, however, and incorrect bases are commonly left in the newly synthesized DNA strand. Mismatch repair proteins correct this by locating incorrectly matched nucleotides and excising them before placing the correct nucleotide in its place.

Exogenous damage, also called induced damage, is the result of external factors acting on the cell. The common causes of exogenous damage include Radiation such as UV light exposure (UVA and UVB) and ionizing radiations, thermal disruptions, toxins, and drugs that cause base-pair mismatches, intercalation causing inhibition of replication. UV damage causes the cross-linking of adjacent cytosine and thymine bases, forming harmful dimers.

Ionizing radiations such as X-rays can dissociate water molecules in the cell, producing hydroxyl radicals that can react with DNA, altering its structure and cause DNA strands to break. Certain toxins and drugs cause chemical associations resulting in single or double-strand breakage in the DNA helix. Thermal disruption via DNA being exposed to high temperatures causes higher rates of depurination to occur, as well as single-strand breaks. Radiation exposure also causes strand breaks. These types of induced damage are very severe and can cause irreparable damage and harm to the cell. Similarly, environmental toxins such as cigarette smoke contain carcinogens like benzo-pyrene. These chemicals can be oxidized by cellular enzymes and cause DNA damage by forming DNA adducts.

Damage inflicted on the DNA during or after replication and transcription are not to be confused with mutations. DNA damage results in single and double-strand breakages and is repairable by the different actions of enzymes in the cell. This is because the enzymes have a template for repair present in either the complementary strand of a damaged DNA molecule or a homologous chromosome that can be copied and used to implement the correct base pairs and base orders in the double helix.

Mutation, on the other hand, is a permanent alteration to the base pair sequence of the host's DNA. It is irreparable to enzymes as mutation leaves no template for the correct base pair sequence to be integrated into the strand. Mutation can also cause changes in how certain genes are expressed, in contrast to damage, which causes either a halt in gene function or is deleterious to the cell. Damage may lead to mutation, but while mutation may lead to harmful byproducts, it does not cause direct damage to the mutated gene or DNA molecule.