Once the surgeon finds a breat mass, he may reassure the patient or perform further evaluation.  Essentially, the goal of the workup is to rule out breast cancer. The extent of the evaluation required to accomplish this goal varies based on the chief complaint, patient's age, and risk factors. Workup is as follows:

- A thorough breast examination

- A mammogram, +/-ultrasound,  +/-MRI

- Fine needle aspiration or core biopsy or excisional biopsy

Mammographic Features

At mammography, fat necrosis may demonstrate the typical appearance of a cyst, which has a typical appearance of a smooth-bordered lucent mass. However, it is possible, based on the level of fibrosis, that fat necrosis will manifest as a cluster of pleomorphic microcalcifications, with areas of abnormal opacity, making it hard to differentiate from malignancy.

Sonographic Features

Fat necrosis or oil cyst, when seen on ultrasound is a cystic lesion with echogenic internal bands, and its orientation is affected by the patient's body position. In non-cystic lesions including fat necrosis, common features include increased echogenicity of subcutaneous tissue (27%), anechoic cyst with posterior acoustic enhancement (17%), hypoechoic mass with posterior acoustic shadowing (16%), solid mass (14%), or normal appearance (11%).

MRI

MRI is used to differentiate breast fat necrosis from carcinoma when there is prnounced fibrosis, and the lesion presents as a spiculated infiltrative mass with or without microcalcification. MRI has been reported to have a negative predictive value approaching 100% in patients with a history of breast surgery.

The presentations of breast necrosis vary on mammography, ultrasound, and MRI. In one study, however, it was found that diangosis of calcifications was best by mammography, oil cysts by ultrasound, and fibrotic fat necrosis by MRI.

Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA)

FNA has high sensitivity and specificity in diagnosing fat necrosis, offering an alternative to biopsy.

Core biopsy

Core biopsy is more sensitive than FNA, and the accuracy of a large-bore core biopsy is said to be comparable to excisional biopsy for diagnosis of fat necrosis in low-risk patients.

Excisional Biopsy

If suspicion for malignancy is high, and core biopsy is negative, excisional biopsy is the next diagnostic step.