Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a common injury occurring in the United States with an incidence of approximately 54 per million persons per year.

The term "spinal shock" was first used by Hall in 1840.

Acute traumatic SCI requires high-impact, direct trauma that leads to spinal cord injury and spinal shock. The initial encounter with a patient with spinal shock is usually under a trauma scenario. Ischemia of the spinal cord can also produce a spinal shock; for example, a hypotensive patient in the medical intensive care unit (ICU) or a post-angiography patient with thrombotic occlusion of arteries that supply the cervical spine can have a similar presentation. Treatment of ischemic spinal shock is different, and outcome expectations are also different. Cord injury is often associated with fracture-dislocation, tearing of ligaments, rotational distraction, as well as tearing of the disc space. If the spinal shock is not associated with significant injury of the spinal column itself, then the prognosis for these patients is more favorable than when a fracture is present. The overall treatment of patients with significant spinal shock and injury is a challenge, but aggressive medical management can reduce its effect on the overall functionality of the patient.

However, despite optimal care, deficits after a spinal shock may be permanent. Moreover, there are several definitions in the literature for spinal shock, which alters care received by the patient and consequently the clinical outcomes. Spinal shock has been defined as the absence of reflexes below the level of the lesion, with or without hypotension, while some definitions require the presence of hypotension. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of spinal shock and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients affected by this condition.