Effective management of bacterial infection requires increased awareness among physicians for the optimal choice of cephalosporins and the duration and frequency of administration based on their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles. Antibiotic resistance is a global health emergency, and extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing organisms resistant to third-generation cephalosporins are rising. The use of these agents requires caution, avoiding unwarranted prescriptions from clinicians.

A consult with a microbiologist/infectious disease specialist (e.g., antimicrobial stewardship programs) and a board-certified infectious disease pharmacist regarding the choice of antibiotic for the particular patient, the type of infection at hand, profile of the microorganism elucidated, including its sensitivity/resistance patterns, their experience with similar illnesses in other patients in the hospital or the region can invariably lead to a better treatment protocol. For example, when using cefotaxime to treat gonorrhea causing cervicitis or urethritis, treatment for chlamydia should be added as cefotaxime does not have coverage for this organism. Nurse practitioners and PAs can assist in closely monitoring the patients for adverse drug reactions, and immediate withdrawal of the culprit drug can reduce management complexity. Indeed, an interprofessional collaboration that aims to prevent and rapidly recognize cefalosporin-induced toxicity (e.g., neurotoxicity and bleeding) is mandatory, especially in high-risk patients such as the elderly. Pharmacists can assist in verifying dosing and checking for drug-drug interactions and confirming the infecting organism is being appropriately targeted since failure to do so can lead to the development of resistant organisms in the community. They can also ensure the safety of the patients by meticulously evaluating other medications ordered along with that may cause drug-to-drug interactions in a patient. Effective communication between interprofessional teams, hospital supervisory boards/authorities in reporting any newly developed resistant organisms, or peculiar clinical presentation of an infectious pathogen will be worthwhile in tackling the healthcare costs, leads to efficient patient care, and helps the evolution of novel treatment regimes. [Level 5]

Finally, but importantly, patient education is also of paramount importance. It is imperative to continue the entire course of antibiotics to eradicate the pathogen to improve infection cure rates and avoid developing any resistance or treatment failures.