Emergency responders should be trained to observe the scene, document the observations, and provide for the caretakers the emotional support. If the infant is pronounced dead, responders should let families interact with the victim. Due to the sensitive nature of their role, emergency responders should be trained about the grief reactions of the caretakers and beliefs/practices of the families in the communities in which responders serve.

Emergency department (ED) personnel should be supportive to the families, providing appropriate information and emotional support as well. Families should be explained about the rationale for the autopsy and death scene investigation. They should be told when their child will be transported for the autopsy. They should be given enough time with their child in an unhurried and sensitive manner. If the family presents to ED in a private vehicle, ED personnel should call law enforcement so that an officer may secure the area and ensure witnesses. Medicolegal death investigators may be contacted by a medical facility. Before families leave the ED, hospital staff should arrange for families' transportation to home (who are often unable to drive), confirm the contact information, offer a referral to a local SIDS/SUIDS program or other bereavement programs, and provide information about the funeral arrangement and hospital contact number in case families have questions.

It is important for the hospital nursery to follow AAP's recommendations and set up the expectation and role model for mothers.

Hospitals should establish institutional policies on safe sleeping practices for infants.

Despite worldwide campaigns advocating for letting the baby sleep in a supine position in a safe environment, many families still do not adopt safe sleeping practices, due to financial struggles, cultural expectations and norms, lack of knowledge, concern for comfort, and hassles in the efforts. Health professionals should, on the one hand, acknowledge the difficulties in following the recommendations, but, on the other hand, continue to advise for safe sleeping environments for infants.

Large epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that SIDS is associated with many preventable risk factors, of which the most important is prone sleeping. (Level III) Many countries started to campaign for sleeping on the back in a safe environment in the 1990s, and the incidence of SIDS has significantly declined in the 2000s. Regardless, SIDS continues to claim the lives of its victims. The healthcare team should inform parents about safe sleeping practices for an infant and the risk of SIDS in order to reduce the incidence of SIDS.

This research was supported (in whole or in part) by HCA Healthcare and/or an HCA Healthcare affiliated entity. The views expressed in this publication represent those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of HCA Healthcare or any of its affiliated entities.