**Classification**

**Based on Anatomical Position**

- **Scleral-**Cover cornea, sclera, and conjunctiva

- **Corneal-**Covers the cornea

- **Semi-Scleral-**Cover the cornea, bridge the limbus and partially cover the conjunctiva

**Based on Water Content**

- Low - 0 to 40%

- Medium - 40 to 55%

- High - >55%

**Based on Wear Time**

- Daily wear

- Extended wear

- Disposable

**Based on the Material**

- Soft/hydrogel contact lenses - hydroxyethyl methacrylate

- Rigid gas permeable contact lenses - silicon and cellulose acetate butyrate

- Rigid non-gas permeable contact lenses - polymethylmethacrylate

**Designs of Contact Lenses**

**Single cut -**These lenses have two surfaces, the front surface has a single continuous curve, and the back surface has a base curve as well as a peripheral curve.

**Lenticular cut -**These lenses have a front surface with a central optical and peripheral carrier portion. The peripheral portion is thinner, and the radius of curvature is flatter. The back surface has a peripheral curve as well as a base curve.

**Terminologies Related to Contact Lens Material**

**Wettability**

It is the property by which liquid binds to the surface of a solid despite cohesive force between the water molecules. Wettability is inversely proportional to the wetting angle. The lower the angle, the better is the wettability and vice versa.

- No wetting - Angle 150 degree

- Partial wetting - Angle 70 degree

- Complete wetting - Angle 0 degree

**Water content**

The percentage of water constituting the contact lens is called the water content. The contact lens has cross-linked monomers, which lead to the formation of pores. The pores absorb the water increasing the water content of the lens. Water content increases the lens's oxygen transmission, permeability, and thickness and increases the lens's mechanical strength.

**Transmission of Light**

This is an optical property of contact lenses.

**Refractive Index**

This is dependent on the density of contact lenses.

**Heat Resistance**

This is the property of contact lens material to resist high temperatures.

**Dimensional Stability**

Depending on various external factors of the contact lenses.

**Flexural Stability**

**Oxygen Permeability**

By this property, contact lenses transmit gases like oxygen. This is denoted by the coefficient of variable DK, where D is the diffusion coefficient, and K is the solubility coefficient. This property doesn't mean the actual permeability of oxygen through the contact lenses. This is a unit by which oxygen passage for a specific lens is obtained.

**Oxygen Transmission**

This is the oxygen passage of a contact lens of a particular thickness. This is denoted by DK/L, where L indicates the thickness. The central thickness is taken as the average thickness for all practical considerations, and -3D is taken as the standard thickness of the lens by the manufacturers.