The well-perfused metaphyses, which have scarce functioning phagocytes, are the most common site of infection in hematogenous osteomyelitis affecting the long bones. The blood supply to the long bones penetrates the bone at the mid-shaft then splits into two traveling to both metaphyseal endplates. Slowing of blood flow in vascular loops at the metaphysis encourages the deposition of microbes and the establishment of infection. To contain the disease, phagocytes release enzymes that lyse bone, creating an inflammatory response. This inflammatory response forms pus (a protein-rich exudate containing dead phagocytes, tissue debris, and microorganisms) and causes increased intramedullary pressure. The inflammatory exudate can rupture through the cortex to the periosteum if left unchecked. Disruption of the periosteum impairs the periosteal blood supply leading to bone ischemia then necrosis.

The main histopathological finding in acute osteomyelitis are microorganisms, congested or thrombosed blood vessels, and infiltrates of neutrophils. On the other hand, the hallmark histopathological finding in chronic osteomyelitis is necrotic bone. Other features of chronic osteomyelitis include a predominance of mononuclear cells, replacement of osteoclast resorbed bone by granulation, and fibrous tissue leading to bone loss and the formation of sinus tracts, which is pathognomic.

Native vertebral osteomyelitis (NVO) is usually a hematogenous infection affecting two adjacent vertebral endplates.

The categorization of osteomyelitis as acute or chronic is based on the histopathological findings rather than the duration of illness.

There are two major classification schemes for osteomyelitis. The first is by Lew and Waldvogel, while the other is by Cierny and Mader. Lew and Waldvogel classified osteomyelitis based on the duration of illness as acute or chronic and by the mechanism of infection (either hematogenous or contiguous infection). Contiguous infection is further classified based on the presence or absence of associated vascular insufficiency.

The Cierny and Mader scheme provides guidance in patient management. In this scheme, the classification of osteomyelitis is by anatomic stage and the host health status.

The categories and corresponding anatomic types are:

- Stage 1: Disease confined to the medullary of the bone

- Stage 2: Superficial disease

- Stage 3: Localized spread

- Stage 4: Diffuse disease

The local and systemic factors which define host health status are:

- A:  Normal host

- Bs: Host with systemic compromising factors

- Bl: Host with local compromising factors

- Bsl: Host with both local and systemic compromising factors

- C: Host for whom treatment of the osteomyelitis is worse than the disease itself.

Causes of systemic host compromise are malnutrition, renal and hepatic failure, diabetes mellitus, chronic hypoxia, neoplasm, and immunodeficiency disease. Local compromising factors of the host health status are chronic lymphedema, venous stasis, major and small vessel disease, arteritis, peripheral neuropathy, and tobacco use.