Dead space can be affected by various clinical scenarios, both in terms of lung and airway pathology that change the anatomical dead space or secondary to healthcare intervention that affects physiology, such as mechanical ventilation.

**Lung Disease**

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) destroys alveolar tissue and leads to air trapping and decreased diffusion surface area, thereby increasing dead space volume.

**Pulmonary Embolism**

Clinical trials have demonstrated that in patients where the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism is suspected, dead space and capnography findings can be utilized, along with the biochemical test D-dimer, to exclude the diagnosis. The clinical diagnosis of pulmonary embolism when not critically unwell is difficult because common signs such as shortness of breath, chest pain, and mild hypoxia may be caused by various clinical entities. Furthermore, the diagnostic imaging technique of CT pulmonary angiography is a relatively expensive technique and therefore requires appropriate clinical triage. In this setting, volumetric capnography was found to be a sensitive but not specific test for pulmonary embolism, demonstrating a sensitivity of 98.4% (95% confidence interval [CI], 91.6%-100.0%).

**Mechanical Ventilation**

When patients require mechanical ventilation, the necessary tubing from the ventilator machine to the endotracheal tube increases dead space volume by adding length to the space between inhaled air and the alveolar gas exchange space. In other words, the tubing of mechanical ventilators obviously does not participate in gas exchange, and minimizing this space is important when considering the optimal care of mechanically ventilated patients, particularly during critical illness.

Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) is commonly used in the ventilation of critically ill respiratory patients, for example, in ARDS. The modality of ventilation increases the anatomic dead space by expanding the conducting airways.

Furthermore, in patients who have been mechanically ventilated during a critical care illness, the dead space to tidal volume ratio (Vd/Vt) has been demonstrated to be of clinical use when considering extubation, both in the adult and pediatric populations. In adults, one study demonstrated that a poor Vd/Vt ratio was powerfully predictive of extubation failure, with an area under the ROC curve value of 0.94 (95%CI 0.86 to 0.98, p<0.0001).

Specifically, within the pediatric population who are mechanically ventilated, studies have shown that preterm infants have higher anatomical dead space volumes compared to neonates born at term. The median anatomical dead space volume was found to be 3.7 ml/kg in infants born prematurely and 2.4 ml/kg in infants born at term.

**Anesthesia**

Bronchodilation from inhalational anesthetic agents, particularly isoflurane, increases dead space volume.

**High-flow nasal oxygen**

Clearance of the anatomic dead space is believed to play a significant role in using nasal high-flow cannulas. It is believed that high nasal flow allows dead space to be cleared more rapidly and subsequently decreases the portion of dead space that is rebreathed, increasing alveolar ventilation.