Evaluation of PCS requires recognition of residual symptoms following TBI. Due to the ambiguity of symptoms, recognition takes time, and thus, treatment is often delayed. Concussion refers to the condition that resolved within 30 days of injury and symptoms identified during this time attributed to the concussion or mild TBI before the diagnosis of PCS is made. As outlined in the DSM-IV, PCS is diagnosed with the presence of cognitive deficits in attention or memory and at least 3 of the following:

- Fatigue

- Sleep disturbance

- Headache

- Dizziness

- Irritability

- Affective disturbance

- Apathy or personality changes that persist for 3 months or longer.

The ICD-10 defines PCS as the symptoms outlined above persisting for longer than 3 weeks, is more general, and encompasses more patients. Most patients recover in the first 7 to 10 days following an injury and will require no further evaluation.

The initial evaluation will include a thorough history and physical exam. Initial evaluation can occur on the scene in sports-related cases, in the emergency department (ED) during trauma or emergency, or by a primary care physician on an outpatient basis in patients who do not seek medical care at the time of injury. Highlighted areas include clearance of the cervical spine (if emergency), mental status, cranial nerves (including visual acuity), balance, strength, proprioception, sensation, and reflexes. Patients should be screened with vestibular-ocular motor screening exams to be repeated once the patient becomes asymptomatic. Any neurological or mental status deficits should be documented regarding the time elapsed from the time of injury.

Each patient will present with different clinical features and diagnostic testing should be used judiciously.

The evaluation may also include imaging if completed in the emergent setting via head CT. An MRI can be performed in patients who continue to endorse symptoms at greater than 1-month post-injury. Imaging allows for the evaluating physician to rule out other etiologies that may be responsible for symptoms before referral for symptom-specific therapies.