# Introduction

Mullerian inhibiting factor (MIF), also called the anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH), plays a significant role in sexual differentiation. It is produced by the Sertoli cells in male fetuses and signals the regression of the Mullerian ducts, fallopian tubes, and uterus. Androgens, which are secreted by Leydig cells, induce differentiation of Wolffian ducts into male internal and external genitalia.

# Development

Approximately around six weeks of gestation, the SRY gene is expressed on the Y chromosome, which initiates the formation of the testes. Mullerian inhibiting factor, testosterone, and insulin-like factor 3, which are all produced by the testis, control male sex differentiation.

# Cellular

SRY gene, found on the Y chromosome, promotes the expression of SOX9, which plays a crucial role in the development of the testes. Under the influence of SRY and SOX9, the genital ridges differentiate into the testes. Testes are composed of transverse cords that contain Sertoli, germ, and peritubular myoid cells. Sertoli cells induce differentiation of Leydig cells via hedgehog signaling. Leydig cells are present in the interstitium, in between the transverse cords. Sertoli cells reinforce their own differentiation via prostaglandin D2 and FGF9 signaling by maintaining SOX9 expression. SOX9 also inhibits FOXL2, which prevents the differentiation of supporting cells into ovarian granulosa cells.

# Molecular Level

Mullerian inhibiting factor is composed of two identical 70kDa subunits linked by disulfide bonds, which form a dimeric glycoprotein.

# Mechanism

Gonadotropins and androgens regulate the secretion of the Mullerian inhibiting factor. The gonadotropin-releasing hormone regulates LH and FSH secretion. FSH binds to its Sertoli cell receptor to stimulate the production of AMH.

# Testing

The levels of the anti-Mullerian hormone are assessable via an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.

# Pathophysiology

Persistent Mullerian duct syndrome is a type of male pseudohermaphroditism defined by the presence of female internal genitalia and male internal and external genitalia. This condition can also result from a mutation in the gene encoding MIF or a mutation in the MIF receptor. A mutation in the MIF gene will result in the lack of production of MIF. A mutation in the MIF receptor will result in the insensitivity of the Mullerian ducts to the hormone.

# Clinical Significance

Anti-mullerian hormone serves as a marker for ovarian reserve. It is used to determine the age at menopause and ovarian insufficiency. The number of primordial follicles is fixed at birth in females, but the follicles remain dormant until puberty. The dormant follicles do not produce AMH, but once recruited for development, AMH gets secreted by preantral and small antral follicles.

Measuring ovarian reserve predicts pregnancy chances in women, which is essential in couples dealing with infertility. Additionally, It has been useful in monitoring the fertility potential of women with cancer by measuring the serum levels before and after treatment to assess chemotherapy's effect on the ovaries. Serum AMH, which is secreted by granulosa cells of ovaries, can be used to diagnose ovarian granulosa cell tumors, monitor efficacy of surgery, and assess for recurrence.

Serum AMH is a marker of the function of Sertoli cells, while testosterone is a marker of the function of Leydig cells. In persistent Mullerian duct syndrome, serum testosterone is normal, and AMH is undetectable or normal. Normal levels suggest normal production and means that the mutation is present in the receptor of AMH. Low or undetectable levels suggest reduced production and that the mutation exists in the AMH gene. If both testosterone and AMH levels are undetectable, this is suggestive of a lack of testicular function such as in anorchia or Klinefelter syndrome. Both are also low in mixed disorders of sex development because fetal hypogonadism results in dysfunction of Leydig and Sertoli cells.

The anti-mullerian hormone also plays a role as a biochemical marker for testing testicular dysfunction in cryptorchid males. The levels of AMH tend to be significantly lower in bilateral undescended testis compared to unilateral.