The arteries of the volar surface of the hand consist of two systems: the superficial volar arch and the deep volar arch. These arches and their branches form the basis of an extensive collateral circulation that is responsible for providing oxygenated blood to all parts of the hand and fingers.

The superficial volar arch is considered the dominant vascular structure of the palm. It forms mainly by the ulnar artery and the superficial branch of the radial artery. The ulnar artery enters the hand superficial to the flexor retinaculum, via the ulnar canal (Guyon canal), and terminates in the superficial volar arch, where it anastomoses with the superficial branch of the radial artery.

Arising from the superficial volar arch are three common palmar digital arteries that travel in the palm, between the finger webs, to supply blood to the fingers. As the common palmar digital arteries travel towards the fingers, they split at the finger web space into two proper palmar digital arteries that run along the contiguous sides of digits two, three, four, and the lateral side of the little finger. The medial aspect of the fifth digit receives supply from a branch off of the superficial volar arch.

The deep volar arch forms from the dorsal radial artery and the deep palmar branch of the ulnar artery. Before reaching the flexor retinaculum, the radial artery gives off the superficial branch of the radial artery and then continues as the dorsal radial artery. The dorsal radial artery continues its course by curving around to enter the dorsal aspect of the hand while passing the scaphoid and trapezium, through the floor of the anatomical snuffbox.

Arising from the deep volar arch are three palmar metacarpal arteries that anastomose with the common palmar digital arteries coming off of the superficial volar arch.