The ulnar nerve is a terminal branch of the brachial plexus, comprised of fibers from the medial cord (C8-T1). The nerve courses along the medial side of the humerus and after traversing through the arcade of struthers, the nerve continues posteriorly as it pierces the medial intermuscular septum in the upper arm.  The nerve continues into the cubital tunnel at the posteromedial elbow, running between the olecranon process and medial epicondyle.  Distal to the elbow, the ulnar nerve passes between the ulnar and humeral heads of flexor carpi ulnaris muscle to enter the flexor compartment of the forearm. Typically, it is found deep to flexor carpi ulnaris, and lateral to flexor digitorum profundus.  Distally at the wrist, the ulnar nerve courses superficial to the flexor retinaculum before entering the palm of the hand via Guyon's canal

Although the nerve can be blocked at any point in the upper arm or in the forearm, there are more reliable and reproducible techniques and locations for nerve blockade that have been studied and reported in the literature.

Historically, the literature advocated for either the volar or ulnar approach for ulnar nerve block

**Volar Approach**

The location for ulnar nerve blockade in the volar technique is between the FCU and distal ulna. The FCU is palpated near its insertion at the pisiform, and the needle is inserted just lateral to the FCU tendon and proximal to the wrist crease.  Although this is one of the more popular approaches utilized, recent cadaveric studies have continued to report relatively high (up to 50%) rates of intra-arterial puncture or placement of the anesthetic

**Ulnar/Medial Approach**

Compared to the volar approach, the needle is inserted posterior (as opposed to lateral/radial) to the FCU tendon.  As in the volar approach, the location is just proximal to the wrist crease.  Recent studies comparing the two approaches described in this review have cited no cases of intra-articular penetration or placement of anesthetic in the ulnar artery with the ulnar approach (as opposed to up to 50% rate in the volar approach).

**Other Considerations**

Ulnar nerve block at the level of the cubital tunnel is not recommended, as this has been documented to result in compression neuropathy with persistent paresthesia/dysesthesia.