The treatment goal is to relieve local symptoms and prevent the propagation of the thrombus.

Supportive care includes elevation of the affected extremity, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, warm or cold compress, compression stockings, and increased ambulation.

In patients with superficial thrombophlebitis involving a vein segment of size less than 5 cm and thrombus site remote from the saphenofemoral junction and saphenopopliteal junction and no medical risk factors for venous thromboembolism, supportive care is indicated. These patients are followed up in 7 to 10 days or sooner if symptoms progress, and if no clinical improvement in symptoms, ultrasound duplex is performed to rule out deep vein thrombosis.

Anticoagulation is indicated in patients with the propagation of clot and also in high-risk patients with thrombus longer than 5 cm and within 5 cm from the saphenofemoral junction or saphenopopliteal junction and in patients with concomitant deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

The choice of anticoagulation agent and its dose and duration of treatment remain debated. In patients with superficial venous thrombosis, an intermediate subcutaneous dose of low-molecular-weight heparin, like enoxaparin 40 mg daily, dalteparin 5000 units every 12 hours, subcutaneous fondaparinux 2.5 mg daily, or oral rivaroxaban 10 mg daily is suggested for 45 days.

In patients with contraindications for anticoagulation, the recommendation is for ligation of saphenous vein at a saphenofemoral junction or saphenopopliteal junction.

In patients with Trousseau syndrome, heparin is the choice of anticoagulation. Heparin inactivates the thrombin and activated factor Xa, resulting in interruption of secondary platelet activation and fluid-phase thrombosis.

Migratory thrombophlebitis can be resistant to anticoagulation treatment in cancer patients, resulting in the progression of thrombus and recurrent pulmonary embolism.

There are reports in patients with malignancy, and migratory thrombophlebitis, surgical removal of cancer results in cancer cure and also improves phlebitis symptoms and reducing thrombotic events

In patients with Buerger disease, the clinician should strongly recommend smoking cessation.