Hepatic granulomas, on their own, are typically asymptomatic and may not even present with laboratory abnormalities or features of hepatic dysfunction. Clinical manifestations are the result of the underlying systemic disease. A thorough history and physical examination are essential in the proper diagnosis of granulomatous hepatitis. Manifestations may be nonspecific; however, granulomatous hepatitis should be considered in any patient with abdominal pain and tenderness, especially in the right upper quadrant, fever of unknown origin, hepatomegaly, or mild transaminitis. Constitutional symptoms such as prolonged fevers, night sweats, chills, weight loss, anorexia, myalgias, and arthralgias are common, especially in tuberculosis and sarcoidosis.

Patients may have ascites, spider angiomata, hepatic fibrosis with portal hypertension, and cirrhosis, as seen in PBC, sarcoidosis, or schistosomiasis. Details in their history such as ethnicity, current or recent medications, toxin exposures, family history, occupational exposures, recent travel, risk factors for opportunistic infections such as the use of immunosuppressive drugs or in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) may assist in establishing the etiology. Recent travel to endemic areas may provide a clue to infectious sources. Histoplasmosis is usually self-limited; however, it may present as progressive disseminated histoplasmosis in infants or in immunocompromised patients. These patients may present with hepatomegaly (62%) or abnormal liver function tests (84%). Schistosomiasis is characterized by progressive portal scarring called “pipestem fibrosis” with marked splenomegaly and variceal hemorrhage.