**General Considerations**

The presence or absence of symptoms often dictates management decisions for benign orbital masses. In many cases, small and asymptomatic tumors can be observed closely with annual exams. Exceptions to this include tumors with a high potential for malignancy.

**Medical Management**

Most primary orbital tumors cannot be treated with medical management. There have been reported cases of severe lymphatic malformations and lymphangiomas that have responded to Sildenafil (PDE-5 inhibitor) and Sirolimus (mTOR inhibitor).

**Surgical Management**

Surgical excision is warranted in orbital masses that cause symptoms, particularly vision changes, proptosis, and extraocular movement restriction. The risk of recurrence may be high with some primary orbital tumors, including lymphangiomas and incompletely-excised cavernous hemangiomas. Hemangiopericytomas should be surgically resected due to their relatively high potential for malignancy.

Certain orbital tumors, such as orbital varices and optic nerve sheath meningiomas, are difficult to resect due to the risk of hemorrhage or proximity to vital structures. More recently, embolization of vascular tumors by interventional radiology has allowed resection of these masses with a lower risk of hemorrhage.

**Radiation Therapy**

Radiation therapy is rarely used in isolation to treat benign orbital masses. In recent studies, it has been implemented in the treatment of some unresectable or recurrent primary orbital tumors, such as schwannomas and sphenoid wing meningiomas.

**Special Considerations**

Lesions of the orbital apex can result in compressive optic neuropathy and progressive, permanent vision loss. Surgical resection is often difficult in such cases due to challenging anatomy and limited surgical approaches. Orbital decompression has been described as an option in cases and can preserve vision without the need for complete tumor resection and the associated morbidity of orbital apex resection.