Sotalol is a non-cardioselective beta-blocker that also possesses potassium channel blocker properties. It classifies as a class III agent in the Vaughan-Williams classification system for antiarrhythmic medications due to its predominant potassium channel blocking effect. Sotalol prolongs the action potential duration and effective refractory period in the atrium, ventricle, and nodal and extranodal tissue. It is a potent competitive inhibitor for potassium current. Sotalol exhibits reverse use-dependent effects, meaning that the maximal potassium current blocking effect occurs when the heart rate is slow, increasing the risk of QT prolongation and torsades de pointes in bradycardic conditions. A low dose is enough to exert a beta-blocking effect. For example, 25 mg offers good beta-blocking activity, but a higher dose is necessary for class III antiarrhythmic effects (up to 80 mg).

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**The bioavailability is 95% to 100% without the hepatic first-pass effect (metabolism). After a single oral dosage, it takes about 2.5 to 3 hours to reach its maximum (peak) serum concentration. On the other hand, the intravenous (IV) infusion takes around 2 hours to attain peak serum levels.

**Distribution:**The drug is water-soluble, which results in minimal blood-brain barrier penetration. Sotalol distributes to the heart, liver, and kidneys.

**Metabolism:**Sotalol has no active metabolites.

**Excretion:**Sotalol is eliminated primarily from the kidneys, with up to 20%  excreted in the feces. Its half-life is 10 to 20 hours in a population with normal renal function.