The transthyretin (TTR) protein is one of several proteins normally found in human plasma. Structurally consisting of a heterodimer surrounded by monomers, TTR functions to transport both thyroxine and retinol-binding protein (RBP) to retinol in healthy individuals.

Currently, medications for managing hATTR and its multi-organ manifestations are limited to antisense oligonucleotide therapeutics, RNA interference therapeutics, orthotopic liver transplant (OLT), and emerging therapies such as immunotherapy. Similarly, other medications sometimes used for the disease include kinetic stabilizer natural products, including curcumin and xanthones, FDA-approved molecules, such as tolcapone and diflunisal, and their iodo-derivatives.

Specifically, inotersen is an antisense oligonucleotide that targets the TTR protein, subsequently reducing TTR tissue deposition in patients with hATTR. Notably, inotersen is a 2′-O-methoxyethyl-modified RNA molecule that exerts its mechanism of action by binding TTR messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), thus inhibiting the expression of TTR protein via Ribonuclease H (RNAseH) degradation.

This process, in turn, reduces circulating TTR, alleviating the neuropathic symptoms of patients suffering from the disease. Due to its non-specificity to TTR mRNA, inotersen targets both wild-type and mutant TTR, reducing all circulating and deposited TTR proteins. Therefore, inotersen therapy may theoretically be accompanied by defective retinol transport, which can be mitigated by vitamin A (retinol) supplementation.

In a 15-month randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial in 112 adults with stage 1 or stage 2 hATTR polyneuropathy receiving inotersen, Benson et al. demonstrated an improved disease course and quality of life in those receiving the drug. It should be noted that 6% of the patients in the study developed either thrombocytopenia or glomerulonephritis, one of which died as a result of grade 4 thrombocytopenia. All other patients with either complication were given close monitoring to ensure survival.

Additionally, in a continuation of the 15-month trial, Brannagan et al. further demonstrated the effectiveness of inotersen in reducing the progression of the deleterious consequences of hATTR polyneuropathy. Notably, the authors reported the relative safety of inotersen in patients with up to 5 years of continuous use. Further, the authors noted in order to ensure the relatively safe use of inotersen, healthcare providers should administer routine platelet and renal monitoring to mitigate the potential risk of severe thrombocytopenia and glomerulonephritis in patients undergoing inotersen therapy long term.