Consider empiric antibiotic therapy upon suspicion of a lung abscess. Empiric coverage should target colonized organisms in upper airway and oropharynx like gram-positive cocci, respiratory gram-negative cocci, aerobic, and anaerobic gram-negative bacilli. If the patient exposed to healthcare set three months before the presentation, coverage for MRSA should be considered. Atypical organisms can be found in the setting of an abscess that is not improving with broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy.

Poor prognostic factors are old age, severe comorbidities, immunosuppression, bronchial obstruction, and neoplasms. Beta-lactamase inhibitors (ticarcillin-clavulanate, ampicillin-sulbactam, amoxicillin-clavulanate, and piperacillin-tazobactam) are the preferred initial empiric antibiotic therapy followed by imipenem or meropenem.

Clindamycin, as empiric treatment for a lung abscess, is no longer recommended given the risk of Clostridioides difficile infection but remains an alternative for penicillin-allergic patients.For methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), vancomycin or linezolid are preferred. Daptomycin has no activity against pulmonary infections.Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) choice is cefazolin 2 g IV every 8 hours or nafcillin 2 gm IV every four hours or oxacillin 2 gm every 4 hours. Dosing adjustment is considered in patients with compromised renal function.

Antibiotic duration is usually around three weeks but varies depending on clinical response. Consider switching to per oral (PO) antibiotics once patients are afebrile, stable, and able to tolerate an oral diet. Amoxicillin-clavulanate is the drug of choice for PO antibiotics for lung abscess.

Metronidazole, as a single therapy, does not appear to be particularly useful, due to polymicrobial flora.

Abscesses larger than six centimeters (cm) are unlikely to resolve with antibiotic therapy alone and might require surgical or percutaneous intervention.

In patients who fail to respond with medical therapy, surgical intervention is considered with lobectomy or pneumonectomy.

In patients who are poor surgical candidates, percutaneous and endoscopic drainage is considered.

When the clinical response is inadequate, associated conditions or alternative diagnoses are considered, especially like certain fungi and mycobacteria. Empyema sometimes might be misdiagnosed as a parenchymal abscess.

Antibiotic installation is proven to be beneficial in the case of chronic lung abscess.

Also, in the case of hematologic causes of lung abscess, underlying conditions such as infective endocarditis, septic thromboembolism, and others should be thoroughly treated.