- It is not necessary to precisely classify or diagnose patients with a neurogenic bladder.

- It is sufficient to identify if the main bladder problem is bladder overactivity or underactivity (hypotonicity).

- Similarly, urethral activity can be normal and appropriate or not (as in dyssynergia).

- Become familiar with the various anticholinergic and beta-3 adrenoreceptor agonists to customize treatment based on the individual characteristics of the patient's condition and comorbidities.

- Factors to consider when selecting a drug should include insurance coverage, side effect profile, availability, indigent pharmaceutical programs, coupons, and out-of-pocket costs to the patient if not covered by their insurance.

- Guidelines are not written in stone, and selected patients may benefit from treatments outside the published guidelines.

- Cystoscopy is probably not necessary for most patients with neurogenic bladder.

- The term "neurogenic bladder" has been changed by the International Continence Society. The new term is "neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction."

- Most patients with a neurogenic bladder can be managed with self-catheterization with or without bladder relaxation therapy (medications, botulinum toxin detrusor injections, or sacral neuromodulation).

- For further review, published societal guidelines on neurogenic bladder diagnosis and management are available from the American Urological Association, the European Urological Association, and the Canadian Urological Association.

- See our companion articles on autonomic dysreflexia,