Techniques used in ERCP include endoscopic papillectomy, sphincter of Oddi manometry, sphincterotomy, endoscopic papillary balloon dilation, stone removal, tissue sampling, placement of biliary and pancreatic stents, cholangiopancreatoscopy, and biliary and pancreatic drainage.

The procedure starts with passing the duodenoscope through a mouthguard. Duodenoscope is then advanced through stomach pylorus into the duodenal bulb. The scope should be advanced to the second part of the duodenum to visualize the major duodenal papilla, a protuberance at the junction of the horizontal and vertical duodenal folds. Cannulation of the major duodenal papilla is then done. The recommended wire-guided technique is done through a guidewire that passes under fluoroscopy into the common bile duct or pancreatic duct before contrast injection.

On the other hand, the standard contrast-assisted method involves contrast material injection after introducing the cannulation device tip into the major duodenal papillary orifice to assure proper positioning. Difficult cannulation may be due to periampullary diverticulum, impacted biliary stone, bile duct stenosis, or tumor of the bile duct or pancreatic head. Infrequently, cannulation of the minor papilla with sphincterotomy may be done in cases of idiopathic recurrent acute pancreatitis or patients with pancreas divisum.

Ways to perform per-oral cholangiopancreatoscopy include a mother-baby system (dual operator), SpyGlass technique (single operator), and direct per-oral cholangioscopy (DPOC).

Dual operator system, which is also known as a mother-baby system, requires two endoscopists to operate, where one endoscopist controls the mother duodenoscope, and the other endoscopist controls the baby cholangiopancreatoscope, with a tip that is deflectable in one plane which is up and down only.

Single operator SpyGlass technique, is catheter-based, where the optical probe is passed through a 4-lumen catheter, with a tip that is deflectable up-down and right-left.

In the dual operator and single operator techniques, the cholangioscope is passed through the 1.2 mm working channel of the therapeutic duodenoscope, over a guidewire into the biliary duct.

DPOC uses ultraslim and transnasal endoscopes, with digital imaging. They are used in cases of dilated common bile duct as their shaft diameters range from 4.9 to 5.9 mm. Insufflation in these situations should be done using water or carbon dioxide to prevent air embolism from happening.

Cholangioscopes’ distal diameters range from 3.1 to 3.5 mm. ERCPs working lengths range from 187 to 220 cm. Ultraslim endoscopes have a wide range of angulation, working length ranging from 65 to 110 cm, and working channel diameter ranging from 2 to 2.2 mm, allowing for accessories for cholangioscopy including biopsy forceps, electrohydraulic lithotripsy, and laser lithotripsy.