**Medical Treatment**

All the currently available antifungal agents are fungistatic but not fungicidal, which necessitates a prolonged period of treatment until the body defenses can completely eradicate the fungal organism. Topical natamycin 5% is usually the first treatment of choice for FK especially filamentous fungi,

Other topical agents used in the treatment of FK include amphotericin B 0.15-0.3%, voriconazole 1%, econazole 1%, itraconazole 1%, and miconazole 1%. Amphotericin B is the preferred treatment of choice for yeasts. Voriconazole 1% has better penetration into the eye and is purported to be a superior alternative to natamycin. It can also be used as intrastromal or intracameral injections.

Subconjunctival injections of antifungal agents such as miconazole and fluconazole may be used in patients with poor compliance and those with severe keratitis.

Systemic treatment can also be used in the form of intravenous amphotericin B or oral itraconazole or fluconazole.

Decisions to continue therapy as based on the following biomicroscopic findings:

- A decrease in pain and size of infiltrate

- A decrease in satellite lesions

- A decrease in the density of suppuration

- Blunting of the infiltrate edges

- A decrease in inflammation in the anterior chamber

- Continued reepithelialization

Recently published clinical trials have reported equal or inferior efficacy of topical 1% voriconazole (reconstituted from injection vial) compared with topical 5% natamycin eye drops in FK especially in that caused by Fusarium. These results, however, are contradictory to experimental and in vitro data. Sharma et al conducted a study of 118 patients where 58 patients were treated with voriconazole and 60 patients with natamycin. Despite the frequency of healed or resolving ulcers being similar on day 7 (natamycin 35/54, 65%; voriconazole 34/50, 68%), at the final visit the percentage of patients who had healed corneal ulcer were significantly higher in the group treated with natamycin (50/56, 89.2% versus 34/51, 66.6%; p=0.005).

A Cochrane Database systematic review of the medical treatment of fungal keratitis was performed in 2015 and also concluded that natamycin may be more effective than voriconazole in the treatment of fungal keratitis but that also most studies were underpowered with variable quality.

**Surgical Treatment**

Patients who fail to respond to medical therapy may require surgical intervention, including therapeutic penetrating and lamellar keratoplasty.

A recently available treatment modality is corneal collagen cross-linking which may sometimes be useful in medically resistant corneal ulcers or even in some early cases of fungal infection.

If a corneal perforation occurs, a tectonic or therapeutic keratoplasty is usually required to save the eye. Cases complicated by endophthalmitis may require intravitreal injections of antifungal agents or even pars plana vitrectomy which can be performed using endoscopy in cases with poor posterior segment visualization due to extensive corneal infiltration.

Healing of FK may result in central corneal scarring and opacification which may require penetrating or lamellar keratoplasty for the restoration of visual acuity.