The optic tracts consist of the axons originating from the retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in the retina. Axons of RGCs from throughout the retina join at the optic disc, an area of the retina devoid of photoreceptors colloquially referred to as the “blind spot.”

The retrochiasmal visual pathway includes fibers from the optic chiasm to the visual cortex. The optic chiasm is an area of partial decussation, in which primarily the nasal retinal fibers traveling through the left and right optic nerves decussate to the contralateral optic chiasm and optic tract. Temporal retinal fibers do not decussate, instead of continuing through the ipsilateral optic chiasm and tract. The crossed to uncrossed ratio of decussation at the optic chiasm is approximately 53 to 7. The proximity of optic chiasm to local structures explains visual deficits, classically bitemporal hemianopsia, associated with pituitary gland expansion and aneurysms of the anterior communicating artery (ACOM) or the internal carotid artery (ICA).

Axons from the ipsilateral temporal RGCs and contralateral nasal RGCs continue as the left and right optic tracts. Therefore, the function of the left optic tract is to carry visual field information responsible for the right visual field, and vice versa.

From its origin at the optic chiasm in the suprasellar cistern, the optic tract courses posterolaterally through the ambient cistern to ultimately synapse at one of six layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus. The ambient cistern contributes to the subarachnoid space and is filled with CSF, serving as a connection between the interpeduncular and quadrigeminal cisterns. The optic tract is located just lateral to the uncus, the innermost part of the medial temporal lobe parahippocampal gyrus that houses the primary olfactory cortex. The pituitary stalk, or infundibulum, and cerebral peduncles of the midbrain lie medially to the path of the optic tract. Immediately superior to the optic tract is the substantia perforata anterior, a region of the gray matter of the limbic system in the basal forebrain.

The lateral geniculate nucleus, which plays a central role in visual processing and the termination of the optic tract, is located in the posteroventral region of the thalamic nuclei. Parvocellular (P) and magnocellular (M) cells of the LGN separate into six layers, in which fibers originating from ipsilateral RGCs synapse onto layers 2, 3, and 5, while contralateral neural information synapses onto layers 1, 4, and 6. The left and right LGN serve as points of neural origin for optic radiations (Meyer’s loop, central bundle, and Baum’s loop) that travel to the primary visual striate cortex (V1) and several extrastriate locations of the cortex, primarily through the internal capsule. Optic radiations classify as superior, inferior, and central nerve fibers, carrying differing subsets of visual information to V1, superior, and inferior to the calcarine fissure in the occipital lobe.