Many medical situations require knowledge about pain management, especially when dealing with the tormenting chronic pain associated with cancer. Physicians have to provide patients with relief from agonizing pain, along with investigating the underlying cause. Opioids are a recognized class of analgesia for pain management with established therapeutic outcomes and side effects. Fentanyl is a strong synthetic short-acting opioid that acts on mu-receptors with greater than 50 to 100-fold potency than morphine, and its primary use is for analgesia and sedation. Opioids have numerous routes of administration; however, the oral route is a preferred method of delivery due to its noninvasive nature. Oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate (OTFC) incorporates fentanyl citrate into lozenges, which slowly dissolve in the mouth and undergo rapid absorption via the oral mucosa. Breakthrough pain (BTP) is a severe episodic flare-up of pain in cancer patients with long-term opioid-controlled baseline pain. BTP is a severe, paroxysmal, and brief episode of pain that peaks in intensity in 3 to 52 minutes. BTP results in daily functional impairment, psychological disturbance, and increased utilization of medical resources. The duration, intensity, and pathophysiology of BTP make it difficult to manage.

OTFC has received approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and indicated specifically for the management of BTP in cancer patients due to its rapid onset and short duration of analgesia, which mimic the characteristics of BTP episodes. Two randomized, double-blinded studies demonstrated that OTFC had superior analgesic effects, greater global satisfaction, and faster onset of action in managing BTP than the usual BTP medications. A study evaluating the efficacy of OTFC for the management of severe pain crises in cancer patients reported OTFC treatment resulted in reducing the mean pain intensity of patients from 9.0 to 3.0. This study demonstrated that OTFC prevented the need for hospitalization or parenteral opioids administration for the management of BTP., suggesting that OTFC is an ideal alternative to intravenous opioids for the management of BTP episodes in cancer patients. OTFC's rapid onset, coupled with its short duration of analgesia and its noninvasive delivery (oral), makes it ideal to be used for the management of paroxysmal, severe, and brief episodes of BTP.

OTFC can also have a role in non-FDA-approved indications in non-cancerous patients as a treatment of moderate to severe postoperative pain. A randomized, double-blinded study investigated potency, pain relief, and pain intensity in 133 postoperative patients assigned to one of four treatment groups: high- or low-dose OTFC (800 micrograms vs. 200 micrograms), or high- or low-dose intravenous (IV) morphine (10 milligrams or 2 milligrams). It demonstrated that the higher dosage groups of OTFC and morphine provided superior analgesia than the lower dosage groups of OTFC and morphine. Higher dosage groups of OTFC and morphine produced pain relief with the duration of analgesia lasting 3.5 hours, while lower dosage groups of OTFC and morphine provided pain relief for approximately 2.5 hours. There was no significant difference in pain relief outcomes when comparing similar dosage groups between the two medications. The study demonstrated that the relative potency of OTFC to morphine was between 8 and 14 to 1.