People with illness anxiety disorder often seek initial care from their primary care provider as opposed to a mental health care provider. A diagnosis of IAD is typically first speculated by primary care physicians when despite a normal physical examination, laboratory investigations, and repetitive assurances, the patients continue to have a severe disabling preoccupation and anxiety about an underlying serious medical condition. These patients often do not have somatic symptoms. If the somatic symptoms are present, they are only mild. If another medical condition is present, the preoccupation related to their health is clearly excessive and disproportionate to the severity of the condition.

The patients with IAD typically remain dissatisfied with negative evaluations and consult multiple physicians for the same medical problem. They have a belief that their previous doctors were either incompetent or were not paying attention to detail and have missed their serious medical condition, which will have terrible consequences.

Most of the patients with IAD belong to one of the two types:

- A care-seeking type. These patients frequently utilize the health care system and keep changing their doctors. They may ask for multiple investigations and treatments.

- A care-avoidant type. These patients avoid medical care. They have severe anxiety with the belief that the primary doctor or laboratory testing will reveal a life-threatening illness (e.g., cancer).

The presence of a general medical condition does not preclude a diagnosis of IAD. A general medical illness and IAD can be comorbid diagnoses. When a medical disorder is present, IAD is considered when health-related anxieties/preoccupations are out of proportion or excessive relative to the general medical disease.