The manifestations of botulism are due to a decrease in the availability of acetylcholine in the cranial nerve and parasympathetic nerve terminals. Common symptoms include:

- Diplopia, dysphasia, dysarthria

- Descending symmetric flaccid paralysis of voluntary muscles

- Loss of deep tendon reflexes

- Constipation

- There are no sensory or cognitive deficits

- Respiratory muscle paralysis may lead to respiratory failure and death.

**Types of Botulism**

- 
**Foodborne botulism**

It results from the consumption of foods contaminated with preformed botulinum toxin. The most common source is homemade canned food. Most cases are sporadic; outbreaks are rare.

- 
**Wound botulism**

It results from contamination of wounds with C. botulinum spores. It presents like foodborne botulism except for the absence of gastrointestinal features.

- 
**Infant botulism**

It results from the ingestion of contaminated food (usually honey) with spores of C. botulinum in children of 1 year of age. Spores germinate, releasing the toxin. Manifestations include the inability to suck and swallow, weakened voice, ptosis, floppy neck, and extreme weakness and hence referred to as 'floppy baby syndrome.' It is a self-limiting condition, managed by supportive care and assisted feeding. However, rarely it can progress to generalized flaccidity, respiratory failure, and sudden death.

- 
**Adult intestinal botulism**

Rarely, in patients with suppressed normal flora, the colonized clostridial spores may germinate producing toxin.

- 
**Iatrogenic botulism**

It results from the injection of an overdose of toxin while used for therapeutic purposes.