The management and treatment of accidental hypothermia revolve around the prevention of further heat loss and the initiation of rewarming. However, the initial steps are always to evaluate and support airway, breathing, and circulation. Wet clothing should be removed and replaced with dry clothing or insulation as soon as possible to prevent further heat loss.

Once able, one should then attempt to determine the degree of hypothermia based on history, mental status, physical exam, and core temperature measurement. If there is suspicion for moderate or severe hypothermia, especially in those with a decreased level of consciousness or in those who have an irregular or faint pulse, extra care should be taken not to move or jostle the patient too much as it may precipitate cardiac collapse from a fatal arrhythmia due to increased cardiac irritability. Comorbid medical conditions and trauma that may also have occurred merit considerations and appropriate treatment.

Rewarming of hypothermic patients involves passive external rewarming, active external rewarming, active internal rewarming, or a combination of these techniques. The treatment of choice for mild hypothermia is passive external rewarming. After the removal of wet clothing, additional layers of insulation are placed on the patient with the goal to prevent heat loss and promote retention of heat produced by patients. Shivering allows the body to spontaneously produce up to a 5-fold increase of heat as compared to baseline. However, the success of this method requires adequate glucose stores so that a patient can produce heat. Given that at this point, many will have depleted energy reserves (more so in elderly, young, and malnourished), it is appropriate to supply glucose to these individuals orally when possible. In individuals with mild hypothermia, it is recommended to warm them at 0.5 to 2 C per hour. Vigorous shivering, however, can be problematic in people with limited cardiopulmonary reserve as it requires an increase in the consumption of oxygen. Furthermore, patients with more severe hypothermia may fail to respond to passive techniques, so it is appropriate to progress to active external rewarming techniques.

Active external rewarming is necessary for moderate to severe hypothermia and, in some cases of mild hypothermia, not responding to standard measures. A heated air unit can decrease heat loss and transfer heat through convection. Water immersion is an alternative, but it is more cumbersome and harder to monitor. Immersion of extremities in warm water (44 to 45 C) requires great care and attention, as efforts to rewarm patients may precipitate increases CV load and collapse as peripheral vasodilation may lead to an after-drop cooling of core temperature from sudden return of cold blood from the extremities.

Despite active external rewarming, some patients may require more invasive methods ranging from airway rewarming with humidified air to full cardiopulmonary bypass. Most patients will be started on warm intravenous fluids of 40 to 42 C as they are readily available and safe, as well as humidified air. Lavage of body cavities such as stomach, bladder, colon, peritoneal and pleura with warm fluid, though invasive, can be considered. Pleural and peritoneal lavages are preferable due to the larger mucosal surface area. Pleural lavage involves placing one thoracostomy tube between the second and third anterior intercostal space in the midclavicular line and the second thoracostomy tube between the fifth and sixth intercostal space at the posterior axillary line. Warm fluid infusion will begin at the anterior tube and drain through the more posterior tube. Peritoneal lavage involves the placement of two or more catheters in the peritoneal cavity, which allows for the diagnostic of occult abdominal trauma and rewarming peritoneal cavity. Extracorporeal rewarming techniques allow for even faster rewarming.

Extracorporeal methods, including hemodialysis, continuous arteriovenous rewarming, cardiopulmonary bypass, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Hemodialysis is the most accessible and can raise the core temperature 2 to 3 C per hour. In arteriovenous rewarming, the patient’s blood pressure creates movements of blood from the femoral artery through a countercurrent fluid rewarmer and into the contralateral femoral vein. It is capable of raising the temperature by 4.5 C per hour. However, hemodialysis and AV rewarming require the patient to have adequate blood pressure. Cardiopulmonary bypass surgery and venoarterial ECMO is the most effective but highly invasive method of rewarming a patient. These methods are only for hypothermic patients in cardiac arrest, those patients refractory to other rewarming techniques, and hemodynamically unstable patients. It is capable of raising core temperature by 7 to 10 C per hour. It is an ideal option for cardiac arrest, as it simultaneously provides rewarming, oxygenation, and circulatory support. However, it is not readily available and requires systemic anticoagulation.