Angioid streaks may be idiopathic in up to 50% of cases.

The most important systemic association of angioid streak is pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) or Gronblad–Strandberg syndrome- It is an autosomal recessive disease caused by the mutation of the ABCC6 gene on chromosome 16.

PXE is characterized by:

- Skin lesions (discrete in early-stage and later confluent yellowish papules or pseudoxanthomas) at the sides of the neck, umbilical region, and flexures like elbow giving a 'plucked chicken' appearance

- Gastrointestinal bleeding

- Intermittent claudication/ peripheral arterial vascular disease

- Coronary artery disease

- Aneurysms at brain, kidney, mesentery causing hemorrhage

- Brain infarct or hemorrhage

- The ocular manifestations include:

- Peau d'orange appearance of the fundus is noted in children even before the development of angioid streaks.
- Angioid streaks- Nearly all patients of PXE shows angioid streaks after 20 years after the first diagnosis.
- Optic nerve head drusen or hyaline bodies are seen in about 5% cases with PXE and angioid streaks.
- Pattern dystrophy of the macula- In a study on 22 confirmed cases of PXE, pattern dystrophy was noted in 27 eyes of 16 patients.
- Small round RPE atrophic patches- These may have a white, yellow, or pink color. Punched out scars similar to presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS) may also be seen. These have been called 'salmon spots.'
- Crystalline bodies or whitish subretinal round lesions in mid-peripheral fundus usually inferiorly- Some of these nodules have Comet-like tail of depigmentation. Crystalline body is seen in up to 75% of cases.
- Atrophy of retinal pigment epithelium****(RPR) near the angioid streak

Other associations of angioid streaks include:

- Marfan syndrome

- Paget's disease of bone- Angioid streaks are noted in up to 10% of cases.

- Sickle cell disease- Angioid streak is noted in around 1-2% cases, usually after the 3rd decade. Angioid streaks have been reported in sickle cell trait, homozygous sickle cell disease, sickle cell-thalassemia, and sickle cell hemoglobin C disease.

- Other hemoglobinopathies- acquired hemolytic anemia, hereditary spherocytosis, beta thalassemia major, beta thalassemia minor, beta thalassemia intermedia, hemoglobin H disease, and congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type 1.

- Acromegaly

- Hemochromatosis

- Diabetes mellitus

- Sturge Weber syndrome with facial angiomatosis

- Myopia

- Hyperphosphatemia

- Neurofibromatosis

- Hypercalcemia

- Abetalipoproteinemia

- Familial polyposis of the colon

- Congenital hypertrophy of retinal pigment epithelium

- Diffuse lipomatosis

- Cutaneous calcinosis

- Microsomia

- Myopia

- Trauma

- Hypertensive coronary disease

- Senile elastosis

- Epilepsy

- Diabetes mellitus