Whatever the etiology, two factors are common in mucous plaque formation, altered corneal epithelium, and disturbed tear film mucous. Mucous receptors present on corneal epithelium are involved in the maintenance of tear film. Alteration in these receptors due to various causes, including inflammatory mediators, exposure, infection, and denervation, can lead to the accumulation of mucous.

Mucins are heavy molecular weight glycoproteins formed by sugar (carbohydrate) chains linked to a core protein called apomucin. In patients with dry eye, there is an alteration in the carbohydrate component of mucin in the goblet cells. Also, there is a decrease in sialic acid and GaINAc (N-acetylgalactosamine) in the goblet cells, which result in the formation of mucin, which is less soluble, more viscous, and thus more prone to accumulation.

This increase in viscosity can also occur in cases associated with staphylococcal blepharitis. The bacteria liberate enzymes, which in turn lyse the glycosaminoglycan and mucoprotein components of the mucin.

These changes cause accumulation of viscous mucous and proteinaceous debris over the altered corneal epithelial cells. This material adheres to the deeper epithelial cells and even to the Bowman membrane through the epithelial defects and abnormal intercellular spaces. The overlying material prevents the normal sloughing of the epithelial cells so that the desquamated cells are incorporated in the material, gradually forming an elevated plaque. Chronic plaque enmeshes dust particles, debris, bacteria, and even foreign bodies.