Screening with PSA has led to earlier detection of prostate cancer; however, morbidity increases for all patients with an elevated lab value, as a majority of the patients have a benign condition as the etiology of the elevated serum PSA. When evaluating the elevated serum values due to prostate cancer, most prostate cancers are indolent and never progress to a point in which intervention is required. As few as 2% of all elevated serum PSA values above 3 ng/mL will ever require further intervention because of an aggressive form of prostate cancer.

It is well known that 5-alpha reductase inhibitors (5-ARIs) will reduce PSA levels by 50%, but this effect typically takes between six and twelve months. PSA levels in men on long-term 5-ARI medications should be doubled for screening purposes. Conversely, patients should be screened for prostate cancer prior to being started on 5-ARI medications specifically because of this delayed PSA reduction effect and how long it takes to become fully expressed. There is no significant change in prostate cancer incidence or progression in men on 5-ARI medications compared to similar male cohorts without the drugs.

Besides 5-alpha reductase inhibitors, statins, NSAIDs, acetaminophen, and thiazide have all been shown to lower PSA levels.

Obese men with high BMI will have larger intravascular volumes, so they tend to have lower PSA values solely due to this dilutional effect. It remains unclear if the normal PSA range should be adjusted for this effect.

Technical errors and inaccurate measurements of prostatic volume can lead to erroneous PSA density determinations. The use of different laboratory tests for PSA can cause some variation in the results. Prostatitis, a digital rectal examination, hard bowel movement, urologic instrumentation, and recent ejaculation can all increase PSA levels.