There is typically no anastomosis of posterior and anterior interventricular arteries, so occlusion of a coronary artery can have significant effects on the heart. Ischemic heart disease has as its fundamental characteristic an imbalance between the supply and demand of oxygenated blood for cardiac tissue. This commonly occurs when the blood supply to the heart tissue is diminished, such as in coronary artery atherosclerosis where the lumen of a major epicardial artery is obstructed by atherosclerotic plaque and potentially a superimposed thrombosis.

Coronary artery occlusion is most common in the left anterior descending artery (LAD, also known as the left anterior interventricular artery), but it may also occur in the right coronary arteries. A posterior wall MI can occur with occlusion of the posterior descending or distal right coronary arteries, which will inhibit or block the blood supply to the posterior walls of the left and right ventricles and a third of the interventricular septum. Unlike the anteromedial papillary muscle, which receives blood from the anterior interventricular artery and the left circumflex artery, the posteromedial papillary muscle is supplied only by the posterior interventricular artery. This makes it more susceptible to coronary ischemia as well. The clinical significance of this would be possible mitral regurgitation. Another type of MI is an inferior wall infarct, which occurs from occlusion of the right coronary artery. Because it is the innermost layer of tissue in the heart wall, the endocardium is usually the layer most severely impacted with infarction. Infarction resulting from blockage of the right coronary artery or any of its branches that supply the SA or AV node may affect the ability of the node to fire and control the heartbeat which would manifest as nodal dysfunction like bradycardia or heart block.