Management of aplastic anemia is directed at the underlying cause. Remove the offending agent(s), if possible. Some drugs have been discontinued in the United States due to their associations with aplastic anemia (e.g., Ticlopidine, a platelet aggregation inhibitor used as primary/secondary stroke prevention or dual antiplatelet therapy following percutaneous coronary intervention; phenylbutazone, a NSAID used as an analgesic and antipyretic). Aplastic anemia associated with pregnancy is self-limited and ends with delivery. Patients with thymoma usually have full bone marrow recovery following thymectomy.

For patients in whom no reversible cause is found, treatment depends on age, disease severity, donor availability, and performance status. Young patients (younger than 50 years) in good health with severe disease should undergo allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT) before initial immunosuppressive therapy. Older patients (50 years or older) in good health and young patients without an HCT donor receive full-dose immunosuppressive therapy using eltrombopag, horse/rabbit anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG), cyclosporine A, and prednisone. This combination can be tailored to single-agent eltrombopag, ATG, or cyclosporine A for less healthy individuals. Eltrombopag is a thrombopoietin non-peptide agonist that increases platelet counts and activates intracellular signal transduction pathways to increase proliferation and differentiation of marrow progenitor cells. ATG eliminates antigen-reactive T-lymphocytes and induces hematologic responses in aplastic anemia. Cyclosporine A inhibits the production and release of interleukin-II (IL-2) and inhibits IL-2 induced activation of resting T-lymphocytes. Prednisone induces cell death of immature lymphocytes. Clinical studies are underway for alternative therapies used as second-line agents.

Supportive care includes infection prophylaxis/treatment and transfusions (leukoreduced red blood cells for Hb less than 7 mg/dL or platelets less than 10,000/microliters or less than 50,000/microliters for active blood loss). Monitor for secondary hemochromatosis and administer iron chelators as indicated. Use of growth factors such as erythropoietin or granulocyte colony-stimulating factors is not recommended because there are inadequate precursor cells to generate sufficient responses.

Survival in aplastic anemia depends largely on age, disease severity, and response to initial therapy. Those who recover following drug cessation or treatment of underlying condition have a stable clinical course, as well as those with self-limited processes. Five-year survival is greater than 75% for patients who undergo bone marrow transplant from a suitable donor. The majority of untreated patients die within one year from disease-related complications (e.g., bleeding, infections, or transformation to lymphoproliferative disorders).