In normal adults, Hemoglobin A (HbA) makes up 95 to 98% of the total hemoglobin, hemoglobin A2 (HbA2) is 2 to 3% of hemoglobin, and hemoglobin F(HbF) makes up less than 2% of total adult hemoglobin.

**Beta Thalssemia Minor**

Thalassemia minor is also called beta thalassemia carrier, beta thalassemia trait, and heterozygous beta thalassemia. The most important laboratory tests for diagnosing asymptomatic carriers are red cell count (RBC) and red cell indices.B0 or B++ carriers have increased red blood cell count with decreased MCV (60–70 fl), MCH (19–23 pg) and hemoglobin can range from 2 g/dL to normal.

Reticulocytes may be normal or slightly increased but do not have any significant value in diagnosis. RBCs may show morphological changes like microcytosis, hypochromia, and anisopoikilocytosis. The most valuable test for definite diagnosis is HBA2 quantification by various hemoglobin analysis methods, as described above. The normal value of HBA2 is less than 3.2%, while 3.2 to 3.6% is considered borderline, which warrants further investigation. Values between 3.6% to 7% are considered beta thalassemia carriers. Values of HBA2 are variable in thalassemia. Sometimes iron deficiency anemia may be confused with thalassemia carriers due to microcytosis in both.

**Beta Thalssemia Intermedia**

They have mild-moderate anemia with hemoglobin, even in severe forms not going below 7 g/dL, ranging from 7 to 10 g/dL. In thalassemia intermedia, there is more than or equal to 3.5% HbA2, and HbF ranges between 10 to 50%. The molecular defect and the degree of erythropoiesis determine the amount of Hb A2 and Hb F. Molecular testing is a more accurate diagnostic tool.

**Beta Thalassemia Major**

They present early in life with severe normocytic/microcytic anemia. The hemoglobin level is usually less than 7 g/dL. The MCH is low, <20 pg, and peripheral smear show marked poikilocytosis with tear-drop cell, erythroblasts, and target cells.