**Laboratory Evaluation of Lymphadenopathy**

- CBC with manual differential: This is a foundational test in diagnosing both generalized and regional lymphadenopathy. The number and differential of the white blood cells can indicate bacterial, viral, or fungal pathology. In addition, characteristic white blood cell (WBC) patterns are observed with several hematological neoplasms producing lymphadenopathy.

- EBV serology: Epstein-Barr viral mono is present, causing regionalized lymphadenopathy

- Sedimentation rate: A measure of inflammation though not diagnostic, can contribute to diagnostic reasoning.

- Cytomegalovirus titers: This viral serology is indicative of possible CMV mononucleosis

- HIV serology: This serology can be used to diagnose acute HIV syndrome-related lymphadenopathy or to infer the diagnosis of secondary HIV-elated pathologies causing lymphadenopathy.

- Bartonella henselae serology: Serology that may be indicative of the diagnosis of cat-scratch lymphadenopathy

- FTA\RPR: These tests can establish if syphilis is a cause of lymphadenopathy

- Herpes simplex serology: Serological testing to discern if the herpes-related, mononucleosis-like syndrome is present or if regionalized inguinal adenopathy is secondary to herpes simplex exposure

- Toxoplasmosis serology: These serological tests can lead to a diagnosis of acute toxoplasmosis as a cause of lymphadenopathy

- Hepatitis B serology: Serological tests for hepatitis B to establish it as a contributing factor for lymphadenopathy

- ANA: A serological screening test for SLE that can help establish it as a cause for generalized lymphadenopathy

**Diagnostic Radiological Testing**

- Chest x-ray: This radiological imaging modality can reveal tuberculosis, pulmonary sarcoidosis, and pulmonary neoplasm.

- Chest CAT scan: This radiological imaging modality can define the above processes and reveal hilar adenopathy.

- Abdominal and pelvic CAT scan: These images, in combination with chest CAT scan, can be revealed in cases of supraclavicular adenopathy and the diagnosis of secondary neoplasm.

- Ultrasonography: This imaging modality can be used to assess number, size, size, shape, marginal definition, and internal structures in patients with lymphadenopathy. Of note, color Doppler ultrasonography is used to distinguish the vascular pattern between older pre-existing lymphadenopathy and recent (newly active) lymphadenopathy. Studies have indicated that a low long axis to short axis ratio of lymphadenopathy as measured by ultrasound can be a significant indicator of lymphoma and metastatic cancer as a cause of lymphadenopathy.

- MRI scanning: As with CAT scanning, this modality of diagnostic imaging has great utility in evaluating thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic masses.

**PPD**

Tuberculosis is among the leading cause of both regional and generalized adenopathy in the non-industrialized world