Constipation is one of the most common complaints in outpatient clinics and hospitalized patients. The patients may present with symptoms of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or urinary retention. The causes of constipation may be due to a myriad of underlying diagnoses, including neurological, metabolic, obstructing lesions of the gastrointestinal tract, including colorectal cancer, and endocrine-related problems such as diabetes or hypothyroidism. Psychiatric disorders such as anorexia nervosa can also contribute to constipation. Inadequate amounts of fluid and fiber intake are risk factors for developing constipation.

A primary care clinician may initially encounter and manage most cases of constipation. However, referral to a sub-specialist may be required in some cases, depending on the underlying cause, as noted above. The involvement of a surgeon, gastroenterologist, neurologist, psychiatrist, or endocrinologist can be necessary. A radiologist can provide valuable information through imaging studies about bowel pathology by collaboratively working with a physician or a surgeon. A dietician plays a vital role in modifying dietary risk factors. The pharmacist will ensure that the patient is not on any medication that can worsen constipation and suggest appropriate alternatives. The nurses are critical members of the interprofessional group as they are involved in direct patient care, education, and counseling both in the outpatient and hospital setting.

Overall, interprofessional care coordination by clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, and dieticians is vital in improving patient experience and outcomes.