Aside from the significance of the study of water balance has on our physiologic understanding of the human body, the idea behind it is commonly seen in pathology and is presented clinically on a daily basis. Various conditions lead to an imbalance of water in the different compartments of the body; the specific imbalance can show in different ways and can be treated differently as well. The following presents five clinical scenarios where alterations in water balance can present. Each will have an accompanying analysis of ECF volume, ECF osmolarity, ICF volume, and ICF osmolarity.

- Diarrhea - Diarrhea can be caused by a myriad of pathogens, but classically is associated with isosmotic volume contraction.

- Diabetes Insipidus - In this condition, the body is either unable to produce ADH, or the kidneys cannot respond to it, leading to a hyperosmotic volume contraction. In either case, there is a decrease in free water reabsorption from the distal tubules leading to free water loss.

- SIADH - Conversely, there is excessive free water retention in SIADH, so the results will be the antithesis of what is seen in diabetes insipidus, leading to hypoosmotic volume expansion. In this condition, there is excess free water reabsorption in the distal tubule of the kidney leading to a decreased osmolarity of the ECF as well as an expansion of the ECFV.

- Adrenal Insufficiency - In this case, there is low aldosterone, primarily leading to decreased tubular sodium absorption, resulting in hypoosmotic volume contraction.

- Uremia - Often found in kidney failure. BUN can increase. However, an isolated state of increased urea would not cause a shift in the volume of either compartment, nor would it lead to a change in osmolarity. The reason for this is that these changes are only accompanied by the addition or subtraction of free water or the addition or subtraction of an osmotically active particle, meaning a particle that cannot freely cross the cell membrane.