SCH can be differentiated into two categories: traumatic vs spontaneous.

Traumatic incidences of SCH have risen secondary to the increased use of contact lenses as well as the number of people undergoing ocular surgeries. Contact lens wearers have a higher tendency to have conjunctivochalasis, pinguecula, and superficial punctate keratitis. These conjunctival diseases can cause increased inflammation through dryness and friction between the lenses and conjunctiva itself as well as a possible disruption of tear flow. Material defects and surface deposits in hard lenses, as well as defects at the rims with prolonged use of disposable contact lenses, can promote SCH.

Ocular surgeries, especially in patients on anticoagulation, increase the risk for SCH. Cataract surgery, refractive surgery, local anesthesia such as sub-Tenon's injections can potentiate SCH.

Often times local minor trauma such as eye rubbing or foreign body can cause SCH. For this reason, the patient may not recall any minor trauma. In cases with extensive trauma, SCH may be present in the scope of a more devastating injury such as an open globe. SCH may develop after orbital fractures. Basilar skull fractures can be identified if there is SCH coming from the fornix when globe trauma is not present.

Nonaccidental trauma should be considered in infants who present with bilateral isolated subconjunctival hemorrhages especially if they are associated with facial petechiae. Traumatic asphyxia syndrome which is caused by prolonged compression of a child's upper abdomen and chest can cause sudden severe venous congestion.

The biggest risk factor for spontaneous SCH is hypertension and other vascular disorders like diabetes and hyperlipidemia. These diseases can cause blood vessels to become fragile and spontaneously rupture. Hypertension has been shown to be the major risk factor for SCH regardless of whether the blood pressure is controlled by medication. Spontaneous SCH has also been shown to be a predictor of hypertension if shown to be high on initial presentation subsequently at a 1 and 4 week follow-up.

People who have vascular disorders also may be placed on anticoagulation such as warfarin or heparin. NSAIDs such as aspirin and P2Y12 inhibitors such as clopidogrel can also increase the risk for SCH. A risk of SCH is still present even if INR is in the therapeutic range.