Indications for PCN fall into several broad categories:

- Drainage only

- Stone treatment

- Urine diversion

- Other therapeutic intervention

- Diagnosis of obstruction

Drainage

PCN is the procedure of choice when transurethral access is impossible or has already failed at relieving an obstructed urinary system from extrinsic mass effect (e.g., pregnancy, malignancy, fluid collections such as cysts, abscesses, or urinomas) or intrinsic blockage (e.g., benign or malignant strictures).  Drainage of an obstructed renal unit is the most common indication for PCN accounting fo 85 to 90% of all nephrostomy placements.

Pyonephrosis and Obstructive Pyelonephritis

The most common reason for emergency PCN placement is to provide drainage in an acutely obstructed, infected kidney (pyonephrosis or obstructive pyelonephritis) in a septic patient, due to the high mortality risk as well as the permanent renal impairment it can cause. In these cases, both percutaneous nephrostomy and transurethral retrograde Double J stenting are recommended.  The decision of which one is preferred is usually determined by local technical expertise, equipment availability and individual patient factors.  PCN is often preferred in the most seriously ill patients based on its reduced manipulation of the obstructed, infected ureter.  The transurethral approach may not be successful in bypassing a severely obstructed ureteral stone which is not an issue for PCN.  Even when transurethral bypass of an obstructing stone is accomplished, PCN generally offers the opportunity to use a larger caliber drainage catheter.  However, in a morbidly obese patient with minimal hydronephrosis or in a patient with an uncorrected coagulopathy, transurethral Double J stenting would be preferred. Typically, urology will be involved in these emergency cases and make the final decision regarding the preferred therapeutic approach, usually in consultation with radiology.

Nephrolithiasis Treatment

PCN is the first step in accessing the renal collecting system to enable percutaneous insertion of devices to treat nephrolithiasis (percutaneous nephrolithotomy or PCNL) for:

- Staghorn calculi

- Other large, renal, pelvis (usually greater than 2 cm), and lower pole (usually greater than 1 cm) stones

- Ureteral stones that are not amenable to transurethral manipulation due to distal ureteral strictures, tumors, reimplantation, etc.

- Complex or abnormal renal anatomy

- Pregnancy

PCN creates a tract through which lasers, ultrasonic probes, and retractable baskets can be inserted for mechanical crushing, vaporization and stone retreival.  In this way, PCN can be an adjunct therapy to percutaneous lithotomy or extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, which may cause a large stone to fragment into many smaller pieces that are still large enough together to result in obstruction.  The overwhelming majority (90%) of percutaneous renal access prior to definitive percutaneous nephrolithotomy surgery is now done by interventional radiology.

PCN rarely may need to be used as part of the "primary treatment strategy" in persons with the recurrent stone formation, such as in the setting of mineral-forming metabolic disease.  In such cases, 24 hour urine testing and optimal prophylactic therapy is recommended.

Pregnancy

Nephrolithiasis is the most common non-obstetrical complication of pregnancy.  Double J stents and PCN are considered equally safe and effective in relieving pain in pregnant nephrolithiasis patients who are not manageable with conservative measures alone.  Double J stents are less well tolerated by most patients and are associated with increased rates of ascending urinary infection.

Urinary Diversion

Healing of injured urinary tract tissue, such as in the setting of urinary leak or fistula and hemorrhagic cystitis, may be accelerated if urine is preferentially rerouted away from the region of inflammation through bilateral nephrostomies.  Urinary urokinase tends to promote bleeding which can be eliminated with bilateral nephrostomies.  This is limited to severe and refractory cases of hemorrhagic cystitis.

Other Therapeutic Ureteral Interventions

Direct access to the collecting system percutaneously may be the least invasive (i.e., less than surgery and when transurethral access is not feasible) manner for introducing tools for treating strictures, fistulas, or infections.  Pyeloplasty or urethroplasty may relieve a stricture that developed secondary to inflammation from stones, trauma or other causes.  Stent insertion may allow a fistula to heal.  Direct administration of a highly concentrated medication may help treat resistant infections (e.g., fungal) while reducing systemic toxicity.  Percutaneous renal access can also help with uretero-enteric anastomotic strictures in post-cystectomy patients as retrograde access across such strictures is very problematic.

**Diagnosis
**

In some patients, particularly patients with only one functioning kidney (e.g., patients who have already undergone renal transplant), there may be a need for invasive testing to differentiate renal failure from intrinsic, autoimmune etiologies from obstruction; especially when imaging by other means does not provide a reliable diagnosis. Antegrade nephrostograms can readily identify the location and nature of ureteral obstructions not easily imaged otherwise.

The Whitaker test involves percutaneous puncture of the kidney with or without insertion of a catheter to measure pressure within the system.  First described in 1973, the Whitaker test is designed to differentiate obstructed, hydronephrotic renal units from those with dilated but unobstructed ureters.  Through a percutaneous catheter, fluid is infused while the intrapelvic pressure is measured via a catheter.  A gradient pressure of 22 mm of water or more indicates obstruction while 15 mm or less indicates no obstruction.  Pressures between 22 and 15 mm are considered indeterminate.