Dismantling health disparities faced by many AIANs and enhancing healthcare team outcomes requires a multifaceted approach. Strategies that can work to accomplish this include:

- Approach the care of AIAN patients through a structurally competent lens.

- Consider the historical and sociopolitical context that drives health disparities among AIAN populations.

- Recognize AIAN community-specific social determinants of health.

- Improve health professionals' understanding of historical, cultural, and spiritual factors that influence AIAN health.

- Appreciate the vast diversity that exists among AIAN people and Nations.

- Address the distrust of Western medicine in AIAN communities caused by a centuries-old legacy of discrimination.

- Address provider bias, microaggressions, and individual and institutional racism experienced by AIANs today.

- Incorporate issues related to AIAN health care within the medical school curriculum.

- Ensure adequate representation of AIANs in health care by increasing the number of AIAN students in health professional schools.

- Strive for maximum tribal involvement in meeting the health needs of local AIAN populations.

- Increase coordination of care between traditional Native healers and health professionals practicing Western medicine

- Partner with AIAN community members to develop sustainable community-based interventions that integrate their culture, history, and inherent strengths into local health-based programs.

- Partner with AIAN communities and work together to understand better the health impacts caused by toxin exposure and find appropriate solutions to address the adverse effects.

- Inquire about environmental risk factors and exposure to pollutants and metals such as uranium, arsenic, lead, copper, vanadium, and manganese. Identify individuals who are at high risk of developing a health condition based on their exposure.

- Practice cultural humility and compassion in the clinical setting.

- Avoid stereotyping and encourage patients to share the cultural identity that is personal and unique to them.

- Explore each patient’s health beliefs and factors influencing their decision-making to provide contextually tailored care.

- Use a strength-based instead of deficit-based approach to patient care.

- Appreciate tribal cultural and regional differences that impact the experience of illness for each patient.

Achieving these goals will allow health professionals to properly address health disparities, effectively evaluate and treat AIAN patients in clinical settings, and promote health equity.