In addition to the indications for rotation flaps, it is also critical to consider the contraindications for these flaps. Flaps are contraindicated if any existing malignancy is not completely cleared. Failure to achieve clear margins before performing a flap may have disastrous consequences. Residual tumors may grow unrecognized beneath a flap for years. A tumor can spread along the plane of undermining, which can further add to the morbidity of the malignancy.

For this reason, most flaps are performed following Mohs micrographic surgery, as this technique is highly effective for obtaining clear margins. Additionally, patients should be evaluated for any signs of malignancy within or near a flap for the same reasons as above. Surgeons should be aware that future closure options for nearby malignancies may be severely limited by the previous use of a flap and should adjust their closure techniques accordingly.

Proper patient selection is essential in assuring quality outcomes. Limited functional status or access to care may obligate the use of different closure techniques than what might be employed for another patient. The quality of a flap's vascular supply and its durability are also very patient-specific. For example, a pedicle taken from within a scar or an area that underwent radiotherapy may have an impaired vascular supply, and therefore other reconstructive options should be considered.

Relative contraindications to rotational flap transfer include an increased risk of hemorrhage and active smoking. Smokers, in general, have a higher risk of developing complications following surgery. Specifically, they are at increased risk of flap necrosis, which means that other closure options may be preferable.