Patients who remain asymptomatic 4 to 6 hours after ingestion or those who have not ingested a potentially toxic amount do not require any treatment for iron toxicity.

Patients who have GI symptoms that resolve after a short period of time and have normal vital signs require supportive care and an observation period, as it may represent the second stage of iron toxicity.

Patients who are symptomatic or demonstrate signs of hemodynamic instability require aggressive management and admission to an intensive care unit. The following is used for the treatment of iron toxicity:

- IV crystalloid infusion is administered to correct hypovolemia and hypoperfusion.

- Deferoxamine, a chelating agent that can remove iron from tissues and free iron from plasma, is indicated in patients with systemic toxicity, metabolic acidosis, worsening symptoms, or a serum iron level predictive of moderate or severe toxicity. It is administered as a continuous infusion at 15 mg/kg/hr for up to 24 hours with a maximum dose of 35 mg/kg/hr if there is no rate-related hypotension. The maximum daily dose is 6 g. Clinical recovery guides the termination of deferoxamine therapy but the duration of therapy is typically 24 hours. Consultation with a toxicologist is highly recommended.

- Whole-bowel irrigation with polyethylene glycol solution may clear the GI tract of iron pills before absorption and should be administered at 250 to 500 mL/h in children and 1.5 to 2 L/h in adults via nasogastric tube.

- Coagulopathy can be corrected with vitamin K (5 to 10 mg subcutaneously) and fresh frozen plasma (10 to 25 mL/kg in adults; 10 mL/kg in children).

- Gastric lavage with a large-bore orogastric tube is only indicated if abdominal x-ray demonstrates a large number of visible pills in the stomach. For most cases, the risks of gastric lavage outweigh the benefits.

- Activated charcoal binds iron poorly and is not effective.

Patients with GI symptoms or evidence of dehydration should be admitted. Patients receiving deferoxamine treatment should be admitted as well. Intensive care unit admission is indicated for patients presenting with coma, shock, metabolic acidosis, or iron levels over 1000 mg/dL. Psychiatric referral is indicated for patients with an intentional overdose. Patients can be safely discharged if they are asymptomatic after a 6 to 12-hour observation period and have a negative radiograph, or if they have mild GI symptoms that resolve without metabolic acidosis and serum iron level under 350 mg/dL after a 6 to 12 hour observation period.

Patients with iron bezoars may require surgery. In severe cases, hemodialysis can also be effective.