Suzuki stages explain the process from the beginning of stenosis in the terminal portion of ICA and the appearance of a deep but fragile network of collaterals (moyamoya) to the reduction of moyamoya vessels with the simultaneous development of supply from external carotid artery branches. This fragile network of collaterals mainly develops from thalamoperforating and lenticulostriate perforating arteries. Suzuki stages of moyamoya disease are mentioned below.

**Stage 1:**'Narrowing of carotid fork'. On the angiographic exam, only the terminal portion of the internal carotid artery is stenosed.

**Stage 2:**'Initiation and appearance of basal moyamoya'. On the angiographic exam, stenosis of all the terminal branches of ICA (ACA and/or MCA) and deep moyamoya vessels are seen.

**Stage 3:**'Intensification of basal moyamoya'. On the angiographic exam, deep moyamoya vessels are intensified. MRA taken during this stage shows a "puff of smoke" appearance. The deflection of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and middle cerebral arteries (MCA) is noted.

**Stage 4:**'Minimization of basal moyamoya'. On the angiographic exam, deep moyamoya vessels begin to regress while transdural collaterals begin to appear. The deflection of the posterior cerebral artery (PCA) is noted.

**Stage 5:**'Reduction of moyamoya'. On the angiographic exam, continued regression of deep moyamoya vessels and progression of transdural collateral vessels are noted.

**Stage 6:**'Disappearance of moyamoya'. On the angiographic exam, deep moyamoya vessels have vanished and there is complete occlusion of the ICA. Blood supply to ACA and MCA areas is derived mainly from the external carotid artery