From the AUA Guidelines: "In the hands of an experienced provider, more than 70% of cryptorchid testes are palpable by physical examination and need no imaging. In the remaining 30% of cases with a nonpalpable testis, the challenge is to confirm the absence or presence of the testis and to identify the location of the viable nonpalpable testis."

Ultrasound is non-contributory in routine use, with sensitivity and specificity to localize nonpalpable testes reported at 45% and 78%, respectively.

The cost and ionizing radiation exposure associated with CT scanning preclude its use. MRI with or without angiography has been more widely used with somewhat greater sensitivity and specificity but is discouraged due to its cost, low availability, and the need for anesthesia.

A karyotype can confirm or exclude dysgenetic primary hypogonadism. Hormone levels such as gonadotropins and Mullerian inhibitory substance may confirm hormonally functional testicles worth salvation, as can stimulation with human chorionic gonadotropin to elicit a rise in the testosterone level. In some cases, further testing is crucial and is highly likely to detect intersex conditions.

**Bilateral Cryptorchidism**

Bilateral cryptorchidism with palpable testes can undergo surgery. There is some controversy regarding the timing of surgery. Some experts suggest two separate procedures to allow for the complete healing of one testicle before fixing the contralateral side. While this ensures that at least one testicle survives, it requires subjecting a young child to two separate procedures and anesthesia. For these reasons, many specialists prefer to repair both sides in a single surgery based on the overall low complication rate of about 1%.

Patients with bilateral impalpable testes, which may occur in 20% to 30% of all cryptorchid boys, require additional workup for a possible disorder of sexual development.

If congenital adrenal hyperplasia has been ruled out, the next step is to determine if there is testicular tissue present. The presence of Mullerian inhibiting substance, produced by the testicular Sertoli cells, would indicate that there is testicular tissue somewhere, possibly intraabdominal. FSH can be used to stimulate inhibin B and Mullerian inhibiting substance, while hCG will stimulate Leydig cells to manufacture testosterone.

Patients with a male karyotype (46 XY), bilateral nonpalpable testes, elevated serum FSH along with no detectable serum Mullerian inhibiting substance and inhibin B can be reasonably diagnosed as having no testicular tissue (anorchia).