The management of mesenteric vasculitis can be challenging. an interprofessional approach is central in providing comprehensive care to these patients. A patient-centered team consisting of the primary care physician, rheumatologist, gastroenterologist, nurses must be involved in careful monitoring of the disease, titration of therapy, and early recognition of complications should they occur. Pharmacists need to coordinate with prescribers on dosing and interactions and educate patients on the types of drugs used to treat vasculitis, their benefits, and potential complications. Since there is no cure for vasculitis disorders, life-long follow-up is necessary. Also, when initiating biological treatments, patients require monitoring for infections and malignancies.

Since adverse drug reactions can be a part of the etiology of vasculitis, the pharmacist should consult about the potential for this by verifying the patient's medication record and reporting their findings to the treating physician(s). Once medical therapy begins, they should be involved with medication reconciliation and dose verification to assist the healthcare team. Nursing will also counsel, administer medication, and are in the best position to monitor treatment progress and watch for any drug adverse reactions, charting and communicating their observations to the team. This is the type of interprofessional team approach needed to take therapy to its optimal course. [Level V]

Though mesenteric vasculitis is uncommon, failure to diagnose or a delay in management can lead to dire consequences.  In most patients with vasculitis, gastrointestinal involvement occurs with severe disease. Therefore, it is important to maintain a high index of suspicion in patients with abdominal symptoms and other evidence to suspect vasculitis. With several advances in medical treatment, endovascular interventions, and surgical options, the prognosis of patients with mesenteric vasculitis has improved significantly.