The RAS is a component of the reticular formation, found in the anterior-most segment of the brainstem. The reticular formation receives input from the spinal cord, sensory pathways, thalamus, and cortex and has efferent connections throughout the nervous system. The RAS itself is primarily composed of four main components that each contain groupings of nuclei. These are the locus coeruleus, raphe nuclei, posterior tuberomammillary hypothalamus, and pedunculopontine tegmentum. Each is unique in the neuropeptides they release. In large part, these centers are activated by the lateral hypothalamus (LH), which releases the neuropeptide orexin in response to the light hitting the eyes, which then stimulates arousal and the transition from sleep to waking.

The locus coeruleus is located within the upper dorsolateral pons of the brainstem. It is activated directly by orexin from the lateral hypothalamus, and in response, releases norepinephrine. Its excitatory functions are widely distributed within the brain, acting on both the alpha and beta receptors of neurons and glial cells distributed throughout the cortex. It functions primarily upon waking and in arousal.

The raphe nuclei are located midline throughout the brainstem within the pons, midbrain, and medulla. The majority of neurons located in the raphe nuclei are serotonergic. The more rostral raphe nuclei appear to be important in various bodily functions, including pain sensation and mood regulation. In the context of the RAS, these nuclei communicate with the suprachiasmatic nucleus, playing a role in circadian rhythms, and contributing to arousal and attention.

The tuberomammillary nucleus is located within the posterior aspect of the hypothalamus. The neurons that make up these nuclei are primarily histaminergic and serve as the primary source of histamine projections in the brain. They are important in both wakefulness and cognition, projecting in large part to the forebrain where they play an important role in arousal.

The lateral and dorsal pedunculopontine tegmentum contains primarily cholinergic neurons in neighboring groups within the midbrain and pons. Cholinergic neurons project to the thalamus and cortex, promoting desynchronization of the brain, allowing the body to switch from slow sleep rhythms to high frequency, low amplitude wake rhythms.