An increase in cardiac output, an increase in heart rate of 4 to 10 beats per minute, and an increase in the cardiac index are observed in patients who received a single dose of 5 to 15 mg per oral (PO). In addition, systemic vascular resistance has decreased from the baseline, thereby reducing blood pressure. However, the effect was inconsistent and not dose-dependent.

The immediate-release form of the vericiguat showed a mean half-life (t1/2) of about 18 to 22 hours. There were no significant differences between single and multiple doses regarding bioavailability, the area under the curve (AUC), and Cmax (maximum concentration). Absorption through percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) is reported to be faster when compared to oral administration. As discussed above, food increases the bioavailability of vericiguat and reduces the variability in the postprandial/fed state; hence medication should be administered with food. A single oral dose of 10 mg was well tolerated by healthy Japanese, Chinese and European subjects.

According to phase III of the VICTORIA Heart Failure with Reduced Ejection Fraction study, the dose of vericiguat can be increased from 2.5 mg to 10 mg depending on patient response. Phase II of the VITALITY Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction study reported that the dose could be titrated up to 15 mg.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dosage adjustment of vericiguat is advised in patients with mild hepatic impairment(Child-Pugh A) or moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh B). Use of vericiguat should be avoided in severe hepatic impairment(Child-Pugh C) as there are no studies conducted in these patient populations.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dosage adjustment of vericiguat is suggested in patients with eGFR ≥15 mL/min/1.73m2. However, the use of vericiguat has not been investigated in patients with eGFR <15 mL/min/1.73m2 or on dialysis.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Vericiguat has the potential cause for serious adverse reactions in breastfed infants. Hence, breastfeeding is not recommended during treatment with vericiguat.****

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Due to concerns for embryo-fetal toxicity and substantial fetal harm to the fetus, vericiguat should not be administered to pregnant women or currently planning for pregnancy.