The basis of the development of microphthalmia with cyst is embryological. Normally, the embryonic fissure's closure begins at the 11 mm stage and completes by the 18 mm embryonal stage. The invagination of the optic vesicle begins prior to the 6-7th embryological week. Following this, differential growth of the inner layer of the optic cup occurs (where the inner layer develops faster than the outer layer), resulting in everted margins of the fissure.

The complete formation of the retina at these margins may prevent the closure of the optic cup. In the case where the closure fails, a typical coloboma is formed. When no closure occurs, these retinal layers further distend, followed by accumulation of fluid in between the layers, leading to the formation of a cyst.

It is the timing of the developmental arrest that plays a key role in understanding this entity's etiology. Microphthalmia with cyst results when the embryological disturbances occur later at the 7 to 14 mm stage during 6 to 7 weeks of gestation, a time when ocular structures are already present. On the contrary, when the arrest occurs during the 2 to 7 mm stage, causing failure of invagination of the primary optic vesicle, anophthalmos with cyst results.

The influence of gestational insult on the development of microphthalmia with cyst is controversial. Recognition of the related genetic syndromes with appropriate genetic counseling must be done. Although most cases present in isolation, familial occurrence in monozygous twins and in siblings, has been documented.