# Introduction

The central nervous system (CNS) is composed of the brain and the spinal cord. They both develop from the embryonic ectoderm alongside other structures like the skin. Their development begins as early as the 3rd and 4th weeks of embryonic life, starting with the process of neurulation, which is the development of the neural tube. The neural tube closes spontaneously rostrally and caudally. In the fifth to sixth week, the first appearance of the brain, the prosencephalic development ensues. The primitive brain is comprised of the prosencephalon, mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon. The prosencephalon divides further into telencephalon and diencephalon through a series of developmental stages, namely: formation, cleavage, and development of the midline.

The article describes the embryology of the central nervous system, the developmental malformation of the cerebral cortex and spinal cord. Developmental malformation of the brain and spinal cord leads to various diseases from microcephaly to spinal bifida. The stages of development of the cerebral cortex encompass three main steps. Defects in one or a combination of these steps form the basis of classification of abnormality of the cortical development as:

**The proliferation of neural cells:**an abnormally high proliferation of the neural cells can lead to megalencephaly, and decreased proliferation leads to microcephaly.

**Neuronal migration:**the outcome of partial neuronal migration is heterotopia and lissencephaly; excessive neuronal migration causes cobblestone malformation.

**Postmigrational cortical organization and connectivity**: irregular events in the post-migrational cortical organization causes focal cortical dysplasias and polymicrogyria.

The defects of neural tube fusion consist of encephalocele, meningocele, myelomeningocele, and spina bifida occulta.

# Pathophysiology

**Etiology/Pathophysiology**

Several studies have implicated environmental factors in the malformation of the central nervous system of an embryo. These include folate deficiency, illicit drug use, and prescribe medications that affect folate metabolism in the body.

**Cellular/Biochemical/Molecular Mechanism**

**The PI3K-AKT3-TSC2-mTOR Pathway**

Both genetic and molecular factors may disrupt the normal development of the cerebral cortex. Any form of alteration in the genes that control growth and metabolic pathways leads to cortical development malformation. Generally, the mammalian target of the rapamycin (mTOR) pathway has been strongly recognized in these malformations. The inhibition of TSC or activation of PIK3CA or AKT3 hyperactivates the mTOR pathway leads to dysregulated cell growth.

The majority of neural tube defects are sporadic. Genetic factors remain strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of NTDs, and the usual form of inheritance is multifactorial or polygenic. Maternal folate deficiency may contribute to NTD development in genetically susceptible individuals. Studies have shown that mutations in the genes involved in mitochondrial folate metabolism increase the risk. The 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene and its variant form (C677T genotype) (MTHFR C677T) is associated with the risk for NTDs.

# Clinical Significance

**Development Malformation of the Cerebral Cortex**

**Holoprosencephaly**

Holoprosencephaly is a malformation of the prosencephalon characterized by incomplete separation of both cerebral hemispheres. Chromosomal abnormalities such as Patau and Edward syndromes carry a higher risk for holoprosencephaly as well as gestation complicated with diabetes. Patau syndrome (trisomy 13) is the most commonly associated syndrome.

**Agenesis of Corpus Callosum (ACC)**

ACC is a partial development or complete absence of the corpus callosum, which is the connecting structure between the two cerebral hemispheres.

**Septooptical Dysplasia**

This condition is an abnormality of the forebrain comprised of the triad of a defect in the midline forebrain structures - septum pellucidum n (with or without agenesis of the corpus callosum), hypoplasia of the optic nerve (cranial nerve II), and pituitary insufficiency.  It most likely occurs in the 4th to 6th weeks of life. It is an uncommon condition with an incidence of 1 in 10,000 live births. It has links with a mutation in the HESX1, SOX2, and SOX3, or OXT2.

**Megalencephaly**

Megalencephaly is an increased head size above two standard deviations. Clinically, it is more applicable to define it as brain size greater than three standard deviations above the mean to exclude familial megalencephaly. It occurs due to congenital defects in neuronal migration or abnormal cell proliferation, or a combination of both. Megalencephaly is classified based on etiology, genetic abnormalities in metabolism, and development. Mutations in genes controlling major molecular pathways like the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K/AKT) have been implicated. On the other hand, megalencephaly requires differentiation from macrocephaly, which is an unusual increase in occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) at least two standard deviations caused by structural abnormalities of the cranium, brain, or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and related structures.

**Hemimegalencephaly**

This is a one-sided cerebral hemisphere enlargement involving part of or the whole cerebral hemisphere. Commonly seen in association with hemimegaloencephaly, neurocutaneous syndromes like linear sebaceous syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and neurofibromatosis. The common presentation of this disease includes psychomotor retardation, intractable seizures, cranial nerve palsies, and hemiparesis. The presence of seizures in the first year of life is indicative of a poor prognosis.

**Periventricular Heterotopia**

This pathology is a genetic disease due to a failure of neurons to migrate, leading to abnormally located nodules around the ventricles. The most common clinical manifestation is an afebrile seizure. Research has shown it to occur alongside other conditions like EDS, Williams syndrome, and Ci du Chat. However, mutations in the filamin A (FLNA (Xq28) and ADP ribosylation factor guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (ARFGEF2 (20q13). X-linked FLNA while the ARFGEF2 autosomal recessive.

**Lissencephaly-Pachygyria**

Lissencephaly-pachygyria is a spectrum of abnormal development of the cerebral gyri and sulci resulting from the abnormal migration of neurons. The term for a partial development is pachygyria, and complete absence is agyria. Pachygyria typically have milder symptoms compared to lissencephaly. Type one is known to be the classic lissencephaly, and type two is the cobblestone complex. actin, dynein, kinesin, tubulin genes, CASP2, and RIPK1 domain-containing adaptor with death domain (CRADD).

**Polymicrogyria**

As the name implies is simply an abnormally formed cerebral cortex that has multiple small gyri. The severity of the symptoms is strongly related to the extent of brain involvement with the unilateral focal variant as the mildest form of this disease. It has little or no symptoms and is mostly controlled with antiepileptic medications. The most severe is the bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria with significant neurological manifestations. This severe form gets inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, and the defect is on chromosome 16q12-21.

**Focal Cortical Dysplasia[34]**

Focal cortical dysplasias (FCDs) is an umbrella name consisting of several subgroups of abnormal lamination of the cerebral cortex.

Strong ideas have been advanced to demonstrate that tuberous sclerosis 1 and 2 (TSC1 and TSC2), as well as phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) genes that regulate mTOR, are also the causes of FCD type 2b because it shares common features with tuberous sclerosis.

FCD type III is either type I or II co-occurring with other brain lesions.

**Developmental Malformation of the Spinal Cord**

Neural tube defects (NTDs) are malformations of the brain and spinal cord resulting from the failure of the neural tube closure in the third and fourth week of intrauterine development. They are the most prevalent congenital malformation of the CNS.

Spina bifida is a common NTDs in which the spinal cord is exposed or protrudes to the surface with the meninges into a sac-like through a defect in the vertebral wall. It includes myelomeningocele, meningocele, and myelocele.

Anencephaly is one of the common types of NTDs with a congenital absence of the brain or parts of the brain and cranium. It occurs as a result of the failure of the cranial portion of neural tube closure.

Encephalocele is a rare NTD in which the brain protrudes through an abnormal opening of the cranium with or without the meninges, leaving a projection of a bag-like structure handing on the head.

**Investigation/Treatment**

Most central nervous system (CNS) malformations are recognizable during routine laboratory screening and ultrasound scans. A second trimester elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in triple screen raises a very high suspicion for neural tube defects.