Those with a BMI of 30 - 34.9 with metabolic syndrome or uncontrolled diabetes mellitus; BMI 35 to 39.9 kg/m with one or more significant co-morbidity including CVD, HTN, OSA, HLP; and those with a BMI greater than or equal to 40 kg/m should be considered for bariatric surgery. To be eligible for surgery, all patients must undertake a weight reduction program. These programs should be multifactorial and include interventions targeted to reduce energy intake, improve the quality of diet, and increase activity levels. Programs such as these are also an opportunity to further assess factors contributing to obesity, such as psychological health and lifestyle behaviors. They are also used to identify whether patients have the level of commitment needed to comply with post-operative dietary recommendations.

The care provided should be from the multi-disciplinary team, including but not limited to; surgeons, dieticians, family physicians, and psychologists. Patients should be counseled on the risks and benefits and the potential complications of the surgery to be able to make an informed decision. Patients should be aware that they will be followed up for a minimum of two years, including dietetics monitoring, medication reviews, physical and psychological support. Patients will be on lifelong vitamin supplementation and require interval monitoring of blood tests, including parathyroid hormone, vitamin D, calcium, full blood count, vitamin B12 and folate, iron studies, magnesium, and phosphate. They may be referred to the Plastics team for cosmetic surgery such as apronectomy post-bariatric surgery if appropriate. Referral to support groups can be a useful resource for patients and clinicians. If, after two years, patients can be discharged from bariatric surgical services, they ought to continue to have annual monitoring of their nutritional and mineral state.

Bariatric surgery is divided into two categories; restrictive and malabsorptive. Restrictive techniques are devised to produce early satiety by reducing the size of the stomach, and therefore a reduction in food intake. Commonly used restrictive procedures include laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) and laparoscopic adjustable gastric band. Malabsorptive procedures include biliopancreatic diversions with or without duodenal switch. They aim to induce a state of malabsorption similar to short bowel syndrome by reducing the length of the bowel. The Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (REYGB) is a combination of both methods. LSG and REYBG are the most commonly used methods.

The average length of stay in the hospital following REYGB is one day and two days following LSG. BMI > 50 and sleeve gastrectomy were both associated with a longer postoperative admission.

There is no difference in the rate of late complications between the two procedures.