The examination of blood, urine, hair, nail, and tissues may be utilized in confirming HM toxicity.

The patient should refrain from seafood for at least 48 hours before the tests. If gadolinium or iodine-contrast was used, the waiting time increases to 96 hours.

In industrial workers, blood and urine testing for heavy metal exposure are necessary to monitor safe permissible limits and specimens should be obtained at the end of the workweek; for example, if Friday is the last day of the workweek, the test specimens should be obtained at the end of that day to affect actual levels of exposure.

Special metal-free tubes for blood or acid-washed containers for urine will maximize accuracy.

The level of HMs in the blood or urine will reflect current exposure and will not accurately reflect body stores from chronic exposure. Symptoms may not correlate with blood levels, and profound symptoms may be apparent in individuals with HM levels only slightly above normal. Sometimes a chelation challenge is necessary to strengthen the diagnosis and is the most accurate method of establishing the diagnosis of HM toxicity.

Ancillary tests like hemogram to detect anemia, liver, and renal function tests are often helpful. Hypophosphatemia, hyperphosphaturia, hypercalciuria, proteinuria with low molecular weight proteins like beta-2 microglobulin, elevated alkaline phosphatase, and bone markers, decreased serum 1,25 dihydroxy vitamin D3 and increased intact PTH are all useful in documenting Cd-induced bone disease.

An abdominal X-ray may show a radioopaque foreign body that contains heavy metal. A chest X-ray may show changes due to inhalation exposure. These changes may be amplified in CT scans of the chest and will help differentiate sarcoidosis, infective, and malignant diseases causing similar clinical features.

A beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test (BeLPT) has been described. It can identify prior sensitization to the element. About one in ten of sensitized subjects will develop chronic beryllium disease.

A Chronic Arsenic Intoxication Diagnostic Score(CAsIDS) has been developed. This evaluation takes into account the bone As load and several clinical features in quantifying the risk for chronic As toxicity.

The detection of HM pollution of water-bodies has been revolutionized by real-time biosensors that are quick, accurate, and less labor-intensive and can aid in controlling community HM toxicity.

Toxicogenomic technologies show promise in decoding many of the links between HMs and carcinogenicity.