Autonomic dysfunction, hyperventilation, cardiac arrhythmia, or hyperkinetic crisis can occur in children presenting with neurological symptoms. These children should be managed in the ICU. First-line treatment involves teratoma resection (if present), immunotherapy comprising of corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulins or plasma exchange, and supportive care.

Clonidine, trazodone, and benzodiazepines help to reverse sleep disturbances. Phenobarbital, trihexyphenidyl, and opioids can treat extreme agitation.

Psychotic and behavioral symptoms are managed using typical or atypical antipsychotics. Severe dopamine blockage can exacerbate dyskinetic movements. The development of neuroleptic malignant syndrome may occur, which can complicate and misdiagnose anti NMDAR encephalitis. Quetiapine is the drug of choice for treating psychosis. Valproate works as an excellent mood stabilizer and also offers seizure prophylaxis. Gabapentin and lithium can also be used for mood dysregulation.

If children show no improvement with any of the above treatment modalities, mechanical ventilation, and ketamine or propofol infusion can be considered. Children under the age of 5 years are at a higher risk of precipitating propofol infusion syndrome. Vigilant laboratory surveillance is needed in children receiving propofol for longer than 24 hours.

Resting tachycardia is one of the most common autonomic and hemodynamic instability seen in the pediatric population suffering from anti-NMDAR encephalitis.

In the third week, placement of tracheostomy and gastrostomy tubes have shown to improve patient safety and also allows to switch to lesser sedation. Once feasible, it becomes of the utmost importance, that a comprehensive rehabilitation program is begun.