After a snakebite, patients should immobilize the limb and seek medical attention. There are many folklore treatments for venomous snakebites, including venom extraction, electric current, tourniquets, and applying ice packs. These therapies, including mechanical venom extraction devices, are not useful.Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab (Fab) is processed from sheep immunoglobulins inoculated from four North American pit vipers: eastern and western diamondback (C. adamanteus and atrox), Mojave rattlesnake (C. scutulatus), and cottonmouth (Agkistrodon piscivorus).C. durissus) and fer-de-lance (Bothrops asper) snakes.Agkistrodon species and its efficacy for cottonmouth envenomation is unknown.

The initial dose of Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab antivenom is four to six vials given intravenously. Antivenom will not reverse the soft tissue effects of pit viper envenomation but should halt progression. Control of progression of soft tissue injury and/or hematologic toxicity is the goal of antivenom therapy. If initial control has not been achieved, then another loading dose of four to six vials should be given. More than six vials can be initially administered if there are signs of shock or severe bleeding.

The dose of Crotalidae Immune F(ab’)2  is ten vials intravenously given once; this can be repeated in one hour if failing to achieve initial control. Since F(ab’)2 is a larger fragment with slower elimination kinetics, there is no maintenance dosing. Treatment of venom-induced hematologic toxicity is an additional antivenom. If clinically significant bleeding is occurring, treatment with blood products in addition to antivenom may be necessary.

Despite being rare, if compartment syndrome develops, it should be treated with additional doses of antivenom. There is a very limited role for fasciotomy for North American pit viper envenomation, and it is a consideration for persistent concerns despite adequate antivenom, or for decompression of digits.