While KCN is often accompanied by significant myopia, this is not by itself a criterion. The two most significant presentations are irregular corneal astigmatism and focal stromal thinning. We should distinguish the focal thinning from a generally thin cornea. Also, significant astigmatism, if symmetrical, is not a KCN criterion. It is stressed that the astigmatism noted in KCN is highly asymmetrical. The corneal thinning and the asymmetric astigmatism both occur in the area of the corneal protrusion, which is often infero-temporal. Thus topography, tomography, and pachymetry are the prime diagnostics used in the diagnosis and evaluation of KCN,

The first use of Placido topography for the diagnosis and classification of KCN was presented by Marc Amsler (1938). Topography can document subtle corneal surface irregularity before other clinical or biomicroscopic signs could be identified. Amsler documented a classification scheme ranging from early changes in cornea shape to clinically detectable keratoconus. Then, he classified KCN into clinically recognizable stages and two latent (subclinical) stages recognizable only by Placido disk corneal topography: forme-fruste

Today, several ocular imaging modalities, including corneal topography, tomography, and biomechanical evaluation devices have enhanced our ability to detect early KCN in a quantifiable and reproducible manner. Corneal topography is the primary diagnostic tool for KCN detection.

Pachymetry data obtained with Scheimpflug-imaging devices, such as the Pentacam (in the past, scanning slit-scan such as the Orbscan), are also used. In addition to the corneal curvature, these devices offer detailed pachymetry maps that present a corneal thinning. The thinnest cornea correlates well with the location of the maximum corneal steepening (cone location).

Other specific quantitative values produced by Placido topography or Scheimpflug imaging topometry that can be used as progression determinants of the disease are anterior surface irregularity indices, such as the Index of Height Decentration (IHA).

Lately, the use of anterior-segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) has been progressively used in the clinical diagnosis of keratoconus.  The use of OCT can provide meridional cross-section (B-Scan) images of the cornea, revealing the asymmetric corneal thinning and posterior curvature asymmetry.

The investigation of corneal epithelial thickness distribution, facilitated by the most recent Fourier-domain OCT devices, can be a very sensitive and specific indicator for KCN.

Other ocular clinical diagnostics that can be used as facilitators in the diagnosis of keratoconus include the tear fluid as a biomarker for KCN