The characteristic feature seen in BCCs is islands or nests of basaloid cells, with cells palisading at the periphery in a haphazard arrangement in the centers of the islands. Each of these small pleomorphic cells is composed of a basophilic nucleus without a discernible nucleolus and scanty cytoplasm. Retraction artifact, also referred to as clefting, is usually is seen between the tumor and its surrounding stroma on paraffin-embedded sections. Mucin deposition may be present within the tumor and in the stroma around the tumor. Mitotic figures also may be present. Perineural growth, also known to as perineural invasion, can be an indicator of aggressive disease.

The histologic differential diagnosis may include trichoepithelioma or trichoblastoma. Various morphological subtypes have been defined, including nodular (solid), micronodular, superficial, cystic, infiltrating, infundibulocystic, pigmented, adenoid, sclerosing, metatypical, basosquamous, and fibroepitheliomatous. Mixed patterns of the above-listed types are also common.

- The superficial subtype has multiple, small buds of basaloid cells descending from the epidermis with no dermal invasion.

- The nodular variant accounts for the majority of all cases. Nodular BCCs are composed of islands of cells with peripheral palisading and a haphazard arrangement of the more central cells. Ulceration may be present in larger lesions.

- The micronodular subtype has histologic features similar to those of the nodular subtype, except that it is composed of multiple small nodules. The micronodular type has a much greater risk for local recurrence than the solid type.

- The sclerosing (morphea-like) subtype is composed of spiky, basaloid, thin strands of cells that invade the dermis, surrounded by dense fibrous stroma. The histologic differential diagnosis may include microcystic adnexal carcinoma, desmoplastic trichoepithelioma, or metastatic cancer. When most of the tumor nests have spiky projections, the tumor may invade deeply, referred to as an infiltrative BCC.

- The pigmented BCC results from the presence of melanocytes and melanin admixed with the tumor cells, which is more common in the superficial, micronodular, or follicular variants.

- The infundibulocystic variant is uncommon and often found on the face. This variant is a small, well-circumscribed tumor composed of nests of cells arranged in an anastomosing manner with little stroma. Numerous small infundibular cyst-like structures contain keratinous material and sometimes melanin.

- Basosquamous or metatypical BCC shows features of both BCC and SCC. The exact nature of this lesion is controversial, but most reserve this term for the rare basal cell carcinoma composed of nests and strands of cells maturing into larger and paler cells without peripheral palisading.

- Fibroepithelioma of Pinkus presents as a soft nodular lesion resembling a fibroma or papilloma, commonly on the lower part of the back. It is composed of anastomosing strands and aggregates of basaloid cells surrounded by a fibrous stroma.