Cramps have always existed in human history. The literature does not report the exact moment in which the first cramp phenomenon is described in medicine, distinguishing it from a benign event with respect to a symptomatological event.

For a patient examination, in addition to the medical history, the patient's posture must be observed, both in an upright position and during walking. It is necessary to understand if muscular imbalances are present. The muscles must be palpated to make sure that the tissue is homogeneous on both body sides.

The patient is asked to stimulate the muscle area where cramps usually appear (voluntary contraction) for the practitioner to understand whether repeated mechanical active stress causes the cramp. It should also carry out a passive stretching of the muscle to verify if the cramp appears in the absence of active stress by the patient. A cramp caused by a passive stretch could be related to a symptom and not to a benign event.

Several pathological conditions present with muscle cramps. The following are some of the more common considerations:

**Nocturnal Leg Cramps**

Nocturnal leg cramps (NLCs) affect approximately 37% of the population in America over 60 years of age. The syndrome is also known as sleep-related leg cramps. The most affected muscle area is the calf. Night cramps reduce sleep quality and quality of life in patients. The diagnosis is relatively simple: cramps and nighttime leg pains, which can disappear with stretching of the muscles involved. Despite the diagnostic simplicity during the anamnesis, the exact etiology of such events is unknown. Some causes could be activities where the person stands a lot at work or performs great physical effort during the day. Predisposing factors could include electrolyte disturbances or neurological disorders, hormonal and metabolic disorders, and compressions of nerve roots or compressed arterial vessels. Other predisposing factors could be related to the constant consumption of drugs, such as diuretics, beta-blockers, and statins. From an electrophysiological point of view, muscles with cramps have a lower activation threshold. The fact that NLCs mostly affect people over age 60 may indicate that cramps result from neurological causes. With age a person tends to lose medullary neurons, creating neuromuscular incoordination more in the lower limbs than in the upper limbs. This disorder would appear to be related to the presence of other diseases, such as heart failure, nocturnal apnea, and depressive syndrome.

As a conservative treatment, deep massage or stretching are considered valid options. Drug treatment curr-ently has not given adequate answers.

**Leg Cramps in Pregnant Women**

Muscle cramps in women during pregnancy are very common, about 50%; particularly in the last 3 months and during the night.

The exact cause of this disorder is not completely clarified. It could be an alteration of neuromuscular function, excessive weight gain, peripheral nerve compressions, insufficient blood flow to the muscles, and increased work by the muscles of the lower limbs. It could increase the glomerular filtration and the need for the fetus to receive minerals, compared to the muscular need of the mother's legs, with a reduction of calcium and magnesium.

Pregnancy cramps are not related to fetal growth problems. There seems to be a relationship between night camps and snoring for some pregnant women. This would lead to problems of fetal growth (delays) and early births.

Currently, there is no adequate treatment to reduce the incidence of cramps.

**Exercise-Associated Muscle Cramp**

Exercise-Associated Muscle Cramp (EAMC) is an event that frequently occurs during or after physical activity. Currently, two hypotheses exist.

The first is related to the concept of dehydration and electrolyte imbalance, while the second, most recent theory is linked to a transient peripheral neurological disorder. The major findings indicate peripheral fatigue of neurological origin as a cause for the appearance of cramps. Continuous muscle contractions increase the afferents from the neuromuscular spindles, with a parallel inhibitory effect on Golgi tendon organs. Stretching reduces the efferences of the second motoneuron to the muscle with the cramp, improving at the same time the afferents of the Golgi. The first theory of electrolyte alteration and cramping is not reflected in human model research.

Stretching before physical activity does not prevent the appearance of a probable cramp.

**Writer Cramp**

Writer cramp (WC) is specific dystonia of the hand used for writing; it is found in particular between 30 and 50 years of age. Recent studies demonstrate different abnormalities of the central neural network, both as activity and as altered volume involving some areas of the cortex, the cerebellum, and the basal ganglia. The differences in the results probably depend on the individuality of the subject and the tools used for the research.

**Cramp-Fasciculation Syndrome**

Cramp-fasciculation syndrome (CFS) is a peripheral syndrome linked to hyperexcitability of the peripheral nervous system. This situation leads to the presence of unwanted muscle cramps and/or fasciculations. In some subjects, other symptoms may appear, such as numbness and burning sensation, which are typical of a neuropathy. Antibodies often are found in these patients to the detriment of potassium channels, with a prevalence of male sex. We do not have adequate explanations or treatment for this condition.

**End-Stage Renal Disease**

People with chronic renal failure undergoing dialysis often suffer from muscle cramps, up to 50%, especially involving the lower limbs. The advent of cramps can happen during dialysis or at home. The cramps in this type of patient are linked to depression, a decline in quality of life, and sleep disorders. The etiology of cramps in hemodialysis patients is not clear.

One possible cause is the presence of polyneuropathy, typical in these situations, with morphological and functional alterations of the peripheral nerve fibers. Renal transplantation greatly reduces the presence of cramps.

**Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis**

About 95% of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) report cramps. The frequency and intensity of the cramps are not related to the severity of the disease. The causes of these cramps are not well known but probably derived from neuronal hyperexcitability. The drugs that reduce cramps in these patients are mexiletine and quinine sulfate with the latter having serious contraindications.

**Cirrhosis**

Muscle cramps in this patient population are a usual and high event (88%). With an electromyogram, the activation of involuntary potential action of the motor units was rather high, over 150 Hz. The behavior of the peripheral nervous system is not connected to nerve degeneration. The cause that supports the presence of cramps remains inconclusive. The presence of cramps varies depending on the muscle area: cervical (9%), thigh (43%), calf (70%), toe (50%), abdominal muscles (12%), and fingers (74% ). More areas of the body can be affected. No direct relationship is established between age or specific causes that lead to cirrhosis (alcohol, infection, etc.). No connectable cause or specific treatments are known to avoid the onset of cramps in patients with cirrhosis.

**Anti-Myelin-Associated Glycoprotein Antibody (Anti-MAG) Neuropathy**

About 60% of patients have the phenomenon of cramps, particularly affecting the lower limbs and upper limbs (only 20%). Most events happen at night or during exercise. There is not a valid explanation as in this pathology due to the presence of cramps, and there is no therapeutic strategy to limit the phenomenon.

**Diabetes**

In people with diabetes, the onset of cramps is connected with the presence of neuropathy, with hyperexcitability of the peripheral nerve. Type 1 diabetes has a lower percentage of cramps (around 60%) compared to type 2 diabetes (about 80%). In type 2 diabetes, nephropathy is another factor for cramps. Another probable cause of cramps is related to the alteration of peripheral vascularization, creating episodes of ischemia and cramps.

**Fibromyalgia**

According to the National Data Bank for Rheumatic Diseases, the onset of cramps is among the ten co-morbidities affecting patients. One of the most likely causes is the hyperexcitation of the peripheral nervous system. According to recent research, the presence of cramps and peripheral neurological alteration has a direct relationship with the severity of the disease and an inverse relationship with the quality of life.