**Band shaped keratopathy:**BSK is a degenerative process that usually develops in chronically inflamed eyes. BSK per se causes visual impairment and cosmetic blemish.

**Pseudophakic and aphakic bullous keratopathy:**These are the end results of corneal decompensation. Endothelial keratoplasty is an option to treat the condition. However, if it persists for longer, it induces anterior stromal scarring and pannus development over the cornea.

**Striate keratopathy:**Usually, striate keratopathy clears up completely over 3 to 4 weeks with topical steroid.

**Whorl keratopathy:**It is not visually significant. It vanishes once the medication causing it is stopped.

**Exposure keratopathy:**If left untreated, the epithelial defect progresses and later corneal stromal melting ensues. In long-standing cases, corneal perforation develops. Secondary bacterial infection is very common.

**Infectious crystalline keratopathy:**ICK is resistant to medical therapy and often needs therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty as a rescue.

**Metabolic keratopathy:**In the absence of treatment, the MPS may result in complete opacification of the cornea. The systemic features and manifestations may be severe enough in some MPS to cause death. Similarly, the KF ring in Wilson's disease does not cause any visual obscuration; however, the systemic manifestations of Wilson's disease may be fatal.

**Filamentary keratopathy:**Usually gets controlled with the above-discussed management strategies. For recurrent cases, the systemic cause needs to be thoroughly looked for and controlled.

**Climatic droplet keratopathy:**This progresses with continued exposure to sunlight.

**Superficial punctate keratopathy:**This often resolves once the offending agents (like contact lenses, giant papillae) are taken care of.

**Keratopathy related to SJS/TEN:**The end-stage is a severe dry with limbal stem cell deficiency with a completely dermalized ocular surface.