# Definition/Introduction

Management skills in the healthcare setting are composed of sets of competencies essential for healthcare professionals who effectively and efficiently manage a variety of medical, nursing, or public health resources to attain goals that ideally align with improving the overall health of the population and healthcare system.

In this activity, healthcare professionals who manage at any level of the health systems serve as healthcare managers, encompassing a wide range of specialties, including physicians (clinicians, surgeons, public health physicians, and other specialists), nurses, laboratory professionals, public health managers, dentists, among other healthcare professions.

As expressed in references both for theoretical and practical guidance documents, management skills are often separated from leadership skills as these two sets of skills were known to be generally different.

# Issues of Concern

In recent years, some issues on management (and leadership) skills, particularly in the healthcare setting, begin to arise. The emergence of these issues highlights the need for improvement of healthcare management:

**Association between management skills and the efficiency of hospitals -**The study looked at nurses and obstetrician’s managers.

**Education and training needs for healthcare management as basic preconditions for the development and implementation of adequate programs -**Researchers performed a needs assessment in this research, which served as a basis for developing solutions in meeting the gap between healthcare managers and the competencies that they need.

**Training of practicing managers beyond clinical skills -**For middle managers, additional skills for managing subordinates and coordinating with top-level managers is necessary, which includes capabilities such as communication skills (not with patients but with colleagues and other stakeholders), self-awareness, change management, conflict resolution, and other leadership skills.

**Collaborative interprofessional practice -**Due to the reforms in transformational education and significant changes in health systems, there is a need to develop interprofessional education to cultivate the value of teamwork despite differences across health professions.

**The leadership of self as key to leading others -**This paper discusses the course for public health leadership where participants are expected to develop their plans for nurturing their leadership skills.

**Healthcare management as a profession -**This is a field of health service delivery where formal and informal learning opportunities become available across countries. There have been academic degrees which make it a distinct profession.

# Clinical Significance

The practice of management skills applied in the healthcare setting indirectly affects the patients. When healthcare managers manage the teams of the organization well, positive work culture (and work climate) become reinforced. In turn, the motivated staff at all levels of the organization increase their work performance as reflected through the optimal clinical (or health) services they provide to their patients. Therefore, the belief is that well-managed staff can lead to well-managed patients. Hence, sound management (and leadership) skills can impact positively on patients’ health outcomes.

The evolving healthcare system has been indicating that there is an increasing requirement for cultivated interprofessional relationships spanning across all health professions and subspecialties.  Physician-Hospital alignment strategies have been receiving increasing levels of attention in the literature given the already identified critical nature of optimizing these relationships.