# Definition/Introduction

Conventional X-ray production involves the excitation of tungsten metal to release photons.

Alternatively, photons can be completely absorbed into the tissue.

X-ray image production procedures focus on optimizing settings to produce the appropriate contrast among the anatomy of interest while limiting noise and artifacts that may detract from the evaluation of the image.

# Issues of Concern

**X-ray Production**

**kVp**

The kilovoltage peak (kVp) is the difference in potential applied to the X-ray tube.

In contrast, this decrease is primarily due to an increased proportion of Compton scatter at higher kVp.

**mAs**

Milliamperes (mA) is a unit representing the amount of current passed through the X-ray tube. Current determines the number of photons produced by the X-ray tube, also known as X-ray quantity.

**Factors that Influence Image Quality**

**Contrast**

Effectively determining anatomy and suspected pathologies rely on identifying and separating different tissue types and boundaries. In X-ray imaging, contrast describes the number of relative photons that can pass through a tissue comparative to another. This is determined by the amount of tube voltage (kVp) and filtration used. Conversely, increasing the mA does not improve or worsen contrast and contributes to the amount of noise in the image.

**Distortion**

Beam profiles and paths of the photons also influence the quality and characteristics of an image. X-ray divergence patterns can be described by photons directed linearly towards the center, whereas those on the periphery tend to splay out more radially.

**Mottle**

Also known as quantum noise, mottle is noise due to random distribution and an uneven number of photons reaching the image detector.

**Spatial Resolution**

Another factor considered in image quality is the spatial resolution, which is determined by measuring the smallest distinguishable space between two distinct lines or landmarks. The smaller the distance between line pairs relates to discerning boundaries and colloquially defined sharper or better resolution images. One of the changeable features that may influence spatial resolution is anode angle. Anode angle is the relationship between the slant of the tungsten anode and the incident cathode ray. The degree of the anode angle significantly contributes to the size of the focal spot generated. Lower amounts of anode angle relate to a smaller focus and image with better spatial resolution.

**Beam Filtration**

Beam filtration refers to the use of X-ray absorbing material (e.g., copper, aluminum, titanium) placed between the X-ray beam and patient to increase the average photon energy by absorbing lower energy photons.

**Grid**

Scatter reduction is primarily addressed with the use of grids. A grid is placed between the patient and the receptor and is composed of X-ray absorbing material (e.g., lead) interspaced with low attenuating material (e.g., carbon fiber).

**Anode Heel Effect**

The anode heel effect describes the phenomenon of the gradient of X-ray emission relative to the angle of X-ray toward the cathode. The number of X-rays emitted is inversely proportional to the angle of emission relative to the cathode.

# Clinical Significance

X-ray image production procedures utilize a balance of image optimization, contrast, distortion, noise, and patient dose. However, these are only a few of many factors technicians and radiologists must consider optimizing when scanning patients and selecting appropriate protocols. Often these settings offer improvement of one imaging parameter at the cost of another. For example, devices (e.g., filters, grids) enhance image contrast at the cost of increased patient dose. Understanding these parameters is central to the understanding and use of X-ray imaging in diagnostic medicine. These understandings demonstrate further utility with interventionalists in radiology, surgery, and pain medicine who use X-ray imaging in real-time to guide therapeutic interventions.