BMI can indicate the relative amount of body fat on an individual's frame but does not directly calculate body fat percentage. BMI tends to overestimate body fat in those with a lean body mass (e.g., athletes or bodybuilders) and underestimates excess body fat in those with an increased body mass.

Individuals with abdominal (visceral) obesity are at a greater risk of acquiring multiple pathological conditions and have a higher morbidity and mortality rate.

It is also essential to understand that BMI has limited use in evaluating bodyweight health in people of short stature and does not account for differences in body types between men and women. One study of 13,601 subjects found that BMI-defined obesity (BMI greater than or equal to 30 kg/m^2) was present in 31% of women and 21% of men, while body fat-defined obesity was found in 62% of women and 50% of men. This study showed that BMI-defined obesity is highly specific (99% for women and 95% for men) but shows poor sensitivity (49% for women and 36% for men). Simply put, this study demonstrated that BMI is beneficial when determining a patient to be obese but can give false data when determining a patient not to be obese.

In the elderly population, being overweight is not associated with increased mortality risk. Instead, there is an increased mortality risk for those elderly individuals with a BMI at the low end of the recommended BMI range (BMI < 23.0 kg/m^2). That being said, it is important to immediately address any unexplained weight loss within this population to identify potentially modifiable causes.

As weight fluctuates within the critically ill population (typically decreased weight), it is not useful to utilize the BMI of these patients to guide treatment options or future outcomes.

Several studies have shown that Asian populations exhibit a higher overall body fat and increased cardiovascular risk factors at lower BMI values than white populations.