The arteries and veins of the orbit show a great degree of interindividual variation.

The principal artery of the orbit is the ophthalmic artery (OA). It is the first intracranial branch of the ICA after it leaves the cavernous sinus. The OA enters the orbit through the optic canal, inferolateral to the optic nerve (ON). It runs inferior to the ON, gives rise to the central retinal artery (CRA), and then crosses to the superomedial aspect of the ON. The medial and lateral long posterior ciliary arteries (LPCA) and multiple short posterior ciliary arteries (SPCA) supply the outer coats of the globe. The OA passes between the medial rectus and the superior oblique muscles, gives multiple muscular branches, supraorbital artery, anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries, and terminates near the superomedial orbital margin to form the supratrochlear and the dorsal nasal arteries. The ECA contributes the infraorbital artery and an orbital branch from the middle meningeal artery to the orbit.

The orbital venous system comprises two main veins, the superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) and the inferior ophthalmic vein (IOV), and multiple variable veins. The SOV drains into the cavernous sinus passing through the superior orbital fissure. The IOV can be a tributary of the SOV or drain directly into the cavernous sinus.

The orbital blood flow (OBF) is autoregulated by the activity of the autonomic nervous system and some chemical mediators, as enlisted below.

- **Endothelin-1**: It is a potent vasoconstrictor affecting choroidal blood flow and is primarily a risk factor for glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy.

- **Nitric oxide (NO)**: It is a vasodilator molecule regulating the intraocular pressure (IOP) and OBF during orbital inflammation.

- **Adenosine**: It is a potent molecule modulating the IOP and causes retinal vasodilation.

- Other molecules like estrogen and carbonic anhydrase enzyme have a debatable role in autoregulation.

Exercise and sympathetic stimulation cause arteriolar vasoconstriction and decrease the OBF.