Intussusception is a condition in which part of the intestine folds into the section next to it. Intussusception usually involves the small bowel and rarely the large bowel. Symptoms include abdominal pain, which may wax and wane, vomiting, bloating, and bloody stool. It may result in small bowel obstruction. Other complications may include peritonitis or bowel perforation.

The cause is typically unknown in children, while in adults, a lead point due to cancer is often present. Risk factors in children include infections, cystic fibrosis, and intestinal polyps. Risk factors in adults include endometriosis, bowel adhesions, and intestinal tumors. Medical imaging often supports a diagnosis. In children, ultrasound is a preferred method to diagnose, while in adults, a CT scan is preferred.

Intussusception requires rapid treatment. Treatment in children is typically by an enema with surgery if not successful. In adults, removal of part of the bowel is more often required. Intussusception occurs more commonly in children than adults.

Intussusception occurs more commonly in children than adults; in children, it is more common in males than females. The usual age of occurrence is six to 18 months old.

The rate of intussusception significantly increases over the viral gastroenteritis seasons in some populations. Due to a statically significant increase of intussusception following some forms of rotavirus vaccine, (RRV-TV: Rotashield) form was removed from the market. History of upper respiratory tract infection, otitis media, and flu-like symptoms are present in one-third of the patients before the onset of intussusception. The adenoviral infection has been associated with an increased risk of intussusception. Moreover, in up to two out of five patients with intussusception, positive history of a recent viral enteric or non-enteric infection is present. In a solid population-based study, species C of the adenovirus was established as the strongest predictor of intussusception. However, in the same population, rotavirus infection and poliovirus vaccine were not associated with intussusception. Another study recognized an association with the human herpesvirus 6.

A sub-type of intussusception, called pyloroduodenojejunal intussusception is one of the extremely rare variants of intussusception. Moreover, it is extremely rare in the pediatric population and is predicted in up to 10% of adult patients with intussusception. The underlying causality of pyloroduodenojejunal intussusception, includes pedunculated polyps, Menetrier disease, hamartomas, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Bacterial infections, especially bacterial enteritis, are also associated with intussusception. This association was documented for infection with Salmonella, Escherichia coli, Shigella, or Campylobacter. The intussusception is more common within the first month following the infection.

Intussusception is not usually immediately life-threatening. It is usually successfully treated with barium, water-soluble, or an air-contrast enema, which both confirms the diagnosis and successfully reduces it. The success rate is more than 80%. However, up to 10% may reoccur within 24 hours.