Fasting is not a requirement to evaluate serum calcium levels. Calcium is included in the comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), facilitating routine evaluation. Fist-clenching or forearm exercise can lead to falsely elevated ionized (free) calcium levels. The sample should be drawn with the patient in a sitting position. Standing increases the total calcium concentration.

A venous blood sample is required to evaluate serum levels. For children, a lancet needle can be used on a finger, and the sample can be collected in a pipette, slide, or test strip. Whole blood specimens should be analyzed within 15 to 30 minutes of collection. If this is not possible, the specimen should be kept on ice. On the ice, the specimen is stable for at least 2 hours; however, if concurrent potassium testing is requested on the same specimen, the low temperature leads to a spurious increase in potassium within 1 hour of collection.

Samples can be stored at room temperature for 8 hours or refrigerated at 2 to 8 C for up to 48 hours. If assays are not completed within 48 hours or the separated sample is to be stored beyond 48 hours, samples should be frozen at -15 C to -20 C. Frozen samples should be thawed only once. Analyte deterioration may occur in samples that are repeatedly frozen and thawed.

Urine calcium can be kept dissolved by adding 10 mL of 6 M HCl to the collection container before a 24-hour specimen is collected. Urine should be well-mixed during the collection period. A 24-hour urine sample, timed collection, or random urine sample can be useful to diagnose metabolic abnormalities and a patient’s disposition to form stones.

**FeCa**=**(Urine Calcium**x**S****erum creatinine)****/****(Serum calcium**×**U****rine creatinine)**