Due to the significant morbidity and mortality with which myocardial infarction is associated, prevention and treatment require an interprofessional team. Prevention of cardiac disease in the outpatient setting is of critical importance. This process involves the patient's primary care provider and other outpatient staff, including nurses, pharmacists, and dieticians. In the event of acute myocardial infarction, the first line is often EMS, who are responsible for transporting the patient to the ED, administering medications like aspirin and nitroglycerin, and obtaining an initial EKG. If EKG causes immediate concerns for STEMI, posterior, or otherwise, the cath lab should be activated from the field. EMS may also be responsible for resuscitating patients in cardiac arrest, which may be secondary to STEMI. In the emergency department, physicians, advanced practice nurses, physician assistants, nursing staff, and technicians play a critical role in establishing the diagnosis of ACS, initiating resuscitation, and activating further resources. An initial EKG should take place within 10 minutes, and patients should undergo appropriate reperfusion therapy as soon as possible. Cardiologists play a critical role in reperfusion therapy and ongoing stabilization and monitoring of patients who have had a myocardial infarction. Depending on the degree of disease and other common comorbidities or complications, a cardiothoracic surgeon may further play a role in surgical management via coronary artery bypass grafting or valve replacements. For these processes, cardiology-specialized nursing can assist with the procedures and provide post-operative care, informing the cardiologist immediately of any concerns in the patient's condition. Patients initially require intensive care, requiring all levels of staff to monitor for life-threatening complications and provide appropriate care. After initial resuscitation, patients may require assistance from dieticians, pharmacy, social workers or case managers, physical therapy, and occupation therapy to transition out of the hospital appropriately. Pharmacists will vet all medications on arrival to the ER, and as well, in the post-operative and rehabilitative setting, verifying dosing, duration, and checking for interactions, and informing the team of any issues. Patients benefit from ongoing cardiac rehabilitation and addressing modifiable risk factors. Education regarding the importance of maintaining healthy body weight, cholesterol, and blood glucose, as well as the cessation of tobacco use and adherence to their prescribed medications, can lead to better outcomes.