Treatment options for renal failure vary widely and depend on the cause of failure. Broadly options are divided into two groups: treating the cause of renal failure in acute states versus replacing the renal function in acute or chronic situations and chronic conditions. Below is the summary of renal failure treatment.

**Acute Renal Failure**

- Mainstay is treating the underlying cause and associated complications

- In case of oliguria and no volume, overload is noted, a fluid challenge may be appropriate with diligent monitoring for volume overload

- In the case of hyperkalemia with ECG changes, IV calcium, sodium bicarbonate, and glucose with insulin should be given. These measures drive potassium into cells and can be supplemented with polystyrene sulfonate, which removes potassium from the body. Hemodialysis is also an emergency method of removal.

- Oliguric patients should have a fluid restriction of 400 mL + the previous day's urine output (unless there are signs of volume depletion or overload).

- If acidosis: Serum bicarbonate intravenous or per oral, versus emergency/urgent dialysis based on the clinical situation

- If obstructive etiology present treat accordingly and or if bladder outlet obstruction secondary to prostatic hypertrophy may benefit from Flomax or other selective alpha-blockers

**General Measures
**

- First things first, always review the drug list.

- Stop nephrotoxic drugs and renally adjust others. Many supplements not approved by the FDA can be nephrotoxic.

- Always record ins and outs

- Monitor daily weights

- Watch for complications, including hyperkalemia, pulmonary edema, and acidosis-all potential reasons to start dialysis

- Ensure good cardiac output and subsequent renal blood flow.

- Pay attention to diet: total caloric intake should be 35 to 50 kcal/kg per day to avoid catabolism. Potassium intake restricted to 40 mEq per day; phosphorus restricted to 800 mg per day. If it becomes high, treat with calcium carbonate or other phosphate binder. Magnesium compounds should be avoided.

- Treat infections aggressively.

**Immediate Dialysis Indications
**

- Severe hyperkalemia

- Acidosis

- Volume overload refractory to conservative therapy

- Uremic pericarditis

- Encephalopathy

- Alcohol and drug intoxications

**Chronic Renal Failure**

- Optimize control of specific causes of CKD such as diabetes mellitus and hypertension

- Measure sequentially and plot the rate of decline in GFR in all patients

- Any acceleration in the rate of decline should prompt a search for superimposed acute or subacute process that may be reversible

- Rule out extracellular fluid volume depletion, uncontrolled hypertension, urinary tract infection, new obstructive uropathy, exposure to nephrotoxic agents (such as NSAIDs or contrast dye), reactivation or flare of the original disease such as lupus or vasculitis

- Interventions to slow the progression of CKD

- Reduce intra-glomerular filtration

- Reduce proteinuria; effective meds include ACE/ARB

- Strict glycemic control

- Prevent and treat complications of CKD

- Discuss renal replacement therapy with patients appropriately and timely

- Periodically review medications and avoid nephrotoxic medicines. Dose renally excreted medications appropriately.

- Patients with CKD should be referred to a nephrologist when eGFR is less than 30 ml per minute, as this provides enough time for adequate preparation for kidney replacement therapy.