The treatment of CN is often multimodal, starting with conservative measures such as physical therapy and progressing to pharmacotherapy and minimally invasive procedures. If symptoms are refractory, surgical decompression can also be performed.

Similar to other compressive neuropathies, anticonvulsant neuropathic pain agents such as gabapentin and pregabalin are often used to try and achieve analgesia. Additionally, other classes of medications, including serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), may also be used.

Given the focal nature of CN, targeted interventional procedures are increasing in popularity as an integral part of the treatment paradigm. There are several different approaches to these procedures, as outlined below.

- Nerve blocks can serve as both diagnostic and therapeutic. The technique is often provider-specific and usually consists of a local anesthetic with or without the addition of corticosteroids. As with other peripheral nerve blocks, the therapeutic benefit can vary greatly. Often, the patient will experience the analgesic effects of the local anesthetic for at least its duration of action, and with the addition of corticosteroids, the pain relief can last for months. The SCN can be targeted via palpation guidance using anatomical landmarks, ultrasound guidance, or under fluoroscopy. Nielsen et al. recently described a novel SCN block technique under ultrasound guidance that resulted in successful anesthesia in 90% of blocks.

- Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) can be performed after successful nerve blocks for potentially longer-lasting symptom relief. Ablation of CN via conventional thermal radiofrequency and pulsed radiofrequency resulting in significant analgesia have been described in multiple case reports.

- Neuromodulation using peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS) has gained popularity for targeted therapy in a variety of pain conditions of peripheral nerve origin.

- Surgical decompression is last in the line of treatment options and only appropriate when all other modalities have been exhausted. As our anatomical understanding of the cluneal nerves has evolved and treatment options such as RFA and PNS have progressed, the need for surgical intervention has been sparse. Results from surgical decompression have also been shown to be inconsistent, with one report demonstrating excellent pain relief in only 13 out of 19 cases.

- The ICN, if involved, can be addressed by many of the modalities above; additionally, nerve blockade injections of the ICN with >50% relief in pain while sitting compared to previous pain with sitting before the injection is considered a strong indication of ICN nerve involvement and the likelihood of success with further therapies directed at the ICN by the Nantes criteria.