Chronic axial LBP remains a global healthcare problem affecting 30 million people in the United States and costing the healthcare system 90 billion dollars yearly.

The sinuvertebral nerve arises from the ventral ramus of the spinal nerves bilaterally and takes a recurrent course to enter the spinal canal traveling towards the posterior aspect of the vertebra and entering the vertebral body through the basivertebral foramen. This foramen is located midline in the posterior vertebral body and is the entry point for the neurovascular bundle consistent with the BVN and the basivertebral vascular plexus. Although there is anatomical variability within its course, the nerve travels anteriorly into the vertebral body about 30% to 50%, where it forms a trunk cluster of fibers that migrate cranially and caudally towards the vertebral endplates responsible for supplying nociceptive input from damaged vertebral endplates. This branching point is the anatomical site (Figure 1) targeted for the ablative procedure.

Vertebral endplates are the superior and inferior edge of the vertebral body, and these structures are highly susceptible to injury, post-traumatic degeneration, fissuring, intraosseous edema, and inflammation, which are visible phenotypic markers of vertebral pain noted on magnetic resonance images (MRI) classified as vertebral endplate Modic changes.

There are three types of Modic changes (MCs), type 1, type 2, and type 3 and these differ based on MRI findings (Figure 2). Type 1 MCs represent vertebral endplate disruption, fissuring, degeneration, active inflammatory vertebral endplate changes and manifest as hypodense or decreased signal intensity of fibrovascular intraosseous bone marrow edema on T1-weighted MRI sequence and as hyperintense or increase signal intensity on T2-weighted MRI sequence. Type 2 MCs represent fatty bone marrow infiltration/replacement of subacute or chronic nature and show an increased signal intensity in both T1 and T2 MRI sequence images. Type 3 MCs are described as decreased intensity in both T1 and T2 MRI sequences.

Although MCs are a radiological finding on MRI, the association of these findings in addition to a history and exam compatible with axial LBP symptoms has been reported by numerous clinical and basic science studies suggesting a positive association for a specific vertebral etiology (vetebrogenic pain). Nociceptive input from these damaged vertebral endplates carried by the BVN is directly related to inflammatory cytokines, substance P, and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), histologically confirmed with protein gene product (PGP) 9.5 positive staining under microscopy supporting this hypothesis. In particular, type 1 MCs have been reported to have a stronger direct association with more debilitating, severe LBP of longer duration, greater frequency, and worse functional impairments than those subjects with chronic axial LBP but without MCs, hence the great need to focus on a treatment intervention directly targeting this pain generator, such as ablation of the BVN.