**Cellulitis and Erysipelas**

Since cellulitis and Erysipelas is not a reportable disorder, the exact prevalence is not clear; however, it is a common infection, involving all different racial and ethnic groups.

**Rosacea**

Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory facial disorder with a worldwide prevalence of 5.46%.

**Lupus or SLE**

The Lupus Foundation of America has the estimation of the prevalence of at least 1.5 million cases. In a study of worldwide prevalence and incidence of SLE, the highest prevalence and incidence of SLE were in North America (241/100 000 and 23.2/100 000 person-years, respectively). Lower incidence of SLE was detected in Ukraine and Africa (0.3/100 000 person-years), and the lowest prevalence was reported in Northern Australia (0 cases in 847 people). Women were more commonly affected than men in every age and ethnic group. People of African ethnicity had the greatest prevalence and incidence of SLE, whereas those of the White race had the lowest prevalence and incidence. The annual incidence of SLE from the 1970s to 2000s has been estimated from approximately 1 to 10 per 100,000 population, while the SLE prevalence has been ranged from 5.8 to 130 per 100,000 population.

**Pellagra**

In the United States, the incidence of pellagra is not clear. Pellagra epidemics no longer occur. Sporadic cases of pellagra may be seen in patients with malabsorption disorders, patients with alcoholism, individuals dependent on illegal drugs and food faddists.

**Dermatomyositis**

The incidence of dermatomyositis is estimated as 9.63 cases per million of the population. Dermatomyositis has a bimodal age distribution; one peak at 5 to 15 years and the other one at 45 to 60 years.