There are multiple types of kidney stones; however, 80% of stones are composed of calcium oxalate or phosphate. Other stone types include uric acid (9%), struvite (10%), and cystine (1%) stones and are significantly less common than stones composed of calcium oxalate or phosphate (80%).

Common risk factors for stone formation include poor oral fluid intake, high animal-derived protein intake, high oxalate intake (found in foods such as beans, beer, berries, coffee, chocolate, some nuts, some teas, soda, spinach, potatoes), and high salt intake.

A prior personal and family history of kidney stones will increase the patient’s risk of developing subsequent stones substantially. Procedures such as Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy have shown a three-fold increase in calcium oxalate stone formation secondary to the malabsorptive post-surgical state, resulting in increased urinary oxalate levels, decreased production of urine, and decreased urine citrate.

The presence of medical conditions such as chronic kidney disease, hypertension, gout, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, obesity, endocrine, and malignancies increase the risk of the development of kidney stones. Obesity, hyperlipidemia, and type 2 diabetes mellitus have a strong association with calcium oxalate and uric acid stones. Patients with histories of hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes mellitus often have diets that are high in animal-derived proteins, salt, and sugar, placing them at higher risk for stone formation. Insulin resistance in obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus promotes metabolic changes that increase the risk of stone formation secondary to increased urinary calcium and uric acid excretion. A recent study evaluating 4500 patients with a history of kidney stones and insulin resistance showed increased urinary pH and decreased urinary acid excretion, promoting nephrolithiasis/urolithiasis. A prospective, large study followed participants over the years and assessed initial weight, weight gain, dietary exposure, BMI, and waist circumference and strongly showed that while increased BMI does raise the risk of symptomatic stone formation, increased weight due to adiposity in adulthood plays a very key role.

Drug-induced urolithiasis is rare, and only compromises 2% of stones. Common drugs include protease inhibitors used for the treatment of HIV (atazanavir and indinavir) and sulfadiazine. Protease inhibitor stones are poorly visualized on unenhanced CT scans and are gelatinous in material, making them often unsusceptible to lithotripsy. They typically cause a high-grade urinary obstruction requiring ureteral stenting.

Struvite stones, also known as infection stones, are less common and can form slowly and before becoming symptomatic. This type of stone can form into a staghorn or large calculus that overwhelms the renal collecting system. They are composed of magnesium ammonium phosphate and form secondary to elevated urine pH, and this is largely caused by the presence of Proteus or Klebsiella species, which are urease formers. Urea breakdown yields ammonia as a by-product, which increases the urinary pH (typically to more than 8), and facilitates struvite stone formation.

Uric acid stone formation is related to low urinary uric acid levels, low urine pH, and low urinary volume. Most commonly, these patients will present as idiopathic uric acid stone formers; however, metabolic disorders such as diabetes and obesity will also increase the risk of uric acid stones. Low urinary pH will promote uric acid crystal formation and deposition, typically under a pH of 5.5. Diets rich in animal proteins will increase uric acid load and precipitation. Gout, certain neoplastic disorders, and chronic diarrhea are also associated with uric acid stone formation.

Cystine stones are rare and occur due to an inborn congenital disorder causing mutations in 2 genes, SLC3A1 and SLC7A9. These mutations cause defective cystine metabolism and transport, resulting in cystinuria and stones. They typically present in childhood or adolescence, but some cases have even been shown in infants. Of note, cystine stones can also form staghorn calculi.