The medical management of acute non-complicated diverticulitis includes oral or intravenous antibiotics, pain control, hydration, and restricted oral intake. Medical management of diverticulitis with antibiotics remains the standard of care. However, antibiotic choice, duration of treatment, and route of administration remain controversial.

Patients who are febrile, immunosuppressed, unable to stay hydrated, or those with multiple medical comorbidities require admission to the hospital for treatment with parenteral antibiotics. As symptoms improve, the diet is advanced, and patients are started on oral antibiotics. Any patient failing to improve on parenteral antibiotics or deteriorates during therapy should undergo repeat evaluation with CT imaging to rule out evolving complications.

After acute episode resolution of diverticulitis, a colonoscopy is recommended 6 to 8 weeks later, particularly if the patient has not had a colonoscopy in the past 2 to 3 years.

Historically, elective sigmoid colectomy used to be performed after the second bout of uncomplicated diverticulitis. However, more recent evidence has disproved the benefit of this approach. Firstly, the recurrence rate of uncomplicated diverticulitis is lower than previously estimated, ranging from 13 to 23%. Secondly, the incidence of complicated recurrent episodes that may require a stoma is also low, at approximately 6%. Therefore, current recommendations emphasize that selection criteria for elective surgery should be individualized according to the number, severity, and frequency of diverticulitis episodes, persistent symptomatology after an episode of diverticulitis, and the immunologic status of the patient. These criteria merit consideration in terms of the patient’s age, comorbidities, and social history. Finally, routine sigmoid colectomy in patients younger than 50 is no longer the recommended therapeutic path.

Regardless of the indication and technique used (open, laparoscopic, or robotic) when performing an elective sigmoid colectomy for diverticulitis, it requires removing the entire sigmoid colon, the proximal and distal anastomotic sites must appear healthy and well-perfused, and the anastomosis performed without tension.

Approximately 1% of patients with an acute episode of diverticulitis will require surgical intervention during that episode.

A second option for patients with Hinchey 3 and 4 diseases is a primary colorectal anastomosis with a proximal diverting ileostomy. Initial retrospective evaluation of this surgical modality shows a decreased overall mortality after performing a primary anastomosis. However, randomized controlled studies comparing a Hartmann procedure to the primary anastomosis with proximal diversion are not yet available.

Acute colonic diverticulitis should be managed in a stepwise manner as follows:

- If the patient meets any of the following criteria, they should be admitted for inpatient management.
- Presence of evidence suggestive of complicated diverticulitis, including:

- Frank perforation
- Abscess formation in a symptomatic patient
- Bowel obstruction
- Complicated colonic diverticula with a fistula formation


- Evidence of sepsis or systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) suggestive by equal or more than two of the following indexes;

- Temperature of greater than 38 C or less than 36
- Heart rate of greater than 90 beats per minute
- Respiratory rate of greater than 20 breaths per minute
- WBC of greater than 12,000 cells/mm^3 or less than 4,000 cells/mm^3
- C-reactive protein (CRP) level of greater than 15 mg/dl


- Physical examination suggestive of diffuse, non-localized peritonitis 
- Evidence of micro-perforations in the imaging measures, including the presence of few extramural colonic micro-bubbles
- Advanced age; older than 70
- Remarkable comorbidities, including but not limited to:

- Diabetes mellitus with end-organ damage (e.g., presence of retinopathy, microangiopathy, and nephropathy)
- Recent cardiovascular event, including acute myocardial infarction 


- Immunocompromised status
- Oral intake intolerance

Inpatient management should be initiated with intravenous antibiotics, hydration, pain control with intravenous medications, and complete bowel rest. However, dietary limitations to a liquid diet have also been investigated in some centers.

In patients with signs and symptoms of acute colonic diverticulitis who do not meet the criteria to be admitted for inpatient management, outpatient treatment with pain control and a liquid diet should e triggered. However, the response to the conservative outpatient treatment should be re-evaluated within the first 72 hours. Those without improvement evidence should be admitted for inpatient management. On the contrary, the responders to conservative management should be approached with diet advancement and clinical reassessment weekly. If all the symptoms are resolved within six weeks after the index episode, performing an elective colonoscopy should be scheduled.

It should be noted that even in patients with normal colonoscopy, surgical referral for further evaluation should be considered in the following circumstances; 1. immunocompromised patients, and 2. complicated episode of diverticulitis.

- If the patient does not meet any of the mentioned criteria, outpatient treatment with pain control and a liquid diet should be initiated. Still, clinical improvement should be evaluated in two or three days.

- In the absence of clinical improvement within three days, inpatient management should be initiated with intravenous antibiotics, hydration, pain control with intravenous medications, and complete bowel rest. However, dietary limitations to a liquid diet have also been investigated in some centers.

- During inpatient management, frank perforation, obstruction, or fistula formation should be evaluated. In the presence of any of these complications, surgical referral should be considered.

- In the absence of the mentioned complications, the next step is to evaluate the presence of a drainable abscess equal to or greater than 4 cm in size, which should be drained percutaneously.

- If the abscess is less than 4 cm, the clinical improvement within the first three days should be examined.