The overall prognosis of children with infantile spasms is poor. Up to 50% have long-term developmental and neurologic deficits. Many continue to have seizures, although the spasms may evolve into other types of seizures as the patient ages. These seizure types are also often hard to control with standard treatments. Patients with no specific underlying etiology (cryptogenic) tend to have better neurologic and developmental outcomes than patients with other significant underlying etiologies. Observational studies suggest that initiating therapy soon after infantile spasms start confers a better possibility of a good neurologic and developmental outcome.

Close follow-up of a patient with spells concerning for infantile spasms is important. Occasionally, if a patient is evaluated by EEG for spasms early in the clinical course, hypsarrhythmia may not have developed. A repeat EEG a few weeks later may reveal the classic hypsarrhythmia finding. When there is clinical suspicion for infantile spasms, a patient needs close follow-up.

Variants of the classic infantile spasm presentation do exist as well. As above, the classic hips arrhythmia finding may not be present on EEG at the time of initial evaluation. Additionally, this finding may be intermittent. This is more likely to occur early in the clinical course.  Therefore, a longer EEG study may be helpful in identifying if intermittent background changes on EEG exist. Furthermore, a variant of hypsarrhythmia called modified hypsarrhythmia may be seen. In this rare situation, EEG background amplitude is not as high as what is typically seen in hypsarrhythmia. Patients in this situation still merit aggressive treatment as is provided in more typical cases of infantile spasms. Lastly, there are cases reported of clinical infantile spasms where hypsarrhythmia is not seen. Given the high morbidity associated with this condition, it is prudent to use clinical judgment even when unexpected EEG findings occur.