Generally, adverse events resulting from incorrect dosing (excessive dosing) often form a hyperthyroid-like picture or an allergic reaction to the excipient of the levothyroxine tablets. Levothyroxine 50 mcg tablets don't contain allergic excipients, so there is a decreased risk for immune reactions.

**Adverse Drug Reactions**(According to System Organ Classification)

**Cardiovascular Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Angina pectoris

- Tachycardia

- Palpitations

- Arrhythmia

- Myocardial infarction

- Atrial fibrillation

**Neuropsychiatric Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Anxiety

- Insomnia(advise the patient to take levothyroxine in the morning)

**Gastrointestinal Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Weight loss

- Fatigue

- Diarrhea

- Emesis

**Dermatological Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Skin rash

- Alopecia

- Diaphoresis

**Endocrine Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Goiter

- Menstrual irregularities

- Heat intolerance

- Decreased bone mineral density (a result of TSH suppression)

**Hepatic Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Increased liver enzymes(hepatocellular or mixed pattern)

- Immunoallergic hepatitis(with eosinophilia)

**Drug Interactions**

- Calcium carbonate, ferrous fumarate, and sevelamer bind to levothyroxine and reduce the absorption of levothyroxine. Administer levothyroxine 4 hours apart from the medications mentioned above. Bile acid sequestrants (e.g., colesevelam, cholestyramine, colestipol) and ion exchange resins, e.g., polystyrene sulfonate, reduce levothyroxine absorption. Administer levothyroxine at least 4 hours before these drugs and monitor TSH levels. Monitor patients treated concomitantly with levothyroxine and orlistat for changes in thyroid function due to reduced absorption. Gastric acidity is a prerequisite for adequate absorption of levothyroxine. Sucralfate, antacids, and proton pump inhibitors can cause hypochlorhydria and decrease levothyroxine absorption.

- Furosemide inhibits the protein binding of T4 to thyroid binding globulin(TBG), leading to an increase in free T4; it also competes for T4-binding sites on TBG, so a single high dose of furosemide can acutely lower the total T4 level. Phenytoin and carbamazepine decrease the protein binding of levothyroxine, and total and free T4 may be reduced by 20% to 40%. However, most patients have normal TSH levels and are clinically euthyroid. Therefore, clinicians should closely monitor thyroid hormone parameters. Drugs that increase serum TBG include estrogen, tamoxifen, clofibrate, opioids, mitotane, fluorouracil, and capecitabine. Estrogen treatment in postmenopausal women is associated with an increase in mean TSH concentration. Rapid estrogen increase is associated with increased TBG and TSH values in treated hypothyroid women. Androgens have the opposite effect and reduce the serum TBG concentrations, thus requiring a decrease in levothyroxine dose. Propranolol and amiodarone, reduce the conversion of T4 to T3. Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and rifampin induce liver microsomal enzymes, increase levothyroxine metabolism, and decrease serum concentration. Drugs such as dopamine, glucocorticoids, and octreotide can reduce TSH concentration, while lithium, iodine, and sulphonamides interfere with thyroid hormone synthesis.

- Patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy (ICPi- pembrolizumab, nivolumab, ipilimumab) may develop hypothyroidism due to immune-related adverse events (IRAE), which may require discontinuation of ICPi.

- The absorption of levothyroxine can be impaired by soybean, papaya, and grapefruit.