Cardiac arrhythmias occur due to functional and structural defects in molecular, cellular, tissue, and organism levels.

Early after depolarization (EAD) occurs due to the critical prolongation of action potential duration (APD). This prolonged APD may cause inactivated Na/Ca channel to reopen, providing extra current for depolarization. Thus EAD may trigger torsades de pointes arrhythmias (TdP), which is a polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and, in turn, can deteriorate into ventricular fibrillation.

Delayed After depolarization is due to abnormal calcium handling. Here increased intracellular calcium like after myocardial infarction increases the activity of Na/Ca exchanger. The net effect of this channel is one inward depolarizing current, which may initiate an extrasystole on reaching threshold potential.

While earlier noted, even though the initiation of torsades de pointes (TdP) is due to early after depolarization, subsequent TdP occurs due to re-entry phenomenon. Usually, an impulse spreads in all directions, and tissue behind the depolarization front is refractory. However, when the AP has to pass around an obstacle, either anatomical (e.g., scar tissue) or functional (a cardiomyocyte in its absolute refractory period), it can cause re-entry and re-excitation of origin tissue. Thus tissue heterogeneity in refractoriness is a potent enhancer of re-entry arrhythmia. Hence large transmural dispersion of repolarization, which increases this heterogeneity, increases the risk of re-entry arrhythmia.

Thus the evaluation of repolarization through analysis of electrical activity is a useful clinical tool to assess cardiac function as variations in repolarization can contribute to the development of potentially lethal cardiac rhythms.