In order to understand the etiology of open-angle glaucoma, it is important to understand the formation and drainage of aqueous humor. Aqueous humor is produced in a continuous fashion by the ciliary body in the posterior chamber and drains into the anterior chamber of the eye. A majority of aqueous humor drainage occurs through the trabecular meshwork and a minority of aqueous outflow is drained through the uveoscleral pathway. Primary open-angle glaucoma is the most common type of glaucoma and is characterized by increased resistance to drainage in the trabecular meshwork, even though the drainage angle between the cornea and iris remains open. Due to this blockage, the pressure in the eye gradually increases, resulting in damage to the optic nerve and progressive visual loss. Secondary open-angle glaucoma can have multiple etiologies but is far less common than primary open-angle glaucoma.

**Genetic Etiologies**

Chromosome 1q24.3, MYOC gene: Myocilin is a cytoskeletal protein product of the MYOC gene, which is implicated in cases of hereditary juvenile OAG and hereditary adult OAG. Myocilin is a cytoskeletal protein expressed in the trabecular meshwork and is also known as trabecular meshwork glucocorticoid-inducible response protein (TIGR).

Chromosome 5q22.1, WDR36 gene: The WDR36 protein is a member of the WD repeat protein family, and is thought to be implicated in adult-onset POAG. This protein functions in ribosomal RNA processing, p53 stress-pathway response, cell cycle progression, signal transduction, apoptosis, and gene regulation. WDR36 protein is expressed in the lens, iris, sclera, ciliary muscles, ciliary body, trabecular meshwork, retina, and optic nerve in the eye but is also expressed outside of the eye in the human heart, placenta, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney and pancreas. Four mutations in WDR36 at the GLC1G locus (N355S, A449T, R529Q, and D658G) have been identified, with one study implicating the gene in approximately 6% of POAG patients. However, a recent 2017 Chinese study repudiated this claim by showing that the association between WDR36 and POAG is not consistent across populations and calls for more data supporting WDR36 protein's role in POAG.

Chromosome 7q31, CAV1/CAV2 genes: CAV1 and CAV2 are proteins members of the caveolin family that are involved in the formation of caveolae- invaginations of the plasma membrane in areas that are rich in cholesterol during the process of transcytosis. This gene is associated with POAG susceptibility in populations of European and East Asian ancestry.CAV1 and CAV2 are expressed in most human cell types, including tissues such as the scleral spur cells, trabecular meshwork, and retinal ganglion cells. In vitro studies of CAV1 showed consistent upregulation in the trabecular meshwork after one hour of increased IOP.

Chromosome 9p21, CDKN2B-AS1 gene: CDKN2B-AS1 is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2B antisense noncoding RNA that regulates cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A and 2B in the cell cycle. US-based observational case study, we found that this region modifies optic nerve vulnerability to glaucomatous change. It is thought that an SNP in this gene is implicated in POAG by causing RGCs to undergo apoptosis during their quiescent post-mitotic state.

Chromosome 10p13, OPTN gene: Optineurin the coiled-coil protein product that is implicated in adult-onset primary open-angle glaucoma and in normal-tension glaucoma. Optineurin is involved in various cellular functions including apoptosis, cellular morphogenesis, inflammation, vasoconstriction, membrane protein trafficking, vesicular trafficking as well as transcription activation.

Chromosome 15q24.1, LOXL1 gene: Lysyl oxidase-like 1 gene codes for an extracellular copper-dependent amine oxidase enzyme that catalyzes the first step in crosslinking of collagen and elastin in the extracellular matrix and is implicated in cases of pseudoexfoliation syndrome. Single nucleotide polymorphism in the LOXL1 gene is associated with excessive levels of crosslinked amyloid-like fibrillar glycoproteins that deposit in the anterior segment and is more common in Scandinavian populations. SNPs in LOXL1 gene can present as exfoliation glaucoma as the first signs of a more serious systemic condition that implicates multiple tissues with the expression of this enzyme including the liver, kidney, and gallbladder.