The 2016 AUA guidelines state that biopsy usually is not indicated for a solid tumor in the setting of "1) young or healthy patients who are unwilling to accept the uncertainties associated with (biopsy) or 2) older or frail patients who will be managed conservatively independent of renal mass biopsy findings (Campbell 2016)."

Imaging characteristics that discourage proceeding to renal mass biopsy are discussed in detail by Caoili

- Hemorrhage and protein within a complicated cyst.   Dense fluid can simulate solid tissue on either pre or post-contrast ultrasound, CT, or MRI. Comparing precontrast and postcontrast images and using contrast subtraction imaging technology can help clarify this finding.

- Pseudoenhancement.  This is an artifactual increase in attenuation (typically 1 HU to 25 HU) or intensity within a lesion on postcontrast imaging. It is more likely to be seen with small (less than 2 cm) hypodense or hypointense lesions adjacent to the dense renal parenchyma.  Given small lesion size in these situations, active surveillance is sometimes a reasonable decision depending on other factors.

- Lesion enhancement equivalent to the enhancement of the "blood pool" (in other words, to the same degree as the intensity or density of the aorta).  Such a lesion may initially appear as if it is a solid lesion but may actually be a vascular anomaly, such as a pseudoaneurysm.  US and/or MRI sequences optimized for the detection of blood vessels should be performed as the next step in this situation.

Biopsy of isolated hemorrhage/protein or pseudo-enhancement lesions usually results in a nondiagnostic specimen, whereas biopsy of a vascular anomaly has a high pre-test probability of resulting in a hemorrhagic complication.

The following CT/MRI findings favor a benign diagnosis.

- Macroscopic fat.  This finding is diagnostic of a benign angiomyolipoma (AML) in the absence of calcifications or other aggressive features.

- Microscopic fat (intracellular/"minimal fat")-containing tumor.  Minimal fat AMLs are hypointense to normal parenchyma on T2 MRI (similar to papillary RCC) and demonstrate avid arterial enhancement (similar to clear cell RCC).  The key to the diagnosis is that the two cancers only have one of these features, whereas minimal fat AMLs have both.

- Rapidly expanding ill-defined mass in a patient with risk factors for or clinical findings of urinary tract infection.  This should suggest focal bacterial pyelonephritis.  If the finding persists on repeat imaging after clinical improvement of the infection, then a biopsy can be used to determine whether the lesion is infectious or neoplastic.

Risks of the biopsy procedure, such as hemorrhage, may serve as relative contraindications if the patient is not able to tolerate the possible adverse outcome physically or psychologically.  The 2013 Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) guidelines placed renal biopsy, even via the transjugular approach which is usually considered safer as it lowers the risk of significant hemorrhage somewhat, in the highest of its three risk categories for hemorrhagic complications

Prior to the procedure, it is good practice to ask the patient if he/she is aware of any known allergic reaction to any of the drugs intended to be used in the procedure so that anaphylaxis risks can be addressed prophylactically