- Postmastectomy radiation therapy (PMRT) is associated with a decrease in locoregional recurrence and an improvement in overall survival among patients with high risk pathologic features including positive lymph nodes, positive margins, and for inflammatory breast cancer.

- There is controversy over the benefit of PMRT in patients with T3N0 breast cancer, however, the risk of recurrence is increased in the presence of other high-risk pathologic features such lymphovascular invasion, high tumor grade, close or positive margins, and premenopausal status.

- Target volume should include the chest wall and comprehensive lymph node areas which include the axillary, supraclavicular and internal mammary lymph nodes. If all lymph nodes are negative and the patient has a positive margin, then chest wall alone can be the target. Studies evaluating the role of comprehensive lymph node coverage have demonstrated a small improvement in disease-free survival and overall survival, however, this comes at the cost of increased dose to the heart.

- 3D conformal radiation therapy (3D CRT) and intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) are two of the most common treatment techniques used for postmastectomy radiotherapy.  There are several different consensus guidelines for target volume delineation.

- Long-term side effects of PMRT include increased risk of heart disease and secondary malignancy. Deep-inspiratory breath hold is a technique used to reduce the radiation dose to the heart.  Proton beam therapy has the potential to reduce the dose to the heart and normal tissue and is currently an active area of research.