Once the diagnosis of syphilis has been made, the management is with an interprofessional team since the infection can affect almost every organ in the body. These patients need close follow-up by the cardiologist, neurologist, dermatologist, internist, primary care, ophthalmologist, obstetrician, gynecologist, urologist, and infectious disease expert. The patient must be followed by an infectious disease specialist, gynecologist, urologist, or primary care to ensure that the treatment works and the patient is compliant with therapy. The patient's partner should be examined and treated if necessary. If a patient with syphilis is or becomes pregnant, close follow-up with an obstetrician is highly recommended.

Patient education is vital, and the public health team, including clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists, should counsel patients about safe sexual practices and the potential harm of IV drug use which can be mitigated by using clean needles. Today, there are needle exchange programs in many cities.

Nurses must also educate the public on the importance of regular screening for sexually transmitted diseases. The use of barrier protection (condoms) is highly recommended. Pharmacists should educate patients that there are effective treatments for STDs, and the earlier the condition is treated, the better the outcomes, as well as reiterating appropriate prevention strategies.

Every interprofessional team member must keep meticulous records of every intervention and interaction with the patient so that everyone involved in care has access to the same updated patient information. They must also be prepared to communicate to any other team member if they note any concerns, including status changes, non-compliance with therapy, adverse events, or anything else that may warrant further attention. Only through close collaboration with an interprofessional team can the incidence and morbidity of infections like syphilis be lowered.

The outlook for most patients who are compliant with treatment is good, but those who delay or fail to comply with therapy can develop life-threatening complications.