The etiology of vestibular dysfunction can be divided into peripheral and central causes, both of which may present acutely or chronically. The term "peripheral" refers to a pathology of the vestibular system itself: the membranous labyrinth and the superior and inferior vestibular nerves. The term "central" refers to a pathology of the central nervous system (CNS) proper. Acute vestibular syndrome is characterized by a constellation of symptoms, including vertigo, nausea, vomiting, head motion intolerance, unsteady gait, and postural instability. The symptoms must persist for at least 24 hours to meet the criteria for an acute vestibular syndrome, except in cases of paroxysmal positional vertigo.

Paroxysmal positional vertigo is a mechanical disorder of the inner ear causing short intervals of transient vertigo, often accompanied by autonomic symptoms. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) accounts for at least 20% of individuals with moderate to severe dizziness/vertigo and is the most common cause of brief, episodic, peripheral vestibular dysfunction.

The average duration of symptoms is two weeks, although individual episodes typically last less than one minute and may occur several times daily. Symptoms are caused by the stimulation of a semicircular canal, usually the posterior semicircular canal, and typically only affect one side. Anatomically, BPPV is most often caused by "canalithiasis," free-floating otoconia (calcium carbonate-protein crystals that have become detached from the utricle or saccule) that move to the most dependent position within the canal when the head changes position, thereby shifting the endolymph and causing displacement of the cupula with a subsequent spinning sensation. Less commonly, the particles may adhere to the cupula in the ampulla of the semicircular canal and cause similar but longer-lasting symptoms with head movements - this is termed "cupulolithiasis."

Another common peripheral vestibular disorder is Ménière disease, characterized by episodes of vertigo lasting minutes to hours that are accompanied by hearing loss and roaring tinnitus. This condition is thought to be due to endolymphatic hydrops with distortion and distention of the endolymph portions of the labyrinthine system. The cause of excess fluid in the inner ear has been difficult to determine, but numerous proposed etiologies exist.

One of the etiologies is the blockage of the endolymphatic sac or duct. The entrance of the endolymphatic sac potentially becomes blocked by saccular otoconia that detach from the membranes and block the flow of endolymph. This is similar to the mechanism proposed for BPPV. The second theory is a hypoplasia of the vestibular aqueduct, leading to a reduction in the ability to regulate the volume of fluid in the endolymphatic space. The third is an immunologic mechanism that has not been clearly defined and may explain the association between Ménière disease and allergies. There also appears to be a genetic predisposition through an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which has been demonstrated in 8% to 15% of patients with Ménière disease.

A family history of earlier age at onset is associated with genetic Ménière disease, which tends to produce more severe manifestations in successive generations. However, a specific gene marker has not been identified. There may also be a link between migraines and Ménière disease; as vestibular migraines may often be mistaken for Ménière disease, it may be that a vascular phenomenon that dysregulates blood flow plays a role in the production of vertigo.

Another theory studied in the 1980s proposes that the rupture of the dilated or distended endolymphatic sac allows potassium-saturated endolymph into the perilymphatic space. The result is that the biochemical gradient depolarizes the cochlear and vestibular hair cells, leading to loss of function. Once the membrane rupture seals and the ion pumps restore the electrical gradient, the hair cells' function is normalized. This process repeats and results in degeneration of the hair cells. Trauma can also cause vestibular damage, whether via a direct blow, such as in the case of a temporal bone fracture, whiplash, or overpressure, as in a blast injury.

In the vestibular variant of Ménière disease, hearing loss and tinnitus are absent, and differentiating this entity from a vestibular migraine can be very challenging. Bilateral disease may develop in up to 17% of patients, but it is much more likely to develop sequentially (78%) than simultaneously (22%).

A third common peripheral cause of vertigo is vestibular neuronitis; it is believed to be caused by an acute viral or post-viral inflammatory disorder. The inflammation affects the vestibular branch of the eighth cranial nerve, resulting in hypofunctional vestibulopathy and vertigo that can persist for days at a time.

Many other conditions may also result in peripheral vestibulopathy, including autoimmune disorders like Cogan syndrome and autoimmune inner ear disease, neoplasms like vestibular schwannoma, temporal bone fracture, vestibulotoxic medications like gentamicin and streptomycin, perilymph fistula, and semicircular canal dehiscence syndrome. Ultimately, any process that causes inflammation of the membranous labyrinth or vestibular nerves aberrantly stimulates the vestibular apparatus or structurally violates it can cause peripheral vertigo.

The common central causes of vestibulopathy are vertebrobasilar transient ischemic attack (TIA), acute ischemic stroke involving the vestibular nerve tracts, cerebellum, or brainstem; hemorrhagic stroke affecting the brainstem and cerebellum, and demyelinating diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, that affect the vestibular tracts, cerebellum, and brainstem.