Genomes are unique entities that acquire changes over time and generations due to the cumulative results of both small- and large-scale changes. Small-scale changes are due to mutations, which occur due to several factors, either endogenous or exogenous. Endogenous mechanisms include DNA replication errors (insertion of the incorrect nucleotide), DNA repair errors (failure to remove the incorrect or damaged nucleotide), spontaneous base deamination (loss of the nucleotide’s amine group), base methylation, reactive oxygen species (byproducts of metabolism), and spontaneous hydrolysis of nitrogenous bases.

Exogenous causes of mutations include ionization radiation, ultraviolet radiation, alkylating agents (mustard gas), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (found in tobacco smoke, charred food, combustion products), crosslinking agents (cyclophosphamide), insertional mutagenesis (integration of viral genome), and other toxins.

In contrast to small-scale changes, large-scale genetic changes are not due to mutations. They typically occur due to chromosomal abnormalities, such as translocation, duplication, inversion, or deletions of parts of chromosomes or entire chromosomes.

If a mutation involves a change in a single nucleotide base pair, this is referred to as a point mutation. However, it is important to understand that proteins are coded for in groups of 3 nucleotides, termed codons. Each codon contains instructions to create exactly one amino acid, which is then added to the growing protein chain during translation. Point mutations have different consequences depending on which codon and what part of it they affect.

Silent mutations can occur when a point mutation occurs in non-coding or non-regulatory regions of DNA, sparing genes and codons. Much of the human genome is neither used for genes or genetic regulation, with only about 8% used for biological activity. As a result, any mutation in the non-biologically active regions would be silent. Silent mutations may also occur even if a mutation targets a codon, and this is due to redundancy in the genetic code, also referred to as degeneracy.

While there are 64 different codons based on varying combinations of the four nucleotides, this only codes for 20 amino acids and three stop codons—for example, CGU codes for the amino acid arginine. If a mutation were to occur in this stretch of DNA, changing CGU to CGC would still code for arginine! Therefore, silent mutations can occur when the codon mutates to another codon representing the same amino acid and this is because all but two amino acids are coded for by more than one codon. However, should a mutation within a codon result in it coding for a different amino acid, this is termed a missense or substitution mutation. In effect, one amino acid was replaced with another. For example, if the CGU that codes for arginine were changed to CAU, this would result in the placement of a histidine instead of arginine, thereby changing the amino acid composition of the protein.

However, the consequences of a missense mutation vary depending on the exact amino acid that is replaced and exchanged. More specifically, their size, polarity, and presence/absence of hydrogen bonding with other nearby amino acids will determine the consequences of the genetic alteration.

Relative to silent and missense mutations, nonsense and frameshift mutations are much less forgiving to the cell and organism and more likely to cause pathology. Nonsense mutations occur when a single nucleotide change results in a stop codon (UGA, UAA, UAG), resulting in premature termination of protein translation. The result of a nonsense mutation will vary, however, on how close the new stop codon is to the original and also how much of the protein’s functional sub-domains are still present. If the nonsense mutation resulted in a new stop codon just upstream of the original, this would likely disrupt protein function much less than a new stop codon placed immediately after the start codon.

Frameshift mutations, in contrast, result from either the insertion of a new nucleotide into the DNA strand or the deletion of a pre-existing nucleotide. This can occur through transposons, toxins, mutagens, or viruses. The human papillomavirus (HPV), for example, relies on the insertion of its genetic material into the host’s genome for its life cycle to progress successfully.

The insertion of its genome alters the reading frame of nearby codons, and every codon downstream of insertion is changed. Consequently, whether viral or not in origin, the earlier a frameshift mutation occurs within a gene, the more deleterious its effects are. Interestingly, frameshift mutations can result in a premature stop codon if the downstream codon shift into one of the three stop codons. However, insertion or deletion of nucleotides will not cause a frameshift mutation in situations where the number of nucleotides is a multiple of 3. In this situation, a new amino acid would be inserted or deleted from the structure with varying effects on protein structure and function. Frameshift mutations are notable due to their implication in the pathogenesis of various cancers, particularly prostate and colorectal cancer.

A unique type of small DNA mutation is the trinucleotide repeat expansion. This is a type of mutation where “slippage” occurs during DNA replication, resulting in repeated copying of the same codon. Slippage occurs due to repetitive sequences, typically G-C, located in the vicinity of one another. During DNA replication, when the double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) is unwound to single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), nucleotides located in the repetitive regions have the opportunity to base-pair to other nucleotides on the same strand resulting in the formation of a single strand loop. This single strand loop is then copied, which typically results in the expansion of the repetitive sequences.

If located within a gene or its regulatory components, this can result in either impaired production of a product or a dysfunctional product.