# Definition/Introduction

The Ghon complex is named after Anton Ghon (1866-1936), an Austrian pathologist who described primary tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis as having a pulmonary lesion with regional lymph involvement.

The Ghon complex is a non-pathognomonic finding on chest radiography that is significant for pulmonary tuberculosis.

The most frequently encountered route of infection with M. tuberculosis is through the respiratory tract. The predilection of M. tuberculosis for the upper lobes is possibly due to the ventilatory physiology of this region.

The Ghon complex should not be confused with the Ranke complex. The Ghon complex precedes the development of the Ranke complex. The Ghon complex is seen in untreated primary pulmonary tuberculosis infection with Ghon lesion fibrosis. The Ranke complex results from a primary tuberculosis Ghon complex undergoing calcification during the inflammatory process and is characterized by a calcified Ghon lesion and calcified mediastinal lymph nodes.

After primary infection, M. tuberculosis can progress in one of three ways. The primary infection can be eradicated from the body by the immune system. The infection may persist in a dormant, controlled state, sometimes called latent tuberculosis; latency may last indefinitely. The primary infection may bypass latency and progress to cause symptomatic disease, sometimes referred to as active tuberculosis.

Patients with latent tuberculosis are at risk of reactivation to active tuberculosis; this risk is highly dependent on the immune status of the host.

On pathological examination, the Ghon complex usually measures approximately 1.0 to 1.5 centimeters in area.

Cavitation of Ghon complexes occurs with greater frequency in children when compared with adults, and the presence of these lesions correlates with positive gastric aspirates and sputum cultures in children.

The Ghon complex is not unique to pulmonary tuberculosis and can also be seen in other infections, such as pulmonary histoplasmosis and paracoccidioidomycosis.

# Issues of Concern

In 2016, TB was estimated to be responsible for 1.3 million deaths among HIV-negative individuals and remained one of the leading infectious causes of death globally.

Approximately 1.7 billion people are estimated to have latent pulmonary TB, but only 5% to 15% of these individuals may develop active TB.

Imaging interpretation can be challenging, as tuberculosis can mimic many conditions, including malignancy and sarcoidosis.

# Clinical Significance

The diagnosis of primary pulmonary tuberculosis heavily relies on the culture of M. tuberculosis from the sputum,

In an estimated two-thirds of cases of primary TB, a parenchymal focus resolves independently. Overall, about 15% of patients with primary TB may present with normal chest radiography.M. tuberculosis to spread from the respiratory tract to distant parts of the body by lymphatic and hematogenous routes, untreated primary pulmonary TB can result in extrapulmonary infection of the pericardium, myocardium, central nervous system, head and neck, intra-abdominal organs, peritoneum, and the genitourinary tract or present as spondylitis, osteomyelitis, tuberculous arthritis.

The Ghon complex highlights the role of lymphatics in disseminating M. tuberculosis. Lymph nodes are the site of antigen presentation but also play a role in the persistence of M.
tuberculosis infections.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The recognition of radiologic signs, such as the Ghon complex, can be the first alert that pulmonary tuberculosis is present; radiologists play a critical role in the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis. In addition, alerting other healthcare team members to the presence of a Ghon focus allows for initiating treatment and enacting isolation precautions to protect hospital workers and other patients from potential exposure. However, radiologists are often not the first clinicians that evaluate the radiograph. Therefore, the ability of clinicians to recognize the radiographic signs of possible tubercular infection helps to ensure patient safety. Additionally, members of the infection prevention teams coordinate with treating providers to ensure that patients with potentially active tuberculosis are placed under appropriate isolation precautions to halt transmission.

Healthcare workers are at a ten times higher risk of becoming infected by M. tuberculosis when compared to the general population.M. tuberculosis aerosolizes into the air around an infected patient with regular respiratory activity, but coughing can connote greater infectivity.

Nurses should know the signs and symptoms of active TB to minimize their risk of exposure to infected patients. The signs and symptoms of active TB include but are not limited to cough, hemoptysis, unintentional weight loss, fever and chills, night sweats, loss of appetite, and fatigue.

After identifying a patient with potentially active TB, nurses and healthcare workers should follow their healthcare facilities' protocols for minimizing their occupational exposure to TB and place patients in airborne precautions to protect other hospitalized patients.

In addition to minimizing the healthcare workers' risk of exposure to TB, the risk of TB exposure to the inpatient population should be minimized by using airborne isolation rooms equipped with negative pressure air circulation; this limits exposure to contaminated room air to those outside of the patient isolation area.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

A diagnosis of tuberculosis requires long-term follow-up.