Quinidine is available in both parenteral and oral preparations.

- **Parenteral:**(only gluconate preparations): quinidine is available in an injectable dose form, given via intravenous route.

- **Oral:**Quinidine tablets are available as immediate-release 200 mg and 300 mg (quinidine sulfate salt), and each tablet of 200 mg of quinidine sulfate is equivalent to 166 mg of quinidine base, and 300 mg of quinidine sulfate is equivalent to 249 mg of quinidine base. Quinidine extended-release 324 mg (quinidine gluconate salt) tablets are equivalent to 202 mg of quinidine base. For the extended-release preparations, patients should receive counsel to swallow the whole pill and not chew, crush or break the tablet.

**Dosing Regimens**

**Atrial Fibrillation/Flutter to Sinus Rhythm Conversion**

- **Oral immediate-release:**As initial therapy, administer two 200 mg tablets every six hours. If that did not result in desired pharmacological conversion after 4 to 5 doses, the dose might be increased with caution.

- **Oral extended-release:**As one regimen option, administer two 324 mg tablets (403 mg of quinidine base) every eight hours. If that did not result in desired pharmacological conversion after 3 or 4 doses, the dose might be increased with caution.

- As another regimen, patients may have been administered one tablet (202 mg of quinidine base) every eight hours for two days followed by two tablets (403 mg of quinidine base) every twelve hours for two days, and finally two tablets (403 mg of quinidine base) every eight hours for up to four days. The lower dose may be used based on the physician's judgment for the final four-day treatment plan.

- During any of these regimens, if the QRS complex or QTC interval widens to 130% of its pre-treatment duration, QTC interval is longer than 500 ms; P waves disappear; the patient develops significant tachycardia, bradycardia, or hypotension, then quinidine therapy should be discontinued.

**Reduction of Atrial Fibrillation/Flutter Relapse**

- **Oral immediate-release:**As initial therapy, administer one tablet (166 mg of quinidine base) every six hours. If the regimen is well-tolerated and serum quinidine level is well within the therapeutic index range, the dose may be increased with caution to achieve the desired pharmacological effect.

- **Oral extended-release:**As one regimen option, patients may have been administered one tablet (202 mg of quinidine base) every eight hours or twelve hours. If the regimen is well-tolerated and serum quinidine level is well within the therapeutic index range, the dose may be increased with caution to achieve the desired pharmacological effect.

- During any of these regimens, if any times the QRS complex or QTC interval widens to 130% of its pre-treatment duration; QTC interval is longer than 500 ms; P waves disappear; the patient develops significant tachycardia, bradycardia, or hypotension, then the total daily dose of quinidine should be reduced.

**Ventricular arrhythmias suppression:**The dosing regimens for ventricular arrhythmias suppression have not been adequately studied. However, these regimens have generally been similar to the regimen described above for the treatment of atrial fibrillation. Therefore, this therapy should be managed and optimized based on the results from programmed electrical stimulation and/or Holter monitoring with an exercise where ever possible.

**Treatment of P.Falcipum malaria:**As per the manufacturer label, the dosing regimen for quinidine sulfate tablets should be similar to the regimen is described in the package insert of quinidine gluconate injection. However, a couple of years ago, the sole manufacturer of quinidine IV products has discontinued this product in the US.

**Specific Patients Population**

- **Patient with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with hepatic impairment. However, most quinidine is metabolized and eliminated via cytochrome 3A4, so the drug should be used with caution in these patients.

- **Patient with Renal Impairment:**There is no dose adjustment guidance in the manufacturer label for patients with renal impairment. However, 20% of quinidine is eliminated in the urine, so the drug should be used with caution, and a lower dose may be needed in patients with severe renal impairment.

- **Pregnant women:**It is considered as pregnancy category C medicine. Quinidine and its metabolites may cross the placenta membrane and appear in the neonatal serum.

- **Breastfeeding Women:**The manufacturer recommends avoiding quinidine therapy in nursing mothers as the drug presents in breast milk.

- **Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of quinidine are not established for antiarrhythmic use in pediatric patients.

- **Geriatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of quinidine are not systematically studied in geriatric patients.