History and physical examination are essential for the diagnosis. Antenatal, birth, and patient history, as well as family history, should be obtained. Few deformities are associated with neurological or genetic disorders, so a neurological exam or genetic testing may also be needed.

**Clubfoot:**Family, antenatal, and birth history should be obtained, including positive family history for clubfoot and the presence of environmental factors such as smoking, medication, alcohol intake, and solvent exposure. However, in some countries, the presence of deformities would be diagnosed during newborn screening. On physical exam, the foot or feet assume the characteristic clubfoot position; the mnemonic CAVE will help recall the order of deformities (cavus of the midfoot, adductus of the forefoot, varus, and equinus of the hindfoot).

Variations in the degree of severity and rigidity may exist. Limb length and girdle discrepancy could also be noted, with a smaller foot and calf and shortened tibia on the affected side.

**Planovalgus:**Medical history should be obtained to distinguish between congenital and acquired flatfoot deformity and the presence of other risk factors. Pes planovalgus is usually asymptomatic. However, some patients may experience plantar foot pain and ankle instability. During the physical exam, midfoot planus and hindfoot valgus, on standing, will be noted. Range of motion, gait pattern, and stability need to be assessed. Flatfoot will characteristically reconstitute to normal foot arch with toe walking and foot hanging out of bed.

**Cavovarus:**History and physical are important in reaching the diagnosis. Conditions such as CMT, cerebral palsy, spinal cord lesions, Friedreich ataxia, amniotic band syndrome, and others should be evaluated as the potential cause of the cavovarus deformity. A neurological exam should always be performed. This is important as it may alter the course of the deformity and the treatment approach. A family history should also be obtained.

The patients usually present with chronic foot pain, ankle instability, or painful calluses.

Another pathognomonic sign is the 'peek-a-boo sign,' where the examiner can see the foot arches with the patient standing while standing in front of the patient.

**Congenital vertical talus:**A comprehensive medical and family history is essential to identify conditions associated with the congenital vertical talus. The examiner should evaluate the patient for distinguishing facial characteristics or other clues of underlying conditions. Clinically the CVT will appear as a 'rocker-bottom' deformity with a convex midfoot appearance. Forefoot dorsiflexion and hindfoot equinus and valgus should be present to qualify for the diagnosis of CVT. The gait pattern will reveal patients walking on their heels with limited foot contact. A thorough neurologic exam is also essential.

**Congenital oblique talus:**Thorough history and physical exam are required to identify other conditions that may lead to COT, such as cerebral palsy, Down syndrome, and other neuromuscular syndromes. In the physical exam, the foot will be in pronation. In more severe cases, however, possible forefoot dorsiflexion, hindfoot valgus, and equinus position are assumed. A complete neurological examination should also be performed as COT is rarely associated with cerebral palsy.

**Metatarsus adductus:**A detailed history is essential as some concomitant conditions are caused by the same intrauterine packaging phenomenon that causes metatarsus adductus. These conditions include developmental hip dysplasia, acetabular dysplasia, hip dislocation, and congenital torticollis.

**Skew foot:**Thorough past medical and family history is essential to identify secondary causes of skew foot deformity, such as neurological conditions or syndromes. On physical exam, foot deformity should be examined while standing and assessing both the foot's plantar and dorsal aspects. Physical exams may be challenging due to the plantar fat pad in children younger than one year. The patient will more likely present with in-toeing. Unlike simple or complex metatarsus adductus, where correction to the midline is achieved either actively or passively, in a skew foot, the deformity is rigid and will likely reveal adduction of the forefoot, abduction of the midfoot, and valgus of the hindfoot. Physical exam also includes work-up for other causes of in-toeing, such as increased hip anteversion and tibia internal rotation. Through neurological exam is also essential to identify causes of skew foot deformity.