- **Bilateral Renal Agenesis (Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser Syndrome):**It is the primary cause of classic Potter syndrome. But bilateral renal agenesis does not always lead to Potter syndrome. Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome is associated with bilateral renal agenesis. Still, the presence of other features of this syndrome, such as congenital uterine anomalies and other urogenital dysplasia, helps to distinguish for Potter syndrome.

- **Multicystic Renal Dysplasia:**Renal dysplasia with multiple non-communicating cysts formation is the common congenital manifestation of children. The dysplastic renal issue can be recognized in between the cysts. It is considered one of the causes of Potter sequence. Renal insufficiency and low urine output due to multiple cysts kidney lead to the oligohydramnios.

- **Polycystic Kidney Disease:**It consists of a large kidney with multiple cysts with less or absent intervening parenchyma in between the cysts. It is an autosomal dominant or recessive disease in children as well as adults. Renal failure in a fetus leads to oligohydramnios that resemble the Potter syndrome.

- **Posterior Urethral Valves:**The presence of the posterior urethral valve increases the chances of vesicoureteric reflux that prevents amniotic fluid contribution.

- **Prune Belly Syndrome:**It is more commonly associated with a male child with abdominal wall deformities, skeletal, and renal anomalies, but the urinary bladder is usually dilated. Other genital malformations such as cryptorchidism may be present.

- **Sirenomelia:**It is a rare congenital disorder characterized by caudal regression and pelvic anomalies. It may be associated with oligohydramnios due to bilateral renal agenesis. Other multiple deformities associated with sirenomelia are lower limb fusion, absent external genitalia, or imperforation. Because of oligohydramnios manifestation, it may lead to Potter syndrome.

- **Ectopic Kidney:**Patients having an ectopic kidney demonstrate empty renal fossa and discoid adrenal resembling an ultrasonographic study of Potter syndrome.

- **Melnick-Fraser Syndrome:**This syndrome has renal malformation ranging from hypoplasia to bilateral renal agenesis. Other associations are preauricular pits, ear malformations, and branchial fistula.

- **Fraser Syndrome:**It is autosomal recessive disease having renal agenesis, laryngeal atresia, syndactyly, and cryptophthalmos.