The clinical presentation of babies with ASD is related to the size of the hole. Patients are often asymptomatic and are only detected when hearing a murmur. However, a patient with a large ASD could present with heart failure, failure to thrive, or recurrent lung infections. The murmur associated with ASD is a fixed splitting of S2 due to A2 occurring before P2, which is due to the increase in right atrial and right ventricular volumes, which ultimately increase flow through the pulmonic valve, delaying closure.

The clinical presentation of babies with VSD also depends on the defect's size. Small VSDs are often asymptomatic. Larger VSDs with significant left-to-right shunting may cause failure to thrive and congestive heart failure because the heart cannot pump enough blood to meet the body's demands. A holosystolic murmur was auscultated at the left lower sternal border.

On physical examination of babies born with PDA, patients have a continuous machine-like murmur, loudest at S2. It is best auscultated in the left infraclavicular area and associated with congenital rubella or prematurity.

In TOF, a child commonly presents with "tet spells." These spells mean that cyanosis may develop when a child is agitated. Upon physical exam, the patient will have a blue tint to their lips and around their mouth, their skin will be damp or warm, and breathing will be rapid.

A child with pre-ductal coarctation of the aorta may present with differential cyanosis. There will only be lower extremity cyanosis because deoxygenated blood is not entering the branches of the aorta that go to the upper extremities. In post-ductal coarctation of the aorta, a child will not present with cyanosis because a PDA is not present. A child with coarctation of the aorta may also present with high blood pressure in the upper extremities because of the high pressure before constriction and low blood pressure in the lower extremities after the point of constriction.

**Treatment**

Prostaglandins from the placenta keep the shunts in the fetus open. During birth, the shunts usually close due to the loss of prostaglandins from placental separation and increased oxygen due to respiration. However, in the management of PDA, NSAIDs like indomethacin may be given to close the shunt because it blocks the production of prostaglandins.

TGA is incompatible with life, except when there is another heart defect that allows blood to mix. Prostaglandins may be given to permit the oxygenated blood and deoxygenated blood to mix by keeping the ductus arteriosus open.

In TOF, squatting may improve symptoms. Squatting kinks the femoral arteries, increasing systemic vascular resistance. As a result, the pressure of the left heart is greater than that of the right heart, reversing the shunt. However, early surgical correction is the recommendation.