Sulfur mustard exposures occur when the skin or mucous membranes come into contact with the aerosolized, semi-solid, or liquid chemical. The severity of an injury is related to duration and route of exposure, a dose of exposure, and ambient and exposed surface temperature and humidity.

**Cutaneous Exposure**

Sulfur mustard is lipophilic, and thus causes most severe injury in areas of the skin rich with eccrine and sebaceous glands. The face, axillae, and groin are particularly sensitive to sulfur mustard exposure.

Sulfur mustard exposure causes degeneration of the basement membrane of the skin and mucous membranes and induces inflammatory changes. Apoptosis of cells and basement membrane degeneration cause the characteristic bullae to form. These bullae are filled with a yellow fluid, which itself can cause burns when healthcare workers come into contact with it without appropriate protection.

**Respiratory Exposure**

Respiratory tract injury occurs when the chemical is inhaled, but an evident injury is usually delayed 12 to 48 hours after exposure. The warm, moist environment of the upper airway contributes to increased absorption and severe injury in significant respiratory tract exposures. Sulfur mustard damages the respiratory epithelium causing inflammation and necrosis. Tracheobronchial tree edema ensues, and injury is localized predominantly to the upper airway and large bronchi. This structural damage leads to clinical signs of a cough, hoarseness, excess sputum production, dyspnea and, in more severe high concentration exposures, pulmonary edema, bronchopneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). In sulfur mustard exposures, death can occur from acute pulmonary edema or secondary pulmonary infection. Chronic low-level exposures result in chronic bronchitis, decreased lung volumes and chronic cough.

**Ocular Exposure**

The corneal epithelium is particularly sensitive to sulfur mustard exposure due to the moist and warm environment created by the thin layer of tears over the cornea. Acute manifestations of ocular exposure include acute conjunctivitis, eyelid inflammation, and photophobia. A low dose or short exposure time may cause chemical conjunctivitis; whereas, a high dose or longer exposure time may cause temporary blindness. After an ocular injury, patients may go on to have chronic corneal ulcerations and chemical keratitis.

**Gastrointestinal Exposure**

A gastrointestinal injury is mostly localized to the upper tract, including oropharyngeal, esophageal, and gastric edema, inflammation, and necrosis. Patients with significant gastrointestinal injury can develop nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea which may be bloody. Sequelae of gastrointestinal exposure described include the development of Barrett’s esophagus and some malignancies.

**Hematological Effects**

Large cutaneous exposures or multi-system exposures can affect the hematopoietic system resulting in an initial leukocytosis followed by leukopenia, occasionally pancytopenia. Delayed mortality has been attributed to leukopenia in some cases.