Persistent postural-perceptual dizziness is a chronic vestibular disorder with a strict diagnosis criterion. The diagnostic criteria for PPPD are described below in the International Classification of Vestibular Disorders. There are five criteria that all must be met.

Patients must experience vestibular symptoms for greater than half of the days over 90 days. These symptoms include unsteadiness, imbalance, dizziness, or non-spinning vertigo. The symptoms should be present for hours rather than minutes or seconds. This helps distinguish the disorder from other disorders like BPPV. The severity may waiver, increase or decrease, and change from one person to the next.

The symptoms experienced by patients with PPPD must not be provoked by any specific events like BPPV or orthostatic hypotension. However, symptoms of PPPD can be exacerbated by the patient being in an upright posture, being exposed to actively moving visual stimuli (ex: moving cars, being in a crowded mall), and by attempting motion (active or passive) with disregard to orientation and position.

Another crucial criterion for accurately diagnosing a patient with PPPD is that it must be precipitated by a condition that causes problems with balance. Conditions that can lead to PPPD are other vestibular syndromes like BPPV, vestibular neuritis, or traumatic brain injury. Other conditions that challenge a healthcare provider's treatment plan include neurologic and psychiatric disorders like anxiety and depression. When these conditions are acute or episodic, the disease course may progress to a persistent presentation. In contrast, if the causative condition is a chronic condition, then symptoms can develop at a slower pace and gradually worsen.

Functional impairment is the fourth diagnostic criterion. The disorder must be negatively affecting their lives. Commonly patients state that they feel swaying from side to side while they are, in fact, being still. Patients often report issues with walking and driving.

The final criterion needed to diagnose PPPD correctly is that it must not be better explained by another medical condition.

Recapping the five criteria to diagnose PPPD: non-room-spinning, unsteadiness, and difficulties with a balance must be present for most of the days over a 90 period. Symptoms cannot be provoked but can be exacerbated by changes in position and exposure to certain stimuli. PPPD must be preceded by a condition with acute, episodic, or chronic vestibular symptoms. Patients with PPPD must be troubled by their symptoms and must have impairment to some degree. Finally, PPPD cannot be explained by another medical condition or disorder.

The diagnosis is made based on the history with the criteria listed above. A physical and neurological exam is generally unremarkable. To assess for comorbid conditions, the workup may include a HINTS test, cervical and ocular vestibular evoked myogenic potentials, neuroimaging of the brain with MRI or CT imaging, and audiogram.

Recent research has demonstrated a difference in PPPD patients compared to healthy individuals. Patients with PPPD will demonstrate lower Amplitude of Low-Frequency Fluctuations (ALFF) and lower regional homogeneity (ReHo) in the lower right precuneus and cuneus regions of the brain. The precuneus region is associated with visuospatial imagery, episodic memory retrieval, and self-processing operations. The cutaneous region is often used for visual processing. Thus, supporting PPPD as a vestibular disorder rather than a structural or psychiatric disorder.