Phenelzine sulfate is available as a 15 mg film-coated tablet for oral administration. It should seldom be the first therapeutic choice but instead is more suited to patients who have failed to respond to the first-line agents more commonly used for its indications.

**Dosing**

Depression in Adults: Dosing regimens range from 15 mg orally every other day to 30 mg orally three times daily. Patients should typically start with 15 mg orally three times per day. Dosing can be increased to 60 to 90 mg daily in three or four divided doses; these increases seek to establish the minimal effective dose, with a maximum dose of 90 mg per day.

Depression in the Elderly: The usual therapeutic dose is 15 to 60 mg daily in 3 or 4 divided doses. Initial dosing is 7.5 mg orally per day, with increases of 7.5 to 15 mg every three to four days as tolerated.

Pediatric Dosing (selective mutism - unlabeled indication): Dosing is 30 to 60 mg orally per day in divided doses.

Dosing in severe renal insufficiency is contraindicated. Dosing in patients undergoing peritoneal or hemodialysis is undefined at present. The drug should not be administered to patients with a history of hepatic disease or elevated LFTs.

When dispensing phenelzine as an outpatient prescription (new or refill), patients should receive the FDA-approved medication guide concerning the use of antidepressants in children, adolescents, and young adults when the patient will be taking the drug without direct clinician supervision. As with all antidepressants, this drug comes with an FDA Box Warning regarding the increased risk of suicidal thinking and behavior in children, adolescents, and young adults (18 to 124 years of age) who have major depressive disorder and other psychiatric conditions. Phenelzine is not FDA-approved for treating depression in children less than or equal to 16 years of age.

The mean elimination half-life of a single 30 mg dose of phenelzine is approximately 11 to 12 hours. According to the manufacturer, multiple-dose pharmacokinetics have not been studied in humans. The onset of the antidepressant effects of phenelzine takes 2 to 3 weeks to manifest. When discontinuing the medication, the dose should be tapered slowly to minimize possible withdrawal symptoms, and the prescriber should allow three to four weeks from discontinuing phenelzine to and initiating another antidepressant. If the clinician deems it necessary to administer phenelzine concurrently with another antidepressant or within 10 days of discontinuation of other antidepressant drug therapy, the prescriber must counsel the patient regarding the possibility of an adverse drug-drug interaction.