Bacterial species have different coping mechanisms with selective harsh environmental conditions. One of the most common coping mechanisms for bacteria is forming spores to protect themselves against ecological degrading agents. Bacterial spores are the most dormant form of bacteria since they exhibit minimal metabolism and respiration, as well as reduced enzyme production.

Typically, Gram-positive bacteria are best known for producing intracellular spores called endospores as a survival mechanism. Endospores are highly retractile and thick-walled structures formed inside the bacterial cells. It is most common for Bacillus species as well as Clostridium species to create endospores.B. cereus is a member of the Bacillus species and is well-known for its ability to cause foodborne illness as a result of its spores surviving various temperatures. Similarly, C. perfringens spores are acid-soluble proteins that show high resistance to chemicals and heat.

Endospores can resist inactivation from ethanol treatment.

Endospores germinate back into vegetative cells (an active bacterial cell that undergoes metabolism) when surrounding environmental conditions favor bacterial growth and reproduction. Several stimulants revert bacterial cells to their active vegetative cells, such as optimal close-to-body temperature and diffusion of nutrients and water through bacterial cell walls through alteration of their surface tension.

The process of spore formation is a multistep process. It starts from replication of the bacterial DNA, followed by the formation of the forespore, which is, by definition, pinching of the cellular plasma membrane between the replicated chromosome. Then, a cortex forms between the inner and outer membrane by extending the second cellular membrane to enclose the forespore with calcium and dipicolinic acid. Finally, the external spore coat surrounds the endospore before its release.

Microscopic examination to delineate the morphology of endospores involves differential staining processes such as malachite green and fluorescence staining techniques. Staining dormant bacterial samples with malachite green as the primary stain and safranine as the counteract stain results in the appearance of green oval endospores enclosed inside pink vegetative bacterial cells.

Despite their sturdy and resistant nature to environmental threats, endospores can get affected by certain eradication factors. During the 17th century, John Tyndall, a famous European physicist, discovered Tyndallization. The latter is the process of heating liquids and objects at a temperature of 80 to 100°C for 30 minutes; then, the sample is incubated. The procedure is repeated for three consecutive days. The principle behind successive heating for three days is that heating endospores for the first-time results in reverting them into vegetative cells killed through repetitive heat in the second and third days.