**Globally**

There are approximately 800,000 deaths from suicide annually, which, as the World Health Organization points out, exceeds the number of people who die each year from homicide and wars throughout the world. Suicide was the second-leading cause of death for 15-29-year-olds globally in 2016. In 2013, the World Health Organization declared suicide a global public health crisis due to the rising rates and urged all member nations to implement evidence-based prevention strategies. Approximately 79% of the world's suicides occur in low-income and middle-income countries where inadequate access to services, poverty, and mental health stigma are cited as barriers to seeking care. In developing countries, most suicides are completed by people living in poverty, most often young single women who lack education and struggle to support themselves.  Older adults are among the high suicide rates throughout every region of the world.

Due to their large populations, India and China contribute to over half of the total global suicides. However, when comparing 2016 suicide rates per 100,000 of the population, the WHO reported India (18.5/100,000) and China (7.9/100,000). The highest rates are in Eastern European Baltic countries (Russian Federation 48/100,000; Kazakhstan 40/100,000 Ukraine 34/100,000) and South Korea (30/100,000). Throughout the world, countries with predominantly Muslim populations have the lowest reported rates (e.g., Pakistan 3/100,000; Saudi Arabia 4.6/100,000). Latin American countries (Honduras 5.3/100,000; Mexico 8.2/100,000) also have low rates compared to European nations (France 17.9/100,000, Germany 13.6/100,000 and the UK 11.9/100,000) or North Americans (Canada 15/1000,000 and USA 21/100,000). Some literature suggests cultural differences and religious beliefs about suicide influence suicide rates. In middle-income and high-income nations, male suicide rates are much higher than female rates, with males surpassing females by 4:1 or higher.

A large international comparison of the risk factors for SI and suicide attempts was obtained from data collected in the WHO World Mental Health Surveys, which involved structured face-to-face interviews with participants (n >108,000) from 21 countries.

SI and suicide methods and rates vary by country, although there are some patterns that cross all nations.  Economic recessions and job losses

There is an important role for epidemiologists to monitor risk factors for suicide and emerging trends, including new and unusual suicide methods. For example, within a decade, there was a 65-fold increase in suicides by young people in Taiwan who died in charcoal-burning suicides. This involved burning charcoal fires indoors in small-contained spaces. The practice spread regionally and was adopted by different demographic groups, becoming a preferred means for young females in some locals.  Several years later, charcoal burning deaths appeared in England, and epidemiologists traced it to the dissemination of this highly lethal means via social media.

**United States**

The CDC records show over 47,000 suicides occurred in 2017. From 1999-2016, American suicide rates increased by nearly 30%. Despite the assumption that individuals who take their own lives have psychiatric histories, the data show that in 2015, over 50% of suicide victims had no known mental health diagnosis. This means other factors need to be more fully appreciated as key risk factors for lethal self-directed violence. Research studies point to the significance of losses or difficulties with relationships, financial troubles, employment problems, and pending legal issues as key contributors. Rural areas of the country, such as the western states, have higher suicide rates compared to more urban areas in the east. The prevalence of firearms, remote distance from support systems/mental health services, and financial stressors may contribute.

Firearms account for 50% of suicides in America, followed by suffocation (28%), drug poisoning (11%), and non-drug poisoning (3%), according to the CDC WISGARS database. The crude suicide rate is highest (20.1/100,000) for individuals aged 45-59 years and those aged 85 years and above. Males have higher rates of suicide than females, largely due to the differences in the lethality of means used during suicide attempts. Older white males in rural American states usually die on their first suicide attempt due to their use of firearms. Females in the USA are more likely to attempt by overdose and be rescued.

However, it is the increased prevalence of suicide in youth and younger adults that garners attention.  CDC data (2008-2017) shows an increase in the crude suicide rate for ages 18-35 years as 12.7/100,000 rising to 17.0/100,000 and affecting both males and females. Beyond the dramatic increase in completed suicides, there is a corresponding increase in suicide attempts. It is estimated by the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP) that in 2017 there were 1,400,000 suicide attempts and almost 10,000,000 people with suicidal thoughts in the USA.

The American Psychiatric Association Assessment and Management of Risk for Suicide Working Group 2013, p. 22 cites the risk of suicide increases with:

- Psychiatric diagnoses:  especially mood disorders, psychotic disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, substance use disorders, and disorders associated with impulsivity

- Medical conditions: particularly those that are chronic, debilitating, disfiguring, or painful