AI/AN patients have lower life expectancy than most other ethnic groups. Compared to whites, members from this group are also likely to lack opportunities to pursue higher education, leading to lower quality of life; thus, they are susceptible to developing various deleterious chronic conditions. A survey-based analysis shows AI/AN members are prone to consume sugar-sweetened beverages leading to obesity that predisposes them to hypertension and diabetes. A sedentary lifestyle along with residential inactivity has also been reported, leading to poor health. Lack of higher education provides a barrier to the population from attaining high-paying jobs, therefore, immobilizing progress and causing unemployment. These factors call for direct action to escalate preventive measures for tackling chronic conditions within the population but also social inequity.

The economic deficits of the AI/AN population have also affected its healthcare costs. Most members reportedly covered their own healthcare expenses and others by the Indian Health Service (IHS). The IHS grants access to medical care at federal clinics and hospitals, toughening their pathway to acquire specialist-level consults in non-IHS sites. Health coverage in this scenario may seem like an unattainable reality for these members.

The location of IHS facilities is another crucial issue in maintaining AI/AN health. IHS facilities are usually located in remote areas on Indian reservations. When AI/AN populations move out of the areas seeking jobs or higher education, they lose access to the facilities, which results in limited healthcare access for the AI/AN.

Furthermore, the AI/AN face a chain of barriers to accessing their providers due to travel costs and longer hold times. Language barriers within IHS facilities make it difficult to provide appropriate preventative measures for the patients. Specified data on Native American health is still hard to allocate in the current system. Despite Congressional demands for the IHS to analyze and document clinical performance for quality control, follow-up data is tough to acquire. Since IHS is federally funded, data allocation on quality control is significantly tougher. IHS quality was often diluted by deprived funding that rid the facilities of timely preventative measures and clinician attendance.

Physicians noted the following issues in treating indigenous populations:

- Access to highly trained and qualified specialist-physicians is comparatively minimal.

- Hospitalization for non-emergency purposes

- Diagnostic screening of the highest caliber

- Refined quality outpatient mental health rehabilitation sites

An adequate number of general practitioners and providers (59%) reported having difficulty handling issues without specialist referral was more (16%) and mildly greater than the usual. Although 32 percent of physicians cited a shortage of specialist services in close vicinity as a crucial challenge, a much greater majority (63 percent) thought that a "very important" wall was an insufficiency of IHS resources to allow the possibility of treatment by subspecialists.

For screening mammography (54 percent) and diabetic eye tests, a limited number of primary care doctors (60 percent) responded with the availability of preventive programs. Clinical performance ranged widely across the screening sites for ductal carcinoma (interquartile difference of 31 percent to 55 percent) and diabetic eye examination (intergrading range 44 percent to 58 percent ). Health centers with a higher percentage of doctors indicating that mammography testing was readily accessible had an adequate screening rate for breast cancer (46 percent) than those hospitals with the lowest percentage of doctors responding to service availability (35 percent), with a strong association at the level of the health center (p = 0.04, simp = 0.27).