Methyldopa overdose reports are exceedingly rare. Clinical manifestations include coma, hypothermia, hypotension, bradycardia, and dry mouth. In addition, prolonged, severe hypotension, along with marked renal potassium loss necessitating IV infusion of norepinephrine and vigorous potassium replacement therapy for almost two days, was reported.

**Hepatotoxicity**

- Chronic use of methyldopa is associated with mild and transient elevations in serum aminotransferase levels that resolve after discontinuation of the medication.

- Hepatic injury is rather uncommon and may appear within weeks or months to years after initiation of drug therapy.

- An acute injury demonstrates elevated levels of ALT and AST (5-to 100-fold). Most patients become jaundiced with symptoms resembling those of viral hepatitis. Liver biopsy shows hepatitis-like features, and re-exposure can lead to severe hepatitis and death.

- The chronic injury clinically resembles autoimmune hepatitis with marked elevations in liver enzymes, increases in IgG, and high titers of ANA antibodies. In addition, cirrhosis and end-stage liver disease can occur if drug therapy continues.

- Granulomatous hepatitis can also occur with methyldopa therapy associated with systemic symptoms.

- The disease resolves slowly with the discontinuation of the drug.

**Hematologic Effects**

- Positive Coombs' test shows within a few weeks of initiation of drug therapy, which rarely leads to fatal hemolytic anemia.

- Discontinuation of the drug promptly resolves the anemia, along with the use of corticosteroids.