**Local Adverse Reactions**

- Pain at IM/IV injection site

- Thrombophlebitis

**Gastrointestinal Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Stomatitis

- Nausea and vomiting

- Pseudomembranous colitis

- Enterocolitis

- Black hairy tongue

**Hypersensitivity Reactions**

- There are frequent reports of skin rashes and urticaria.

- Reports also exist of some cases of erythema multiforme and exfoliative dermatitis.

- Anaphylaxis is the most serious complication experienced and is usually associated with the parenteral form, which requires prompt treatment.

**Hepatotoxicity**

- A moderate elevation of serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) is reported, commonly in infants; its significance is unknown. In addition, mild transient elevation occurs with repeated intramuscular administration in individuals receiving larger than usual doses.

- Evidence indicates that SGOT(AST) gets released in the intramuscular injection site, and the increased quantities seen in the blood may not necessarily be from the liver as a source.

**Hemato-lymphatic Systems**

- These reactions are reversible on discontinuation of therapy, the etiology being a hypersensitive phenomenon.

- Hemolytic anemia

- Thrombocytopenia

- Eosinophilia

- Thrombocytopenic purpura

- Agranulocytosis

**Neurological Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Headache

- Seizures

**Opportunistic Infections**

- Superinfection with Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea(CDAD) and fungal infections

- Such cases warrant discontinuation of therapy and substitution of appropriate alternative treatment.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

- The administration of the cholera vaccine is not recommended during systemic antibiotic treatment as it reduces the efficacy of the cholera vaccine. Prolonged antibiotic treatment with intravesical BCG adversely impacts bladder cancer disease recurrence and outcomes. Avoid simultaneous use.

- Concomitant use of allopurinol with ampicillin increases the risk of Stevens-Johnson syndrome.

- Ampicillin is a bactericidal drug; combining bactericidal drugs with bacteriostatic drugs like doxycycline is generally not recommended.