Treatment begins at the site of injury and paramedics, and emergency medical services staff can play a significant role in stabilization before transfer to the hospital. Immobilization can help prevent the worsening of any existing injuries. In the case of serious trauma, address any life threats or concurrent traumatic injuries immediately.

Hypotension and shock will worsen the impact of any existing SCI and worsen the likelihood of neurologic recovery. Immediate measures are necessary to maintain breathing and hemodynamic stability. Surgical decompression may be warranted if feasible to lessen the extent of the injury.

Patients with SCI are best managed in neurological intensive care units with expertise in managing such patients. Dedicated trauma units must be identified and designated to transfer and care for these patients.

Rehabilitation is an integral part of healing, and these patients have the best possible outcomes with intense rehabilitation therapy under the guidance of physiatrists, physical therapists, and occupational therapists. Rehabilitation is to be continued on an outpatient basis once the patient is ready for discharge from the inpatient rehabilitation unit.

Several medications have had trials to help with improving outcomes in SCI, but the results have not shown significant benefits. Trials with nimodipine, gacyclidine, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, riluzole, gangliosides, minocycline, magnesium, acidic fibroblast growth factor have been studied to see their impact on improvement in patients with SCI.