Prevalence is a measure of how common a disease process is found in a specified at-risk population at a specific time point or during a specified time period.  Prevalence is thus a measure of disease burden for the specified population, or how commonly someone with the disease will be encountered in the specified population.

In biostatistics, prevalence could be considered similar to the pre-test probability.  That is, before any testing, the probability of a person in the specified population having the disease is the same as the prevalence of the disease in the population.  If the prevalence of a disease is 1% of the population, then we would expect approximately 1 in 100 people to have the disease before any testing.

Prevalence Impact on Positive Predictive Value (PPV) and Negative Predictive Value (NPV)

Prevalence thus impacts the positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) of tests.  As the prevalence increases, the PPV also increases but the NPV decreases.  Similarly, as the prevalence decreases the PPV decreases while the NPV increases.

For a mathematical explanation of this phenomenon, we can calculate the positive predictive value (PPV) as follows:

- PPV = (sensitivity x prevalence) / [ (sensitivity x prevalence) + ((1 – specificity) x (1 – prevalence)) ]

If we hold all values except for the prevalence the same then as prevalence increases the numerator will also increase for PPV.  In the denominator note the last term of “1 – prevalence.”  Thus as prevalence increases towards 100% (a value of one) the term “1 – prevalence” goes towards zero.  This drives the second part of the denominator, “(1 – specificity) x (1 – prevalence)”, to smaller and smaller values as prevalence increases.  Thus at a very high prevalence the value of “1 – prevalence” goes towards zero and the PPV equation reduces to:

- PPV = (sensitivity x prevalence) / [ (sensitivity x prevalence ) + ((1 – specificity) x (0)) ] =

- PPV = (sensitivity x prevalence) / [ (sensitivity x prevalence) + (0) ] =

- PPV = (sensitivity x prevalence) / (sensitivity x prevalence) = 1

Similarly we can write the negative predictive value (NPV) as follows:

- NPV = (specificity x (1 – prevalence)) / [ (specificity x (1 – prevalence)) + ((1 – sensitivity) x prevalence) ]

For the NPV as the prevalence increases (goes towards one) the term “1 – prevalence” becomes smaller making the numerator smaller.  In the denominator NPV has the same first term as the numerator, “specificity x (1 – prevalence)” which will also become smaller as the prevalence increases.  The second term in the denominator, “(1 – sensitivity) x prevalence” will increase as the prevalence increases.  As the prevalence comes very close to 100% we can write NPV as:

- NPV = (specificity x (1 – 1)) / [ (specificity x (1 – 1)) + ((1 – sensitivity) x 1) ] =

- (specificity x 0) / [ (specificity x 0) + (1 – sensitivity) ] =

- 0 / (0 + (1 – sensitivity)) = 0