The renal system pathologies have a wide range of clinical presentations. Emphysematous urinary tract infections, chronic kidney disease, nephrolithiasis, and urinary incontinence in men and women are topics of discussion below.

Emphysematous UTI is a form of UTI, where infections of the lower or upper urinary tract present with gas formation. Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae commonly cause emphysematous UTI although Proteus, Enterococcus, Pseudomonas, Clostridium, and Candida spp can be part of the causative organism.

Chronic kidney diseases are not uncommon. Approximately 16.8% of the US population has chronic kidney disease (CKD).

Nephrolithiasis is another pathology commonly seen in the renal system. Nephrolithiasis is the presence of crystallized calcium, magnesium, cystine, or uric acid in the renal system. Calcium stones are known to cause eighty percent of nephrolithiasis. Calcium stone has two forms: calcium oxalate which is the most common and the calcium phosphate.

Urinary incontinence is also a common renal pathology. It is an involuntary leakage of urine. There are four types of incontinence: urgency incontinence, stress incontinence, mixed incontinence, and incontinence due to incomplete bladder emptying. There are similarities and differences in the causative factors for the different types of urinary incontinence between men and women. In men, 11 to 34 percent of men older than 65 years have urinary incontinence.

Approximately 50 percent of adult women experience urinary incontinence.