**Screening: Tools
**

- The American Academy of Pediatricians has free guides for the history, physical, diagnostic testing, documentation, treatment, and legal issues in cases of suspected child abuse.

- The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides several scales assessing family relationships, including child abuse risks.

- The physical examination is still the most significant diagnostic tool to detect abuse. A child or adult with suspected abuse should be undressed, and a comprehensive physical exam should be performed. The skin should be examined for bruises, bites, burns, and injuries in different stages of healing. Examine for retinal hemorrhages, subdural hemorrhages, tympanic membrane rupture, soft tissue swelling, oral bruising, fractured teeth, and organ injury.

**Screening: Recommendations
**

- Evaluate for organic conditions and medications that mimic abuse.

- Evaluate patients and caregivers separately

- Clinicians should regularly screen for family and domestic violence and elder abuse

- The Elder Abuse Suspicion Index can be used to assess for elder abuse

- Screen for cognitive impairment before screening for abuse in the elderly

- Pattern injury is more suspicious

**Risks
**

- Failure to report child abuse is illegal in most states.

- Failure to report intimate partner and elder abuse is illegal in many states.

**Legal**

It is important to be aware of federal and state statutes governing domestic and family abuse. Remember that reporting domestic and family violence to law enforcement does not obviate detailed documentation in the medical record.

- Battering is a crime, and the patient should be made aware that help is available. If the patient wants legal help, the local police should be called.

- In some jurisdictions, domestic violence reporting is mandated. The legal obligation to report abuse should be explained to the patient.

- The patient should be informed how local authorities typically respond to such reports and provide follow-up procedures. Address the risk of reprisal, need for shelter, and possibly an emergency protective order (available in every state and the District of Columbia).

- If there is a possibility the patient’s safety will be jeopardized, the clinician should work with the patient and authorities to best protect the patient while meeting legal reporting obligations.

- The clinical role in managing an abused patient goes beyond obeying the laws that mandate reporting; there is a primary obligation to protect the life of the patient.

- The clinician must help mitigate the potential harm that results from reporting, provide appropriate ongoing care, and preserve the safety of the patient.

- If the patient desires, and it is acceptable to the police, a health professional should remain during the interview.

- The medical record should reflect the incident as described by the patient and any physical exam findings. Include the date and time the report was taken and the officer's name and badge number.

**National Statutes
**

Federal Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA)

Each state has specific child abuse statutes. Federal legislation provides guidelines for defining acts that constitute child abuse. The guidelines suggest that child abuse includes an act or failure recent act that presents an imminent risk of serious harm. This includes any recent act or failure to act on the part of a parent or caretaker that results in death, physical or emotional harm, sexual abuse, or exploitation.

Elder Justice Act

The Elder Justice Act provides strategies to decrease the likelihood of elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation. The Act utilizes three significant approaches:

Patient Safety and Abuse Act

The Violence Against Woman Act makes it a federal crime to cross state lines to stalk, harass, or physically injure a partner; or enter or leave the country violating a protective order. It is a violation to possess a firearm or ammunition while subject to a protective order or if convicted of a qualifying crime of domestic violence.