A few pearls regarding May-Thurner syndrome:

- Although MTS accounts for only 2% to 5% of all patients presenting with DVT, multiple autopsy studies have shown that the actual prevalence is as high as 14% to 32% in the general population.

- Despite the high prevalence, MTS remains clinically silent in most patients.

- Iliofemoral DVT is the most common presentation of MTS.

- Young women are at a higher risk of developing DVT compared to men.

- A transient risk factor is usually present in patients with MTS, which precipitates the thrombotic event.

- MTS has been associated with patent foramen ovale and cryptogenic stroke.

- Prompt anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin or fondaparinux is needed to prevent PE.

- Although most societies recommend warfarin for long-term anticoagulation, recent studies show that rivaroxaban is equally effective and has a lower risk of major bleeding (although this has not reached statistical significance in clinical studies).

- Venogram with IVUS is the gold standard in diagnosing MTS. In addition to diagnosis, it also helps in the treatment of DVT secondary to MTS.

- Catheter-directed thrombolysis, followed by stent placement, is the treatment of choice.

- Surgical resection of thrombus is falling out of favor. It is reserved for patients in whom endovascular treatment fails.

- Anticoagulation alone is not sufficient to treat patients with DVT secondary to MTS. It should be combined with catheter-directed thrombolysis.

- Post-thrombotic syndrome is the most common adverse event after developing iliofemoral DVT. Residual thrombus after thrombolysis and stent placement is positively associated with the risk of developing PTS.