Deviation from this normal development can cause a multitude of abnormalities in the growing heart. If there is a defect in the dynein, which guides the heart into the correct position, dextrocardia will occur. Dextrocardia occurs when the heart is located on the right side of the chest instead of the left. It is usually seen in Kartagener syndrome. If the endocardial cushion, which forms the valves and septums within the heart, does not fuse there will be an open connection between the right atrium and left atrium. This connection is called a patent foramen ovale. This will lead to shifting of oxygenated blood into the right side of the heart due to the increased pressure present on the left side, as well as paradoxical emboli. Along with a patent foramen ovale, there will also be valve absorbabilities, whether they be stenotic, regurgitant, displaced or atretic. The most common displaced valve seen in early development is Ebstein's anomaly. This is when the tricuspid valve is displaced downward into the right ventricle, which can cause right-sided heart failure and tricuspid regurgitation in the future. Lithium toxicity can cause it. The neural crest and endocardial cell migration are responsible for the twisting and fusion of the truncus arteriosus and bulbus cordis into the aorticopulmonary septum, ascending aorta, and pulmonary trunk. Failure of migration leads to the transposition of great vessels, patent truncus arteriosus, and tetralogy of Fallot. Transposition of the great vessels means that the aorta leaves from the right ventricle rather than the left and the pulmonary trunk leaves from the left ventricle. This creates a complete separation of systemic and pulmonary circulations. If not, intervention is done infants will die within months.