There has been a trend over the past half-century of delaying motherhood. There is known to be age-related fertility loss for women, and thus with the delay in childbearing more women are now seeking oocyte cryopreservation and other fertility preservation techniques to have children at a later date.

Another group to consider is the newly emerging population of transgender individuals at risk of infertility after pursuing gender-affirming surgeries or hormone therapy. The options for transgender preservation of fertility depend on the specific phase of transgender transition that the patient is undergoing. For transgender women, who were assigned male at birth, options before gender transition with hormones or surgery include cryopreservation of sperm or testicular tissue.

If puberty has already occurred, the patient may obtain semen from ejaculation or testicular sperm extraction (TESE). If TESE specimens are used, the sperm collected may only be used for in vitro fertilization (IVF) or intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), whereas if ejaculated sperm is used, it may be used for intrauterine inseminations (IUI) as well as IVF or ICSI. For prepubertal transgender girls who have not started gender-affirming hormones, the only option for fertility preservation is testicular tissue cryopreservation.

If a transgender woman has started hormone therapy with estrogen, the suppression of spermatogenesis is reversible after holding therapy for at least three months.

On the other hand, options for fertility preservation in transgender men, who were assigned female at birth, include oocyte and embryo cryopreservation or ovarian tissue cryopreservation if they present before receiving hormone therapy or surgery. For these patients, controlled ovarian stimulation is used to obtain eggs for oocyte and embryo cryopreservation. If a transgender male has already started hormone therapy with testosterone studies, have recommended cessation of testosterone for at least three months.

A strategy to reduce the estrogenic symptoms from ovarian stimulation for this group is to use an antagonist protocol with the addition of letrozole.