A large number of causes can induce syndromes and clinical manifestations of extrapyramidal damage. Most of the EPS alterations have a degenerative cause. A genetic component underlies some disorders, while injury processes, and those due to perfusive damage, are also possible. Extrapyramidal syndromes can also be associated with drugs such as antipsychotic drugs and reserpine, as well as toxic substances such as carbon monoxide, cyanide, and paraquat, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). Manganese can occupationally induce secondary parkinsonism through serious neurotoxicity involving the basal ganglia.

**General Clinical Features**

The alterations of the extrapyramidal system can be grouped into hypokinesias and hyperkinesias.

**Hypokinesias**

Unlike pyramidal pathology, extrapyramidal involvement does not lead to paralysis but instead to scarcity or absence of movements which are termed hypokinesia and akinesia, respectively. Both conditions can express voluntary and involuntary movements. Several voluntary acts, such as walking, writing, and speaking, will slow down. Concerning involuntary movements, a reduction, or loss, of the associated movements of pendulation of the upper limbs during walking or mimic and expressive movements can be observed. Furthermore, slowness in the execution of voluntary movements, especially at the beginning of the movement or when this is about to complete, can be present. This condition is termed bradykinesia.

**Hyperkinesias**

These concern abnormal involuntary movements that can present in extrapyramidal diseases. These movements become distinguished by:

- Choreic movements: sudden, irregular, incomplete, aimless, variable movements

- Athetotic movements: arrhythmic, slow, exaggerated, tentacular movements

- Hemiballism: the movements are similar to choreic movements but much more intense and persist during sleep

- Rapid muscle contractions, which reproduce a stereotyped movement, repeated obsessively; they can become voluntarily inhibited, even if with effort

- Tremors: the extrapyramidal tremor (e.g., the typical tremor of PD) is rhythmic, at a slow pace (4 to 5 oscillations per second), not very wide, uniform, more pronounced at rest, and attenuates during voluntary and passive movements - for instance, it disappears during sleep

- Spasms: involuntary movements of a tonic type (intense and lasting contraction, but transient) or clonic (series of rhythmic contractions of short duration, separated by periods of rest)

- Myoclonus: rapid, sudden contractions involving isolated muscles or bundles of muscle fibers - usually do not cause motor effects

Among hyperkinesias, several discharge phenomena are also included:

- Spastic crying: it is frequently observable in people with pseudobulbar syndrome, where an insignificant cause can trigger spasmodic or spastic crying

- Forced gaze crisis: oculogyric tonic crisis, with a forced deviation of the eyes, sideways or upwards, lasting from a few minutes to a few hours, which repeats periodically, sometimes accompanied by simultaneous homologous rotation of the head

- Torsion spasm: deformation of the lordotic or kyphoscoliosis back-lumbar spine, with contortion movements

- Spastic stiff neck: rhythmic spasms of rotation and inclination of the body towards one side, sometimes accompanied by a lifting of the corresponding shoulder

In extrapyramidal diseases, signs and symptoms of a non-motor nature can occur. For example, disturbances of attention, slowed or monotonous ideation, and poor control of emotion and instincts are such findings.

**Extrapyramidal Syndromes**

Concerning the different associations between tone and movement disorders, two fundamental syndromes are distinguishable: pallidal syndrome and striated syndromes.

**Pallidal syndrome**

This syndrome is characterized by muscle hypertonia, bradykinesia, and sometimes by tremor (hypertonic-hypokinetic syndrome) and is mainly observed in PD. In particular, PD is characterized by generalized extrapyramidal hypertonia, static tremor, and akinesia. The hypertonia is mainly observed at the root of the limbs, is permanent, and is accompanied by an exaggeration of postural reflexes. For example, flexing the hand on the forearm remains for a few moments in this position before reverting. The static tremor predominates in the upper limbs; moreover, it is wide and regular. Akinesia is a loss of the ability to move muscles voluntarily. A typical sign of akinesia is 'freezing.' The patient loses automatic and associated movements, with difficulty regaining balance, and they walk with the center of gravity moved forward or in a stooped posture. Non-motor symptoms such as pain are usually essential features of the disease and can also precede motor disorders.

**Striated Syndromes**

Also termed hyperkinetic-dystonic syndromes include the choreic syndrome characterized by choreic movements and hypotonia; the athetosis syndrome with athetosis movements and hypotonia; the hemiballism syndrome; and the hepatolenticular syndrome, better known as Wilson disease.

**Bilateral Injuries At The Brainstem Level**

In addition to quadriplegia, two fundamental pictures of hypertonia can be observed, depending on the level of injury: decerebrate rigidity and decorticate rigidity. The EPS plays a key role in both phenomena.

**Decorticate Rigidity**

Decorticate rigidity occurs when an injury at the superior border of the red nucleus disturbs descending corticospinal and rubrospinal tracts. This condition leads to the flexion of the upper extremities and extension of the lower extremities with painful stimuli.

**Decerebrate Rigidity**

Decerebrate rigidity occurs when an injury at the superior border of the pons disconnects the posterior aspect of the brainstem and the spinal cord from the rest of the brain. With the transection, stroke, or hemorrhage of the brainstem regions, the lateral ventrospinal tract and the reticulospinal tract over-activate extensor motor neurons with restricted inhibition of the cortex and basal ganglia. This, in turn, causes increased activity of alpha motor neurons and gamma motor neuron discharges.