Pathophysiologic conditions affected by EDRF dysfunction include an increase in monocyte and platelet adhesion to the endothelium, myocardial infarction, atherosclerosis, and stroke. This activity may be due to increased peripheral vascular tone caused by increased superoxide radical inactivation of NO or impaired NO synthesis. For example, the first step to the atherosclerotic process is endothelial dysfunction.

The quiescent endothelial cell in its normal state is attached to the endothelial cell surface and attached to the basement membrane. The endothelial cell has protective mechanisms against endothelial glycocalyx dysfunction and endothelial cell dysfunction. These protective mechanisms include a functional glycocalyx which coats the external surface of the plasma membrane in a composition of glycoprotein and glycolipid and several micro as well as macro physiologic responses to stress.

Type 1 endothelial activation, type 2 endothelial activation, endothelial apoptosis, and endothelial necrosis, all lead to endothelial dysfunction. Type 1 endothelial activation occurs almost immediately and does not require gene transcription or de novo protein synthesis. Type 2 endothelial activation can occur over a longer period, taking hours, days, or even months in some cases. In contrast to type 1 endothelial dysfunction, type 2 endothelial dysfunction requires gene transcription and de novo protein synthesis, thus requiring a longer period to progress. If endothelial activation is uncontrolled, type 2 endothelial activation can lead to endothelial apoptosis. Chronic endothelial activation can then lead to endothelial necrosis.  This is significant in cardiorenal syndrome, where endothelial dysfunction may serve as an intersection between renal dysfunction and cardiac dysfunction.

Endothelial cell activation can lead to reversible endothelial dysfunction. In this case, target treatment aims to restore normal endothelial cell function and to stop the reversible endothelial dysfunction. However, if the reversible endothelial dysfunction progresses without treatment, it can lead to endothelial apoptosis and endothelial necrosis. Both endothelial apoptosis and necrosis lead to irreversible endothelial dysfunction. In this case, target treatment cannot restore normal endothelial cell function nor stop reversible endothelial dysfunction.