In many patients with carcinoid have nonspecific symptoms, and diagnosis is delayed, and metastatic disease is present at diagnosis. Goals of treatment are to resect primary tumor and associated regional lymph nodes and to control carcinoid syndrome when present.

Surgical removal of the tumor is curative in localized disease although finding the primary when small can be challenging. The goal of surgery in midgut carcinoids is complete curative en bloc resection of the primary tumor and extensive mesenteric lymph node dissection. Subserosal-injected methylene blue helps identify surgical margins for midgut carcinoids. Small intestinal carcinoids can cause a severe desmoplastic reaction and deeply infiltrative lymph nodes around major vessels and thus complete surgical resection is seldom achieved, but cytoreductive surgery (resection of 90% of the tumor) from an experienced surgical team results in improved symptomatic outcomes. Surgery should not be delayed until symptoms occur because this makes cytoreductive surgery more difficult. As most patients with midgut carcinoids require treatment with somatostatin analogues at some point and these agents are associated with biliary stasis and cholelithiasis, cholecystectomy should be performed at the time of initial surgery. Small bowel obstruction is also an indication for surgery and is treated with resection of the involved segments and mesentery. All patients with metastatic carcinoids should be evaluated for a multimodality approach involving surgery, medical therapy, and radiotherapeutic techniques.Metastasectomy can also be curative in isolated metastasis and can also be used to decrease tumor bulk to provide relief in symptomatic patients. Liver-directed therapies for palliative control of advanced metastatic disease include chemoembolization and radioembolization.

Somatostatin analogues (SA) are the mainstay of medical therapy for carcinoid syndrome due to high expression of somatostatin receptors (SSTR) on these tumors. Octreotide and lanreotide bind to SSTR-2 and -5 and reduce diarrhea and flushing in up to 80% of patients. Somatostatin analogues have been shown to control the growth of well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors and to increase progression-free survival. Pancreatic malabsorption can occur with use of SAs and benefits from pancreatic enzyme supplementation. Tolerance to somatostatin analogues develops over time requiring dose escalation. Refractory diarrhea may benefit from the use of loperamide. It has been recommended that all patients with functional or nonfunctional neuroendocrine tumors (including carcinoids) be considered for treatment with somatostatin analogues and have routine tumor surveillance. Interferon-alpha has a potential role for refractory symptoms of carcinoid syndrome despite somatostatin analogue treatment. The role of mTOR inhibitors in the management of carcinoids needs further study. As carcinoids are slow growing, traditional chemotherapy is ineffective.

Peptide receptor radiotherapy (PRRT) utilizing somatostatin analogue chelated to beta emitting cytotoxic isotope, 90-Yttrium or 177-Lutetium is an emerging therapeutic modality that utilizes somatostatin receptor as a target. I 131 MIBG therapy is being used for metastatic neuroendocrine tumors with intense uptake and needs further studies.