**Internal Ear**

The internal ear is derived from ectoderm, and it is the first of the three anatomic parts of the ear to form. Development begins as a pair of short-lived thickenings of the surface ectoderm, the otic placode or otic disc, appear dorsolateral to the hindbrain around the fourth week of development—the otic placode forms due to the induction of surface ectoderm by the nearby notochord and paraxial mesoderm. The otic placode is one of the first sensory placodes involved in the formation of special sensory organs to develop.

The otic placode invaginates into the mesenchyme adjacent to the rhombencephalon to form an otic pit. The sides of the otic pit fold together and fuse to form a hollow piriform structure lined with columnar epithelium, called the otic vesicle. Rapidly, the otic vesicle moves deep to the surface ectoderm and is instead enveloped in mesenchyme to form the otic capsule. The statoacoustic, or vestibulocochlear, ganglion arises as neurons delaminate during the formation of the otic vesicle and, later, the ganglion splits into cochlear and vestibular portions.

The otic vesicle forms two visible regions: a ventral saccular portion and a dorsal utricular portion. The ventral saccular portion gives rise to internal ear structures involved in hearing, including the cochlear ducts and saccules. The dorsal utricular portion gives rise to the vestibular system, including the utricle, semicircular canals, and endolymphatic tube.

The otic vesicle elongates within the first four weeks to form a tube-like structure called the endolymphatic appendage. Soon after, a groove-like indentation forms and demarcates a tubular diverticulum on the medial side of the endolymphatic appendage. This diverticulum differentiates into the endolymphatic duct and sac and continues to grow until around the age of four.

**Internal Ear: Ventral Saccular Component**

The ventral saccular component of the otic vesicle forms a tubular cochlear duct, the primordial cochlea, within the mesenchyme by the sixth week. The cochlear duct grows and spirals two and a half times to produce the membranous cochlea. Rapidly, the saccule connects to the utricle via a duct called the ductus reuniens.

Mesenchyme surrounding the otic vesicle is induced to form a cartilaginous otic capsule, which will ossify to produce the internal ear's bony labyrinth later in development. The cartilaginous otic capsule then forms vacuoles that coalesce into the fluid-filled perilymphatic space of the cochlea. The fluid, or perilymph, resides within the perilymphatic space and surrounds the membranous labyrinth. The perilymphatic space then separates into two divisions: the scala vestibule and the scala tympani. Two membranes separate the cochlear duct from the perilymphatic divisions. The basilar membrane demarcates the cochlear duct from the scala tympani, while the vestibular membrane separates the cochlear duct from the scala vestibule. Cells in the lateral aspect of the cochlear duct differentiate to form the organ of Corti, or spiral organ or spiral organ of Corti, within the scala media of the cochlear duct. The cochlear duct also develops an attachment to the surrounding cartilage via connective tissue, the spiral ligament.

The organ of Corti is formed when ridges of epithelial cells from the cochlear duct produce rows of mechanosensory hair cells that are covered by the tectorial membrane. The spiral ganglion forms when ganglion cells derived from the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII) migrate along the spirals of the membranous cochlea. Nervous processes then extend from the spiral ganglion to hair cells of the organ of Corti.

The cartilaginous otic capsule surrounding the membranous labyrinth ossifies by about 23 weeks to form the true bony labyrinth.

**Internal Ear: Dorsal Utricular Component**

The dorsal utricular portion of the otic vesicle forms the utricle and semicircular canals, the organs of balance. During the sixth week, disc-like epithelial outpouchings extend dorsolaterally from the dorsal utricular portion of the primordial membranous labyrinth. The central portions of these discs approach each other, and their epithelium joins to form fusion plates which ultimately regress via programmed cell death. The peripheral unfused portions of the discs that fail to regress form incipient semicircular ducts that attach to the utricle. Later, the semicircular ducts are incorporated within the anterior, posterior, and lateral semicircular canals.

At one end of each semicircular duct, a dilatation of the duct develops and is called an ampulla. The ampullae contain sensory hair cells that form crests with specialized receptor areas, the cristae ampullares. Similar specialized areas form in the walls of the saccule and utricle. These regions sense changes in angular acceleration and serve as the sensory organ of rotation. Sensory cells of the cristae ampullares generate impulses that reach the brain via vestibular fibers of the vestibulocochlear nerve.

**Middle Ear**

The middle ear is composed of the tympanic cavity and the Eustachian, also known as the auditory or pharyngotympanic, tube. Structures of the middle ear are derived from the tubotympanic sulcus, or tubotympanic recess, an endodermal extension from the first pharyngeal pouch. Around the 5th week of development, the tubotympanic sulcus extends laterally to approach the floor of the first pharyngeal groove but remains separated by mesenchyme. During development, the endoderm of the tubotympanic sulcus and the ectoderm of the first pharyngeal groove further approach each other, but they continue to maintain a layer of mesoderm between them. The end result is a trilaminar tympanic membrane made up of tissues derived from all three germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm.

The tympanic cavity develops as an expansion of the distal portion of the tubotympanic sulcus. Anatomically, the tympanic cavity divides into upper (attic) and lower (atrium) chambers and gradually surrounds the ossicles, their attachments, and the chorda tympani. The Eustachian tube is formed from the proximal portion of the tubotympanic sulcus. The Eustachian tube is more horizontal, short, and narrow at birth than in later adulthood, which is a major reason infants have recurrent ear infections. Despite an endodermal origin, both the tympanic cavity and the Eustachian tube are ultimately lined by epithelium-derived from endoderm and neural crest cells. The Eustachian tube demonstrates the most growth during weeks 16 to 28 of the fetal period.

The middle ear ossicles initially form around six weeks of development. They first appear in a cartilaginous form that arises from neural crest-derived mesenchymal cells within the first and second pharyngeal arches that condense at the dorsal end of the tubotympanic sulcus. The malleus and incus develop from Meckel's cartilage of the first pharyngeal arch. The stapes have a complex origin, partly arising from both neural crest cells and Reichert's cartilage of the second pharyngeal arch. As the tympanic cavity develops, the ossicular cartilages go through endochondral ossification that continues throughout the entire fetal period. Late in the fetal period, the mesenchyme that fills the tympanic cavity and surrounds the ossicles is resorbed to produce an air-filled tympanic cavity with ossicles suspended inside. Eventually, the tympanic cavity expands and forms the mastoid antrum.

The tensor tympani muscle arises from the mesoderm of the first pharyngeal arch and is innervated by the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve. The stapedius muscle originates from the mesoderm of the second pharyngeal arch and is innervated by the facial nerve.

**External Ear**

The external ear first develops in the lower cervical region, but it gradually moves posterolaterally during development to reach its typical location.

The external auditory meatus arises from the dorsal portion of the first pharyngeal groove. The meatus first develops as an invagination of ectoderm between the first and second pharyngeal arches that extends toward the developing middle ear structures. Around the fifth week, the ectodermal diverticulum extends toward the pharynx and houses proliferating ectodermal cells that produce an epithelial plug, the meatal plug, that will fills its entire lumen. At approximately ten weeks of development, the end of the meatal plug expands circumferentially to create a disc-like structure. Eventually, the disc-like meatal plug contacts the primordial malleus, divides, and leaves behind a thin ectodermal layer forming an incipient tympanic membrane. A continuation of the thin skin of the pinna lines the entire external auditory meatus and the outer surface of the tympanic membrane. By 18 weeks, the external auditory meatus is completely patent and expands to produce its typical morphology.