Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome presents with symptoms related to increased IOP, including eye pain, photophobia, blurred vision, headache, nausea, or vomiting. Important information in the history should also include symptoms related to retinal detachment, including a history of ocular trauma, recent surgery, floaters, photopsia, peripheral visual field loss, or decreased visual acuity.

Although the most common cause of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment is non-traumatic, blunt ocular trauma to the eye may lead to Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome.

Typically, there are two mechanisms through which blunt ocular trauma can result in retinal detachment – one is from contusion to the globe, whereas the other is a consequence of a perforating injury to the posterior segment of the eye.

Retinal detachment following traumatic contusion usually results from a direct blow to the globe of the eye. These usually result in two types of retinal breaks: retinal dialysis (typically located in the superonasal and inferotemporal quadrant) and large, irregular breaks at the level of the equator.

The retinal detachment that results from a traumatic perforation of the posterior segment of the eye requires urgent management at the time of diagnosis. This type of traumatic injury is not likely to appear similarly to Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome as the intraocular pressure is usually lower.

Closed ocular traumas with contusions that lead to retinal detachment often are not accompanied by acute symptoms making them difficult to diagnose at the time of injury. Several reasons, including delayed symptom presentation, waiting to seek medical attention, and other distracting injuries, add to the delay in prompt ophthalmic evaluation.

Furthermore, history should include an assessment of other etiologies of increased IOP such as a family history of glaucoma in a first-degree relative, history of ocular hypertension, history of intraocular surgery, intraocular inflammation, refractive error, pertinent medical history including cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, chronic use of topical/systemic corticosteroids, and other medications.

As Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome may appear similar to uveitis or uveitic glaucoma, history should also be taken to evaluate for uveitis or intraocular inflammation. The history may include prior episodes of ocular hyperemia, photophobia, eye pain, excessive tearing, and decreased visual acuity. It is also important to identify and rule out other systemic inflammatory diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease, ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, sarcoidosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, syphilis, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS that could present with ocular pain and uveitis.

Signs of uveitis include white blood cells and flare in the anterior chamber. Anterior uveitis is also associated with iris nodules, keratic precipitates (granulomatous and non-granulomatous), pigment on the anterior lens capsule, and posterior synechiae. These findings are typically not present in Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome. In particular, there are some causes of uveitis that are associated with high IOP.

Acute uveitis secondary to toxoplasmosis, herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, sarcoidosis, syphilis, and Posner-Schlossman syndrome are associated with increased IOP. Mechanisms of increased IOP in uveitis are hypothetically caused by the deposition of inflammatory proteins and cells within the trabecular meshwork, trabeculitis leading to outflow obstruction, or increased aqueous humor production.

Therefore, it is essential to evaluate for other possible causes of increased IOP in patients presenting with symptoms related to anterior uveitis as it is an important differential diagnosis of Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome.

The examination should include an IOP measurement, a slit-lamp examination including gonioscopy, and a dilated fundus examination with scleral depression to evaluate for rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, including evidence of retinal dialysis. It is important to perform a slit lamp and gonioscopic examination to rule out other causes of elevated IOP. Findings such as peripheral anterior synechiae and neovascularization of the angle would suggest an alternative etiology for elevated IOP.

Typically, angle changes associated with angle recession are seen on the gonioscopic exam in patients with blunt trauma to the eye, which can also be a risk factor for retinal detachment. Therefore, it's important to understand that both angle recession and retinal detachment can occur simultaneously in patients with blunt trauma to the eye leading to Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome.

A triad of elevated IOP, rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and aqueous cells in the anterior chamber allows for the diagnosis of Schwartz-Matsuo syndrome.