Rifampin is the cornerstone of M kansasii therapy. The first line therapy recommended by IDSA-ATS guidelines for M. kansasii is rifampin, ethambutol, and isoniazid plus pyridoxine.M. kansasii are predictably resistant to pyrazinamide. Isoniazid (INH) resistance should be interpreted with caution as a higher concentration is needed for M. kansasii when compared to M. tuberculosis. M. kansasii organisms show resistance to isoniazid at one mcg/mL but are susceptible at five mcg/mL. In a treatment naïve patient, INH is effective regardless of concentration achieved in the serum. Rifampin-containing regimens have low failure rates (1.1%) and low long-term relapse rates (< 1%). Based on M. kansasii susceptibilities in vitro, patients with rifampin-resistant M kansasii disease should be treated with a 3-drug regimen, which should include clarithromycin or azithromycin. The other two drugs should be chosen from moxifloxacin, ethambutol, sulfamethoxazole, or streptomycin.M. kansasii be tested only for clarithromycin and rifampin susceptibility. INH and streptomycin susceptibility should be tested as secondary agents.

M. kansasii in HIV patients:

One strategy to treat M. kansasii infection in HIV-positive patients is to use an NRTI-based regimen, allowing for a full dose of rifampin, which is the cornerstone of therapy for M. kansasii. If a protease inhibitor (PI) such as darunavir or atazanavir or non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor [NNRTI] such as efavirenz or nevirapine is included in HIV treatment regimens, rifabutin can be used instead of rifampin. Clarithromycin can be added to improve efficacy, but rifabutin-related toxicity can increase when combined with clarithromycin.

Monitoring therapy:

Serial sputum samples for AFB should be obtained regularly so patients failing therapy are recognized early and susceptibility testing for additional drugs can be done. Serial CXR can be administered, although lung disease is likely to evolve at a slow pace. Routine monitoring for adverse effects of medications and drug-drug interactions is recommended.