Muscle wasting, atrophy, and degeneration are thought to occur secondary to either direct mechanical compression from an underlying anatomic variation, space-occupying lesion, or secondary to repetitive traction and irritation of the nerve at one of the anatomically predisposed sites of SSN focal entrapment as described below.

**Anatomic sites of entrapment**

The SSN is derived from the upper trunk of the brachial plexus, consisting of fibers from the C5 and C6 nerve roots.

The SSN traverses through the supraclavicular fossa, passing through the posterior triangle of the neck before coursing deep to the trapezius muscle and the clavicle. Continuing laterally toward the suprascapular notch, the SSN is accompanied by its artery and vein. Aiello et al.

**Anatomic variants**

Multiple anatomic variations have been gaining increasing attention in the literature as additional elements predisposing to SSN dysfunction. Much of the attention has focused on variations in the morphology of the suprascapular notch itself, given that it remains the most common site of SSN focal entrapment. SSN neuropathy has been reported in the setting of an ossified STSL, with varying degrees including the presence of a double suprascapular foramen created by multiple, discrete osseous bridges.

The ITSL has continued to gain literature support and documented evidence of its physiologic existence in the majority of the population. While historical studies reported the presence of the ITSL in about half of the population, more recent cadaveric specimen dissections identify a discrete, complex ITSL structure in 100% of the dissected specimen. In 2005, Plancher et al. identified the spinoglenoid ligament in all cadaveric specimens, with the ligament reproducibly demonstrating an irregular quadrangular shape, thinnest in its midportion and fanning out to its insertions superomedially and inferolaterally. The inferolateral portion of the ligament demonstrates distinct superficial and deep layers inserting into the posterior aspect of the shoulder capsule and the posterior aspect of the glenoid neck, respectively.