The management of hyperkalemia is done by an interprofessional team because of its potential to induce cardiac arrest and severe weakness. Once hyperkalemia is diagnosed, the primary condition must be treated. Patients with hyperkalemia need cardiac monitoring, and nurses should be familiar with ECG features of hyperkalemia, which are often the first to appear. The pharmacist has to ensure that all nephrotoxic medications and agents that raise potassium are discontinued and discuss their findings with the clinical team. Nursing will perform monitoring and follow-up, watching for signs of worsening hyperkalemia and alerting the clinical staff immediately for corrective action. All interprofessional team members must engage in open communication with the rest of the team, particularly when patient status changes necessitate intervention. Meticulous records are also crucial to proper patient care so that everyone involved operates from the same up-to-date patient data.

If hyperkalemia is severe, the nephrologist should be consulted. If ECG changes are present, a cardiology consult should be made. Treatment to lower the high potassium should be ongoing. These patients need cardiac monitoring 24/7 until hyperkalemia has resolved. The dietitian should educate the patient on a low potassium diet. For those with renal dysfunction, continued follow-up with a nephrologist is recommended. Only through open communication between members of the interprofessional team can the morbidity of hyperkalemia be avoided.

**Outcomes**

The majority of patients have an excellent prognosis. However, patients with chronic disorders like end-stage renal failure may require continual blood work to monitor potassium.