Patients taking oxazepam for insomnia should avoid caffeine-containing products as they may decrease the efficacy of the drug. Coadministering oxazepam with other CNS depressants such as diphenhydramine or hydrocodone may result in enhancement of CNS effects (e.g., severe sedation and respiratory depression). It is also not recommended for those who suffer from sleep apnea.

Concurrent use of opioid agonists such as methadone, morphine, and naltrexone may result in respiratory depression, severe hypotension, and sedation.

Oxazepam may also cross the placenta and be excreted into breastmilk; thus, it is not a recommended pharmaceutical therapy in pregnant or nursing women. According to the prior system of FDA categorization of the safety of medications during pregnancy, there is evidence of risk to the fetus when using benzodiazepines during pregnancy. In some instances, potential benefits may still justify use. In mothers receiving benzodiazepines during pregnancy, neonatal flaccidity, as well as withdrawal symptoms, may be present.

Oxazepam use is not recommended for geriatric patients due to increased risk of dependence and cognitive impairment as well as falls. Several studies have indicated that long-term use of benzodiazepines such as oxazepam may potentiate the development of dementia in the elderly; clinicians should exercise caution when prescribing oxazepam in the geriatric population.

Patients who have demonstrated hypersensitivity to previous oxazepam use or other benzodiazepines should not take oxazepam. Also, patients with substance misuse disorders should not be prescribed oxazepam.