Evaluation of SpA involves both laboratory and radiographic testing. The approach differs depending on whether a patient presents with inflammatory back pain vs. inflammatory arthritis, enthesitis, or dactylitis.

In a patient who presents with inflammatory back pain, the initial step is to obtain plain films of the sacroiliac joints and spine as well as inflammatory markers. Inflammatory markers should be elevated in the presence of a SpA. In AS, plain films typically detect late structural changes and may not be useful early in the disease. Classic findings on plain film are 1) “shiny corner (sclerosis at the attachment of annulus fibrosis to the anterior corner of vertebral endplate), 2) “bamboo spine” (calcification of fibrous ring of the intervertebral discs forming marginal syndesmophytes), and 3) “squaring” of vertebral bodiesHLA-B27 is obtained; at that time, MRI can also be considered as it is useful for early detection of signs of inflammation. Patients with nr-axSpA do not have definitive radiographic findings of sacroiliitis but have serological and clinical evidence of a SpA

In a patient who presents with signs of inflammatory arthritis, enthesitis, or dactylitis, the presence of psoriasis, IBD, or preceding infection should be evaluated. In the presence of a predisposing condition, a diagnosis of PsA, IBD-related SpA, or ReA can be made. In the absence of a predisposing condition, autoimmune (including HLA-B27) and inflammatory markers should be obtained, and patients should have radiographs of their affected joint(s) and be evaluated for uveitis.