To prepare a compound microscopy sample, researchers cut the bone sample to approximately 25 mm in length using a saw microtome. They refine the bone using some warm water and polish the side that will touch the microscope glass slide using the grinding paper and micro-mesh polishing pad. Afterward, they clamp the entire segment in a vice and carefully make a narrow slice. They cut the section to 5mm by 5mm chip. Transparent epoxy glue is used to bind the segment to the microscope glass slide. Researchers then firmly attach the sample to the slide, using the polish paper to decrease thickness to about 25um. The dust is removed by wiping the preparation with water followed by coverslipping before final viewing under 40x magnification.

**Ground section compact bone**(Image 1,2): lamellar organization of Boston with Haversian canal is visible in the horizontal section of the bone. At the outer surface thin layer of the periosteum can be seen. Two layers of the periosteum are difficult to differentiate in the ground section. In many cases, periosteum may also be lost if not properly preserved. Endosteum is visible as the lining membrane of the osteon and the internal wall of the shaft.

**Hematoxylin and eosin stain (Image 3):**

The periosteum is composed of two layers: The outer firm and a fibrous layer made up of collagen and reticular fibers and an inner proliferative cambial layer.

The periosteum is identifiable on the outer surface of the bone; both layers of the periosteum can be differentiated. The outer layer provides elasticity, while the inner layer consists of three to four layers of cells.

Periosteum divides into three zones.

The first zone adjacent to the bony surface predominantly contains osteoprogenitor and osteoblast; this thinnest part of the periosteum can be named as a germinative zone.

The second zone is the thickest part and transparent part of the periosteum; it contains capillaries and amorphous extracellular matrix. Fibroblast is abundant in this layer. This layer contains pericyte along with microvessels.

The third zone of the periosteum consists of abundant fibroblast and collagen fibers; the extracellular matrix is low in amount. The collagen fibers are firm and insoluble. This layer is also known as the fibrous layer. With the aging, collagen fibers and cells decrease, and periosteum becomes thinner.

The endosteal membrane is identifiable as a membrane covering the osteonal (Haversian) canal, and Volkman's canal.

Osteoprogenitor cells are identifiable in both endosteum and deeper layer of the periosteum; In adult bone, the deeper layer of the periosteum is thinner. Osteoprogenitor cells appear flattened with light staining in growing bones. It may be acidophilic or slightly basophilic also. In the inner layer, multiple cells are visible, while in the outer layer shows fibrous structure. The bone covering is a layer of the flattened cells in sites where remodeling is not active.

PEriosteum is anchored to osseous tissue by extended cellular processes between osteoblasts and osteocytes known as the lacuna-canalicular network. The perforating fibers also form a nail-like structure and continue with collagenous fibers of the internal matrix of the bone; these perforating fibers are known as Sharpey's fibers also keep the periosteum anchored to the bone. The other involves perforating fibers.