Exercises have become the cornerstone of treating and preventing back pain. Evidence suggests that the lack of muscle strength can itself contribute to low back pain even in the absence of degeneration. A study of adolescents aged between 14 to 16 and who had minimal to no degenerative changes showed that weakness of the lumbar spine extension was a risk factor for developing low back pain.

Though there are many modalities of exercise therapies that are beneficial for back pain, this article will only discuss the motor control exercises here because motor control exercises allow regaining the stability and control of the spine, which patients who have low back pain lose.

Among the paraspinal muscles, the deeper uni-segmental multifidus muscle control stiffness and intervertebral relationship. The larger multi-segmental and global erector spinae are torque generators and aid in lifting. The deep fibers of the multifidus are the first to become active when a limb is moved because a limb can only move on a stable axial skeleton. Hence co-activation of the spinal and abdominal muscles is required before limb movement or any activity that involves perturbation of the trunk and spine.

The dysfunction of the multifidus muscle results in delay and reduced activity.  When there is a delay or reduced activity in the deeper multifidus, the larger multi-segmental muscles compensate by co-activation. Motor control errors or lack of the abdominals and the multifidus acting before larger global muscles increase compressive forces across spinal segments and result in pain.

The Motor control exercise (MCE) program involves three stages.

The target to aim for is 30 repetitions in each position. After reaching the goal by the second week, then the second stage of the program starts. In the second stage, increased loads are placed on the trunk by placing the upper and lower limbs and the trunk in various positions while continuing with the ADIM. This activity may involve heel slide in supine, curls in supine, side bridge with knees bent, the side bridge with knees straight, prone plank, supine bridge, a quadruped with raised contralateral arm and leg. The second stage continues from the second week to the fourth week. From the fifth week, the patient can progress to the third stage of the program; this involves using functional positions like rolling, sit to stand transfer, squatting, and sit to stand transfer. Rabin et al. provide a detailed description of images.

The lack of ability in patients with low back pain to compensate for unexpected balance challenges can be improved with rehabilitation. Also, retraining increases the cross-sectional area of the multifidus, which is usually maintained in the long term and helps to decrease recurrence and chronicity.