The most common complications associated with hemodialysis are:

- Intradialytic hypotension: This causes poor long-term outcomes due to increased mortality and increased rate of regional wall motion abnormalities during dialysis, known as myocardial stunning. A nadir systolic BP lower than 90 mmHg strongly correlates with mortality. It usually presents as dizziness, light-headedness, nausea, or subtle symptoms. Management revolves around maintaining the patient in the Trendelenburg position and rapidly administering a 100 mL bolus of normal saline through the bloodline. Reduce the ultrafiltration rate and observe the patient until vitals have stabilized.

- Muscle cramps: The pathogenesis is unknown. Hypotension, high ultrafiltration rate, hypovolemia, and low-sodium dialysis solution predispose to cramps. These factors trigger vasoconstriction and muscle hypo-perfusion, with secondary impairment of muscle relaxation. When occurring concomitantly with hypotension, treatment with 0.9% saline is effective. Forced stretching of the muscle involved could provide relief.

Some reactions are medical emergencies and must be managed by an immediate stopping of dialysis, clamping of lines, and supportive care followed by definitive care.

- Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome: This is more common in patients during or soon after their first treatment. It is a clinical syndrome characterized by neurologic deterioration, restlessness, mental confusion, headache, occasional muscle twitching, and coma. It occurs due to a substantial gradient between the urea concentrations in the CSF and blood that causes water movement into the central nervous system (CNS), resulting in raised intracranial pressure. Patients undergoing fast dialysis develop seizures and cerebral edema more often. A reasonable goal of urea concentration reduction is 40% over two hours, URR of 0.4. Adding an osmotic agent to the blood could prevent the gradient from forming. Sodium, mannitol, high glucose dialysate, and glycerol are usually added. Setting the dialysate’s sodium concentration higher throughout the treatment may be beneficial.

- Dialyzer reactions: Anaphylactic type A reactions present with dyspnea, increased body and local temperature at the fistula site, a feeling of impending doom, itching, urticaria, coryza, watery eyes, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea. Symptoms may begin anytime during the first 30 minutes following dialysis due to hypersensitivity to ethylene oxide used to sterilize dialyzers. Management includes intravenous antihistamines, steroids, and epinephrine. Proper rinsing of dialyzers before use eliminates residual allergens and helps prevent them. Nonspecific type B dialyzer reactions cause chest or back pain 20 to 40 minutes after commencing dialysis, attributable to complement activation. Trying a different dialyzer membrane may help prevent it.

- Hemolysis: Acute hemolysis during dialysis is a medical emergency indicated by the port-wine appearance in the venous blood line, a marked fall in the hematocrit, and a pink-colored plasma centrifuged blood sample. The patient should be evaluated by hematologic investigations and kept under observation for delayed hemolysis. A dialysate sample must be investigated to find the cause.

- Air embolism: This is a fatal complication with foam noted in the dialyzer’s venous blood line. A churning sound may be heard during chest auscultation. Place the patient in a left lateral recumbent position, administer 100% oxygen by mask and aspirate air from the cardiac chambers with a percutaneously inserted needle or cardiac catheterization.

- Other nonspecific complications include nausea and vomiting (10%), headache (70%), chest and back pain (1% to 4%), and itching. These are probably related to hypotension or could be an early manifestation of disequilibrium syndrome. Treating the associated hypotension resolves the symptoms. A single predialysis dose of 5 to 10 mg metoclopramide is sufficient. Acetaminophen given during dialysis can help manage the headache. Switching to a different type of dialyzer membrane could reduce itching caused by low-grade hypersensitivity to blood circuit components. Vascular access dysfunction, most commonly stenosis of arteriovenous access, is the strongest determinant of the quality of life of a dialysis patient. There are reduced blood flow and risk for thrombosis.

- Precautions for vascular access: Do not cause additional trauma to the arm at the access site; avoid wearing tight clothes/jewelry, carrying heavy items, and sleeping on the arm. Avoid blood collection or measurement of BP on this arm. Rotate the site of needle insertion on the access. Use gentle pressure to arrest bleeding after needle removal. Bleeding can be stopped by applying gentle pressure; the patient should be educated to call a health care provider for prolonged/profuse bleeding lasting more than 30 minutes. Bleeding is due to the use of heparin in dialysis patients and can be treated efficiently using protamine sulfate. Monitoring venous and arterial pressures to detect a line separation, securing and taping needles, using wetness detectors for blood and dialysate leaks, and closed connector devices for tubing junctions. Periodic local site examination for any signs of infection like redness, warmth, and pain must be carried out. In case of loss of normal bruit, access site clotting should be ruled out to prevent limb ischemia.

Dialysis is used to treat electrolyte imbalance; however, it can also cause it. Hyperkalemia is the most common and clinically significant complication in non-compliant patients besides hypermagnesemia, hyponatremia, and hypocalcemia.