The treatment guidelines for autoimmune hepatitis are continually evolving. Untreated individuals develop cirrhosis and subsequently die of liver failure two years from diagnosis.

- Elevated AST and ALT more than ten times the upper limit of normal, or at least five times the upper limit of normal

- Gamma globulin at least two times the upper limit of normal

- Presence of bridging necrosis and multilobular necrosis in liver biopsy.

It is now well established that the use of corticosteroids leads to complete remission and in most cases improves mortality. The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases recommends monotherapy with prednisone or combination therapy with prednisone and azathioprine. However, due to multiple adverse effects of long-term use of prednisone, combination therapy is preferred over monotherapy with prednisone. Monotherapy with prednisone is preferred in cases of pregnancy, intolerance to azathioprine, an absence of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) activity, or severe cytopenia. Immunosuppressive therapy should not be started in patients with preexisting comorbid conditions such as vertebral compression, brittle diabetes, uncontrolled hypertension, psychosis.

For monotherapy, a typical induction dose of prednisone is 60 mg daily for 1 week followed by 40 mg in the second week, and 30 mg daily in the third and fourth week. The maintenance dose of prednisone is 20 mg daily until the endpoint or deep clinical remission. The prednisone should be tapered over time and eventually discontinued. The American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases recommends at least 3 years of treatment. Upon completion of prednisone, patients are classified as in remission, relapsed, or treatment failure based on their histological and laboratory response to steroids, and the presence or absence of clinical symptoms. Histologic regression lags by 3 to 6 months, so treatment must be continued despite normalization of liver enzymes. For combination therapy, the induction dose of prednisone is 30 mg daily for 1 week, followed by 20 mg daily for 1 week, followed by 15 mg daily for 2 weeks. The maintenance dose is 10 mg daily until the endpoint. The dose of azathioprine in combination therapy for both induction and maintenance is 30 mg oral daily.

Budesonide may be used instead of prednisone to reduce the adverse effects associated with steroid treatment. The combination of budesonide and azathioprine is emerging as an alternative first-line therapy. In cases of inadequate or incomplete response, or azathioprine intolerance, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine A, and tacrolimus can be used.

Remission occurs when the patient becomes asymptomatic with normalization of inflammatory markers, transaminases, gamma globulin, and histological improvement in liver biopsy.

Relapse can occur after a patient in remission stops therapy. About 50% of patients have disease relapse within 6 months of discontinuing therapy. Relapse is defined by the elevation of AST (three times the upper limit of normal), the reappearance of histological findings after discontinuing therapy.

Liver cirrhosis can develop in about 7% to 40% of treated patients. The development of cirrhosis is associated with incomplete response, treatment failure, and multiple relapses. Once cirrhosis develops, upper endoscopy should be performed for esophageal varices surveillance. Regular screening for hepatocellular carcinoma should be done with biannual liver ultrasound and alpha-fetoprotein. Overall, management of liver cirrhosis in autoimmune hepatitis is similar regardless of etiology.  Finally, liver transplantation is considered the standard of care in patients presenting with fulminant hepatic failure or those with the progression of disease despite multiple lines of therapy. Patients are also encouraged to avoid alcohol, unregulated herbal supplements, and high amounts of dietary fats.