Obtaining an accurate history from the patient, family, bystanders, or first responders is of pivotal importance as this can help determine what the patient was doing when symptoms started and in what environment they were found. Symptoms of heat illness vary depending on which form of heat injury has occurred. The following are a list of various heat-related injuries:

- Heat edema: swelling and possible discomfort in the distal extremities due to vasodilation and gravity-dependent pooling of fluids. An example of this would be an older individual who has recently arrived at an environment hotter than previously accustomed to with dependent swelling in the extremities after one to two days. Individuals may complain that gloves or shoes feel tight due to this acral swelling.

- Heat rash (also known as miliaria or prickly heat): caused by obstruction of eccrine sweat glands during exposure to hot climates. The use of restrictive clothing or occlusive objects like bandages may exacerbate heat rash. The various types include:

- 
              
- Miliaria crystallina: this is the most common and mild form and involves the superficial stratum corneum. It typically develops on the face and trunk as small, clear vesicles. This condition can also appear during the neonatal period.
              
              
- Miliaria rubra: this involves the deeper epidermis. It presents as small, non-follicular erythematous macules and papules topped by a punctate vesicle, usually on the neck and upper trunk. These may be pruritic or feel like a burn. The onset is typically days to weeks after heat exposure and can progress to a chronic, pustular state known as miliaria pustulosa.
              
              
- Miliaria profunda: this more severe form involves the deeper, dermal-epidermal junction. It presents as larger white vesicles that are more commonly asymptomatic due to their location deeper in the dermis.

- Heat cramps: involuntary spasmodic contractions of large muscle groups as opposed to an isolated muscle spasm/cramp that can also occur during or after exertion. This condition is due to a relative deficiency of sodium, potassium, chloride, or magnesium. Other symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, fatigue, weakness, sweating, and tachycardia.

- There has previously been a distinction between muscle cramping due to heat exposure and cramping caused by exertion, also known as exercise-associated muscle cramps (EAMCs). The reason behind this is because research has shown that exertion-related cramping is not necessarily related to elevated body temperature, it does not occur with passive heating at rest, and it can be present during exercise in cool, temperature-controlled environments. Regardless, the treatment, as described below, is the same for both cramping conditions.

- Heat syncope: temporary, self-limited dizziness, weakness, or loss of consciousness during prolonged standing or positional changes in a hot environment, including physical activity. The thinking is that it is due to a combination of dehydration, pooling of blood in the venous system, decreased cardiac filling, and low blood pressure, which leads to decreased cerebral blood flow.

- Heat stress or heat exhaustion: symptoms usually include any combination of nausea, vomiting, dizziness, light-headedness, irritability, headache, thirst, weakness, excessive sweating, muscle cramps, and decreased urine output in the setting of high body temperatures. External temperatures may be more moderate if associated with intense physical exertion. Survey-based data has shown that some of the most common symptoms are headache, exhaustion, or a combination of symptoms.

- Heat injury: presents with similar symptomatology as heat exhaustion and includes organ injury or dysfunction (cardiac, renal, hepatic, gut, or musculoskeletal injury).

Central nervous system involvement with symptoms or signs that may include seizures, gait abnormalities, delirium, coma, etc., in the setting of elevated temperature cause concern for heatstroke, as described elsewhere.