Infection with M. chelonae may be asymptomatic. Colonization of the pulmonary tract in cystic fibrosis patients is likely. M. abscessus frequently cause pulmonary infections. Skin biopsy and cultures should help to evaluate skin and subcutaneous infections on the extremities, those not responding to antibiotics, or in patients who had injection procedures or are immunocompromised. The biochemical evaluation in the microbiologic lab is inadequate to identify NTM to the species level, which is important for instituting appropriate therapy. Molecular techniques such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) should be utilized to identify NTM including M chelonae.
M. chelonae can have unpredictable resistance pattern. However, most are sensitive to macrolide and aminoglycosides. Susceptibility testing is recommended.

High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) alone is not enough to separate M. chelonae from M. abscessus. Acridinium ester-labeled DNA probes specific for M. chelonae have not been approved. DNA analysis of hypervariable regions A and B cannot differentiate isolates of M. chelonae and M. abscessus, although they do vary at other 16S rRNA gene sites (only by a total of 4 bp). PRA method currently has been adopted widely for identification of NTM. This system is based on the coupling of the PCR of a heat shock protein (HSP) followed by restriction fragment length identification, which is species specific. Although sufficient to differentiate M. chelonae from M. abscessus but may not be enough for newer species of NTM.