A thorough diagnostic workup is needed to identify the cause or combination of causes responsible for watery eyes.

**Chief Complaint**

Clinical history is one of the most important aspects of assessing a patient with a watery eye as it provides clues to identify the possible cause of this symptom.

The clinical history should include the following:

- The onset of symptoms. Tearing since birth in a child is often caused by an obstructive Valve of Hasner. However, tearing onset in an older child suggests a different etiology, such as an obstruction in the canaliculus.

- Laterality. Unilateral tearing often indicates obstruction; in contrast, bilateral tearing mainly suggests reflex tearing. Some exceptions exist, such as bilateral puncta or canaliculi obstruction secondary to a viral infection or unilateral reflex tearing secondary to facial nerve palsy.

- Intermittent or continuous course. Intermittent tearing in adults usually results from partial stenosis, dacryolithiasis, or reflex tearing. Persistent symptoms are usually due to complete outflow obstruction.

- "Tears on the cheek" vs. "tears stay in your eyes." True epiphora manifests with tears overflowing onto the cheek due to lacrimal drainage duct obstruction.

- Exacerbating or provoking factors: For example, worse tearing in cold air or wind may be caused by dry eye or partial lacrimal obstruction.

- Association with eating or chewing. This association suggests aberrant facial nerve regeneration ("crocodile tears").

- Associated ophthalmic symptoms:

- 
              
- Itching. This suggests an allergic phenomenon.
              
              
- Grittiness and burning may suggest tear film instability (dry eye).
              
              
- Pain in the eye. Conditions such as keratitis, iritis, ulcers, or foreign bodies must be ruled out when there is a pain in the eye. 
              
              
- Pain at the site of the lacrimal sac: acute dacryocystitis should be ruled out.
              
              
- Photophobia: suspect corneal damage.

Constant tearing without foreign body sensation, grittiness, or pain suggests epiphora.

- Associated signs:

- 
              
- Mucous discharge, particularly in the morning, suggests nasolacrimal duct obstruction.
              
              
- Bloody tears may be due to malignancy.

- Associated nasal symptoms.

- Use of ophthalmic medications.

**Medical and Surgical History**

- Systemic conditions such as craniofacial syndromes

- Lacrimal probing during childhood

- Past ophthalmic diseases or symptoms

- Prior surgical history:

- 
              
- Lid or lacrimal surgery
              
              
- Sinus surgery

- Lid, facial or orbital trauma

- History of facial palsy

- History of dacryocystitis: prior episodes of dacryocystitis mean a nasolacrimal duct obstruction is present

- History of chemotherapy or orbital radiotherapy

**Physical Examination**

Physical examination focuses on demonstrating the patency of the drainage system and ruling out causes of reflex tearing.

- **Examination of the face and peri-ocular area**:
- Inspect the patient's face for signs of skin diseases (such as rosacea, acne, eczema, ichthyosis, and scleroderma) or facial asymmetry (indicative of facial nerve palsy).
- Examine the superolateral orbit for clues of lacrimal gland disease (enlargement, tenderness, erythema, or induration. 
- Exclude orbital fat prolapse.
- Check for spillage of the tears onto the cheek: medial spillage indicates impaired drainage, and lateral spillage suggests lower lid laxity.
- Assess for leakage from a dimple in the eyelid suggesting a congenital fistula.

- 
**Examination of the eyelids:**

- 
              
- Contour. Any lump, cyst, or notch may irritate the ocular surface causing reflex tearing. 
              
              
- Laxity. This affects the pumping mechanism of the eyelids. Check for lid laxity with the lid snap test and lid distraction test.
              
              
- Position:
              
              
- 
                  
- Entropion (lid turns inward): Contact between the entropic eyelid and the ocular surface can result in ocular irritation and subsequent reflex tearing. 
                  
                  
- Ectropion (lid turns outward): The ectropic eyelid can cause watery eyes due to corneal exposure.
                  
                  
- Ptosis. Increased ptosis during cheek puffing indicates aberrant facial nerve regeneration.
                  
                  
- Retraction. Upper or lower eyelid retraction may cause unsuccessful tear pumping and increase the ocular surface, which favors tear evaporation. 
                  
                

              
              
- Closure of the eyes. Incomplete or defective eyelid closure (lagophthalmos) can cause tearing due to corneal exposure. 
              
              
- Blink. Check for blink frequency and the proper touch between the upper and lower eyelid with each blink.
              
              
- Associated diseases. Assess the lids for signs of blepharitis.
              
              
- Eversion. Evert the eyelids to rule out any foreign body irritating the eye or scars that indicate previous surgery, trauma, or trachoma. 
              
              
- Signs of previous eyelid surgery. Skin color changes or scars may indicate previous eyelid surgery contributing to tearing.

- **Examination of the eyelashes**: examine the eyelashes for signs of blepharitis, meibomian gland dysfunction, or eyelashes turning in.

- **Examination of the medial canthus**: compare both sides for symmetry and check for fistulas, lumps (look for visual clues and palpate) or scars (indication of prior surgery).

- 
              
- Dacryocystitis. Acute dacryocystitis presents with erythema, swelling, and tenderness at the medial canthus, with discharge through the punctum when the sac is manually expressed. No further testing is necessary to diagnose nasolacrimal duct obstruction in this case.
              
              
- Mucocele. In the case of a mucocele, palpation is necessary as many mucoceles are not visible.
              
              
- Malignancies in this region may mechanically obstruct the drainage system.

- **Examination of the conjunctiva**: examine the conjunctiva for evidence of conjunctivochalasis, symblepharon, redness, follicles, papillae, foreign body, scars, or secretions.

- **Examination of the cornea:**examine the cornea to rule out any noticeable corneal pathologic changes, for example, the presence of punctate epithelial erosions in dry eyes or a corneal ulcer. Assess how much of the cornea is covered when the patient blinks spontaneously or closes her eyes.

- **Examination of the tear film.**Two crucial aspects of the tear film need to be assessed:

- 
              
- Quantity. Examine the tear film lake before placing any drops. If the tear film lake is high, obstruction is usually present.
              
              
- Quality. Look for the existence of a foamy tear film, debris, and mucous. Debris floating in the tear meniscus suggests obstruction of the nasolacrimal duct. Conversely, high tear meniscus without debris indicates blocked puncta or canaliculi.

- **Examination of the punctum**:

- 
              
- Check for its presence, size, number, and position during all stages of the blink cycle. Physical eversion of the eyelid is necessary to visualize the punctum on slit lamp examination. If the punctum is visible with no eversion of the eyelid, its position is abnormal.
              
              
- Examine it for evidence of inflammation or stenosis.
              
              
- Look for the presence of discharge, granules (suggesting canaliculitis or dacryocystitis), or bleeding (alerting to the possibility of malignancy).

- **Examination of the canaliculi:**

- 
              
- Check for signs of inflammation.
              
              
- Palpation may reveal any localized problems or the level of obstruction.
              
              
- Additional tests may help assess the patency of the canaliculi.

- **Examination of the nose:**Rhinoscopy helps rule out malignancy, hypertrophic mucosa, or nasal polyps that can obstruct the nasolacrimal ostium.