The pleural fluid is contained in the pleural cavity, which is the space between the internal thoracic wall and the lungs. The pleural cavity is lined by a fibrous mesothelial membrane that is made up of a parietal and visceral layer. The parietal layer is the lining of the internal thoracic cavity, and the visceral layer covers the outside of the lungs. These layers are continuous and meet to form a double layer at the hilum of each lung, with no communication between the right and left pleural cavities.

The innervation of the pleural cavity can be divided between the two pleural layers. The visceral pleura is innervated by autonomic fibers and is generally insensitive to irritation and inflammation; however, the parietal layer is innervated by somatic fibers and highly sensitive. The parietal innervation can be divided into four sections that have distinct and clinically significant presentations in the setting of physiologic insult: (1) cervical, (2) costal, (3) mediastinal, and (4) peripheral pleural zones. The cervical pleura is innervated by the first thoracic spinal nerve and when irritated may refer pain to the inner aspect of the upper limb. The costal pleura is innervated by the overlying thoracic nerves and may refer pain to the overlying thorax. The mediastinal pleura is innervated by the phrenic nerve, which runs down the fibrous pericardium and may refer pain to the ipsilateral shoulder in the distribution of the C4 dermatome. The peripheral diagrammatic pleura are innervated by the lower six thoracic nerves and may refer pain to the anterior abdominal wall.

The intercostal, internal thoracic and musculophrenic arteries provide the blood supply to the parietal pleura. The intercostal veins provide the venous drainage of the parietal pleura. The lymphatics of the parietal pleura drain into the intercostal, parasternal, diaphragmatic, and posterior mediastinal group of nodes. The blood supply and venous drainage of the visceral pleura come from the bronchial vessels, with the lymphatic drainage going through the hilar lymph nodes.

The anatomical protection of the pleural cavities is the bony thorax, which leaves three areas of vulnerability that may be clinically relevant in the setting of trauma to the lungs and pleura: (1) above the medial end of the first ribs, (2) below the costal-xiphisternal angle on the right side, and (3) below the costovertebral angles.

Pleural fluid enters the pleural space through the systemic capillaries in the parietal pleurae and exits via parietal pleural stomata and lymphatics.