Once a patient has been diagnosed with end-stage renal disease, a significant number of patients will require dialysis, and the lucky few may be eligible for a renal transplant. Unfortunately, end-stage renal failure significantly increases morbidity and mortality; it also leads to enormous costs to the healthcare system. Thus, the disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team dedicated to adequate disease control and improving outcomes for these patients.

There is no cure for end-stage renal disease, and all the available treatments are short-term. Thus, the key to improving long-term outcomes is preventing the disease's progression.

A dedicated interprofessional healthcare team should comprise a nurse educator, a specialized pharmacist, a nutritionist, a social worker, and a couple of clinical providers, including a primary care provider and a trained nephrologist.

The specialized nurse educator plays a vital role in educating the patient about lifestyle modifications necessary to prevent the progression of CKD. In patients with advanced CKD, the dedicated nurse's role become crucial in protecting an arm for future fistula placement. During hospitalizations, the clinical nurse should place limb restrictions on that arm to ensure venipunctures and blood pressure readings are not taken on that arm.

The pharmacist should identify those patients who carry a diagnosis of CKD and provide specialized instructions to these patients, particularly concerning avoiding nephrotoxic agents and medications. In addition, the pharmacist plays a crucial role in communicating and guiding the providers about the patient's medications to limit those that can adversely affect the kidneys.

A trained nutritionist should also be involved in the care of these patients to guide an appropriate diet plan specific to their needs.

A social worker should be involved in the care to ensure that the patient has a support system and financial resources to continue therapy.

To improve outcomes, each interprofessional team member should maintain accurate and updated patient records, communicate with the other team members, and act collaboratively to ensure that the patient receives optimal care resulting in the best outcomes. [Level 5]