Clinical presentations and laboratory results of tubulointerstitial nephritis are not specific but rather overlap with most kidney diseases, causing AKI and renal insufficiency. So differentials of TIN include all those causes of AKI. Thus, clinicians use different diagnostic tests, i.e., biopsy, imaging, etc., to differentiate the TIN from AKI because therapeutic interventions differ according to the various causes of AKI. Therefore, while assessing the suspected tubulointerstitial nephritis in patients with renal insufficiency, the following problems should be considered:

**Acute Tubular Necrosis**

It is the most common cause of acute renal failure characterized by tubular cell necrosis for various reasons, such as ischemia, toxins such as aminoglycosides, heavy metals, urate, radiocontrast dye, ethylene glycol, etc. In addition, clinical manifestations like oliguria, metabolic acidosis, elevated BUN and creatinine, and electrolyte imbalance are similar to TIN.

**Atheroembolism**

Atheroembolism (cholesterol crystal emboli) should be considered in patients with a predominance of urinary WBC and RBC casts. Atheroemboli may also present with skin rashes, eosinophiluria, and eosinophilia. Skin changes usually include livedo reticularis and digital infarcts rather than the diffuse maculopapular rash of TIN. History of endovascular diseases, old age, and obesity point towards atheroemboli.

**Glomerulonephritis**

These are a wide range of glomerulopathies, ultimately leading to renal impairment and mimicking TIN. Typical presentations of glomerulonephritis are similar to TIN, such as proteinuria, oliguria, and RBC casts, so visualization of glomeruli and immune complex deposition in light and electron microscopy helps to differentiate different types of glomerulonephritides from TIN.

**Vascular Injury**

Different cardiovascular insults, likely renal artery stenosis, cardiac failure, vasculitis, reduced blood flow due to afferent arteriolar constriction in NSAIDs users, reduced efferent arteriolar tone by ACE inhibitors, etc., are the common causes of AKI that clinically simulate TIN.

**Urinary Tract Obstruction (UTO)**

UTO is the postrenal cause of acute renal failure and is usually attributed to renal stones, tumors, and strictures. In patients, anuria or absence of sediment may be due to obstruction as a differential diagnosis. In such patients, imaging helps to distinguish the obstruction from other causes of AKI. Obstruction is the favorable nidus for infection, which drives the ascending infection and, thus, the pyelonephritis sooner or later. Sterile pyuria, WBC casts, leukocytosis, positive dipstick test for leukocyte esterase, and flank pain are the common manifestations.