**Legius syndrome**is an autosomal dominant disorder like NF-1 but lacks neurofibromas and nervous system involvement. Cafe-au-lait macules, freckling is noted.

**Neurofibromatosis type 2-**Affected individuals do not exhibit more cafe-au-lait macules, unlike NF-1. There is no evidence of Lisch nodules, cognitive dysfunction, or malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Meningiomas and acoustic schwannomas are highly associated with neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). Mutations in the NF2 tumor suppressor gene located on the 22q chromosome cause the disorder.

**Noonan syndrome-**Individuals may exhibit cafe-au-lait macules along with low-set ears, hypertelorism, webbed neck, short stature, and pulmonary stenosis. Mutations of the genes involved in RAS and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway result in the syndrome.

**Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (CMMR-D) syndrome -**This is an autosomal recessive disorder manifesting cafe-au-lait macules, freckling, and Lisch nodules. CMMR-D is typically associated with brain tumors, colorectal cancer, and hematological malignancies, unlike optic glioma and rhabdomyosarcoma associated with NF-1. Mutations in 1 of the 4 mismatch repair genes cause the syndrome.

Other differential diagnoses include McCune-Albright syndrome, Silver-Russell syndrome, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) hamartoma syndrome, Carney syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome, Turner syndrome, tuberous sclerosis.

If pigmentary lesions are only present, the major differential diagnosis includes:

- Legius syndrome

- Noonan syndrome, and

- Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency.