Avascular necrosis (AVN) is one of the most significant complications from radial neck fractures. AVN can occur in 10% to 20% of radial neck fractures. Since the radial head relies on blood supply from the periosteum, the risk of AVN is even higher, up to 70%, in cases requiring open reduction due to damage to the periosteum. Elbow stiffness and decreased range of motion can be difficult to treat; therefore, prevention with an early active-assisted range of motion is crucial. In children, a safe and easy way to achieve this is by teaching children how to use their other arm to carry out movements on the affected side. Another cause of reduced function and range of movement can be due to malunion and non-union, highlighting the need for accurate reduction. Management of both malunion and non-union should be considered on a case by case basis depending on the patient’s signs, symptoms, and function.

Radioulnar synostosis is the fusion of the radius to the ulna, which may be due to reflected periosteum. The condition can hinder pronation, supination, and result in shortening of the arm. It is more common in cases that have delayed treatment or open reduction cases in which extensive dissection has been undertaken. Osteotomy procedures can be used to treat synostosis with the aim of improving function. Finally, compartment syndrome is a possible postoperative complication that presents early and can be challenging to diagnose in children. Compartment syndrome should be suspected in children with increasing pain or pain that is not responsive to opioids. If a definitive diagnosis of compartment syndrome is made, then a fasciotomy will need to be performed without delay.