During fetal development, aldosterone plays a role in maternal volume expansion necessary to accommodate fetal perfusion and may also increase the expression of placental growth factors.

Congenital issues of concern related to aldosterone synthesis include autosomal recessive deficiencies in the enzymes responsible for adrenal hormone production. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) can take many forms, depending on which enzyme is deficient. The three main enzymes that affect aldosterone are 21-hydroxylase, 11-beta-hydroxylase, and aldosterone synthase. A deficiency of any of these enzymes will halt aldosterone production. The production of aldosterone occurs in an interconnected pathway that produces mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids, and androgens. The inability for aldosterone production to proceed leads to a buildup of intermediary products and cholesterol to be funneled down the glucocorticoid and androgen hormone production pathways instead. Depending on the severity of the enzyme deficiency, this can result in hyponatremia, hyperkalemia (due to the inability to exchange sodium for potassium in the nephron), and hypovolemia (low sodium causes a decrease in extracellular fluid). In aldosterone synthase deficiency, many of the functional losses are mitigated by the continued production of corticosterone, which acts similarly to aldosterone. The shunting of cholesterol toward the 17-alpha-hydroxylase pathway (androgen hormone production pathway) can result in virilization and ambiguous genitalia in females. Conversely, in the case of 17-alpha-hydroxylase deficiency, cholesterol is shunted towards mineralocorticoid production while glucocorticoid and androgen production is impaired causing ambiguous genitalia in genetic males and lack of secondary sexual development in genetic females.