Posterior nasal packing can be performed using several techniques. Historically, nasal packing was performed using ribbon gauze impregnated with bismuth iodoform paraffin paste (BIPP) or petrolatum and inserted in a layered fashion using bayonet forceps. This technique can be challenging for the clinician and extremely uncomfortable for the patient.

Foley catheters are commonly used in posterior nasal packing as a simple and readily available method to tamponade the bleeding. The balloon of the catheter should be inflated and then deflated before insertion to check for leaks, and the tip of the catheter should be lubricated to ease passage through the nose. The patient should remain sitting upright with the head extended, and an assistant may need to support the head to prevent sudden movement. After the patient has had appropriate intravenous analgesia and topical anesthetic/vasoconstrictor spray, the catheter should be gently passed directly along the floor of the nose on the side thought to be bleeding.

The Foley catheter tip should be visualized in the oropharynx through the patient's open mouth. This can be difficult in practice because the patient may be actively coughing and spitting blood. The balloon should be inflated, initially with 5-7 mL of sterile water or saline, and traction applied to seat the balloon against the posterior aspect of the choana. A further 5-7 mL may be added if bleeding continues and the patient can tolerate it. The maximum recommended volume is 15 mL in total; if more volume is used, the risk of causing pressure necrosis of the soft palate increases, which can be very painful for the patient. If the balloon is inflated too anteriorly in the nasal cavity, it can also be very painful for the patient; however, inflating too low in the hypopharynx can cause airway obstruction.

With continued traction on the catheter, anterior nasal packing should subsequently be performed on the same side as the posterior packing. This can be done with either insertion of a nasal tampon or layered gauze impregnated with BIPP or petrolatum. Many physicians will also anteriorly pack the contralateral side to prevent septal deviation. While still maintaining traction, an umbilical clip should be placed on the catheter at the nostril to secure it and prevent it from slipping backward. This clip must not be placed directly against the alar rim, as prolonged contact can lead to pressure necrosis. Various alternatives to the umbilical clamp are available as well, including padded clamps, gauze or other padding, iodoform strips, or even cutting the drainage port directly from the proximal end of the catheter and using this as a cushion against the nasal ala.

Alternative options also exist for posterior nasal packing, such as newer dual balloon catheters. These devices should be inserted in the side thought to be bleeding. The posterior balloon is first inflated with 5 to 10 mL when in the posterior nasal cavity, after which anterior traction is applied. The anterior balloon is then inflated with 15 to 30 mL, and an umbilical clamp is applied externally, as above. Posterior nasal packing occludes the choana, causing direct pressure on the posterior vessels, and further serves to stabilize the placement of the anterior pack.

If correctly performed, posterior nasal packing with Foley catheters or double-balloon catheters is a straightforward way of arresting hemorrhage and managing patients non-operatively; in fact, double-balloon catheters were shown to manage bleeding in 70% of posterior epistaxis cases effectively.

For cases in which posterior packing is unsuccessful, more invasive measures to achieve hemostasis must be considered. One option is endovascular SPA embolization by an interventional radiologist, which has a success rate of 88%, according to a 2005 study.

Nasal packing is typically left in place for 48-72 hours, although some authors advocate longer (up to 5 days) depending on physician preference, patient co-morbidities, and bleeding severity. Premature pack removal, at <48 hours, is associated with higher rates of recurrent bleeding. The use of systemic antibiotic prophylaxis with nasal packing remains controversial, although antibiotics are commonly prescribed in actual practice. Nasal packs act as potential sources of infection, and rare cases of toxic shock syndrome associated with nasal packing have been reported; therefore, an anti-staphylococcal antibiotic may be helpful.