Patients suffering from biceps tendon rupture may complain of sudden sharp pain in the elbow or shoulder, depending on the site of rupture. Usually, there is a history of sudden eccentric force to a flexed elbow. They may feel an audible "pop" in the affected arm at the time of the injury. Pain can persist for weeks to months. Pain may diminish if the tendon is completely torn. Patients usually complain of bulbous mass in the upper arm due to excessive retraction of the biceps muscle belly, known as "Popeye deformity." In obese individuals, it is generally hard to appreciate this popeye deformity.

In patients with distal biceps, rupture, ecchymosis, swelling, and tenderness may be present in the antecubital fossa. If the bicipital aponeurosis (lacertus fibrosus) is involved, the muscle will be retracted to the upper arm, and a defect of the distal tendon will be palpable. The hook test can be used to identify the absence of the biceps tendon at its distal insertion. First, the examiner positions the patient's arm in 90 degrees of flexion and then supinates it. Second, the examiner tries to hook the tendon underneath the skin. The intact distal biceps tendon permits the examiner to hook the index finger under the biceps tendon. This test has a high specificity and sensitivity in diagnosing distal biceps tear.

In patients with proximal biceps tendon rupture, surprisingly, there could be very few signs and symptoms other than pain. They may have ecchymosis of the proximal arm, sometimes extending up to the elbow. Proximal biceps rupture does not result in any long-term change in elbow or shoulder strength. It is important to check for atrophy of the shoulder girdle muscle and shoulder impingement because the proximal biceps tendon disorders are usually associated with rotator cuff pathology.