According to 2019 data collected by the US Department of Justice, sexual assault occurs every 73 seconds in the United States and every nine minutes for pediatric victims. The lifetime rates of sexual assault are between 17 to 18% for women and 3% for men. These numbers are likely under-estimations of the true values and do not account for rates of LGBT sexual assaults, for which the rates are higher. This demonstrates that sexual assault has a clinically significant impact on patients of which physicians, nurses, and other healthcare practitioners need to be cognizant, especially in the documentation and forensic examination of these patients.

Sexual assault may trigger severe depression and even suicidality. The practitioner’s history includes assessment for suicidality and, if found, immediate referral to a mental health professional. In most areas in the United States, rape crisis advocates can provide timely support to victims during the examination and throughout follow-up. Psychological and advocacy follow-up programs must be arranged. Survivors may suffer from rape trauma syndrome, which presents with a pattern of symptoms that are similar to posttraumatic stress disorder. The patients must plan to follow up approximately 1 to 2 weeks after the initial evaluation to determine the need for further counseling.

The way a provider interacts with victims can make a difference in their ability to begin the path of recovery and healing.  The clinical significance of a kind and compassionate patient-centered encounter is that of improved physical and mental well-being during and after the encounter. Providers should keep this goal in mind throughout history taking and physical examination.