Insulin’s significant actions focus on storing excess energy in a fed state. Insulin promotes glycogen synthesis, lipid synthesis, protein synthesis, DNA synthesis, and cellular growth and differentiation. Once glucose gets absorbed from a meal, it enters the blood, and then the pancreas releases insulin. Insulin synthesis occurs in the beta cells of the pancreas initially as preproinsulin. Preproinsulin then converts to proinsulin, which then transforms into a single peptide with A, B, and C peptide units. The A and B peptides are joined by disulfide bonds to make insulin and are secreted into the bloodstream. Insulin binds to its cellular receptor. The insulin receptor is composed of alpha subunits, beta subunits, and a tyrosine kinase enzyme. When insulin binds to the alpha subunit, this triggers phosphorylation and activation of the target proteins intracellularly by the tyrosine kinase leading to many effects on cellular metabolism. Activation of the insulin receptor also leads to increased expression of GLUT (a glucose transporter) to the membrane surface and promotes the entry of glucose to the intracellular compartment and then undergoes cellular metabolism. Insulin signals glucose conversion to glycogen for storage and the formation of acetyl coenzyme A and triacylglycerol, which get stored in adipose tissue. Also, insulin directs amino acids for protein synthesis.

In patients with diabetes mellitus, to reach the goal of normal 24-hour insulin activity like in healthy adults without diabetes mellitus, one single insulin formulation with a defined onset, peak, and duration of action is not helpful. Hence there is a need for different kinds of insulin that have different pharmacokinetics. Based on the mode of action, there are four different types of insulin analogs as follows

- Agents include insulin lispro, insulin aspart, and insulin glulisine

- Onset may vary between products for each patient

- If mixing with NPH, draw the rapid-acting insulin into the syringe first; give the mixture immediately to avoid effects on peak action

- Help to achieve post-prandial glycemic control

- May be mixed with NPH in one syringe. Regular insulin (clear) should be drawn into the syringe first, then the NPH (cloudy) - "clear before cloudy."

- Administer approximately 30 minutes before meals for the greatest effectiveness.

- Can be administered via a dosing pen or from a vial with a syringe

- Insulin Lente and insulin Hagedorn are in this category

- Cannot be mixed in the same syringe with other insulins

- Available in pen and vial

- Duration of action can be dose-dependant

- Agents include insulin glargine and insulin detemir

- Action has 2 peaks; one from each individual formulation

- 70% aspart protamine + 30% aspart

- 75% lispro protamine + 25% lispro

- 50% lispro protamine + 25% lispro

- Action has 2 peaks; one from each individual formulation.