# Continuing Education Activity

Desmopressin is a drug that acts on the vasopressin receptors of the body. It has many relevant clinical uses, ranging from nocturnal enuresis to hemophilia. While this drug is relatively safe to use, there are certain side effects to be kept in mind for patients receiving the drug, as well as specific contraindications that limit the population that can receive desmopressin. This activity reviews the indications, mechanism of action, contraindications, and adverse effects. It will also explore the proper monitoring of patients on desmopressin and the role of the inter-professional team required to enhance the outcomes for the patients taking the drug.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications to use desmopressin in a patient.
- Describe the mechanism of action of desmopressin.
- Review the potential adverse effects of desmopressin.
- Summarize the role of an integrated inter-professional team involved in the treatment of the patients receiving desmopressin.

# Indications

Desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin) is a synthetic analog of vasopressin, aka antidiuretic hormone created in 1977 used in the treatment of a wide variety of medical conditions to include nocturnal polyuria, hemophilia A, diabetes insipidus, Willebrand disease, uremic bleeding, as well as many off label uses such as an adjunct with hypertonic saline to prevent rapid sodium correction, intracranial hemorrhage associated with varying antiplatelet agents, and trauma resuscitation with active hemorrhage.

Nocturnal polyuria is a commonly encountered condition seen almost exclusively in the pediatric population, which is responsive to both oral and intranasal desmopressin. Desmopressin is also available to adults who awaken more than two times a night to void.

Hemophilia A is an X-linked autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the deficiency or absence of the clotting factor VIII.

Diabetes insipidus (DI) classically presents with polyuria and polydipsia and can be secondary to multiple other conditions.

Uremic platelet dysfunction encompasses multiple pathways and impairments involving uremia, ultimately resulting in platelet dysfunction. While still largely undefined, the most commonly accepted pathogenesis involves platelet dysfunction secondary to impaired platelet adhesiveness and decreased platelet aggregation, as well as abnormal platelet endothelial interaction. Factors that actively contribute to platelet dysfunction in uremic patients include uremic toxins, anemia, and nitric oxide production.

Uremic platelet dysfunction occurs for several reasons, including circulating uremic toxins, platelet aggregation inhibition by increased nitric oxide production, and anemia resulting in turbulent rather than a laminar flow of blood products.

Von Willebrand disease results from a deficiency in von Willebrand factor. This factor is essential in forming the initial platelet plug as a response to subendothelial tissue exposure.

In a limited number of studies of patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage, some have demonstrated enough evidence to consider utilizing a single intravenous dose of desmopressin in patients with intracranial hemorrhage pending neurosurgical intervention.

In a select number of patients suffering from severe hyponatremia with a serum sodium less than 120 mEq/L, studies have demonstrated benefit when utilizing intravenous 3 percent saline while simultaneously initiating desmopressin to prevent rapid correction; decreasing the risk of developing osmotic demyelination syndrome.

Desmopressin has also been utilized in trauma resuscitation and post-surgically to receive hemostasis. Several animal studies have demonstrated that desmopressin is useful in treating severe coagulopathy in injured or post-surgical patients.

# Mechanism of Action

Desmopressin is a selective vasopressin V2 receptor agonist present throughout the collecting ducts and distal convoluted tubules of the kidneys.

The signaling cascade resulting in the production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate also induces exocytosis of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII from its storage sites, as well as the Weibel-Palade bodies and the alpha granules of platelets.

# Administration

Desmopressin can be administered intravenously, as a subcutaneous injection, as an intranasal spray, and, most recently, as a dissolvable sublingual strip. The tablet form has been discontinued in many countries in favor of the intranasal and sublingual forms due to the latter's superior bioavailability.

The intranasal form of vasopressin is frequently a choice when administration occurs at home.

Sublingual desmopressin, also known as desmopressin lyophilisate, is administered a sublingual melt tablet at a dosage of 120 micrograms.

# Adverse Effects

The major adverse effect of desmopressin for which to monitor is hyponatremia. As desmopressin increases the urine concentration, it can also lead to systemic hyponatremia with physiology similar to the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone.

# Contraindications

Hyponatremia is an absolute contraindication to the administration of desmopressin, except for symptomatic hyponatremia warranting aggressive management with the potential for osmotic demyelinating syndrome. Desmopressin acts primarily in the nephron; this drug is contraindicated in patients with renal impairment.

# Monitoring

Desmopressin is generally well-tolerated in most patients. There are a few instances where patients require monitoring for adverse effects of the drug. Patients receiving desmopressin need monitoring for the occurrence of hyponatremia.

# Toxicity

There is no known antidote to an overdose of desmopressin. The most worrisome complication to result from an overdose is water intoxication. This condition would result in a delayed loss of consciousness and seizures in some instances. Patients require immediate admission to the intensive care unit to be monitored and have electrolyte correction.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Desmopressin is a relatively safe drug for use, but it still requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team for optimal therapeutic success. This team will include clinicians, specialists, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, coordinating their activities and sharing information to achieve the best patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Patients receiving desmopressin to treat hemophilia A or von Willebrand disease can remain at risk of bleeding. As such, these patients require an integrated and cohesive team of specialists consisting of the primary care physician, hematologist, and in some instances, a gynecologist and geneticist. The primary care physician must ensure that the patients are regularly following up with a hematologist or a hemophilia treatment center. In cases of pregnancy, a woman can receive genetic counseling either before becoming pregnant or later on during the pregnancy.