**Osteosarcoma**

Complications are inherent to the malignant nature of the condition. Significant morbidity is associated with wider resection of the jaws and needs for subsequent reconstruction.

**Fibrous Dysplasia**

Fibrous dysplasia can cause marked facial asymmetry in children and adolescents, and it can therefore cause a large degree of distress to patients and their families. Complications are from specific surgical intervention and the risk of regrowth if the patient is in the active phase.

**Central Giant Cell Granuloma**

Complications can occur due to the destructive nature of central giant cell lesions, particularly loss of dentition or tooth buds.  When cortical bone erosion occurs around nerves, specifically the inferior alveolar nerve, impingement can occur. As it does not exhibit perineural invasion but only impingement, once repositioned, the inferior alveolar nerve function is restored.

**Osteoma**

Complications from osteomas can be either related to their functional impact or the surgery performed to remove them and are therefore related to their location and surrounding anatomical structures.

**Osteochondroma**

Complications of osteochondromas occur due to their impingement of temporomandibular joint function and surgical intervention. These are not normally specific to osteochondromas but to temporomandibular surgical intervention generally.

**Osteoblastoma**

When small and managed with local curettage, complications may be minimal. However, when representing an aggressive subtype, high morbidity and small numbers of reported mortalities may be observed.