The first and foremost laboratory abnormality found in CLL is lymphocytosis in peripheral blood and bone marrow. The peripheral blood smear shows leukemic cells, which are small, mature lymphocytes with a darkly stained nucleus, condensed chromatin, and indistinguishable nucleoli with a narrow rim of basophilic cytoplasm. Classical "smudge" cells ("basket" cells) are also seen on peripheral blood smear; these are pathognomic of CLL. The smudge cells are more fragile than normal lymphocytes that are disrupted during the process of being spread on a glass slide.

Immunophenotypic analysis of the peripheral circulating lymphocytes by peripheral blood flow cytometry can be performed, which can help to diagnose CLL. Most cases of CLL can be identified using antibody specific panel for CD5, CD19, CD20, CD23, and immunoglobulin light chains. Characteristic CLL/SLL lymphocyte phenotype features include the following: low levels of immunoglobulins (most often IgM immunoglobulin and sometimes both IgM and IgD); expression of B-cell associated antigens (CD19, CD20, CD21, CD23, and/or CD24); and expression of CD5 which is a T-cell associated antigen.  The most common immunophenotype expression of CLL/SLL is the coexpression of CD5, CD19, and CD23. As for the light chain immunoglobulins, only one type of light chain is seen, suggesting the monoclonality of the lymphocytes. However, in some cases, biclonal CLL expressing both light chains or different levels of expression of other immunophenotypic antigens is also seen.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a highly sensitive test used to detect chromosomal abnormalities in patients with CLL/SLL. Cytogenetics evaluation of the peripheral blood smear with FISH for 17p. deletion, 11q. deletion, 13q. deletion and trisomy 12 is routine pretreatment evaluation of patients with CLL. Though all patients with symptomatic and advanced-stage CLL/SLL are treated similarly, patients with 17p. deletion or 11q. deletion requires special consideration.