# Continuing Education Activity

Groove pancreatitis is a type of chronic pancreatitis that occurs in the 5th to 6th decade of life, with higher prevalence in males than females, and is associated with a significant history of alcoholism or smoking. It affects the anatomical area between the duodenum and the pancreas (The duodenal groove). The condition can simulate or mask pancreatic adenocarcinoma and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of pancreatic (head of the pancreas) masses or duodenal stenosis. The disease entity presents with varied clinical symptoms, including weight loss, nausea with or without vomiting, and jaundice, depending on the extent of inflammation. Management is usually conservative, involving medical and endoscopic interventions in the initial stages. The definitive treatment is usually surgical in cases where the diagnosis is debatable or in patients refractory to medical therapy.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology and pathogenesis of groove pancreatitis.

- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with groove pancreatitis.
- Explain the typical imaging findings associated with groove pancreatitis.
- Review the management of a patient with groove pancreatitis.

# Introduction

Groove pancreatitis is a unique clinical condition. It is defined as chronic segmental pancreatitis involving the duodenum and pancreas.

The term cystic dystrophy of the heterotopic pancreas or duodenal dystrophy was first reported by French authors, Potet and Duclert in 1970.

Pathogenesis involves fibrosis in the anatomical region in the para-duodenal tunnel, leading to altered pancreatic secretions and pancreatitis.

# Etiology

Alcohol misuse is a significant risk factor for groove pancreatitis.

In addition, pancreatic ductal stones can obstruct the dorsal accessory duct (Santorini duct) as it emerges into the minor papilla.

Other anatomical and functional conditions lead to altered pancreatic secretions. The anatomical conditions involve pancreatic divisum, annular pancreas, and ectopic pancreas, and the functional pathologies include duodenal wall thickening.

# Epidemiology

The prevalence has been reported at about 8.9% for the pure form of groove pancreatitis and about 15.5%, for the segmental form of groove pancreatitis, in a study of 123 patients by Stole et al.

# Pathophysiology

Groove Pancreatitis is caused by altered pancreatic secretions leading to retained secretions in the pancreatic head, causing inflammation around and involving the duodenum. The dorsal duct (the duct of Santorini) opens at the minor papilla. Due to the inflammation, changes in the duodenum lead to blockage or obstruction of the minor papilla. This leads to secretions being diverted to the main pancreatic duct (the duct of Wirsung) at an acute angle.

Other factors, such as Brunner's gland hyperplasia, lead to the blockage of pancreatic ductal drainage and potential obstruction with increased inflammation.

# Histopathology

**Macroscopic Appearance**

The inspection of the area around the minor papilla is essential for diagnosis.

There are two pathological subtypes of groove pancreatitis, cystic and solid type. The cystic type is characterized by multiple cysts emerging from the mucosa, ranging in size from 1 to 10 cm, leading to the formation of para-duodenal wall cysts that simulate intestinal duplication.

The solid type is identified by significant thickening of the duodenal wall and smaller cysts, less than 1 cm. Other macroscopic findings include thickened mucosal folds, ulceration, retraction of the duodenal mucosa, and lymph node enlargement in the pancreatic head.

**Microscopic Appearance**

The duodenal wall shows myeloid cell proliferation in the submucosal muscles of the minor papilla.

In addition, the extravasation of mucopurulent material from the ducts can present as giant cells infiltration along with eosinophils. Other common findings are Brunner's gland hyperplasia and neural inflammation into the proliferating islets causing pseudo infiltration.

# History and Physical

The most common clinical presentation involves abdominal pain, localized in the upper abdomen, weight loss, postprandial vomiting secondary to duodenal stenosis, and diarrhea.

Kager et al. did a study of 335 patients; abdominal pain was reported in 308/335 (92%), vomiting in 105/335 (31%), weight loss in 215/277(78%), jaundice in 32/261 (12%), cholestasis in 73/264 (28%) and steatorrhea in 48/179 (27%).

# Evaluation

**Laboratory Testing**

Laboratory testing and biochemical markers are often nonspecific. Serum pancreatic enzymes (lipase, amylase, and elastase) are mildly elevated, and hepatic enzyme levels are sometimes elevated.

**Imaging**

**Abdominal Ultrasound**

Ultrasonography usually demonstrates a hyperechoic mass along with duodenal wall thickening.

Inflammation is more prominent in the initial stages of the disease. However, as the disease progresses, fibrosis is predominant over inflammation. During the early stages of the disease process, the inflammation causes a hypoechoic bandlike thickening in the pancreaticoduodenal groove, moderate duodenal wall thickening, and heterogenicity of the pancreatic head. In the later stages, hyperechoic thickening of the duodenum is seen. During the later stages, myeloid cell proliferation and fibrosis lead to the characteristic finding of the hyperechoic pancreatic head with anechoic ductal structures.

**CT Scan of the Abdomen**

CT scan of the abdomen is helpful in the diagnosis and correlates with the histological features of the disease.

There is also delayed uptake of contrast due to reduce blood flow in the fibrotic tissue. The scan also shows cysts of varying sizes in the groove or wall of the duodenum or even a multilocular cystic mass.

In the segmental form, a hypodense lesion may be observed in the pancreatic head near the wall of the duodenum.

**ERCP**

ERCP is challenging and potentially risky to perform due to the inability to pass the scope secondary to duodenal stenosis.

**EUS**

According to studies, EUS can help determine the disease's exact location and extent. EUS shows the thickening of the second part of the duodenum along with duodenal stenosis, smooth stricturing of the common bile duct, and cysts in the duodenal wall.

**EUS with Biopsy**

If the sampled area shows extensive spindle cells, giant cells, or hyperplasia of Brunner's gland, it can mimic malignancy.

**MRI**

Multiple studies have shown MRI to be the preferred diagnostic method.

Grooves are seen as hypointense areas on T1-weighted imaging, whereas cysts in the duodenum are more appreciated on T2-weighted imaging.

Also seen are increased thickening and stenosis of the duodenal wall.

Although several radiological modalities are available, differentiating groove pancreatitis from pancreatic head adenocarcinoma is often challenging. CT and MRI are unreliable due to a large amount of scarring and fibrosis.

The study by Kalb et al. in 2013 reported diagnostic accuracy of 87.2% for diagnosing groove pancreatitis utilizing MRI.

# Treatment / Management

There are multiple therapeutic options for the management of groove pancreatitis. These include conservative medical management, endoscopic therapy, and surgical interventions.

Conservative management includes a healthy balanced diet, analgesics, pancreatic rest, and abstinence from alcohol and smoking.

Endoscopic treatment options include dilation of the duodenal and pancreatic ductal stenosis and drainage of the pancreatic duct and symptomatic pseudocysts.

Isayama reported endoscopic treatment of groove pancreatitis by stenting the minor papilla, but the long-term course was unclear.

Surgery is the preferred therapeutic option for symptomatic patients refractory to conservative therapy and in patients with a doubtful clinical diagnosis with lesions that are highly suspicious for being malignant. The treatment of choice is pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple's procedure). Casetti et al. reported complete resolution of pain in 76% of the patients.

Pancreaticoduodenectomy has effectively managed the main symptoms of groove pancreatitis, pain, and weight loss. In 2007, Rahman et al. reported an increase in body weight and relief of chronic abdominal pain in all patients who underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy.

However, preserving the pylorus and duodenum is not always achievable because of the extensive fibrosis around the duodenal region.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Pancreatic adenocarcinoma

- Duodenal adenocarcinoma

- Periampullary cancers

- Pancreatic groove neuroendocrine tumor

- Cystic dystrophy of the duodenum

- Conventional edematous pancreatitis with involvement of the groove

- Acute pancreatitis

# Prognosis

The management is usually conservative, with medical and endoscopic therapy in the initial stages. Conservative management options are a healthy balanced diet, pain management, pancreatic rest, and abstinence from alcohol and smoking. Usually, these measures provide short-term relief, and occasionally they do provide long-term benefits. Endoscopic therapies are beneficial but could involve a therapeutic failure in about 10 to 20% of patients. The usual definitive therapy is surgery (Whipple pancreaticoduodenectomy) in most cases that are refractory to conservative therapy or in which the diagnosis is inconclusive.

# Complications

The inflammation associated with groove pancreatitis can lead to several complications. These complications include gastrointestinal hemorrhage, perforation leading to peritonitis, chronic debilitating abdominal pain, duodenal stenosis, distal biliary strictures, chronic pancreatitis, and the potential risk of malignant transformation in the pancreas.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

All patients should be educated about the signs and symptoms of groove pancreatitis. They should be made aware of various clinical presentations such as upper quadrant pain, weight loss, postprandial vomiting secondary to duodenal stenosis, and diarrhea. The patients should be counseled to quit drinking alcohol. They should be told to watch their weight and to follow up with their primary physician if they have accompanying abdominal pain and vomiting.

Specific education should be provided about the concerning features of jaundice, inability to tolerate oral intake, and decrease in appetite. The treatment options, medical, endoscopic, and surgical therapies, should be discussed with the patients, along with the risks, benefits, and alternatives of all available therapeutic options.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The patients usually present with the symptoms of weight loss, decrease in appetite, and early satiety to the outpatient clinic and with abdominal pain to the emergency. The management involves a multidisciplinary and interprofessional team approach involving primary care providers, specialists, dieticians, psychologists, pain management specialists, radiologists, gastroenterologists, surgeons, and nursing staff.

The coordination of care between interprofessional team members leads to improved patient outcomes. The patients might need multiple imaging studies involving CT and MRI scans before establishing the diagnosis. Endoscopic management might include EUS with or without biopsy and ERCP with or without stenting. Surgery is usually the last resort and is useful in refractory cases.