The middle ear cleft, also known as the tympanic cavity, is situated within the petrous temporal bone. The anatomical components of the middle ear include the inner layer of the TM, the Eustachian tube orifice, and the ossicular chain (malleus, incus, stapes). The middle ear cleft communicates posteriorly with the mastoid air cells via the tympanic antrum and the aditus ad antrum; the Eustachian tube connects anteriorly with the nasopharynx, allowing the middle ear to equalize pressure with the ambient environment.

The TM forms the majority of the lateral wall of the middle ear cleft. It is composed of three layers, the stratified squamous epithelial outer layer that is in continuity with the external ear canal, the fibrous stratum (lamina propria) middle layer, which is the most dominant component and provides stability to the TM, and an inner layer that is contiguous with the cuboidal mucosa of the middle ear. Within the fibrous stratum runs solid collagen fibers – it is the limited ability of these fibers to stretch that allows for high compliance with minuscule displacements of acoustic pressures but resistance (low compliance) to additional stretching at higher pressures. The TM diameter is around 10 mm, with a thickness of roughly 0.1 mm; it is usually pearly grey and slightly translucent, allowing for ossicular visibility.

The TM divides anatomically into the pars flaccida superiorly and the pars tensa inferiorly. The pars flaccida is anterior and posterior to the malleolar ligaments; it lacks a central fibrous layer and is, therefore, thinner and more compliant than the pars tensa. The pars tensa forms the majority of the TM, overlying the area below the neck of the malleus.

Functionally, the TM is the vibrational driver of the middle ear apparatus. Sound energy, in the form of air pressure waves, is transmitted from the TM across the ossicular chain to the fluid-containing inner ear via the oval window, producing a ‘liquid wave.’