Patients with multiple biliary duct hamartomas typically require no extensive workup, but an interprofessional healthcare team approach is recommended. This team includes clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), specialists (particularly a radiologist), and nursing staff. While the disease is generally benign, it has the potential for malignant transformation, so the entire team must remain vigilant, including the patients themselves.

It is crucial that radiologists understand this disease and its appearance on imaging to help differentiate it from more malignant or life-threatening liver lesions. Surgeons and oncologists must be aware of this disease in the case of malignant transformation requiring liver resection and chemotherapy or radiation for treatment. It is a condition where the differential is extremely important since getting it wrong can result in either missing a more malignant disease or treating the patient inappropriately if it is not malignant. Good communication and education with the pathologist and surgeon are paramount to dealing with benign liver lesions and improving patient outcomes. Nurses can help coordinate the various clinicians and specialists on the case, ensure all team members have accurate and updated patient information, as well as counsel the patients regarding their condition and how to monitor for signs of possible malignant transformation. In this way, the interprofessional team approach to management is the most appropriate means to achieve optimal outcomes. [Level 5]