The initial treatment for glycol ether toxicity involves addressing the patient's airway, breathing, circulation, and metabolic derangements. After addressing the primary survey, additional therapies depend on the severity of the presentation. The severity is often determined by which glycol ether was ingested, the route, and the time elapsed since ingestion.

GE exerts toxicity primarily through its alkoxyacetic acid metabolite produced by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). Exception for diethylene glycol (DEG), where further metabolism through aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) yields the toxic metabolites 2-hydroxyethoxyacetic acid (HEAA) and diglycolic acid (DGA). Treatment aims to inhibit the production of the toxic metabolite and subsequent removal of the parent compound.

Fomepizole monotherapy may be considered if the toxic compound has a short elimination half-life (i.e., less than the half-life of fomepizole) in a patient with normal renal function. More importantly, these treatment strategies would benefit most during the early stages of toxicity. As such, early suspicion of GE toxicity is paramount.

Note that fomepizole carries a half-life of about 12 hours and is therefore started at 15 mg/kg every 12 hours.

Propylene glycol, a secondary alcohol, is structurally similar to glycol ethers but is generally less toxic. Both toxic alcohols are metabolized by ADH and produce toxic metabolites. However, ADH does not as readily metabolize propylene glycol because it is a secondary alcohol. Nonetheless, treatment for propylene glycol toxicity follows the same principle as for GE toxicity: inhibition of ADH with fomepizole and removal of the toxic alcohol with hemodialysis.

In addition to ADH inhibition and hemodialysis, other supportive measures may be helpful. Electrolyte management (i.e., hyperkalemia) and intravenous sodium bicarbonate for severe metabolic acidosis may also be beneficial. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may also become necessary if the patient is no longer protecting their airway due to drowsiness. Blood transfusions may also be needed if hemolysis results in severe anemia.

The use of gastric decontamination has not been closely studied. Although some authors suggest gastric lavage or nasogastric decontamination, if the ingestion is within the last 1 to 2 hours, the benefits of this have not been studied. Obtaining an accurate history is another limitation of using gastric lavage. Moreover, as neurotoxicity is a common finding, gastric decontamination may increase the risk of pulmonary aspiration.

Activated charcoal is also not recommended, as the substance has a poor affinity for alcohol.