It should be noted that there are variations for the placement of the tube; however, there are some critical steps that should be performed without any deviation from the protocol. These critical steps involve the balloon inflation volumes and/or pressures and the need for interval placement confirmation with a plain film.

- Insert the lubricated and fully deflated Sengstaken-Blakemore tube orally using a similar technique to orogastric tube placement. Stop once at the 50 cm mark on the tube. Markings should be facing the patient's right for proper balloon orientation.

- Test placement location by using a slip syringe and auscultating over the lungs and gastric region. If properly in the stomach, inflate the gastric balloon with 50 ml air through the gastric port.

- Get a chest x-ray or a kidney, ureter, and bladder (KUB) x-ray to confirm the gastric balloon is in the stomach before inflating any further. **This is a key step that should not be skipped.**

- Once confirmed to be in the stomach, inflate with an additional 200 ml of air for a total of 250 ml of air in the gastric balloon.

- Apply traction to the device. Using roller bandage and 1-liter intravenous (IV) fluid bag suspended over an IV pole, which will apply 1 kg of traction. Mark the depth of the tube at the mouth immediately after traction is applied. The tube should stretch slightly over the next 10 minutes as it warms to body temperature. It should not stretch more than 1 inch approximately, which is why the depth of the tube is marked at the beginning. If it moves more than an inch, consider the possibility of a hiatal hernia and balloon migration out of the gastroesophageal junction, which should be evaluated with an x-ray. If it moves less than 1 inch at the completion of stretching, the tube can be secured with ETAD under the same traction.

- Then perform gastric suction followed by a rinse and repeat aspiration. This checks for bleeding below the gastric balloon.

- To assess for bleeding above the gastric balloon, use the premarked nasogastric tube. If there is continued bleeding, the esophageal balloon should be inflated.

- Using a manometer, inflate the esophageal balloon through the esophageal port with 30 mmHg. If bleeding continues, the pressure can be increased to a maximum of 45 mmHg.