Otic ganglion has connections to various nerves. This section describes the multiple nerves connected to the otic ganglion and the structures innervated by them. Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers of the otic ganglion pass through all the branches of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve, like the auriculotemporal nerve, lingual nerve, buccal nerve, inferior alveolar nerve, mylohyoid nerve, meningeal nerve, and the motor branches to deep temporalis and masseter. The otic ganglion also communicates with the Vidian nerve through the internal sphenoid nerve and cavernous sinus through the external sphenoid nerve.

The auriculotemporal nerve, which connects to the otic ganglion through a communicating branch carries postganglionic parasympathetic secretomotor and sympathetic vasomotor fibers for the parotid gland.

The motor fibers of the facial nerve for levator veli palatini muscle run in the cauda tympani nerve and then the otic ganglion by a communicating branch. These motor fibers pass the otic ganglion without any synaptic relay and join the Vidian nerve via the internal sphenoid nerve. Vidian nerve finally brings the motor fibers to the pterygopalatine ganglion, which eventually gives of the lesser palatine nerve to innervate the levator veli palatini muscle.

The postganglionic fibers from the otic ganglion also enter the lingual nerve via a communicating branch and thereby innervates the submandibular and sublingual glands. The greater petrosal nerve is also connected to the otic ganglion by a communicating branch and transmits sensory and parasympathetic fibers to the lingual nerve. The otic ganglion also connects to the meningeal branch of the mandibular nerve through a communicating branch, and it transmits sensory fibers that form the meningeal nerve.

The otic ganglion connects to the cavernous sinus through the external sphenoid nerve. The external sphenoid nerve is a small ganglion cord arising from the dorsal side of the otic ganglion. It accompanies the internal sphenoid nerve along half its course. It then traverses cranially to enter the cavernous sinus through sphenoidal emissary foramen, or through a small bony canal where a para-otic ganglion resides.

Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the otic ganglion also run in other branches of the mandibular nerve like buccal, inferior alveolar, and mylohyoid nerve, and they innervate the small salivary glands in the buccal mucosa. The motor branches of the mandibular nerve to masseter and deep temporalis also contains postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the otic ganglion to a small extent.