The most common side effects of carisoprodol include drowsiness, dizziness, and headache. According to the package insert, up to 17% of patients experienced sedation after taking carisoprodol compared to 6% of patients who received a placebo. This side effect can potentially impair the mental and physical abilities necessary to perform potentially hazardous work such as driving a vehicle or operating heavy machinery. There are post-marketing reports of motor vehicle accidents correlated with the use of carisoprodol. Since the sedative effects of CNS depressants may be additive, patients should be cautioned to avoid or minimize taking other CNS depressants such as alcohol, opioids, or benzodiazepines simultaneously and to take necessary precautions not to drive or engage in other potentially dangerous activities if experiencing sedation.

Significant hypotension can also occur with carisoprodol overdose and is usually treated with supportive care and possibly dialysis.

Dependence, withdrawal, and carisoprodol misuse have been reported with prolonged use, especially in patients with a history of addiction or when used in combination with other drugs with misuse potential.

The active metabolite meprobamate itself was a frequently misused drug in the 1950s and 1960s, and there have been reported overdoses.

In March of 2007, Norwegian medical regulatory authorities conducted a review of carisoprodol, and the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) concluded that the benefits of medicines containing carisoprodol no longer outweigh their risks and that all marketing authorizations for carisoprodol be suspended throughout Europe.

Another potential significant reported adverse effect is seizures. In Indonesia, in September 2017, close to 100 people suffered seizures with at least one fatality when PCC, standing for "paracetamol-caffeine-carisoprodol," was mixed into student's drinks.