VACTERL syndrome is a multi-factorial condition affecting the embryological development of multiple organ systems. One of those systems is the skeletal system and, more specifically, the vertebral column. This condition can lead to skeletal malformations such as missing, fused, or even extra vertebrae present in the spine that can compromise the spinal cord due to variations in the size of the vertebral canal in which the spinal cord resides.

Spondylolisthesis occurs when a vertebral body slips anteriorly relative to the inferior vertebral body. This condition can arise from a congenital malformation of the lumbosacral joint L5-S1, or it can more commonly occur in people who repetitively hyperextend and rotate their movements—this is why spondylolisthesis most commonly presents in gymnastics, swimming, diving, and weightlifting populations. If the anterior slippage is severe, typically less than 50% displacement of the superior vertebra concerning its inferior vertebra, there can be neurological deficits present due to compression of the spinal cord resulting from a reduction in the vertebral canal space. Spondylolisthesis can also be associated with spondylolysis, a bilateral fracture of the pars interarticularis portion of the vertebra. When this occurs, the stabilization of the vertebral column is compromised, and the vertebral body can now slip anteriorly.

Disc herniation is when the nucleus pulposus portion of the intervertebral disc herniates through the weakened annular fibrosis fibers of the outer disc, causing compression of the spinal cord and the spinal nerve roots. Annular fiber weakening is associated with degenerative disc disease.

Spinal stenosis occurs when there is a narrowing of the spinal canal that results in spinal cord compression. Multiple etiologies of spinal stenosis exist and include degenerative bone diseases such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and Paget disease; the latter potentially leads to bony overgrowth due to dysregulation of osteoblast and osteoclast activity. Due to the stenotic process, neurovascular compression can lead to neurological pain symptoms that can be debilitating depending on the severity and patient tolerance.

Several abnormal spinal curvatures can rise to the level of clinical significance. The upper thoracic region normally has a curvature with the concave surface facing anteriorly. When exaggerated, this forms a kyphosis, characterized by the posterior surface being convex and the anterior surface being concave. The most common cause of this is osteoporosis, which is usually most severe in the post-menopausal female due to decreased serum estrogen levels.

Lordosis is an exaggeration of the normal lumbar curvature in which the anterior surface is convex, and the posterior surface is concave. This curvature is exaggerated in pregnancy due to the anatomical changes needed to accommodate a growing fetus. This is a normal development. However, this curvature is exaggerated in osteomalacia or muscle weakness; the condition is termed lordosis.

Lateral curvature of the vertebral column is termed scoliosis. This condition is usually developmental in origin. It can result from abnormal growth of the vertebral column, vertebral damage or erosion, or abnormalities of the vertebral muscles.

In the pelvic region, the deep dorsal vein of the penis and the prostate venous plexus communicates with the vertebral venous plexuses, accounting for the spread of prostate cancer into the bodies of the lumbar vertebrae. These lesions are especially painful, as bone has a rich innervation for pain sensation.

Any fracture of the atlas is a potentially dangerous condition. This is because the transverse ligament of the atlas is stronger than the dens, which is most commonly fractured at its base. Such a fracture can cause loss of blood supply to the dens, causing it to undergo avascular necrosis, in which the structure dies due to loss of its blood supply. This is why supporting the neck at an accident site is essential before transporting the patient.