**Electrophysiology of Contractions**

Resting membrane potential is due to the electrochemical gradient majorly created by the potassium ions concentrated inside the cell and, to a lesser extent by, calcium, sodium, and chloride ions concentrated extracellularly.

Two types of Action Potentials have been observed in uterine myocytes: one involving depolarization followed by rapid repolarization, and the other with initial depolarization with a sustained plateau. It is the release of calcium ions from intracellular stores as well as the influx of calcium ions from the extracellular space which initiate the action potentials.  When the membrane potential is depolarized to about −40 mV, the L-type voltage-operated Calcium channels open, causing the influx of calcium ions. T-type Ca channels are also found in uterine myocytes and have a role in the propagation of action potentials.

Interaction of the uterine agonists with the GPCR located on the plasma membrane of myocyte leads to a chain of events ultimately causing the IP–IPR mediated Ca release from the Sarcoplasmic Reticulum. This further elevated the concentration of calcium in the cytosol as well as the voltage of the plasma membrane. Another process causing the propagation of action potential is the positive feedback mechanism of calcium, known as the  Ca-induced Ca release (CICR), whereby increasing the intracellular concentration of calcium stimulates other Ca channels to open. Perhaps the most poorly understood is the Store-operated Ca entry (SOCE) pathway. When the intracellular stores of Ca in the SR are emptied, a ‘calcium influx factor’ (CIF) is released which causes the plasma membrane to allow the influx of extracellular Ca. Lipid rafts, termed as ‘caveolae’ which are stabilized by a scaffolding protein, caveolin, present on the plasma membrane of myocytes, are also involved in signal transduction and myocyte excitability.

After the influx of calcium ions and their subsequent binding to calmodulin, a conformational change in Myosin Light Chain Kinase leads to an increase in phosphorylation of myosin light chain at serine residue 19, which causes myosin cross-bridge to attach to the actin filament and bring about the contraction.

The relaxation of myocyte is brought about by the efflux of calcium ions out of the cytosol into the SR and extracellular space. Plasma membrane Ca-ATPase (PMCA) and the SR/ER Ca-ATPase (SERCA) belong from the P-type Ca-ATPases family, are responsible for moving one Ca ion out of the intracellular compartment in exchange for an H+ restore the resting membrane potential. Another mechanism involves the Na/Ca exchanger (NCX), with the virtue of the electrochemical gradient of Na created by the Na/K ATPase. Interestingly, calcium itself causes calcium ion clearance: Calcium ions inhibit L-type calcium channels and calcium-calmodulin complex also stimulates  CaM-Kinase II (CaMKII) which inhibits L-type calcium channels.

**Calcium Sensitization and Desensitization**

The increased sensitivity of regulatory and contractile proteins to calcium, eventually resulting in stronger contraction, after stimulation with an agonist, is known as Calcium Sensitization. The vice versa is true for calcium desensitization. This is established through the RhoA/Rho-kinase signaling pathway. Activation of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) causes the recruitment of RhoA to the plasma membrane after the exchange of GDP for GTP. This activates the Rho-associated kinase (ROK) which phosphorylates the myosin targeting subunit (MYPT1) of Myosin Light Chain Phosphatase, preventing the dephosphorylation of Myosin Light Chain. The mRNAs for RhoA, ROK-1, and ROK-2 are present in the non-gravid uterus and increase during pregnancy.  ROK inhibition hampers force development and promotes relaxation without altering the level of [Ca] in spontaneous and agonist-stimulated contractions. Similarly, cAMP causes phosphorylation of MLCK itself by a cAMP-dependent protein kinase which decreases enzymatic activity by decreasing the affinity of the MLCK for the calmodulin-calcium complex. Several receptors are found on the surface of myometrial cells that affect contractility. These include:

- Oxytocin receptors: Contractility agonist

- Estrogen receptors: Contractility agonist

- Progesterone receptors: Contractility antagonist

- Beta2 adrenergic receptors cause an increase in cAMP levels, hence contractility antagonist

- Alpha-adrenergic receptors cause a decrease in cAMP levels, hence contractility agonist

These receptors are the targets of multiple drugs used in the management of abnormal labor as we will see later.

The exact sequence of events that leads to uterine contractions is still largely unknown. Some studies suggest mechanical stretch and hormones work together to initiate contractions in normal labor.

**Mechanical Stretch**

Mechanical stretch refers to tension on myometrial cells as the uterus distends. The physical stretching of the uterus results in an influx of ions, namely sodium and calcium, that changes the action potential across myometrial cells.

**Inflammatory Mediators**

Many studies suggest that inflammation is a mediator of labor.

The two most studied prostaglandins involved in uterine contractions include prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2.) They stimulate myometrial contractility, most likely by acting as calcium ionophores, leading to an increase in intracellular calcium. Misoprostol is the synthetic version of PGE1, which, although initially designed to prevent peptic ulcers, proved to have a dose-dependent effect on myometrial contractility.

PGE2 also plays a role in uterine contractions by activating EP1 and EP3 receptors on myometrial cells.

Prostaglandin F2 alpha (PGF2a) in less studied, but it is thought to both decrease progesterone levels and independently increases uterine contractility by stimulating smooth muscle cells.

Prostaglandins also play a role in uterine contractions after the delivery of the fetus. During this time, also known as stage 3 of labor, the placenta secretes prostaglandins that lead to its detachment from the endometrial cavity.

**Hormones**

The primary hormones involved include estrogen, progesterone, and oxytocin. Oxytocin is one of the most widely studied hormones involved in uterine contractions. It decreases Ca2+ efflux, by inhibiting the Ca2+/ATPase of the myometrial cell membrane which pumps calcium from the inside to the extracellular space, and increases Ca2+ influx, as well as causes the release of Ca2+ from the SR via IICR. Studies suggest that the increased estrogen to progesterone ratio that occurs before the onset of labor leads to an increased number of oxytocin receptors on the uterus.

Oxytocin: The process starts with the hypothalamus, specifically the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei. These nuclei generate and secrete oxytocin, the major contributor being the paraventricular nucleus. Oxytocin then travels to the posterior pituitary via the hypothalamic-hypophysial tract. After oxytocin arrives in the posterior pituitary, it subsequently accesses the systemic blood supply, which delivers the oxytocin molecule to oxytocin receptors on myometrial cells. The uterine epithelial lining also makes oxytocin during pregnancy where it acts in both an autocrine and paracrine fashion.

Progesterone: It decreases permeability for calcium, sodium, and potassium, as well as modulating the intracellular calcium-binding that makes less calcium available for the calmodulin-MLCK system, by increasing the rate of cAMP synthesis. It is vital for the maintenance of pregnancy as it causes uterine relaxation during early pregnancy, and its functional withdrawal will lead to increased estrogen to progesterone ratio that causes an increase in prostaglandin concentration triggering labor.