The etiology of antalgic gait can be divided into traumatic and non-traumatic categories. Traumatic etiologies are typically contusions, strains, and overuse injuries, while non-traumatic etiologies include infectious, oncologic, and bone processes.

**Traumatic Etiologies**

In most cases, there is a history of trauma resulting in symptoms that prompt a caregiver to seek evaluation by a healthcare provider. The management of these children depends on physical examination and imaging findings. A commonly encountered cause of an antalgic gait in older infants and young children is the toddler’s fracture. These are spiral fractures of the tibia that may follow minimal trauma, and sometimes there may be no trauma history. The most common finding in these children is a refusal to bear weight; the physical examination may be normal, or there may be pain elicited over the distal tibia when palpated. Plain radiographs of the affected extremity may show the fracture, but in some 40% of children, these radiographs may be normal.

A practitioner must always consider non-accidental trauma in any pediatric patient of any age, but especially in infants, non-ambulatory children with fractures or injuries that either a child is not developmentally capable of causing or that do not fit with the given history. There is a low threshold for a thorough evaluation of non-accidental trauma if any of these are present. Additional "red flags" include a delay in seeking care, other signs of injury such as patterned bruising or bruising in unusual locations, such as behind the ears or on the back, and other fractures, particularly fractures in various stages of healing. Fractures that require a significant amount of force, such as scapular fractures, or unique fracture types, such as corner fractures and bucket-handle fractures, should raise suspicion for non-accidental trauma. An appropriate evaluation (skeletal survey, laboratory testing, and possible neuroimaging), prompt social services consultation, and/or child protective services notification is indicated. If available, the practitioner should also consult with a child abuse pediatrician. The American Academy of Pediatrics has published guidelines on the radiographic evaluation of a child with suspected non-accidental trauma. This includes a proper skeletal survey in children younger than 2 years of age (this imaging test should be performed on children ages 2 to 5 years on a case-specific basis) with a repeat survey done in 10 days to evaluate for healing occult fractures that may not be evident on the initial surgery. In children older than 5 years of age, skeletal surveys are of limited value.

**Non-Traumatic Etiologies**

**Infectious Etiologies**

The presence of fever and antalgic gait should raise suspicion for an infectious cause. Viral and bacterial agents can produce symptoms. The most frequent bacterial agents are Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes. There may be associated with soft tissue infections, such as cellulitis or an abscess, although this is less common. Involved locations may be in the bones of an extremity, the vertebrae, or discs of the spine. Infections can follow trivial trauma, puncture wounds, or animal bites.

Transient Synovitis: Commonly seen in young school-age children, this condition mimics osteomyelitis or septic arthritis, producing pain and sometimes a refusal to ambulate. Fever may or may not be present. Also known as “toxic synovitis,” this condition follows a viral infection and is inflammatory. It is self-limited.

Osteomyelitis: Typically, osteomyelitis is acquired through the hematogenous spread and most often involves long bones.****Infants with osteomyelitis may present with fever, and fussiness or pain may be elicited with a movement of the involved extremity. Older children will present with fever and painful gait. There may be reproducible pain to palpation or pain with a range of motion of the involved extremity. Young children have a predisposition to have concomitant septic arthritis with osteomyelitis due to boney vascular anatomy; this becomes less common as children age. While S. aureus is the most common etiologic agent, there has been a recent increase in infections due to Kingella kingae, which also is associated with the development of a Brodie abscess.

Myositis: Viral myositis is a common cause of antalgic gait in pediatric patients. Influenza is the most predominant virus in these children and is often bilateral. While any gram-positive bacterial species can cause pyomyositis, staphylococcal species predominate. This is often focal and may have associated osteomyelitis.

Discitis/epidural abscess: Often progressing on a more indolent course, discitis or epidural abscess presents a diagnostic challenge, as children may not localize pain to the back, and physical examination findings may be limited. Older children may localize pain to the back (especially the lumbar area), and infants may become irritable when placed in a sitting position and may prefer to be prone.

**Bone Abnormalities**

Two common etiologies of antalgic gait in pediatric patients are slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) and Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (LCP).

SCFE: This condition, in which the capital femoral epiphysis is displaced from the femoral neck through the epiphysis, is most often encountered in adolescent patients, particularly those who are obese.****SCFE can also be associated with chronic medical conditions, such as hypothyroidism and pituitary disorders. Physical examination of these patients reveals an afebrile child's limited range of motion of the hip and tenderness.

LCP: Often seen in school-age children with a peak incidence of 5 to 7 years of age****and has a male preference.

**Oncologic Etiologies**

Benign and malignant tumors can present with ambulation difficulties in children.

Osteoid Osteoma: This benign lesion is most commonly encountered in the teenage population.

Osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma: These are the two most common malignant bone lesions in the pediatric population. They most often are found in the distal tibia. Progressively worsening pain is the usual symptom and may not respond to anti-inflammatory medications.

Leukemia: Almost half of the pediatric populations diagnosed with leukemia experience pain that may impact ambulation.****There are often systemic complaints such as fever, pallor, and easy bruising.

**Rheumatologic Etiologies**

While not common in the pediatric population, rheumatology causes of antalgic gait do occur, primarily in children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) and lupus. Often the child will have an existing diagnosis of rheumatologic disease, but the clinician should keep this possibility in mind, especially in older children, for example, teenagers.

**Other Etiologies**

Children with appendicitis or testicular torsion may present with an antalgic gait. It is essential to perform a thorough physical examination, including the abdomen and genital areas, to exclude these processes.