The thigh muscles are divided into three compartments: the anterior, medial, and posterior thigh muscles, each of which contains multiple muscles which broadly share the same functional action, innervation, and arterial supply.****

**Anterior Compartment of Thigh Muscles**

This compartment includes two subgroups of muscles: those that are hip flexors and hip abductors, and the knee extensors (called the quadriceps collectively)

**Hip Flexors**

The hip flexors are composed of the iliacus, psoas major, sartorius, and pectineus. The iliacus arises from the iliac fossa within the bony pelvis and inserts at the upper part of the femur. Psoas major arises from the lower border of the T12 vertebra to the L5 vertebra, and it extends downwards under the inguinal ligament with iliacus to inserts beside it at the lesser trochanter of the femur. The sartorius muscle is the longest in the body and crosses from the anterior superior iliac spine inferomedially to insert at the supper medial part of the tibia. The pectineus is a smaller muscle that arises at the eponymous pectineal line of the pubis and inserts at the upper femoral shaft behind the lesser trochanter. The iliacus and the psoas are both flexors of the thigh in relation to the torso and receive blood supply from the lumbar branch of the iliopsoas of the internal iliac artery. Innervation to the iliacus is by the muscular branch of the femoral nerve (L1 through L3), while the direct fibers of L1 innervate the psoas through L3 lumbar plexus. The sartorius is unique in that it flexes and laterally rotates the hip joint and flexes the knee, is innervated by the femoral nerve (L2 through L4), and receives blood supply from the muscular branches of the femoral artery. The pectineus is also unique as it adducts the thigh and flexes the hip; it is usually innervated by the femoral nerve but is sometimes innervated by the obturator nerve. Its blood supply is from the medial circumflex femoral branch of the femoral and obturator artery.

**Knee Extensors (quadriceps)**

The overall function of the quadriceps group is knee extension via their distal attachments at the patellar tendon. All muscles in this group are innervated by the femoral nerve (L2-L4) and supplied by the lateral femoral circumflex artery (except the vastus medialis, which receives its blood supply from the femoral artery, profunda femoris artery, and superior medial genicular branch of the popliteal artery.

The four muscles in the extensor group are the vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, vastus medialis, and rectus femoris. All four function to extend the knee, but the rectus femoris is also an accessory flexor of the hip. The rectus femoris has two heads - the reflected head and the straight head - which arise from just above the acetabulum and from the anterior inferior iliac spine, respectively. The vastus lateralis arises from the intertrochanteric line, the greater trochanter, and the linea aspera. The vastus intermedius arises from the anterolateral part of the upper femur. The vastus medialis arises from the intertrochanteric line and the linea aspera. All these muscles insert via the common quadriceps tendon into the base and sides of the patella, thus exerting their extension action on the knee joint.

**Medial Compartment of the Thigh (adductors)**

The adductors of the thigh are the adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, and gracillis. The longus, brevis, and magnus all adduct and flex the thigh. The longus and brevis rotate the hip joint laterally and share the blood supply of the obturator and medial circumflex femoral arteries. The longus is unique because it is innervated by the anterior division of the obturator nerve (L2, L3, L4). The unique feature of the adductor brevis is that the innervation can be from either the anterior or posterior division of the obturator nerve. The adductor magnus differs as it is considered the most powerful adductor of the thigh; the superior horizontal fibers flex the thigh while the vertical fibers extend the thigh. The magnus is also different due to dual innervation and different blood supply. A majority of the magnus is innervated by the obturator nerve, while the vertical (hamstring) portion is innervated by the tibial nerve (L2 through L4).

Gracilis arises from the inferior ramus of the pubis and attaches to the upper medial tibial shaft close to the sartorius. The adductor longus arises from the body of the pubis and inserts as a flat tendon at the linea aspera of the femur. The adductor brevis also arises from the body of the pubic bone and inserts into the linea aspera behind the insertion of the adductor longus. The adductor magnus has two distinct parts, the hamstring, and the adductor portion. The hamstring part originates at the ischial tuberosity before inserting at the adductor tubercle of the femur. The adductor part originates at the ischiopubic ramus and inserts along the supracondylar line, the linea aspera, and the gluteal tuberosity.

**Posterior Compartment of the Thigh (hamstrings)**

The hamstrings are composed of the semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and long and short heads of the biceps, all of which flex the knee. Both heads of the biceps femoris also rotate the tibia laterally. The long head additionally extends the hip. The semitendinosus and semimembranosus extend the thigh and rotate the tibia medially, especially when the knee is flexed.

Semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and the long head of biceps femoris all arise from the ischial tuberosity. The short head of the biceps femoris arises from the linea aspera of the femur. It inserts as a common tendon with the long head of the biceps femoris at the head of the fibula. The semimembranosus inserts at the medial condyle of the tibia, and the semitendinosus inserts at the medial part of the upper tibial shaft.