# Introduction

Anencephaly is a pathology of development characterized by a fetus that has no calvarium, with a lack of most or all of the fetus' brain tissue.

# Mechanism

Neural tube defects emerge when there is a disturbance during neurulation.

**Primary neurulation:**

Neurulation is a series of systematic, morphologic, structural changes. The process begins with the Hensen node and the nascent ectoderm signaling to one another, which induces the neural plate to begin neurulation.

**Secondary neurulation:**

At the sacral and coccygeal level, the neural tube is referred to as the tailbud.

# Testing

**PRENATAL**

Ultrasound

The presence of anencephaly can be detected as early as the first trimester through fetal ultrasound. However, since some organ systems are still developing through the first trimester, screening for structural abnormalities is used to be delayed until the second trimester. Ultrasound remains the gold standard for diagnostic imaging in pregnant women due to its increased efficacy from technological advances and its safety for the fetus.

Alpha-fetoprotein

Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is a protein normally found in human serum. During pregnancy, AFP concentrations rise quickly, reaching peak levels at the end of the first trimester. After the first trimester, AFP is continuously synthesized, but its presence becomes diluted due to increases in fetal blood volume.

**POSTNATAL**

In the postnatal period, diagnosis is by physical examination. All of the following criteria are required for a positive diagnosis

- No calvarium present

- Absence of scalp

- External presence of a hemorrhagic, fibrous mass or tissue

- Lack of cerebral hemispheres

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis and etiology of anencephaly remain poorly understood but are believed to have a multifactorial origin comprised of both nutritional and environmental risk factors.

**NUTRITIONAL FACTORS**

Folate is a coenzyme that facilitates the transfer of one-carbon units, which are then in various reactions, such as purine and pyrimidine synthesis, as well as methylation reactions.

- Medications that block folate absorption

- Malabsorption of folate

- Increased bodily demand for folate

- Insufficient intake of dietary folate

Folate is involved in the process of methylating homocysteine and cytosine. It also contributes to the synthesis of purines and pyrimidines. Consequently, a lack of folate leads to an inability to properly build proteins and DNA and also alters the expression of some genes.

**ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS**

Anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) are a known cause of NTDs. Use of AEDs, such as valproate, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, alters folate absorption, leading to decreased levels of folate in the blood. Of note, valproate is considered the most teratogenic AEDs, especially when combined with lamotrigine.

Diabetes complicates pregnancies by increasing the risk of the fetus developing congenital birth defects (diabetic embryopathy).

Hyperthermia during the first trimester can alter anterior neural tube closure and correlates with anencephaly. Possible causes of hyperthermia in the mother include the use of saunas or hot tubs, exercising in an environment with increased temperatures, and febrile illness.

Excess Vitamin A has shown to be teratogenic in pregnant rats due to decreased protein synthesis.

# Clinical Significance

Anencephaly is not compatible with life. The most important aspect of the management of this condition is prevention. The simplest way to reduce the incidence of anencephaly is to advise women of childbearing age to take a supplement of folic acid. Any dose at or more than 0.4 mg a day is effective; this is especially important for any woman taking anticonvulsants. For a young female patient with epilepsy, counseling is essential about the risk of seizures during pregnancy to the developing fetus and the risk of teratogenicity. The patient and provider should develop a plan before she starts a family. The seizures should best be under optimal control with at all possible a single anti-epileptic agent at the lowest possible dose. Valproate should be avoided. The anticonvulsant with the best track record concerning teratogenicity is lamotrigine.

Maternal serum and fetal ultrasonography are diagnostic procedures during pregnancy for in utero diagnosis of any neural tube defect, including anencephaly. Early termination of pregnancy may be an option upon the diagnosis of anencephaly.