Urolithiasis occurs when crystals that the stone is composed of supersaturate the urine due to being present in a high concentration and begin to collect and crystallize within the parenchyma of the kidney, forming the renal calculi. These crystals will aggregate together and continue to enlarge with the potential to migrate into the ureter and become symptomatic. If the stone causes an obstruction and does not allow for the passage of urine through the ureter, hydronephrosis can occur secondary to upstream dilation of the ureter and renal pelvis. The most common location for a stone to obstruct is near the ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) because in this region the diameter of the ureter is very narrow. There are two other areas of ureteral narrowing, the first being where the ureter crosses over the iliac vessels and the second at the ureterovesical junction (UVJ). Stones are painful within the ureter because as they pass through the ureter, increased luminal tension and hydronephrosis will lead to prostaglandin release, resulting in colicky pain associated with the condition.

Crystal nucleation and growth are key factors in the production of all types of kidney stones. Nucleation is when crystals begin to compound together to initiate stone formation. Supersaturation of the urine with organic materials contributing to stone formation is a driving force of this mechanism.

There are two theories, free particle vs. fixed particle, that describe the growth and aggregation of crystals. The free particle mechanism states that the crystals will increase in size and aggregate within the urine of the tubules. These aggregates enlarge and block urine outflow from tubular openings, which promotes the formation of smaller stones. Alternatively, the fixed particle mechanism states that stones formed attached to calcific plaques called Randall plaques. These plaques are rooted deeply within the basement membrane of the loop of Henle. The cause of the initial formation of Randall’s plaque is unknown.