As with every procedure, CRRT has risks, and these should be communicated to the patient or family when considering initiation. Firstly, the risks associated with intravascular lines include hemorrhage, AV fistula, infection, or thrombosis. The risks of the therapy itself include electrolyte disturbances, clearance of trace elements or antibiotics, hypothermia, and hypotension.

Although hypotension should occur less commonly than in IHD, hypotension may occur if the net ultrafiltration rate exceeds the intravascular filling rate. Monitoring of electrolytes and acid-base status should be done every 6 to 12 hours when starting CRRT. If remaining stable after the first 24 to 48 hours, the interval may be increased to 12 to 24 hours.

The removal of medications during CRRT is variable, and so it is advised to check the dose of required drugs when on CRRT. This practice is critical when it comes to administering antibiotics, as the trough concentrations of these medications will determine their bacteriocidal or bacteriostatic effectiveness. Most commonly affected are water-soluble antimicrobials, aminoglycosides, and beta-lactam antibiotics.

CRRT will result in amino acid, micronutrient, and water-soluble vitamin loss. Patients are also often in a substantial negative nitrogen balance. Appropriate caloric and protein intake with supplementation of water-soluble vitamins should be ensured.

Finally, the risks associated with the extracorporeal circuit include hypersensitivity to the circuit, air embolization, and blood loss that occurs with the filter or circuit changes.