Researchers have studied the adverse effects of zafirlukast in adults and children 12 years or older. There are rare reports of eosinophilia with vasculitis in patients taking zafirlukast; therefore, eosinophilia, rash, worsening asthma, cardiac issues, and neuropathy should warrant further workup.

There are over 100 reported cases of severe hepatic failure with zafirlukast. Signs of hepatitis, including right upper quadrant pain, jaundice, and pruritus, should warrant monitoring transaminases and discontinuation if clinical suspicion of hepatoxic effects occurs. Generally, The resolution of transaminases occurs in most cases after discontinuation. However, in rare cases, patients have either presented with fulminant hepatitis or progressed to hepatic failure, liver transplantation, and death. In such cases, a rechallenge trial of zafirlukast leads to rapid recurrence and must be avoided.

Neuropsychiatric events, including depression and insomnia, have been reported, and clinicians should educate patients to report related symptoms. In patients over 55 years of age, there are reports of increased respiratory tract infection. In patients over 65, there is decreased clearance of zafirlukast with approximately a two to three-fold increase in maximum concentration.

Common adverse drug reactions of zafirlukast include:

- Headache (10%), dizziness, neuropathy, hallucinations, insomnia, depression, and abnormal dreams

- Nausea (3%), diarrhea (3%), abdominal pain (3%), vomiting, and dyspepsia

- transaminase elevation(AST/ALT), symptomatic hepatitis, hyperbilirubinemia, fulminant hepatitis, and progressive hepatic failure

- Myalgia, back pain, arthralgia, theophylline toxicity symptoms, edema, and malaise

- Pain (2%), asthenia (2%), injury, and fever

- Respiratory tract infection in patients 55 or older with coadministration of inhaled corticosteroids (3%)

- Menorrhagia, thrombocytopenia, alopecia, bruising, pruritis, urticaria, angioedema, and rashes

- Granulomatosis, agranulocytosis, eosinophilia, eosinophilic pneumonia, and Churg-Strauss-related syndrome

Zafirlukast is a CYP2CP9 substrate and weak inhibitor which may interact with or decrease concentrations of alpelisib (kinase inhibitor), dabrafenib, enzalutamide, lumacaftor, ivacaftor, and rifapentine. Erythromycin and theophylline can decrease the concentration of zafirlukast. Aspirin can increase the concentration of zafirlukast. Inhaled loxapine with zafirlukast should be avoided due to the increased risk of bronchospasm. Zafirlukast use with warfarin can cause a rise in the international normalized ratio(INR) and requires monitoring for optimal control of coagulability.