Before deciding to proceed with the diagnosis of brain death, several conditions must be evaluated and met:

- Ensure no recent neuromuscular blocking agents have been administered (must wait five times the drug half-life).

- Drug screen to ensure no central nervous system (CNS) depressants are present.

- Normal core temperature must be present >36 C

- Normal systolic blood pressure >100 mmHg; vasopressors may be administered if necessary.

- No severe electrolyte, acid-base, or endocrine disturbance

- Neurologic examination, in most US states, 1 attending physician exam is sufficient; however, some states require 2.

If the above conditions are present, and there is an identified cause of coma and complete lack of brainstem reflex, the examiner may proceed with apnea testing.

Apnea testing is performed by the following procedure as recommended by the AAN:

- Preoxygenate for at least 10 minutes with 100% FiO2 to a PaO2 >200mmHg

- Reduce ventilator frequency to 10 breaths per minute.

- Reduce positive end-expiratory pressure to 5 cm H2O.

- If SPO2 remains >95%, obtain baseline blood gas.

- Disconnect the patient from the ventilator, and preserve oxygenation with oxygen delivered through insufflation tubing given at 100% FiO2 at 6L/min near the level of the carina through the endotracheal tube.

- Look for respiratory movements for 8 to 10 minutes.

- If no respiratory drive is observed, repeat blood gas at approximately 8 minutes.

- If no respiratory movements are observed, and PCO2 is >60mmHg, the apnea test result is positive.

If the above list is complete, and coma, the absence of brainstem reflexes, and a positive apnea test are present, the diagnosis of brain death can be made. This procedure is validated and supported by several professional organizations.

Although not required for the diagnosis of brain death, hospitals frequently have additional ancillary tests available to confirm the diagnosis of brain death. These include electroencephalogram (EEG), cerebral angiography, nuclear scan, transcranial doppler, computed tomogram angiogram (CTA), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)/ magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA). These tests are used when apnea testing is inconclusive, or patients are too unstable to proceed with apnea testing.

In the case of cerebral angiography, no intracerebral filling is noted in the carotid or vertebral arteries at the skull entry-level, and blood flow in the external carotid artery is maintained. In the case of EEG, no electrographic reactivity is noticed after intense stimuli, either somatosensory or audiovisual.