Borderline personality disorder is multifactorial in etiology. There is a genetic predisposition. Twin studies show over 50% heritability (greater than that for major depression).

There are many theories about the development of borderline personality disorder. In the mentalizing model of Peter Fonagy and Anthony Bateman, borderline personality disorder is the result of a lack of resilience against psychological stressors. In this framework, Fonagy and Bateman define resilience as the ability to generate adaptive re-appraisal of negative events or stressors; patients with impaired re-appraisal accumulate negative experiences and fail to learn from good experiences.

Neuroimaging studies have identified differences in the amygdala, hippocampus, and medial temporal lobes in patients with borderline personality disorder. Such studies also suggest that patients with borderline personality disorder misattribute negative emotions (fear, anger, disgust) to neutral faces more so than controls or other patients, despite having the perception of happy and upset faces equivalent to those groups. Neurobiological studies have suggested that impaired neuropeptide function, particularly serotonin, may be present in patients with borderline personality disorder. On neuropsychological testing, a meta-analysis published in 2005 showed that patients with borderline personality disorder had lower performance on neurocognitive testing in the following domains: attention, cognitive flexibility, learning and memory, planning, speed processing, and visuospatial abilities.