The underlying pathophysiology of acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis is unknown, but there are a few hypotheses. Dysregulation of cytokine secretion (including interleukin-1, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and interferon-gamma) resulting in dysfunction of neutrophil apoptosis is one hypothesis.

Alterations of proinflammatory cell signaling pathways and cytokine production in a genetically predisposed individual are considered central to the pathogenesis of AFND. Ultimately, these alterations affect neutrophil proliferation, migration, and destruction in the skin and other tissues. Tissue neutrophil levels are a function of infectious triggers for neutrophil proliferation and migration, bone marrow granulopoiesis, storage and release, trans-endothelial migration, and rate of neutrophil destruction. Abnormality in any of these steps could influence the development and progression of AFND.

Migration of neutrophils to the tissue in situations of cell stress is a normal immunological response, however, the loss of control over this process in AFND appears to be largely cytokine-mediated. Most commonly, IL-1, IL-3, IL-6, and IL-8 through nonspecific are found to be elevated in AFND. Moreover, elevated levels of G-CSF has also been noted in patients with AFND. G-CSF is produced by a variety of tissues, including endothelium and macrophages. Additionally, increased production of G-CSF is noted in multiple malignancies. Summarizing these facts, it may be hypothesized that abnormally increased production of G-CSF or increased sensitivity to normal levels of G-CSF could be a unifying mechanism of all the three variants of AFND.

The phenomenon of pathergy where-in a cutaneous lesion is triggered by minor trauma is demonstrated in AFND in common with other neutrophilic dermatoses. The probable mechanism could be a destruction of endothelial cells, cytokine dysregulation, and resultant neutrophil activation.

Genetic factors: Defects in the transcriptional regulation of the PTPN6 gene, mutations of the MEFV gene associated with the familial Mediterranean fever have been implicated in the pathogenesis of AFND.