**Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies**

In ulnar neuropathy, sensory nerve action potentials (SNAP) are affected as the lesion is distal to the dorsal root ganglion whereas, in C8 radiculopathy, SNAPs are unaffected as the lesion is proximal to the dorsal root ganglion. In ulnar neuropathy, the amplitude of the ulnar nerve and dorsal ulnar cutaneous SNAP is decreased.

**Motor Nerve Conduction Studies**

The ulnar nerve can be affected at the level of the epicondylar groove or more distal in the cubital tunnel. Compound muscle action potential (CMAP) conduction velocities in these anatomical locations can help distinguish and localize the neuropathy. Ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, in the medial epicondyle, shows proximal decreased motor nerve conduction velocity with or without conduction block, decreased amplitude of the ulnar CMAP. On the other hand, a CMAP amplitude that is 2 cm distal from the medial epicondyle represents an entrapment in the cubital tunnel. A caveat to these findings is the existence of anatomical variants, especially Martin-Gruber anastomosis.

**Martin-Gruber anastomosis (MGA)**

Knowledge of this variant is important in electrodiagnostic interpretations. A patient without this variant produces mostly equivocal CMAP amplitude either at the wrist or abductor pollicis brevis (thenar eminence) is stimulated. However, in a patient with an MGA, the wrist response is smaller because of the median nerve axonal crossover, consequently also leading to a larger response at the level of the elbow. When the ulnar nerve at the hypothenar eminence (abductor digiti minimi or FDI) is stimulated, the median nerve fibers crossover distally, leading to a larger conduction/amplitude compared to the elbow, which could lead to misinterpretation of a positive conduction block. A difference of <= to 25% between elbow and wrist would be an acceptable dispersion in patients with an MGA. Stimulation of the median nerve at the wrist will lead to a smaller response than expected given crossover. A difference larger than 25% would raise suspicion for a true ulnar or median nerve neuropathy, respectively.

**Late Responses**

F-waves and H-reflexes are not helpful when evaluating ulnar neuropathy due to non-specificity.

**EMG**

In electromyography, the most commonly tested hand muscles innervated by the ulnar nerve are the abductor digiti minimi (ADI) and the first dorsal interosseus (FDI). If an axonal lesion is present, these muscles will likely be positive compared to the forearm muscles. If the lesion is distal to the Guyon canal, there will be more involvement of the FDI as opposed to the ADM. In ulnar neuropathy at the elbow, the flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) and flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) are spared. If an acute axonal lesion is present, high amplitude, delayed duration, fibrillation potentials, and positive sharp waves may be seen in the intrinsic hand muscles innervated by the ulnar nerve and the FCU. Chronic and severe proximal or distal ulnar nerve axonal injury or entrapment can lead to delayed recruitment and monophasic waves. Cervical paraspinal muscles and C8 can have similar findings and should be tested to rule out C8 radiculopathy.