By definition, the glycemic index measures the ability of carbohydrates to affect blood glucose measurements. Various types of food affect the glycemic index, and the glycemic index can vary based on whether starchy foods are mixed in meals or consumed individually. Additionally, the glycemic index can also depend on how the food was processed, including the food's nutrient composition. The differing responses related to the glycemic index are related to how each food item is digested and the various factors that influence this rate. In general, the glycemic index is a system of classifications where each glycemic response is compared against a standard piece of white bread.

A measure of long-term glycemic control can be found in the measurement of glycosylated hemoglobin, also known as hemoglobin A1C. The hemoglobin A1C is most often used to measure glycemic control because it represents a stable measurement instead of fasting blood glucose levels which can vary day-to-day. In comparison, hemoglobin A1C has been found to track well in individuals with diabetes over time and has been found to have less of an error in measurement than fasting blood glucose. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) classifies the diagnosis of diabetes at a hemoglobin A1C level greater than or equal to 6.5%.

Data and evidence from large observational studies have shown a positive association between glycemia measurements, including hemoglobin A1C and fasting glucose levels, with the risk associated with cardiovascular disease. Specifically, these studies have shown that hyperglycemia is a modifiable risk factor for coronary artery disease and atherosclerotic disease. In a meta-analysis of 10 independent studies involving the measurement of hemoglobin A1C in individuals with diabetes and cardiovascular disease, it was discovered that the relative risk for total cardiovascular disease and individuals with type 2 diabetes was 1.18 for each one percent increase in glycosylated hemoglobin, indicating an increase cardiovascular risk with increasing hyperglycemia.

Several studies have shown that a hemoglobin A1C reduction of approximately 1% is associated with a relative risk reduction of 15% in non-fatal myocardial infarction. In a meta-analysis of four large randomized controlled trials including 27,049 participants, it was found that more intensive glucose control reduced cardiovascular events by 9% in comparison with less intensive glucose control.

**Glycemic Control and Cardiovascular Effects of SGLT2 Inhibitors**

SGLT2 inhibitors have a modest effect on hyperglycemia, with mean reductions in hemoglobin A1C between 0.4 to 1.1% compared to placebo.

The Canagliflozin Cardiovascular Assessment Study (CANVAS) reported similar findings. This trial recruited 10,142 patients with type 2 diabetes with either multiple cardiovascular risk factors or those already diagnosed with cardiovascular disease, and participants in this trial received canagliflozin or a placebo. This trial also showed that the rates of cardiovascular outcomes, including non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal strokes, and deaths from cardiovascular causes, were significantly lower in patients who received canagliflozin versus placebo. The study proposed that the mechanisms behind these findings could be that SGLT-2 inhibitors were able to improve volume overload, improve glycemic control, and decrease blood pressure.

Data review reveals that the decrease in cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction or stroke is not a class effect. In a recent study evaluating patients with type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, ertugliflozin was shown to be non-inferior to placebo with respect to major adverse cardiovascular events (cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, or non-fatal stroke).

Although the beneficial effect of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with atherosclerotic coronary artery disease appears to be modest, in patients with type 2 diabetes and heart failure, SGLT2 inhibitors have shown significant beneficial effects. The proposed mechanism is thought to be due to a decrease in preload via their diuretic and natriuretic effects, thereby improving ventricular function. Specifically, SGLT-2 inhibition mainly works in the proximal tubule, resulting in diuresis and glucosuria, causing the favorable outcome of osmotic diuresis. Studies have shown that empagliflozin can decrease central, systolic, and diastolic blood pressures, along with pulse pressure.

In meta-analyses of the major cardiovascular disease (CVD) outcome trials with SGLT2 inhibitors compared with placebo, the clinical benefit of using SGLT2 inhibitors to reduce myocardial infarction, stroke, and cardiovascular death was limited to those with established atherosclerotic disease, with no observable benefit for those with risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD).

**Glycemic Control and Cardiovascular Effects of GLP-1RAs**

A meta-analysis of 34 randomized trials comparing GLP-1RAs showed that they reduced hemoglobin A1C between -0.55 to -1.38% when compared to other medications.

The ADA guideline update in 2019 recommended GLP-1RAs to reduce the risk of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) in patients with type 2 diabetes without established coronary vascular disease, but with indicators of high risk, specifically for those patients age 55 or older with coronary, carotid or lower extremity artery stenosis above 55% or left ventricular hypertrophy. GLP-1RA medications have also been shown to lead to significant weight loss and improved blood pressure control. Liraglutide use was shown to provide a mild decrease in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure as evidenced in the trial Liraglutide Effect and Action in Diabetes: Evaluation of cardiovascular outcomes Results (LEADER) trial. This trial also demonstrated a difference between a liraglutide group and the placebo group regarding weight-loss changes over 36 months. The liraglutide group showed a weight loss of 2.3 kilograms more than the placebo group and a reduction in systolic blood pressure of 1.2 mmHg lower than the placebo group. Trials involving GLP-1RAs, liraglutide, subcutaneous semaglutide, and dulaglutide demonstrated significant reductions in cardiovascular outcomes in their respective trials.

In addition to cardiovascular benefits, GLP-1RA has been shown to significantly affect weight loss compared to placebo.

**SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1RAs and Cardiovascular Risk**

The initial ADA recommendation for type 2 diabetes therapy is metformin accompanied by comprehensive lifestyle changes, including weight management and physical activity. However, according to the most recent recommendations by the ADA, for patients with high cardiovascular risk or with established cardiovascular disease, clinicians are advised to consider adding a sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor with proven cardiovascular benefit or a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1) agonist with proven cardiovascular benefit. A Cochrane review published in 2021 reported that meta-analyses of moderate- to high-certainty evidence suggest that GLP-1RAs and SGLT2 inhibitors effectively reduce the risk of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality in patients with diabetes and established CVD.

**Candidates for Therapy**

As stated above, SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1RAs are not considered initial therapy for patients with type 2 diabetes.

GLP-1RAs are appropriate for patients with existing atherosclerotic disease when weight loss is a primary goal and/or avoidance of hypoglycemia is a primary concern. Although GLP-1RAs can be used as an adjunct therapy in most patients, they should not be used with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors due to little additional benefit from this combined therapy or with prandial insulin due to limited data to support their use.

**The American Diabetes Association Guideline for Pharmacologic Therapy for Type 2 Diabetes**

- Metformin is the preferred initial pharmacologic agent for therapy and should be continued unless it is not tolerated or there is a contraindication for its use.

- Other therapies should be added to metformin when additional therapy is required.

- Insulin should be started in addition to metformin is if there is ongoing catabolism (weight loss) or if hemoglobin A1C level is greater than 10%.

- For patients who have established atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease or are at high risk for this disease or heart failure, an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1RA should be initiated early regardless of the hemoglobin A1C level.

- In patients with type 2 diabetes, GLP-1RA is preferred to insulin when possible.