The standard of care in an HIV regimen is to prevent HIV mutation. As a patient will take these medications orally, there are now several options that combine three to four drugs into one pill for better patient compliance due to once-daily administration. This dosing increases both adherence and long-term effectiveness. Ibalizumab is an exception, as it is an injectable agent.

Patients are tested and educated to take all of their medications correctly to reduce resistance and cross-resistance to similar drugs to those they are taking. Medication adherence is difficult due to adverse effects following an HIV regimen. Common barriers to adherence include trouble swallowing pills, busy schedule (shift work), unstable living/housing situations, alcohol/drug use, fear of disclosing HIV status, and lack of insurance. Before starting an HIV regimen, strategies such as 7-day pillboxes, phone applications, and alarms should be in place. Patients must have stable mental health and not be taking illicit drugs to have better adherence.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Hepatic Impairment**

**Regimens not recommended:**Efavirenz/tenofovir disoproxil Fumarate/lamivudine with moderate or severe hepatic impairment. abacavir, abacavir/lamivudine, dolutegravir/ Abacavir/ lamivudine*Due to abacavir component) and Nevirapine is contraindicated. Use of Tenofovir Alafenamide is (not recommended).

**Renal Impairment:**Caution should be exercised if the patient is on tenofovir containing regimen due to potential nephrotoxicity. The recommendations of the CDC are as follows.

CrCl <30 mL/min: Elvitegravir/ cobicistat/ tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/ emtricitabine should not be initiated. Regimens not recommended are efavirenz/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine, doravirine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/lamivudine, efavirenz /tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/lamivudine. Rilpivirine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine. Instead, use the individual component ARVs and modify doses according to creatinine clearance. Generally, avoid any combination containing tenofovir due to the risk of potential nephrotoxicity. Dolutegravir/lamivudine, abacavir/lamivudine and dolutegravir/ abacavir/ lmivudine is not recommended.

Patient on hemodialysis (Crcl<30 ml/min)

- Tenofovir alafenamide/ emtricitabine. One tablet once daily. On hemodialysis days, administer after dialysis.

- Bictegravir/ tenofovir alafenamide/ emtricitabine- One tablet once daily. On hemodialysis days, administer after dialysis.

- Elvitegravir/ cobicistat/ tenofovir alafenamide/ emtricitabine- One tablet once daily. On hemodialysis days, administer after dialysis.

- Rilpivirine/ tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine- One tablet once daily. On hemodialysis days, administer after dialysis.

- Darunavir/ cobicistat/ tenofovir alafenamide/ emtricitabine- One tablet once daily. On hemodialysis days, administer after dialysis.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Preferred regimen is integrase strand transfer inhibitor (INSTI) based therapy such as dolutegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Breastfeeding is not recommended for patients who are confirmed or presumed to have HIV infection. Infants exposed perinatally to HIV should receive postpartum antiretroviral (ARV) prophylaxis to decrease the risk of perinatal transmission. The patient should be counseled that maternal antiretroviral therapy reduces but does not eliminate the risk of HIV transmission to the infant. Hence, mothers should use safe and affordable infant feeding alternatives.

Another study combined zidovudine /lamivudine /nevirapine prophylaxis for neonates with high-risk infants and did not significantly increase the risk of short-term toxicity compared with ZDV-monotherapy.Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia requires prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole to the infants delivered to mothers with HIV.