**Vestibular schwannoma**is composed of two distinct regions microscopically; Antoni A and Antoni B. Antoni A is made up of compact, well organized bipolar cells that may palisade (Verocay bodies). Antoni B, on the other hand, is composed of loosely organized myxoid tissue. The tumor has a strong S100 positivity.

**Meningiomas**have a varied histological appearance and are classified into several types based on the predominant histological architecture. Common varieties include meningothelial (syncytial and epithelial cells with poorly defined borders and classic whorls), fibroblastic (firm tumor comprised of spindle cells and undefined cell borders), and transitional (both meningothelial and fibroblastic components). Other less common subtypes include angiomatous, psammomatous, metaplastic, microcystic, secretory and lymphocytic. WHO grading system divides meningiomas into three grades, i.e., grade I to grade III based on histological features, presence of anaplasia, and prognosis. The majority of meningiomas are benign, slow-growing (grade I).

**Epidermoid tumors**are cystic lesions with squamous epithelium and keratin components. They begin from sequestrated epithelial cells of migrating optic and otic capsules. These are slow-developing tumors not associated with any other congenital abnormalities. They grow by the accumulation of keratin and cholesterol, which is produced by the desquamation of the epithelium that is lining the mass.

**Arachnoid cysts**have a delicate fibrous wall that is lined by meningothelial cells. They are cystic spaces containing cerebrospinal fluid or xanthochromic fluid. They are heterogeneous in their appearance.

**Lipomas**are fatty tumors that cause bone erosions. But the nerves and blood vessels pass easily through the tumor without any signs of displacement.