The most frequent indication for mastectomy is a malignancy of the breast. In most cases, the mainstay of treatment of breast cancer necessitates localized surgical treatment (either mastectomy or breast-conserving surgery) and can be in combination with neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy, including radiation, chemotherapy, or hormone antagonist medications, or a combination thereof. Tumor characteristics like size and location and patient preference are a significant part of the decision-making process, given that in many circumstances, survival rates are equivalent among patients undergoing mastectomy or lumpectomy with adjuvant radiation therapy.

Briefly, cancers of the breast may include both invasive and non-invasive histologies. The most common breast cancer diagnosis is invasive ductal carcinoma, and approximately 85% of all invasive breast cancers are ductal in origin. Alternatively, invasive lobular carcinoma and other infrequently seen histologies, such as breast sarcoma or breast lymphoma, are much less common. Non-invasive carcinoma of the breast includes ductal carcinoma in situ and lobular carcinoma in situ. The latter is often regarded as a marker of increased risk of future breast cancer and may best be considered a benign precursor lesion.

Patients with Paget’s disease of the breast may be considered for mastectomy as well. Paget’s disease is a rare manifestation of breast cancer where neoplastic cells are present in the epidermis of the nipple-areolar complex. While the disease may remain confined to this area, approximately 80 to 90% of cases will have an associated cancer elsewhere within the involved breast.

Mastectomy may be indicated in patients whose disease is multifocal or multicentric within the breast due to the volume and distribution of disease. Also, patients who present with advanced locoregional disease, including large primary tumors (T2 lesions greater than 5 cm) and skin or chest wall involvement, may benefit from mastectomy in many situations. Patients who present with inflammatory breast cancer are also treated with mastectomy, in addition to systemic chemotherapy and radiation treatment, due to tumor burden within the dermal lymphatic channels and more diffuse involvement of the underlying breast parenchyma.

Patients who initially undergo breast-conserving surgery (i.e., lumpectomy or partial mastectomy) and have margin involvement with tumor cells may be considered for a mastectomy if margin re-excision is not successful or is not technically or cosmetically feasible. Clear or negative margins following the resection of a primary tumor are a strong factor in reducing the risk of recurrence.

In patients who do not have a diagnosis of malignancy, mastectomy may be an option for risk reduction or prophylaxis in certain situations. Patients who are proven to carry a deleterious BRCA genetic mutation are at increased risk of breast cancer throughout their lifetime. A BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers have a lifetime risk of breast cancer as high as 80 to 85%.