# Introduction

First described by Hans Chiari in 1883, pancreatic panniculitis is a rare skin manifestation.

The symptoms of pancreatic panniculitis include tender, erythematous to violaceous, ulcerated nodules that commonly appear on the upper and lower extremities. The nodules may undergo liquefaction and necrosis, leading to spontaneous ulceration and brown, viscous drainage. The condition is caused by the massive release of lipolytic enzymes into the bloodstream, which is attributed to the underlying pancreatic disease.

Patients with pancreatic panniculitis are often systemically ill with fever and weight loss. Joint manifestations may be prominent, and serum lipase and amylase levels are elevated.

As there is a relationship between the unregulated release of pancreatic enzymes from pancreatic malignancies to the proposed pathophysiology of pancreatic panniculitis, this condition can also be considered a paraneoplastic syndrome.

Polyarthritis may present concurrently with pancreatic panniculitis, either proceeding or alongside pancreatic disease, which has been labeled a pancreatic disease, panniculitis, and polyarthritis (PPP) syndrome.

# Etiology

Pancreatic panniculitis is more commonly seen in middle-aged men with a history of chronic alcoholism and who also suffer from acute or chronic pancreatitis.

Pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma can also be associated with pancreatic, panniculitis, and polyarthritis (PPP) syndrome.

Pancreatic pseudocysts, posttraumatic pancreatitis, pancreas divisum, and hemophagocytic syndrome have also been reported with this panniculitis.

Idiopathic pancreatic panniculitis has also been reported, where no pancreatic disease was found after appropriate investigation. The skin biopsies in these cases confirmed histopathological features consistent with pancreatic panniculitis.

# Epidemiology

Approximately 2% to 3% of all patients presenting with disorders of the pancreas present with pancreatic panniculitis. This condition is 4 times more common in men than women.

A recent meta-analysis of global trends of acute pancreatitis found that, overall, pancreatitis is increasing, especially alcohol-associated pancreatitis, due to the increased alcohol consumption in developing nations and Asian countries. Areas of the United States might be experiencing stabilizing plateaus of pancreatitis numbers, indicating incidence peaks.

As acute pancreatitis increases worldwide, pancreatic panniculitis may be observed in more cases. However, this is difficult to determine as these studies regarding acute pancreatitis do not include accompanying numbers for pancreatic panniculitis. While systematic retrospective reviews of case studies reporting pancreatic panniculitis have been done, it is difficult to determine its presentation's exact incidence and prevalence, mainly when various etiologies exist for this panniculitis.

# Pathophysiology

The exact pathophysiology explaining the skin manifestations of pancreatic panniculitis is not completely understood but is thought to be related to the release of pancreatic enzymes.

The role of specific cytokines, such as adipokines, immune complexes, and vascular damage that allows for immune complex deposition are also proposed mechanisms for this disease's pathophysiology.

# Histopathology

Histologically, the skin biopsies of pancreatic panniculitis have distinct features. There are descriptions of 2 types of pancreatic panniculitis histologically, septal panniculitis and lobular panniculitis.

Lobular fat necrosis is predominant with adjacent neutrophilic infiltration.

A digital bone biopsy from a pediatric case of PPP syndrome demonstrated the destruction of bone structure with fatty tissue saponification and the absence of inflammatory cells, indicating the relationship between fatty acids and increased cytokine production leading to joint inflammation.

# History and Physical

Patients commonly present with pancreatic panniculitis in their seventh decade of life, but they can be older if the etiology is pancreatic malignancy. The disease usually involves the eruption of tender nodules on the lower extremities. These lesions can also be present on the thighs, hips, buttocks, breasts, upper extremities, scalp, and around various joints.

Skin lesions may not always be painful. However, increasingly difficult-to-control pain from panniculitis can be an initial presentation for patients seeking care and further evaluation.

A migratory polyarthritis may also occur alongside panniculitis, which should raise suspicion for PPP syndrome. In addition to polyarthritis, intramedullary fat necrosis and polyserositis can occur in patients with PPP syndrome.

Clinicians should obtain a complete patient history, especially for alcohol use, prior procedures or surgery, history of malignancy in the patient or family, and trauma.

# Evaluation

Evaluation of pancreatic panniculitis should begin with a thorough physical exam, but investigation of underlying causes can become difficult if this is not suspected initially. The tender, firm and erythematous nodules can be seen before signs of pancreatic disease, so an investigation of etiologies must be performed considering the patient's history and risk factors for malignancy.

Necessary labs include complete blood and cell counts, lipase, amylase, transaminases, bilirubin, and inflammatory markers. Lipase is significantly more elevated in patients with pancreatic malignancy than in those with pancreatitis. Lipase values greater than 4414 U/I were found to have a higher sensitivity and specificity for a malignant etiology for pancreatic panniculitis.

CT abdomen/pelvis with contrast is best to evaluate for pancreatic inflammation, mass, or metastatic disease. This may be a necessary initial step in assessing an abdominal source for panniculitis.

Previous case reports investigating pancreatic malignancies have obtained tumor markers such as CA 19–9. However, it is important to note that in pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma, mixed acinar-ductal, and mixed acinar-neuroendocrine subtypes, elevations in CA 19-9 are not usually seen. Younger patients may have elevated alpha-feto protein.

A biopsy is required for the diagnosis and has pathognomonic findings of anucleated adipocytes, lobular fat necrosis, and leukocyte infiltration to surrounding necrotic adipocytes. The biopsy provides a definitive diagnosis of pancreatic panniculitis.

While not part of a routine investigation, there have been unique features of pancreatic panniculitis of the lower extremities on MRI.

# Treatment / Management

The primary treatment of pancreatic panniculitis is to address the underlying cause.

In cases where pancreatic neoplasms are associated with pancreatic panniculitis, the tumor is often advanced by the time the cutaneous lesions appear. Nevertheless, early treatment may be beneficial. In pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma treated with a chemotherapy regimen of folinic acid, fluorouracil, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin, pancreatic panniculitis was resolved after multiple cycles.

While the subcutaneous nodules can resolve by treating pancreatic disease, hyperpigmented, atrophic scarring can remain.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for pancreatic panniculitis includes other forms of panniculitis, and, additionally, it is essential to distinguish it from other skin finds associated with pancreatic diseases.

Panniculitides are a group of medical conditions that are characterized by inflammation of the subcutaneous fat. In some cases, panniculitides can be associated with lower extremity ulcers. Two other specific forms of panniculitis that are known to cause lower extremity ulcers are erythema induratum (also known as nodular vasculitis) and panniculitis caused by alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency.

Erythema induratum is a type of panniculitis typically seen in middle-aged women. Erythema induratum presents as tender nodules that develop on the lower legs and may ulcerate. An immune reaction to bacteria, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis or other mycobacteria, causes the condition. Panniculitis caused by alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency is a rare genetic disorder in which there is a deficiency in the alpha-1-antitrypsin protein, leading to a buildup of abnormal protein in the liver and lungs. This can also cause panniculitis, which presents as painful nodules on the lower legs that may ulcerate.

Erythema nodosum is the most common form of panniculitis and may be similar to pancreatic panniculitis in appearance but will not be associated with pancreatitis and is rarely associated with pancreatic malignancy. Erythema nodosum will not ulcerate nor secrete a viscous fluid. Necrolytic migratory erythema, a manifestation usually associated with neuroendocrine tumors such as glucagonoma, can also include central foci with crusting or necrosis. However, they are more so plaques instead of nodules.

Skin biopsy can differentiate pancreatic panniculitis from the conditions mentioned above. Still, it is also important to note the presence of pancreatic disease when diagnosing pancreatic panniculitis versus other similarly presenting skin manifestations.

Other conditions to keep on the differential list include migratory thrombophlebitis, cutaneous abscesses, lupus panniculitis Weber-Christian disease, or arthropod bites.

# Prognosis

The prognosis is dependent on the etiology of pancreatic panniculitis. For example, pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma is the most common pancreatic malignancy linked to pancreatic panniculitis despite its rarity and carries a very poor prognosis.

# Complications

Complications from pancreatitis and malignancy occur when the etiology of pancreatic panniculitis is not properly investigated, as pancreatic panniculitis can precede any common signs of pancreatitis or pancreatic neoplasm.

Rarely lipase hypersecretion syndrome (LHS), a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma, can reduce survival to less than one year.

In one published case of PPP presenting with panniculitis and rapidly declining renal function, osteonecrosis of multiple joints, kidney basement membrane necrosis with the glomerular crescent formation, and fat necrosis with calcifications were found in gastric submucosa and bone marrow on autopsy after in-hospital death.

# Consultations

Gastroenterology must be consulted for cases of severe pancreatitis, especially if there are complications or endoscopic ultrasound is required to evaluate the pancreatic mass. Radiology plays an important role when appropriate imaging is done to investigate pancreatic etiologies.

Dermatology and pathology must be consulted, as a skin biopsy must be performed and interpreted. If neoplasm is discovered, oncology and surgery must be involved. Interventional radiology may be needed to biopsy metastatic lesions or masses in locations more appropriate for image-guided biopsy techniques.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Deterrence strategies for pancreatic panniculitis rely on preventing pancreatitis and reducing modifiable risk factors for malignancy.

Cholecystectomy to prevent recurrent gallstone pancreatitis can be considered a risk reduction strategy. While 8% of patients are at risk for acute pancreatitis recurrence within 40 days after hospital discharge, this risk becomes 22% at 5 years if cholecystectomy is not completed.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with pancreatic panniculitis may present in the outpatient setting or at the hospital. Thus, clinicians, including nurse practitioners and physician assistants, must recognize its clinical presentation and have an appropriate differential diagnosis. Next, it is essential to investigate the etiology of pancreatic panniculitis by obtaining appropriate labs, imaging, and in certain circumstances, skin biopsy.

An interprofessional approach is necessary to obtain the correct diagnosis and determine the underlying etiology. Dermatology can be helpful when the skin lesions are nonspecific, and the patient is not presenting with signs of acute pancreatitis or malignancy. Proper imaging, such as CT abdomen/pelvis, must be obtained, with radiologists interpreting primary or metastatic disease findings and/or pancreatitis. As biopsy can also differentiate pancreatic panniculitis from the other forms of panniculitis, communication with pathology is crucial for the appropriate interpretation of histologic findings. Nursing needs to be aware of the patient's condition and should alert other team members if they notice any deterioration or other change in the patient's condition.

As the incidence and prevalence of acute pancreatitis have increased in the United States and other countries, and as pancreatic panniculitis may precede the presentation of typical signs of pancreatitis, it is important to recognize this dermatological finding. Both in the outpatient and inpatient settings, case management and social work are important to consider for alcohol counseling and cessation, as there remains an increased association between alcohol-associated pancreatitis with pancreatic panniculitis.

Behavioral intervention and counseling can also benefit patients, and primary care clinicians must consider these strategies in patient treatment plans. The disease's staging is necessary when a potential cancer diagnosis is made. Hematology/oncology can aid in evaluating and formulating a therapeutic strategy. Addressing goals of care early, including palliative approaches in advanced disease, can significantly improve quality of life.****