# Introduction

The tentorium cerebelli is one of four distinguishable dural reflections which partition the cranial cavity into incomplete compartments.

# Structure and Function

The tentorium cerebelli is an extension of the dura mater and constitutes the second largest of the four distinguishable dural septa.

# Embryology

The development of the tentorium cerebelli commences around day 32 of intrauterine life.

According to other researchers, among whom we find Tubbs, the initiation of the formation of the future tentorium cerebelli begins from the 32nd day of gestation. The completion of its development occurs around the 57th day of gestation.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The tentorium cerebelli is a constituent part of the posterior cranial fossa meninges and receives its arterial supply from the meningeal branches of the ascending pharyngeal, occipital, and vertebral arteries.

The meningeal arteries derive from the carotid arteries (internal and external), the posterior cerebral artery and the vertebral arteries. There is a small arterial vessel; the meningohypophyseal trunk, which arises from the internal carotid artery (intracavernous portion). This meningohypophyseal trunk gives rise to two branches known as the tentorial branch or Bernasconi branch, and a dorsal branch or Cassinari branch. The posterior cerebral artery gives rise to two small branches known as Schechter and Davidoff.

# Nerves

Nerve supply to the meninges derives from the ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). The meningeal branches of the vagus nerve (CN X) and the first and second cervical spinal nerves also contribute to the innervation of the intracranial meninges. The tentorium cerebelli is innervated by the tentorial branches of the ophthalmic and maxillary divisions of the trigeminal nerve (CN V).

The supratentorial portion receives its innervation from the ramus tentorii or Arnold's recurrent nerve of the first branch of the trigeminal (ophthalmic) nerve. Beyond the petrous portion, the tentorium's innervation derives from branches of the second and third divisions of the trigeminal nerve.

The infratentorial portion is innervated by branches of the upper cervical nerves, and the meningeal branch of the vagus nerve (CN X).

The sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems innervate the infra and the supratentorial portions of the tentorium.

# Physiologic Variants

An anatomical alteration of the tentorial notch (size and shape) could be one of the causes of herniation of the brain stem, or the cerebral or cerebellar parenchyma.

There are cases in the literature where the tentorium cerebelli is duplicated or tripled; it may also be absent, but in these cases, the possible symptoms are unknown.

# Surgical Considerations

Benign and malignant space-occupying lesions of the brain parenchyma, as well as extra-axial intracranial mass lesions, may be supratentorial or infratentorial (i.e., relative to the tentorium cerebelli) in location. Extra-axial intracranial mass lesions such as meningiomas may also arise directly from the tentorium cerebelli.

Surgical intervention is made complicated by the fact that the free edge of the tentorium cerebelli lies in close proximity to the brainstem, carrying significant risks of iatrogenic injury to the brainstem. Furthermore, the tentorium cerebelli is quite vascular. As alluded to above, the tentorium cerebelli harbors several venous sinuses receiving tributaries from the supratentorial and infratentorial portions of the brain.

# Clinical Significance

The dural septa, including the tentorium cerebelli, are rigid collagenous connective tissue structures; consequently, conditions necessitating an increase in intracranial pressure may cause portions of the brain to herniate beneath the free edges of the dural septa. The cerebrum and cerebellum occupy the supratentorial and infratentorial compartments of the cranial cavity, respectively. The event of an intracranial mass lesion may cause portions of the cerebrum to become entrapped beneath the rigid tentorium cerebelli.

# Other Issues

The best imaging modalities for visualising the tentorium cerebelli are contrast enhanced computed tomography scans and brain magnetic resonance imaging studies.