Hemolytic uremic syndrome is typically associated with bacterial infection resulting from the consumption of undercooked beef or unpasteurized milk. The Shiga toxin formed by the E. coli in typical HUS is then absorbed by the villi in the intestines, allowing the toxin to enter the bloodstream. The toxin then binds to glycosphingolipid found on multiple different cells throughout the body. The damage that ensues leads to an increase in thrombin and fibrin levels resulting in microthrombi being laid down. These microthrombi lead to platelet consumption, causing thrombocytopenia. Microthrombi present in the blood vessel also leads to the mechanical breakdown of red blood cells, causing hemolytic anemia. As the red blood cells are hemolyzed, there is a further increase in platelet use, causing thrombocytopenia. The Shiga toxin has a high affinity for globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) membrane receptor present in glomerular endothelium and tubular cells, causing widespread damage resulting in glomerular necrosis, cellular apoptosis, and microangiopathic thrombosis leading to acute renal injury.

Atypical HUS is a broad term used for those patients who develop HUS not associated with a Shiga-toxin illness. A common etiology is associated with S. pneumoniae that produces a neuraminidase enzyme. This enzyme targets N-acetylneuraminic acid found on the surface of red blood cells. When the enzyme cleaves N-acetylneuraminic acid, a T antigen is exposed, initiating an immune response. Another proposed mechanism includes increased expression and binding of pneumococcal surface proteins (Tuf and PspC) with human plasminogen leading to bacterial surface plasmin activation and widespread endothelial damage exposing subendothelial matrix and subsequent thrombotic microangiopathy.Mycoplasma pneumoniae, histoplasmosis, and coxsackievirus have also been linked to atypical HUS.

Another form of atypical HUS is called atypical familial HUS. In short, this disease results from a change in the genetic makeup for part of the complement pathway resulting in unregulated endothelial damage. As research continues, multiple different genetic mutations have been linked to atypical HUS. These patients are at higher risk for recurrent episodes of atypical HUS.

A rare form of HUS associated with pregnancy and postpartum is linked to widespread complement activation triggered by pregnancy, and thus patients benefit from eculizumab (anti-C5 humanized monoclonal antibody).