Clinicians must have a high index of suspicion to differentiate rhinocerebral mucormycosis from other diseases having similar overlapping symptoms and involving similar sites.

**Bacterial Sinusitis and Allergic Fungal Sinusitis**

Initial stages of mucormycosis cause sinusitis, which is confusing with other forms of sinusitis. Patients taking antibiotics for bacterial sinusitis should discontinue after diagnosis of mucormycosis. Allergic fungal sinusitis may cause proptosis and shows large rhinocerebral mass, but a history of recurrent allergic rhinitis and sinusitis, nasal polyp, elevated IgE level directs the diagnosis of allergic sinusitis. There may be bone erosion due to pressure but no fungal invasion in an allergic form, unlike in invasive Rhinocerebral form.

**Aspergillosis**

Among the fulminant fungal sinusitis in immunocompromised individuals, aspergillosis like rhinocerebral mucormycosis shows similar characteristics such as CNS invasion and other tissue invasion. It is difficult to distinguish clinically. So, histologic stains can figure out between these two, and there is no black eschar formation of gross examination in aspergillosis. Aspergillosis is responsive to itraconazole, whereas amphotericin B is the primary treatment of mucormycosis.

**Nasal and Paranasal Malignancies**

Due to the high invasiveness of mucormycosis, malignancies resemble mucormycosis. Nasal mass and bleeding on gross examination both in malignancies and mucormycosis mislead the diagnosis.

**Proptosis**

Proptosis is one of the most common manifestations of the of rhinocerebral mucormycosis, any other diseases causing proptosis should be ruled out. Graves disease, orbital tumor, and cellulitis, subperiosteal hematoma result in proptosis.

**Brain Tumor and Pseudotumor Cerebri**

Pseudotumor cerebri is due to increased intracranial pressure has similar symptoms as a brain tumor and Rhinocerebral mucormycosis i.e., headaches, dizziness, nausea, and vision problems.

**Cavernous Sinus Thrombosis**

Mucormycosis is one of the causes of cavernous sinus thrombosis. Other causes of cavernous sinus thrombosis are spread of infection from nose, eyes, face, ear, and pharynx. It usually involves both eyes precipitating proptosis, chemosis, and cranial nerve palsies.

**Migraine Headache**

It is a primary headache disorder that is recurrently associated with nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light. One-sided nature of headache mimics that of rhinocerebral mucormycosis.