Rhizopus grows rapidly in the hyperglycemic environment because phagocytosis is significantly impaired in a high blood sugar state. The ketone reductase system in the fungus helps to successfully survive the acidotic environment in diabetic ketoacidosis. Moreover, acidosis causes dissociation of iron from sequestering proteins in the serum, which could promote virulence and survival. Phagocytosis is notoriously impaired also in neutropenia and steroid therapy. The iron-rich state caused by deferoxamine, an iron-chelating agent, also favors the fungal growth by acting as a siderophore to the fungus. Many patients with diabetes mellitus with rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis present with minimal or no acidosis. The hyperglycemia itself favors fungal growth by at least three mechanisms, which include hyper-glycation of iron sequestering proteins with impaired iron sequestration, enhanced expression of GRP 78, a mammalian protein receptor, which increases binding to Mucorales, and finally the decreased phagocytosis associated with high blood sugar state.

Mucormycosis is an angiotropic fungus having a high tendency to damage the internal elastic lamina of blood vessels, especially the arteries by mechanical and toxic means, and subsequently spreading to lymphatics and veins. After inhalation of spores into the sinuses, the angioinvasive infection gets established via the spores germinating into multiple hyphae in the immunocompromised patient. The pterygopalatine fossa is believed to be the largest reservoir. Vascular and neuronal spread along with vessel wall infiltration ensues rapidly in the coming hours. Direct invasion results in thrombosis and nerve dysfunction. The involvement of blood vessels, bone, cartilage, nerves, perineural areas, and meninges are quite common. The tissue necrosis at the palate results in palatine eschars and the destruction of nasal turbinates. The bone is eroded by the spread of infection from the sinuses, which subsequently extends into the orbital structures, thereby spreading to the brain via a retro-orbital route. Spread to the frontal lobes could also happen via the ethmoid sinuses. Infection spreading along the sphenoid sinuses to the nearby cavernous sinus results in cranial nerve palsies. This is followed by extensive thrombosis of the cavernous sinus, jugular veins, and carotid artery. Blockage of the carotid artery is well reported.