The understanding of delirium is as a complex neuropsychiatric syndrome that is characterized by disturbances in consciousness, orientation, memory, thought, perception, and behavior resulting from or more structural and/or physiological abnormalities directly or indirectly affecting the brain. It is quite prevalent in medical and surgical settings and is associated with high rates of death and healthcare costs.

Delirium is defined as a unitary syndrome, whereby a range of different etiological causes produces a relatively consistent pattern of acute generalized cognitive disturbances. Delirium was introduced as an umbrella term encompassing all such disturbances and thus subsumed a range of synonyms that had previously been in use (acute confusion, ICU psychosis, acute brain failure, septic encephalopathy, etc.). However, despite these commonalities, the symptom profile, course, and outcome of delirium are highly heterogeneous. Consequently, interest has focused on identifying clinically meaningful subtypes. Disturbances of motor behavior are an important and highly visible feature of delirium that physicians have recognized since ancient times with the terms ‘phrenitis,’ and ‘lethargus’ used to denote agitated/hyperactive vs. somnolent/hypoactive presentations respectively. To date, there have been many studies of motor-defined clinical subtypes of delirium, which suggests that they differ significantly regarding frequency and severity of non-motoric symptoms, etiology, pathophysiology, detection rates, and treatment experience.