**Troponin**

Cardiac troponin (cTn) assays, which are widely available, differ substantially from each other. Almost all of these are enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays in which there is a capture antibody that captures the material as well as a tag antibody that labels it. Most assays have monoclonal antibodies as capture antibodies, that are specific for the cTn being measured, either cardiac troponin I (cTnI) or cardiac troponin T (cTnT). In order to increase the amount of protein captured and labeled, more than two antibodies are used very often. Each assay is different depending on the antibodies that are being used. Moreover, detection methods and calibration also vary. Therefore, one cannot substitute the value of the test from one assay for another.

**Creatine Kinase/CK-MB**

Separation of CK into isoenzymes can be accomplished by techniques like electrophoresis, column chromatography, or radioimmunoassay. Clinical laboratories often utilize electrophoresis on an agarose gel or cellulose acetate in combination with band quantification by elution of the electrophoretic bands, or by either fluorometric or spectrophotometric techniques. Electrophoretically, the fraction CK–BB is the most mobile, CK–MB is intermediate, and CK–MM is typically neutral. This helps in the identification of the cardiac-specific CK MB.

**Myoglobin**

While testing for myoglobin, it is important to distinguish it from hemoglobin as well as to measure accurately. The most widely used definitive tests for the differentiation and quantification of myoglobin from hemoglobin in biological fluids include simple immunochemical methods, which include immunodiffusion, hemagglutination inhibition, and immunoelectrophoresis, which are dependent upon the fact that specific antisera will react only with its homologous antigen.