An evaluation must proceed sequentially. Due to the broad array of potential causes, it is vital to consider the appropriate investigation in that specific clinical context. However, the following may provide a frame of reference:

**Hemogram**

Based on the WHO 2017 criteria, hematocrit levels above 49% in males and 48% in females at sea level are to be considered suggestive of polycythemia vera. In cases of polycythemia vera, there could be a concurrent increase in platelet and leukocyte counts as well. The leucocyte count is usually between 10,000 to 20,000/microliter and may show eosinophilia and basophilia. Platelet counts may rarely exceed 1,000,000/microliter.

**Radioisotope Studies**

Radioisotope studies using chromium-labeled autologous RBC transfusions accurately determine the true RBC mass and conclusively exclude spurious polycythemia.

**Serum EPO Levels**

The presence of either high or low EPO levels directs the further plan of evaluation.

- Low EPO Levels

Low EPO levels indicate primary polycythemia. Subsequent evaluation should be targeted toward the detection of polycythemia vera.

JAK2 mutation studies are virtually diagnostic for polycythemia vera (95% cases). Mutations may occur either in exon 14 (more commonly) or in exon 12.

- High EPO Levels

High EPO levels indicate secondary polycythemia. Subsequent evaluation should be aimed at determining the cause. This should include, but not be limited to, the following:

- Measurement of arterial oxygen saturation levels using a pulse-oximeter: low levels would likely indicate a pulmonary or cardiac cause.

- Normal saturation levels could require further evaluation, such as:

- The use of a co-oximeter to rule out methemoglobinemia
- Measurement of carboxyhemoglobin levels for smokers
- Measurement of the P50 of Hb to detect high-affinity hemoglobinopathies
- Relevant investigations to detect a possible EPO-secreting tumor

**Serum Ferritin, Vitamin B12, and Folate Levels**

Low serum ferritin and low folate levels have been associated more with primary polycythemia.

**Assessment of Renal Function**

Renal function abnormalities indicate a higher likelihood of secondary polycythemia. Uric acid levels are often raised due to increased cell proliferation and subsequent turnover.

**Assessment of Hepatic Status**

Liver cirrhosis and inflammatory liver disease have been associated with secondary polycythemia and increased RBC proliferation.

**Ultrasound**

An ultrasound and Doppler study of the abdomen would help identify a secondary cause.

In cases of suspected secondary polycythemia, the utility of additional investigations such as a chest radiograph, lung function tests, sleep studies, and an echocardiograph are to be considered as appropriate.