During fetal development, the ductus arteriosus serves as a shunt between the pulmonary artery and the aorta. In the fetus, blood is oxygenated in the placenta and ultimately pumped to the body systems. The fetal lungs are filled with amniotic fluid and, therefore, cannot be used to oxygenate the blood. The arterioles in the lungs are constricted, which restricts the volume of blood that can pass through the pulmonary system. Since fetal blood leaving the placenta is already oxygen-rich, and the lungs are non-functional, the ductus arteriosus allows some of this blood to bypass the pulmonary circulation to enter directly into the systemic circulation. The ductus arteriosus is maintained in its open conformation by being exposed to the E series prostaglandins which are in relatively high concentrations before birth. These prostaglandins are produced by the ductus and placenta.

Shortly after birth and the first breath, the lungs fill with oxygen, and the pulmonary arterioles dilate. This change in pulmonary-arteriole resistance allows for a significant increase in pulmonary blood flow. Around the same time, the placenta is removed from the circulation by the contraction or clamping of the umbilical cord, resulting in a drop in prostaglandin levels. The ductus arteriosus responds to these changes by contracting and closing, ultimately forming the ligamentum arteriosum. The closure of the ductus arteriosus prevents oxygenated blood from returning to the pulmonary circulation and reducing cardiac efficiency. The closure of the ductus arteriosus typically occurs within the first three months of life. However, there are times when the ductus fails to close, resulting in a condition known as a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). In certain heart conditions, a patent ductus arteriosus can be medically induced by the administration of prostaglandin E2 to assist patient outcomes.