As the external carotid artery ascends the face, it will branch into six arteries: the superior thyroid artery, lingual artery, ascending pharyngeal artery, facial artery, occipital artery, and posterior auricular artery. The external carotid artery will terminate and become the superficial temporal artery and the maxillary artery. The maxillary artery is what branches into the inferior alveolar artery. The inferior alveolar artery is a small muscular artery that branches from the first portion of the maxillary artery.

The course of the inferior alveolar artery is similar to the inferior alveolar nerve. Before the inferior alveolar artery enters the mandibular foramen, it will branch into the mylohyoid and lingual branch of the inferior alveolar artery. While the inferior alveolar artery traverses the mandibular foramen, it branches into the incisor arteries. Once the inferior alveolar artery reaches the mental foramen and exits, it becomes the mental artery; this makes the inferior alveolar artery the main blood supply to the mandible bone.

The mylohyoid branch of the inferior alveolar artery will descend toward the mylohyoid muscle and perfuse the mylohyoid muscle and the anterior muscle belly of the digastric muscle. The lingual branch of the inferior alveolar artery perfuses the genioglossus muscle in the tongue. The incisor arteries that branch from the inferior alveolar artery is responsible for perfusing the teeth, dental sockets, and the gingivae of the lower jaw. The mental artery is responsible for the perfusion of the anterior chin. These arterial branches of the inferior alveolar will also perfuse their corresponding nerves.

The inferior alveolar artery also forms anastomoses with the inferior labial artery and the submental artery. The anastomosis with the inferior labial artery will provide collateral blood to the lower lip, anterior chin, skin, and the muscles in that region. The connection made with the submental artery will provide collateral blood to the skin and muscles on the inferior aspect of the chin.