Surgical treatment for localized and locoregional adenocarcinoma of the small bowel is recommended with tumoral surgical resection and en-bloc lymphadenectomy. Delicate intra-procedural staging with specific attention to determine the level of involvement in the mesentery, omentum, and peritoneum is mandatory in all patients with SBA.

Considering the comparable results with radical and limited segmentectomy in terms of overall and disease-free survival in the third and fourth duodenal sections and antimesenteric side SBA, despite the unfavorable lymph node basin identification, segmentectomy, and similarly limited resections are recommended for less than 2 cm size and mesenteric D1 tumors.

Up to one-third of patients with small bowel adenocarcinoma present metastatic disease in the peritoneal cavity, liver, etc. The estimated 5-year survival for patients with metastatic small bowel adenocarcinoma is almost half of patients with local and locoregional SBA. Operative management might be considered in patients with stage IV SBA for metastasectomy and to address the resectable peritoneal carcinomatosis.

Evaluation of a limited number of patients with non-endocrine non-colorectal metastatic liver carcinoma was significant for an improved survival rate following metastasectomy.

Up to 50% of patients with small bowel adenocarcinoma will have evidence of peritoneal carcinomatosis, which is more common in jejunoileal adenocarcinoma and is accompanied by a poor prognosis. While systemic chemotherapy might be used to manage unresectable peritoneal carcinomatosis to address palliative goals, surgical cytoreduction would be considered in treating resectable peritoneal metastasis.