Different receptor types and free nerve endings, each with their own specific function, generate the overall sense of touch, position in space, and pain. For the purposes of this article, “mechanoreceptor” refers to the mechanosensory end-organ structure and its associated low-threshold mechanoreceptor (LTMR).

**Mechanoreceptors (Pressure, Vibration, and Proprioception)**

Non-painful mechanical stimuli compose the sense of touch via low-threshold mechanoreceptors. Four main types of receptors are responsible for sensing light pressure, firm pressure, dynamic pressure, vibration, and relative position.

- 
**Merkel Discs**

Merkel discs are found in both hairy and non-hairy (glabrous) skin. They are heavily concentrated at the fingertips and basal layer of the epidermis and have large myelinated axons. Merkel’s discs facilitate the detection of pressure, static touch, corners, edges, curvatures, and position sense.

- 
**Ruffini Endings**

Ruffini nerve endings (or Ruffini corpuscles) are concentrated at the fingertips but are located throughout the dermis as well as in joints and fascia.

- 
**Meissner Corpuscle**

Meissner’s corpuscles are located in the dermal papillae of non-hairy (glabrous) skin. Meissner’s corpuscles have a “coin stack” morphology and facilitate the detection of low-frequency vibrations, fine touch, and fine dynamic skin movement.

- 
**Pacinian Corpuscle**

Pacinian corpuscles are located in the deep dermis, especially throughout the palm and fingertips, as well as ligaments and joints.

- 
**Muscle Spindle Mechanoreceptors and Golgi Tendon Organs**

Muscle spindle mechanoreceptors are located in skeletal muscle bellies, and Golgi tendon organs are located within skeletal muscle-tendon junctions. These receptors facilitate the detection of limb position and movement, referred to as proprioception. These receptors are activated by muscle stretch and contractile forces.

**Nociceptors (Pain) and Thermoreceptors (Temperature)**

Noxious stimulation, such as intense heat, cold, or chemical exposure, is converted into an electric signal by free nerve endings that terminate in the dermis and epidermis and have a pseudounipolar morphology. These nerve endings are also present on some viscera and can be further classified into A-delta fibers or C-fibers.

A-delta fiber nerve endings branch in clusters to allow for a more precise receptive field; they are mostly myelinated except at the terminals and are considered medium in diameter with fast signal conductors. “Fast” pain is sometimes referred to as “first” pain, as in the immediate pain felt when pricked by a pin.

On the other hand, C-fibers are spread further apart and lack precision, are unmyelinated with smaller diameters and therefore are slower in signal conduction. “Slow” pain is sometimes referred to as “second” pain, as in the slightly delayed ache felt after stubbing a toe.

**Nerve Fiber Classification**

The nerve fiber types along which action potentials propagate are classified according to diameter and conduction velocity, with an Erlanger Gasser classification (A-C) as well as a numerical classification (I-IV). From A (largest, myelinated, fastest) to C (smallest, unmyelinated, slowest), nerve fiber diameter decreases, as does relative conduction velocity.

- Group I or A-alpha fibers: Ia fibers transmit proprioceptive input from primary endings of muscle spindles. Ib fibers transmit proprioceptive input from Golgi tendon organs.

- Group II or A-beta fibers: Transmit proprioceptive input from secondary endings of muscle spindles and touch and pressure input from specialized receptors in the skin and deep tissues (Merkel discs, Ruffini endings, Meissner corpuscles, and Pacinian corpuscles).

- Group III or A-delta fibers: Transmit “fast” pain, cold, pressure, and touch from the skin and visceral afferents.

- Group IV or C fibers: Transmit “slow” pain, heat, and pressure from the skin, muscle, and visceral afferents.

**Neurotransmitters**

Sensory stimuli initiate action potentials and are considered excitatory. Glutamate is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter and, therefore, pivotal to the sensory system. Substance P and calcitonin-gene-related peptide (CGRP) also serve an important role in transmitting painful stimuli via A-delta and C nerve fibers.