Hepatic encephalopathy is a relevant cause of hospitalization. The management of hepatic encephalopathy involves primary and secondary prophylaxis, dietary changes, and potentially a liver transplant.

- Primary prophylaxis:****Patients with an upper GI bleed are at considerable risk of hepatic encephalopathy. Gastrointestinal lavage by mannitol or non-absorbable disaccharides reduces the risk for overt HE. Treatment of cirrhosis that reduces or reverts the progression of the disease may be considered primary prophylaxis for HE, for instance, alcohol abstinence in alcohol misusers, antiviral drugs in virus-related cirrhosis, proper nutrition in malnourished patients (both excess and deficiency), and iron overload, among others.****

- Secondary prophylaxis:****It is for the patients who have suffered from episodes of hepatic encephalopathy and have a higher risk of more episodes. The use of lactulose following an episode decreases the risk of another episode by 50%. For those who cannot tolerate lactulose well can use rifaximin (a non-absorbable antibiotic). For patients with recurrent episodes of hepatic encephalopathy, a combination of lactulose and rifaximin can further decrease the risk of another episode. In patients who are severely debilitated due to disease, the goal is to find the shunt and obliterate it.

- Dietary changes: For a patient with hepatic encephalopathy, the following dietary changes are advised: 

- The addition of snacks in between meals and before going to bed in order to reduce gluconeogenesis and catabolism of proteins. 
- Decrease consumption of meat proteins. 
- Try replacing meat protein with milk protein. 
- Increase the use of fiber.
- Compensate for micronutrients by taking prescribed vitamins and minerals.  
- Add probiotics to the diet.

Patients with increased risk for aspiration or respiratory compromise should be prophylactically intubated and monitored in the ICU.

- Liver Transplant:****Patients with hepatic encephalopathy are usually poor candidates for a liver transplant due to poor prognosis and quality of life.