While numerous types of diving and HBOT occur daily around the world, it is not without pitfalls.

Middle ear barotrauma (MEBT) remains the most common complication of diving and clinical hyperbaric oxygen treatment (HBO) and is directly related to the change in volume of a gas due to changing ambient pressure (Boyle’s law). In order to reverse the vacuum created by the increased ambient pressure, the addition of air from the nasopharynx into the middle ear space is required, known as equalization. If unsuccessful, decreasing the ambient pressure may also be used and equalization re-attempted. Divers may decrease their depth in the water by swimming toward the surface or hyperbaric chamber operators may decrease the depth of treatment by increasing the chamber exhaust until such time as the patient can clear their middle ear space.

The only absolute contraindication for hyperbaric treatment is an untreated pneumothorax. As patients are breathing compressed air while at depth, the gas within the pneumothorax will expand as the pressure is decreased at the end of the treatment (once again, Boyle’s law!) An untreated pneumothorax may convert to a tension pneumothorax due to this expansion of gas within the thorax.

As described above, oxygen toxicity occurs due to the increased partial pressure of oxygen. As such, treatment relies on decreasing the partial pressure of oxygen. In a recompression chamber, this can be achieved by removing the oxygen source and breathing air, or decreasing the depth of the treatment. Underwater, a diver may decrease their depth, or add a diluent gas into their breathing mix. With respect to pulmonary oxygen toxicity in HBOT, patients take several air breaks during a treatment to decrease the risk.

Caution must be maintained with the general usage of the chambers as pressurized oxygen can be explosive. Care must be taken to avoid excessively combustible materials and ignition sources. Patients must remove any makeup, oils, deodorants, and similar products. Recompression chambers are grounded, and all efforts are taken to eliminate static sparks.