The initial history and physical examination are crucial to establish the diagnosis and evaluate the severity of alcohol withdrawal. Pertinent information in the medical history includes quantity and duration of alcohol abuse, duration since last drink, prior history and severity of alcohol withdrawal, and any additional drug abuse. Additional information should be identified regarding any complicating medical problems such as heart failure, coronary heart disease, chronic liver disease, among others. Some of symptoms may not be self reported, and as a result further evaluation is often needed. Physical examination and laboratory testing should be curtailed to identifying underlying medical problems and identifying potential electrolyte abnormalities, renal and liver function,  sources of infection, coronary ischemia, rhabdomyolysis, and other drug abuse.

The duration of last drink becomes critical in recognizing the severity of symptoms. The initial minor withdrawal symptoms are characterized by anxiety, insomnia, palpitations, headache, and gastrointestinal symptoms. These symptoms usually occur as early as 6 hours after cessation of alcohol use. After 12 hours, minor withdrawal symptoms can progress to alcohol hallucinosis, a condition characterized by visual hallucinations. It can typically resolve in 24 to 48 hours, and may also be associated with auditory and tactile hallucinations. Alcohol withdrawal seizure is followed by alcohol hallucinosis, though it may present as early as 6 hours before alcohol hallucinosis. It can present as the only withdrawal symptoms but typically resolves 24 to 48 hours later. Seizures can recur, though rarely lead to status epileptics. Uncharacteristic signs of seizure activity should warrant further workup. If withdrawal symptoms remain untreated, this can typically lead to DT. DT is characterized by visual hallucinations, profound confusion, tachycardia, hypertension, hyperthermia, agitation, and diaphoresis.