Morphea, also referred to as localized scleroderma, is a rare inflammatory disease of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. It has been reported in both kids and adults with equal frequency. Morphea encompasses a wide spectrum of clinical variants ranging from solitary skin lesions with minimal discomfort to severe subtypes like generalized or linear morphea.

Morphea symptoms are usually limited to the skin and the subcutaneous tissue. Still, extracutaneous involvement is reported in approximately 22% of patients, with linear and generalized subtypes in a cohort reported by Zulian et al. Localized scleroderma can rarely cause debilitating lesions, which result in joint contractures, limb growth defects, and other extracutaneous features in children.

Morphea encompasses a wide variety of clinical phenotypes, which makes its classification challenging. The most commonly used classification was described by Laxer and Zulian, which includes circumscribed morphea, linear morphea, generalized morphea, pan-sclerotic and mixed subtype. Circumscribed morphea is the most common variant and further differentiated into superficial and deep variants. In one cohort study, circumscribed morphea was responsible for 60-65% of the patients. The liner morphea includes the limb or head variant based on the location of the lesion.

One of the most current classifications was developed in 2017 by the European dermatology forum (EDF). The predominant subtypes of the disease distinguished in the EDF classification are generalized type, limited type, linear type, deep type, and mixed type.