Child abuse is a public health problem that leads to lifelong health consequences, both physically and psychologically. Physically, those who undergo abusive head trauma may have neurologic deficits, developmental delays, cerebral palsy, and other forms of disability. Psychologically, child abuse patients tend to have higher rates of depression, conduct disorder, and substance abuse. Academically, these children may have poor performance at school with decreased cognitive function.

Clinicians need to have a high index of suspicion for child maltreatment since early identification may be lifesaving. Once a child is believed to be in an abusive situation, procedures are in place under New York State Law.

**Child Protective Custody**

- Mandated reporters may place an alleged abused, maltreated, or neglected child in protective custody without parental consent or court order if there is imminent danger to the child's health or life.

- Individuals legally authorized to place a child in protective custody include a member of law enforcement such as a police or peace officer, a Department of Social Services employee, an agent of a duly incorporated society for cruelty prevention in children, or an individual in charge of a hospital or medical institution. The authorized individual must take the following actions based on the Family Court Act:

- 
              
- As soon as possible, make a report of suspected child abuse or maltreatment and inform the court pursuant to Title 6 of the Social Services Law.
              
              
- Bring the child to a place designated by the family court unless the person is a treating clinician, and the child will be admitted to the hospital.
              
              
- Immediately notify local Child Protective Services, which shall begin a child protective proceeding in Family Court at the next regular weekday session or recommend that the child be returned to their parents or guardian.
              
              
- In neglect cases, the authorized person or entity may return a child prior to a child protective proceeding if it concluded that there is no imminent risk to the child's health.
              
              
- Make a reasonable effort to inform the individual legally responsible for the child's care of the location of the child and provide written notice of removal of the child from their care.

**New York Laws and Guidelines for Reporters of Child Abuse, Maltreatment, or Neglect**

**Who**

- Anyone may and should report if child abuse is suspected.

- Mandated reporters include:

- 
              
- Coroner and medical examiner
              
              
- Daycare worker
              
              
- Director of day camp
              
              
- The district attorney or their investigators
              
              
- Foster care worker
              
              
- Health professionals (Physicians including trainees, nurses, Therapists, etc.)
              
              
- Any employee or volunteer in a residential care program for youth or any other child care or foster care worker
              
              
- Hospital personnel engaged in the admission, care, examination, or treatment.
              
              
- Police and peace officers
              
              
- Religious practitioner
              
              
- Social worker
              
              
- Substance abuse and alcoholism counselor
              
              
- Teachers and school officials
              
              
- Licensed Creative Arts Therapist

**When**

- *Reasonable cause to suspect abuse or maltreatment

- *Reasonable cause to suspect abuse or maltreatment if the parent or person legally responsible person for such child comes before them in their official or professional capacity and reports from personal knowledge facts, conditions, or circumstances

- Whenever a mandated reporter suspects child abuse or maltreatment while acting in their professional capacity

- 
              
- 
***Reasonable Cause**
              
              
- 
                  
- When a child is abused or maltreated if, considering the physical evidence, told about, or training and experience, it is possible that the injury or condition was caused by neglect or by non-accidental means.
                  
                  
- Certainty is not required; the reporter need only be able to entertain the possibility.

- Mandated reporters must make a report to the Statewide Central Register of Child Abuse and Maltreatment and immediately notify the person in charge of the agency, facility, institution, or school where they work or the designated agent of the person in charge that a report has been made

- Mandated reporters are required to make an oral telephone report immediately, and a written report must be filed within 48 hours of the oral report.

- 
              
- Oral telephone reports call 800-635-1522
              
              
- Written reports are admissible as evidence in judicial proceedings and should be completed on Form LDSS-221A, signed, and filed within 48 hours to the Department of Social Services.

**What**

Child Protective Services will request the following information if available:

- Child

- 
              
- Effect on child
              
              
- Location of victimization
              
              
- Names, addresses, age, gender, and race of the child
              
              
- Names of parents or other people responsible for the child's care
              
              
- Nature and extent of current or past injuries, abuse, maltreatment, including injuries in siblings
              
              
- Family composition
              
              
- Medications
              
              
- Need for interpreter
              
              
- Special needs

- Subject of Report

- 
              
- Name, address, and contact information of the person or persons suspected of abuse, maltreatment, or injury
              
              
- The subject of the report means any parent, guardian, custodian, person 18 years of age or older, operator, employee or supervised by an authorized agency, daycare home, daycare center, the Division for Youth, the Department of Mental Hygiene who is legally responsible for a child and is allegedly responsible for causing or allowing infliction of abuse, maltreatment, or injury.

- Reporter

- 
              
- Source and contact information
              
              
- Available photographs or radiographs

- Other

- 
              
- Removal or keeping of the child
              
              
- Notification of the medical examiner or coroner
              
              
- Safety issues that may impact Child Protective Service investigations
              
              
- Any additional information deemed appropriate.

Once the report is made, the Department of Social Services Child Protective Services will begin an investigation within 24 hours of the report. The reporter is allowed to request the findings of their report.

**Confidentiality**

- The Commissioner of Social Services and the Department of Social Services are not permitted to release to the subject of a report any data that identify the person who made the report without permission of the person who made the report.

- The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act provisions do not affect the responsibilities of mandated reporters under New York Social Services Law.

**Immunity Under Social Services Law**

- To encourage prompt and complete reporting of suspected child abuse and maltreatment, any person, official, or institution that in good faith makes a report, takes photographs, or takes protective custody of a child has immunity from any liability, civil or criminal, that might result from such actions.

- All persons, officials, or institutions required to report suspected child abuse or maltreatment are presumed to have done so in good faith, providing they were done so in the discharge of their official duties and within the scope of their employment and not done so as a result from willful misconduct or gross negligence.

**Failing to Report**

- Any person, official, or institution required to report a case of suspected child abuse or maltreatment that willfully fails to do so can be:

- 
              
- Charged with a Class A misdemeanor and subject to criminal penalties
              
              
- Sued in a civil court for monetary damages for any harm caused by such failure to report