Gastritis can be acute or chronic with various causes.

- H. pylori-associated gastritis: This is the most common cause of gastritis worldwide.

- H. pylori-negative gastritis: The patients should fulfill all four of these criteria (i) A negative triple staining of gastric mucosal biopsies (hematoxylin and eosin, the Alcian blue stain and a modified silver stain), (ii) A negative H. pylori culture, (iii) A negative IgG H. pylori serology, and (iv) No self-reported history of H. pylori treatment. In these patients, the cause of gastritis may relate to tobacco smoking, consumption of alcohol, and/or the use of NSAIDs or steroids.

- Autoimmune gastritis: This is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by chronic atrophic gastritis and associated with raised serum anti-parietal and anti-intrinsic factor antibodies. The loss of parietal cells results in a reduction of gastric acid secretion, which is necessary for the absorption of inorganic iron. Therefore, iron deficiency is commonly a finding in patients with autoimmune gastritis. Iron deficiency in these patients usually precedes vitamin B12 deficiency. The disease is common in young women.

- Gastritis may result from infection by organisms other than H. pylori, such as Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, enterococcal infection, Herpes simplex, and cytomegalovirus. Parasitic gastritis may result from cryptosporidium, Strongyloides
stercoralis, or anisakiasis infection.

- Gastritis may result from bile acid reflux.

- Radiation gastritis.

- Crohn disease-associated gastritis: This is an uncommon cause of gastritis.

- Collagenous gastritis: This is a rare cause of gastritis. The disease characteristically presents with marked subepithelial collagen deposition accompanied by mucosal inflammatory infiltrate. The exact etiology and pathogenesis of collagenous gastritis are still unclear.

- Eosinophilic gastritis: This is another rare cause of gastritis. The disease could be part of the eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders, characterized by the absence of known causes of eosinophilia (not secondary to an infection, systematic inflammatory disease, or any other causes to explain the eosinophilia).

- Sarcoidosis-associated gastritis: Sarcoidosis is a multisystemic disorder characterized by the presence of non-caseating granulomas. Although sarcoidosis can affect any body organ, the gastrointestinal tract, including the stomach, is rarely affected.

- Lymphocytic gastritis: This is a rare cause of gastritis. The etiology of lymphocytic gastritis remains unestablished, but an association with H. pylori infection or celiac disease has been suggested.

- Ischemic gastritis: This is rare and associated with high mortality.

- Vasculitis-associated gastritis: Diseases causing systemic vasculitis can cause granulomatous infiltration of the stomach. An example is Granulomatosis with polyangiitis, formerly known as Wegner granulomatosis.

- Ménétrier disease: This disease is characterized by (i) the presence of large gastric mucosal folds in the body and fundus of the stomach, (ii) Massive foveolar hyperplasia of surface and glandular mucous cells, (iii) Protein-losing gastropathy, hypoalbuminemia, and edema in 20 to 100% of patients, and (iv) reduced gastric acid secretion because of loss of parietal cells