Failure of the branchial arches to properly develop results in a myriad of physical manifestations. This section will describe many of the most common congenital craniofacial malformations resulting from branchial arch dysfunction. The majority of branchial cleft malformations involve the first and second arch complexes.

Facial clefting, most commonly seen as cleft lip or palate, is the most common congenital craniofacial malformation and second only to clubfoot in the overall incidence of birth anomalies. The pathophysiology of facial clefting appears to be multifactorial, containing both a genetic and environmental component. The malformation itself results from a failure of fusion between adjacent structures in the developing face and can present in varying degrees of severity, in combination, or isolation. The defect itself is often corrected surgically when available — the failure of surgical correction of facial clefting results in an increased incidence of serious infection leading to death.

Auricular atresia is another disorder that shows varying degrees of phenotypic presentation based on the severity of the malformation. Anomalies of auricular atresia can affect any part of the auditory transduction system, including the auricle, external auditory canal, middle ear, and inner ear. The varying severity of this disorder can result in a wide range of both audiological and cosmetic manifestations.

Micrognathia refers to the improper development of the mandible leading to a hypoplastic mandible. This defect most often associates with an identified syndrome of developmental defects, including Pierre Robin syndrome consisting of the classic triad, including micrognathia, glossoptosis (posterior displacement of the tongue base), and upper airway obstruction from both anomalies as mentioned above. The degree of micrognathia causing dysfunction of normal physiological processes, including breathing and swallowing, determines the necessity of surgical intervention and correction.

Branchial cleft cysts result from incomplete or persistent development of embryonic tissue in the head and neck. This condition can manifest in many ways, including the formation of an isolated cyst, fistulous tract, or sinus tract. Second branchial cleft cysts are seen most commonly and manifest as a fluctuant lateral cervical mass most often anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. These masses are often surgically excised in the first few decades of life, as their growth can lead to breathing or swallowing difficulties as well as creating a nidus for infection. Branchial cleft cyst diagnosis is usually by CT or MRI and only surgically excised in the absence of infection. Incomplete excision of a branchial cleft cyst can lead to further growth and recurrence, necessitating subsequent surgical resection.