The initial management of acute shoulder instability depends on a multitude of factors. Acute management should always consist of manual reduction (if necessary) following confirmation of a dislocation event. The exact timeline for the initial period of immobilization remains debated. Acute management (e.g., sideline team physician management) consists of sling immobilization with avoidance of a return to play until the completion of a comprehensive assessment.

Owens et al. previously proposed an algorithm to help guide the management of mid-season traumatic anterior shoulder instability in high-level athletes. The authors suggested a set of clinical and sport-specific factors that could guide the management of instability in athletes.

Relative indications for nonsurgical management of traumatic anterior shoulder instability include:

- First-time dislocations

- Osseous defects of the glenoid less than 25%

- Humeral head (i.e., Hill-Sachs) defects less than 25%, non-engaging lesions

- Athlete factors:

- Desires to return to sports in-season
- Noncontact athlete
- Non-overhead/non-throwing athlete
- Responds to bracing during competition and can complete sport-specific drills without instability

By contrast, surgical management would be advocated earlier in the management course if the case meets any of the following criteria

- Associated injuries are present:

- Rotator cuff tear (e.g.,>50%)
- Large bony Bankart lesions; glenoid defects greater than 25%
- Humeral head lesions (e.g., Hill-Sachs) contributing to recurrent instability (greater than 25%; engaging Hill-Sachs lesion)
- Proximal humerus fracture requiring surgery
- Irreducible dislocation

- Other relative surgical indications include, but are not limited to:

- First-time dislocators aged less than 20 years
- Overhead, throwing athletes
- Contact sport athletes
- Primary soft tissue pathology and:

- Recurrent instability is noted upon return to play
- The athlete is unable to tolerate bracing or shoulder restrictions
- Inability to return to baseline performance level following an initial treatment regimen consisting of brief immobilization, full/painless ROM on the exam, PT/strengthening protocol, supervised sport-specific training, and attempted bracing with the return to play
- the player is near the end of the season or in the offseason and requests earlier surgical intervention

A 2014 study by Dickens et al. reported results from a multicenter prospective study of in-season Division I collegiate athletes. The authors reported that despite returning to play at a median of 5 days, 27% of athletes could not complete their season and underwent surgical stabilization.

**Nonoperative Management**

**Physical Therapy (PT) and Bracing**

- Following brief immobilization and cryotherapy use for pain control during the initial 1 to 2 weeks following an acute instability event, formal PT protocols will vary based on provider-specific preference.

- In general, following the initial immobilization period, patients will be weaned from sling use, followed by targeted therapy goals focusing on achieving full active/passive ROM and gradual progression to strengthening exercises that focus on dynamic glenohumeral stabilizers and periscapular stabilizers.

- When ROM and strength are comparable to the normal side, sport-specific drills can be initiated, and a return to play with a brace can be considered.

- Rehabilitation performed in a supervised setting may improve results, although the time to return to sport varies by the program. In most situations, return to play is given consideration after about 2 to 3 weeks.

**Surgical Management**

The optimal approach and technique to address anterior shoulder instability remain controversial.

Open versus Arthroscopic Repair Techniques

Traditionally, open Bankart repairs offered good to excellent results with minimal risk of redislocation (about 2%) in the setting of minimal osseous and primarily soft tissue-only instability cases.

A 2017 study reported the surgical trends in management from 2008 through 2012. Arthroscopic stabilization procedures are being performed at a rate greater than 90% to manage anterior shoulder instability, with the annual rates increasing each year during the study period.

The benefits of arthroscopy include assessing and addressing concomitant associated shoulder injuries. Also, Burkhart and De Beer previously emphasized the importance of utilizing the arthroscopic procedure as a dynamic diagnostic tool to help identify osseous lesions "at risk" of compromising the functional glenohumeral stability following the single performance of an isolated capsulolabral soft tissue repair.

**Arthroscopic Bankart Repair**

In the setting of primarily soft tissue-based pathology, repair and relocation of the detached capsulolabral complex to its anatomic location are the goals of the surgical technique. Thus, the surgeon aims to restore the static restraining capability of the anterior band of the IGHL. Various suture anchor devices allow anatomic repair of the labrum, and techniques often include capsular plication to address the pathologically lax capsular structures. This concept becomes even more critical in the setting of chronic instability cases.

**Bone Loss Considerations**

Although the percentage of bone loss suggested that will trigger a change in the surgical fixation technique employed remains debated, more aggressive glenoid augmentation procedures are considered glenoid bone loss approaches and exceeds 25%. Augmentation procedures include autogenous coracoid transfers (Latarjet technique), tricortical iliac crest, and various allograft tissue augmentation techniques. The distal tibial allograft is a commonly utilized technique for advanced glenoid bone loss or revision surgery.

In the setting of moderate- to large-sized Hill-Sachs lesions, especially engaging lesions, consideration should be given to performing a remplissage procedure. During the arthroscopic procedure, the arm is brought into increasing degrees of shoulder abduction and external rotation to check for a potentially engaging lesion, potentially leading to postoperative instability event recurrence.

Burkhart and colleagues, in 2014, proposed an algorithmic approach. The treatment paradigm broke shoulder instability cases into four subgroups to help guide the most appropriate surgical technique.

- Group 1 shoulder instability patients

- Glenoid: less than 25% defect
- Hill-Sachs (if present): On-track lesion or non-engaging lesion
- Technique: Arthroscopic Bankart repair

- Group 2 shoulder instability patients

- Glenoid: less than 25% defect
- Hill-Sachs: Off-track lesion or engaging lesion
- Technique: Arthroscopic Bankart repair plus remplissage

- Group 3 shoulder instability patients

- Glenoid: greater than 25% defect
- Hill-Sachs: On track lesion, or non-engaging lesion
- Technique: Latarjet procedure

- Group 4 shoulder instability patients

- Glenoid: greater than 25% defect
- Hill-Sachs: Off-track lesion or engaging lesion
- Technique: Latarjet procedure with or without a humeral-sided procedure

- The glenoid is addressed first, and following the glenoid augmentation procedure, the further characterization of the Hill-Sachs lesion is.

- If the Hill-Sachs lesion is engaging or off track, then humeral-sided procedures are recommended.

- Humeral bone grafting techniques
- Remplissage procedure

**Surgical Techniques For Anterior Shoulder Dislocation**

**Modified Bankart Repair**

The skin incision is made from the coracoid process to the anterior axillary crease. The dissection is done in the deltopectoral interval. At the intersection of the upper two-thirds and lower one-third of the tendon, a transverse cut is made along the fibers of the subscapularis tendon. The split in the subscapularis tendon is followed by the horizontal anterior capsulotomy. With a rongeur, the anterior neck is decorticated to bleeding bone. Drill holes are created at roughly 3, 4, and 5:30 on the glenoid rim. No. 2 braided nonabsorbable anchor suture is used to repair the Bankart lesion while keeping the shoulder in 90-degree abduction and 60-degree external rotation. Capsuloraphy is done in a mattress fashion by suturing the superior flap over the inferior flap. The subscapularis muscle and skin are approximated.

**Latarjet Procedure**

A 5 cm incision is made that extends from the tip of the coracoid process to the anterior axillary fold. A dissection plane is made between the deltoid and pectoralis major. The pectoralis minor, coracoacromial, and coracohumeral ligaments are excised. At the intersection of the coracoid's horizontal and vertical parts, an osteotomy is performed. Using a ruler, ensure the coracoid graft is between 22 and 27 mm long from the tip. Glenoid is prepared after splitting the subscapularis at the junction of the superior two-thirds and inferior one-third. After verticle capsulotomy, the graft site is prepared with a high-speed burr. 2 bicortical screws are used to fix the coracoid to the deficient part of the glenoid. The capsule is buttressed with suture anchors, and the subscapularis muscle is approximated.

**Eden-Hybinette procedure**

An anterior glenoid loss of more than 40% requires an iliac crest autograft for bony reconstruction. A 3 cm long iliac crest graft is prepared and aligned vertically along the deficient glenoid with two screws (4mm bicortical). After creating a smooth articular surface, the capsule is buttressed with anchor sutures. The clinical results of the Eden-Hybinette operation are fairly comparable to those of the Bristow-Latarjet approach; however postoperative osteoarthritis and recurrence are more common.

**Remplissage Procedure**

An "off-track" Hill-Sachs defect (HSD) is one that engages and dislocates, whereas an "on-track" HSD does not engage. To restore anterior stability in the shoulder with anterior instability, turning an off-track Hill-Sachs lesion into an on-track lesion is essential. Large Hill-Sachs defect (25 to 40%) on the posterior aspect of the humeral head is filled with infraspinatus muscle followed by capsular shift. The engaged Hill-Sachs lesion(off-track), which typically causes dislocation, is eliminated with this operation.

**Surgical Technique For Multidirectional Shoulder Instability**

Exercises for rotator cuff rehabilitation are recommended, and surgery is often deferred until significant morbidity and impairment. The primary goal of surgery is to remove the inferior redundant capsule and close the rotator cuff interval. The approach depends upon the direction of greatest instability. Patients with multidirectional shoulder instability that is mostly anteriorly oriented should undergo Neer's anterior capsular shift. A deltopectoral approach is used after making an incision from the coracoid to the border of the anterior axillary fold. The superficial part of the subscapularis is dissected out while keeping the deep part attached to reinforce the capsule. After making a T-shaped incision over the capsule, the inferior flap is pulled upward and buttressed with the superior flap downward over it. The arm position must be in slight flexion and 10-degree external rotation.