# Introduction

Both the digestive system and accessory structures have a complex nerve infrastructure that often goes unnoticed. Celiac ganglia are nerve bundles located in the upper abdomen as part of the autonomic nervous system that is functionally responsible for innervating the digestive tract and abdominal visceral tissue. The ganglia serve as integrative centers for coordinating intestinal motility as well as secretion and absorption throughout the digestive tract. The ganglia's close tie with the gastrointestinal tract makes them essential in a variety of clinical scenarios, including pancreatic cancer and gastroparesis.

# Structure and Function

Located in the upper abdomen near where the celiac trunk branches from the abdominal aorta, celiac ganglia are two collections of nerve cell bodies.

Celiac ganglia are the two largest ganglia in the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and serve as an example of prevertebral ganglia. The celiac ganglia possess the cell bodies of the postganglionic sympathetic neurons and thus provide efferent sympathetic input to gut parenchyma via neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine in preganglionic neurons and norepinephrine in postganglionic neurons.

The ganglia are an extrinsic level of regulation because they are not present within the viscera itself.

# Embryology

Embryology: Autonomic innervation of the gut parenchyma, including celiac ganglia, originates in the neural crest cells.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Prevertebral ganglia, in general, contain extensive vascularization. The primary source of vascularization of the celiac ganglia is the celiac trunk and specifically the celiac artery, which eventually branches into small ganglionic capillaries. Most ganglionic capillaries are continuous, but some are fenestrated, which allows the movement of substances through the membrane.

# Nerves

The pathway of autonomic innervation via the celiac ganglia to the gut parenchyma first involves nerves emerging from the lateral horn of the spinal cord. Then, a neuronal axon exits the spinal cord via the ventral root. Next, the signal exits the spinal nerve via the white ramus at the level of the sympathetic trunk and passes through a sympathetic ganglion (also called paravertebral ganglion); however, there is no synapsing on any cell body in the paravertebral ganglion.

# Muscles

Postganglionic nerves from the celiac ganglia innervate the smooth muscles of the digestive tract.

# Physiologic Variants

The celiac ganglia can vary in several categories. One such variation is the diameter of the ganglia, which can range from 0.5 to 4.5 cm. Additionally, the number of ganglia can differ, ranging from 1 to 5. Finally, the exact location of the ganglia can vary anywhere from the T12 to L2 vertebral level.

# Clinical Significance

Knowing the innervation of celiac ganglia postganglionic axons, physicians can use neurolytic blocks to provide relief in a variety of intestinal, pancreatic, and liver-related pathologies. Patients who suffer from refractory visceral pain may benefit from chemo denervation or selective surgical block of celiac ganglion that supplies visceral structures.

One such cause of refractory visceral pain is advanced pancreatic cancer or chronic pancreatitis. Abdominal pain due to pancreatic cancers involves cancer cells invading nerves both in and out of the pancreas, triggering nociceptive fibers in the pancreas. Because afferent neurons from the pancreas connect with the celiac ganglia, blocking the ganglia results in the lack of transmission of the signal from the ganglia to the dorsal root ganglia at the T12 to L1 spinal level.

Another cause of visceral abdominal pain, as well as intractable nausea and vomiting, is gastroparesis due to chronic diabetes. Because the celiac ganglia decrease bowel motility, neurolysis of celiac ganglia can increase GI motility as well as reduce the pain associated with severe cases of gastroparesis.

Celiac axis compression syndrome (also known as median arcuate ligament syndrome) presents with a triad of postprandial abdominal pain, weight loss, and an occasional abdominal bruit.