The perioperative management of anticoagulation for hospitalized and ambulatory adult patients on anticoagulation for various reasons requires expert clinical judgment tailored to the patients' needs. The decision to hold, bridge, or resume anticoagulant therapy for a patient is based on the patient's clinical condition, and established guidelines. This article focuses on recommendations formulated to assist providers in developing periprocedural antithrombotic management plans.

When managing surgical patients on chronic anticoagulation, providers must address the estimated risk of thromboembolism, bleeding, the timing of anticoagulation, and if anticoagulation bridging is necessary.

Patients with mitral valve prosthesis, recent cerebrovascular accident (CVA), and pulmonary embolism (PE), have a higher estimated risk for thromboembolic events and may benefit from a delay in planned surgical intervention. When considering patients with more than one predisposing thromboembolic risk, it is recommended that the condition with the highest thromboembolic risk receive precedence.

The consequences of a significant thromboembolic event for patients with estimated high risk are more long-lasting when compared to the effects of a major bleed. The patient's risk for a thromboembolic event is increased depending on the interval since diagnosis, the number of predisposing conditions, and age. Patients with recent CVA or PE are likely to benefit from a delay in surgical interventions until the risk reverts to baseline.

**Duration of Anticoagulation Therapy**

Treatment duration with anticoagulation should be individualized based on recurrence and risk of bleeding.

- When the first episode of venous thromboembolism (provoked or unprovoked), treatment for a minimum of 3 months.

- Persisting or reversible risk factor, treatment may be extended to 6 or 12 months.

- If unprovoked proximal DVT and symptomatic PE, indefinite anticoagulation for life.

- When recurrent venous thromboembolism with or without anticoagulation, indefinite anticoagulation for life.