When performing any anterior segment ocular surgery, such as penetrating keratoplasty, cataract surgery, or Nd-Yag capsulotomy, it is crucial to preoperatively assess the visual potential of the retina and neural integrity of the visual system. These tests for potential vision are designed to predict visual outcomes, determine whether the procedure should be initiated, and allow for better patient counseling and managing expectations. There are many ways to test for potential vision.

Choosing the proper test and being able to interpret the results is the basis of visual outcome prediction. The healthcare team should perform a thorough preoperative workup with appropriate tests for potential vision so that the benefits and the risks of the surgery can be weighed.

**Definition**

Tests for potential vision evaluate whether patients with anterior segment diseases such as cataracts can benefit from surgery.

**Test Classification**

**1. Visual acuity**

Accurate visual acuity testing is the starting point for all potential vision tests.

**2. Tests that indicate anterior segment disease**

While these are not, by definition, tests for potential vision, they allow the practitioner to determine the contribution of corneal disease and cataracts to vision loss.

- Rigid gas permeable contact lens over-refraction: If vision improves with this test, then corneal irregularity is the cause of vision loss.

- Corneal topography and pachymetry: If corneal irregularity and/or thinning are detected, the cornea may cause vision loss.

- Brightness acuity testing (BAT): If vision is reduced with glare testing, then corneal or lenticular opacities are more likely the cause of vision loss.

- Refraction: If the refractive error is rapidly changing, especially if a myopic shift is observed, this indicates corneal disease or a cataract.

- Slit lamp biomicroscopy: This test allows the practitioner to detect disease of the anterior as well as a posterior segment. If anterior segment disease is the sole cause of vision loss, then the practitioner's clarity when viewing the fundus should be equal to the patient's visual acuity.

**3. Potential vision tests categorization based on media clarity**

**Tests in Mildly Opaque Media**

- Contrast sensitivity - Helps detect defects in vision at an earlier stage than visual acuity.

- Photo stress test - Helps in gross evaluation of the retinal function, more specifically, the time taken for retinal pigment regeneration.

- Color vision - Evaluates the function of the cones in the macula. Certain types of color vision deficiency may indicate optic nerve disease.

- Amsler grid - Evaluates the integrity and shape of the macula.

- Two–point discrimination - Helps in assessing retinal function in uncooperative patients.

- Microperimetry - Helps in the mapping of scotomas.

- Fundus fluorescein angiography - Evaluates the retinal vasculature.

- Optical coherence tomography. Evaluates the shape and integrity of the macula and optic nerve.

**Tests in Significantly Opaque Media**

- Maddox rod test - Gross test for detection of macular disease.

- Focal Electroretinogram - Evaluation of retinal pigment epithelium, rods and cones, and bipolar cells.

- Laser interferometry - Evaluates the retina using fringe patterns.

- Visual evoked potential - Measures the electrical signal generated at the visual cortex in response to the visual stimuli.

- Entopic phenomenon - It is the visualization of reproducible visual perceptions that arise within the eye due to intraocular blood vessels, opacities in the media, colored halos, or phosphenes.

- Critical fusion/flicker frequency - Evaluates the crucial flicker fusion threshold.

**4. Potential Vision Test Categorization Based on Subjectivity**

**Subjective Tests**

- Colour vision

- Photostress test

- Amsler grid

- 2-point-discrimination

- Entopic phenomenon

- Maddox rod test

- Laser interferometry

- Potential acuity meter - projects an image on the retina and bypasses opacities in the anterior segment.

**Objective Tests**

- Pupillary evaluation - is a gross test of the function of the retina and optic nerve.

- Visual evoked potential

- Electroretinogram