It is essential first to obtain consent for the procedure, if possible. Discuss the risks, benefits, and potential complications of the procedure. Once consent is obtained, inform nursing that the patient will be undergoing central venous catheter insertion. Gather the above equipment and necessary personnel, and clear the room of any visitors or non-essential staff to maintain maximum sterility. Use the ultrasound machine to assess the preferable access site (internal jugular, subclavian, or common femoral veins), taking note of anatomical variations, adjacent structures, and the ease with which the procedure can be performed at that site. Place the patient in an anatomically advantageous position for the procedure.

For the internal jugular vein and subclavian, the patient should be placed in the Trendelenburg position to increase the size of the vessel and improve the chance of first-pass success. For femoral vein access, the patient should be in a supine position. Adjust the height of the bed, and clear away clothing, jewelry, and any non-essential equipment which may impede the preparation of a clear sterile field. The patient should be placed on a cardiac monitor that can cycle vital signs every 5 minutes and maintain telemetry.

Once a cursory anatomy scan is performed with ultrasound, clean and prepare the patient for the procedure. When the primary nurse is present and the patient is ready, perform hand hygiene and don the non-sterile personal protective equipment. Open the sterile equipment, creating a “sterile field.” This can be accomplished by grasping the corners of the pure wraps and opening them out and away from the proceduralist. Once a sterile field has been created, clean the site with your chosen antiseptic. Prepare the vascular probe to be easily sheathed with a sterile probe cover. After that, don the sterile personal protective equipment, and prepare the central venous catheter by attaching saline locks with saline flushes and flushing all of the ports to ensure that there are no equipment issues. Next, remove the saline lock from the most distal port. Place the sterile drape over the patient, with the access point over the procedure site. Sheath the ultrasound probe with the sterile probe cover. The needle driver from the central line kit may clamp the proximal portion of the probe cover to the sterile drape to avoid the probe falling off the sterile field during the procedure. Assure that all equipment is within reach before initiating the procedure. Immediately before the procedure, the proceduralist should perform a “time out” with nursing.