Healthy gingival tissue looks pink or pigmented in dark-skinned patients, firm, with no signs of redness or swelling, and with no bleeding after gently passing a periodontal probe along the gingival crevice. On periodontal probing, healthy gingiva shows less than 3 mm crevice and there is no bone loss on x-rays.In many instances, gingivitis may go unnoticed by the patient as the disease may exist and progress without any symptoms. When symptomatic, the patient usually gives a history of bleeding from the gingiva while brushing, flossing, and sometimes eating particularly hard food, along with halitosis that does not resolve even after performing oral hygiene. Physical examination of the oral cavity will reveal the presence of an inflamed and tender gingiva that usually bleeds on gentle probing. The gingival margins that show a knife-edge appearance and the gingival tissue with stippled aspect found in healthy gingiva are replaced by a more rounded and shiny aspect. Significant plaque and calculus deposits are usually seen.

In chronic gingivitis, the size of the gingival tissue may be increased towards incisal due to the edema or hyperplasia resulting in probing depths more than 3 mm; however, no attachment loss has occurred. These are known as false pockets.

The gingival swelling can be graded into four types.

- Grade 0: No signs of gingival swelling.

- Grade I: Swelling that is confined to the interdental papilla region.

- Grade II: Swelling involving both the interdental papilla and the marginal gingiva.

- Grade III: Swelling that covers three-fourths or more of the crown structure.

**The Gingival Index (GI)**

The purpose of the gingival index is to indicate the quality of the gingival tissue, differentiating the severity of the lesion, and the location of the alteration concerning the four areas that form the perimeter of the marginal gingiva. The criteria included in the index are only related to qualitative changes in the gingiva. A score from 0 to 3 is given to each area of the tooth (mesial, distal, vestibular, palatine, or lingual), this is the GI for the area. The GI score per tooth is achieved by adding the scores from the four areas and then dividing this number by four. The GI for the subject is obtained by adding the indices of each tooth and dividing them into the number of teeth that were examined

**Criteria for the gingival index system**

0: Normal gingiva1: Mild inflammation – a slight color change, slight edema. No bleeding on probing.2: Moderate inflammation – redness, edema, and glazing. Bleeding on probing.3: Severe inflammation – marked redness and edema. Ulceration. Tendency to spontaneous bleeding

**Classification of gingivitis**

In the latest International Workshop for a Classification of Periodontal Diseases and Conditions in 2017, gingival diseases have been classified as follow:

Gingivitis - dental biofilm-induced

- Associated with dental biofilm alone

- Mediated by systemic or local risk factors

- Drug-influenced gingival enlargement

Gingival diseases non-dental biofilm induced

- Genetic/ developmental disorders

- Specific infections

- Inflammatory and immune conditions

- Reactive processes

- Neoplasms

- Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases

- Traumatic lesions

- Gingival pigmentation