# Continuing Education Activity

Orbital color doppler imaging (CDI) is an upcoming modality to evaluate the orbital blood flow (OBF). It aids in diagnosis, prognostication, and serial follow-up for a variety of ophthalmic diseases. This activity outlines the ideal steps of the procedure and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating patients undergoing sequential orbital CDI.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the anatomy of orbital vasculature and autoregulation of blood flow in orbit.
- Describe the steps for an accurate and reliable doppler study.
- Summarize the precautions to be taken while performing orbital color doppler imaging.
- Outline the applications of orbital color doppler imaging in ocular disorders managed by an interprofessional team.

# Introduction

Color Doppler imaging (CDI) is a non-invasive technique for two-dimensional visualization of normal and pathological vasculature. CDI for the orbital vessels has been used for diagnosis, prognostication, and serial follow-up of ocular pathologies.

# Anatomy and Physiology

The arteries and veins of the orbit show a great degree of interindividual variation.

The principal artery of the orbit is the ophthalmic artery (OA). It is the first intracranial branch of the ICA after it leaves the cavernous sinus. The OA enters the orbit through the optic canal, inferolateral to the optic nerve (ON). It runs inferior to the ON, gives rise to the central retinal artery (CRA), and then crosses to the superomedial aspect of the ON. The medial and lateral long posterior ciliary arteries (LPCA) and multiple short posterior ciliary arteries (SPCA) supply the outer coats of the globe. The OA passes between the medial rectus and the superior oblique muscles, gives multiple muscular branches, supraorbital artery, anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries, and terminates near the superomedial orbital margin to form the supratrochlear and the dorsal nasal arteries. The ECA contributes the infraorbital artery and an orbital branch from the middle meningeal artery to the orbit.

The orbital venous system comprises two main veins, the superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) and the inferior ophthalmic vein (IOV), and multiple variable veins. The SOV drains into the cavernous sinus passing through the superior orbital fissure. The IOV can be a tributary of the SOV or drain directly into the cavernous sinus.

The orbital blood flow (OBF) is autoregulated by the activity of the autonomic nervous system and some chemical mediators, as enlisted below.

- **Endothelin-1**: It is a potent vasoconstrictor affecting choroidal blood flow and is primarily a risk factor for glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy.

- **Nitric oxide (NO)**: It is a vasodilator molecule regulating the intraocular pressure (IOP) and OBF during orbital inflammation.

- **Adenosine**: It is a potent molecule modulating the IOP and causes retinal vasodilation.

- Other molecules like estrogen and carbonic anhydrase enzyme have a debatable role in autoregulation.

Exercise and sympathetic stimulation cause arteriolar vasoconstriction and decrease the OBF.

# Indications

**Diagnostic Adjunctive Role**

- Persistent fetal vasculature (PFV)

- Intrabulbar tumors

- Arterial occlusion

- Ocular ischemic syndrome (OIS)

- Carotid cavernous fistula (CCF)

**Prognostication and Follow-up**

- Glaucoma

- Thyroid eye disease (TED)

- Diabetic retinopathy (DR)

- Vascular malformations

**Indications Still Under Research**

- Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD)

- Central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO)

- Central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR)

- Sickle cell disease

- Behcet disease

# Contraindications

The absolute contraindication for orbital ultrasonography and CDI is a history of penetrating or perforating trauma to the globe, presenting with globe rupture.

# Equipment

The ultrasonography (USG) machine offering duplex mode - two-dimensional real-time USG with color-coded Doppler imaging is required. The orbital vessels are imaged at a depth of 1.5 to 4.0 cm. A linear probe with a probe frequency of 7.5 to 10 Mhz is preferred.

# Personnel

An expert radiologist, or a well-trained ophthalmologist, should perform the CDI.

# Preparation

An ultrasound console with a 10 MHz linear probe, ultrasound jelly, and a transparent plastic film is needed for a CDI.

The patient should avoid smoking or consumption of alcohol at least 12 hours before the study. The application of topical drugs, specially anti-glaucoma medications, influences the OBF. Factors like hypertension, anxiety, tachycardia, high cardiac output, and increased pulse pressure alter the retrobulbar hemodynamics.

# Technique or Treatment

The patient is asked to lie down with the head elevated by 30 degrees and look straight ahead with eyelids shut gently. The USG probe is placed horizontally over the eyelid to get an axial view of the orbit. The probe should exert minimal pressure over the globe to avoid compression of orbital vessels.

**Doppler Indices**

- **Peak Systolic Velocity (PSV):**The maximum velocity noted during the systole phase of the Doppler waveform.

- **End Diastolic velocity (EDV):**The minimum velocity recorded during the diastole phase of the Doppler waveform.

- **Resistivity Index (RI):**The ratio of the difference of PSV and EDV to the value of the PSV during the same cycle of the Doppler waveform.

**Imaging of the CRA:**The CRA is localized in the optic nerve head at 1 to 10 mm behind the posterior wall of the globe. It has an estimated diameter of 0.2 mm. It shows a low resistance flow, low PSV, and a rapid flow in the diastolic phase. The central retinal vein is a small-caliber vessel located close to the CRA. The CRV has a flow waveform below the zero lines. (Figure 1)

**Imaging of the OA:**The OA is imaged in the nasal orbit as it crosses the ON at a depth of 35 to 36 mm. It has a diameter of 0.7 to 1.5 mm. It is imaged, making an angle less than 60 degrees between the ultrasound beam and the vessel lumen. It has a moderate to high resistance flow, a rapid systolic peak with a dichotomous notch, and a sharply decreasing diastolic phase. (Figure 2)

**Imaging of the SPCA vessels**: The SPCA vessels appear as numerous branches lateral and medial to the ON at 1 to 3 mm behind the posterior pole. The vessels have a diameter of 0.1 to 0.2 mm. Their flow is a low resistance waveform with velocities between the OA and the CRA flow velocities.

**Imaging of the SOV**: The SOV is localized in the superomedial orbit. Due to the absence of valves and flaccidity of the orbital veins, the venous flow waveform depends on multiple external factors.

The flow velocities vary depending on the depth of Doppler imaging, with a deeper vascular localization yielding a falsely low flow waveform.

Definite reporting is done after averaging out the results of at least three doppler waveforms and flow-velocity values on repeat imaging.

Wide differences in the values of these indices have been seen between populations. The average values observed by different investigators have been tabulated below:

Suprasanna et al.

(Study location: India)

Kaiser et al.

(Study location: Switzerland)

Fukukita et al.

(Study location: Japan)

Rusia et al.

(Meta-analysis)

# Complications

Orbital CDI may result in few complications like pain due to excessive pressure on the globe and globe damage in previously undiagnosed traumatic globe rupture cases. Minimal complications have been reported in the hands of trained personnel.

# Clinical Significance

**Persistent Fetal Vasculature (PFV)**

Based on their ultrasonography and CDI characteristics, PFV cases can be classified into 4 types:

- Type I: I-shape

- Type II: Y-shape

- Type III: Inverted Y-shape

- Type IV: X-shape

Sonographic screening and CDI of PFV cases allow visualization of the vascularised membranes and definitive surgical planning. The pars plana incision and surgery can be done in types I and III, whereas types II and IV require an anterior surgical approach under direct visualization.

**Intrabulbar Tumors**

The vascularity and the RI of the orbital vessels can differentiate between malignant and benign lesions. Choroidal melanoma shows a higher PSV and a higher RI in the feeder vessels than orbital cavernous hemangiomas. The response to radiation therapy is monitored by CDI parameters like reduction in the vascularised areas, decrease in PSV, and elevation of tumor echogenicity.

**Arterial Occlusions**

The CRA occlusion (CRAO) or the OA occlusion (OAO) presents as sudden onset painless vision loss. High RI and absent flow in the CRA, with a high RI and normal flow velocities in the OA and the SPCA, suggest CRAO. Acute OAO usually presents as a hemodynamically empty orbit, with collateral circulation opening up in the chronic OAO orbits.

**Ocular Ischemic Syndrome (OIS)**

Misdiagnosis of OIS in the clinics is common and leads to missing out on the critical bailout period. OIS often presents with an absent or reverse end-diastolic flow in the OA and the CRA.

**Arteritic Anterior Ischemic Optic Neuropathy (A-AION)**

Giant cell arteritis (GCA) patients with no evident ocular involvement show a marked decrease in blood flow in bilateral orbits. The absence of flow in the LPCA, very high flow in the OA, and altered flow in the CRA are common findings with GCA.

**Carotid Cavernous Fistula (CCF)**

Evaluation of the SOV in cases of post-traumatic proptosis may show a reverse flow suggesting a flow from the orbital apex towards the globe. The waveform analysis may show an arterialized high-velocity blood flow through a low resistance blood vessel, signifying a high flow fistula between the intracavernous part of the ICA and the cavernous sinus. The SOV resumes normal venous flow in rare cases showing spontaneous resolution of CCF.

**Glaucoma**

The pathogenesis of open-angle glaucoma is a failure of autoregulation of the OBF with poor IOP control.

**Thyroid Eye Disease (TED)**

The active TED orbits show inflammatory changes and higher flow velocities. The inactive TED orbits may develop external compression of the vasculature, causing high RI and decreased flow velocities. Dysthyroid optic neuropathy (DON) can occur with low PSV in the CRA, causing ON ischemia.

**Diabetic Retinopathy (DR)**

Diabetes mellitus is characterized by neuropathy and failure of the normal autoregulation of OBF. The ischemic retina stimulates the release of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and alters the flow velocities before the onset of frank changes.

**Vascular Malformations - Infantile Periocular Hemangioma**

The orbital vascular malformations show a characteristic high flow pattern on CDI. The management of periocular hemangiomas with oral propranolol reduces the intra-lesional blood flow and PSV in the feeding vessels. The CDI findings on follow-up visits help predict the chances of complete remission.

**Age-related Macular Degeneration (ARMD)**

Exudative ARMD shows high RI and decreased arterial blood flow. This suggests a retinal and choroidal vasculature involvement in the pathogenesis of ARMD.

**Central Retinal Vein Occlusion (CRVO)**

Acute CRVO shows a rise in RI of the CRA and reduced PSV in the CRA and the OA. There are no significant changes in the hemodynamics post-intra-vitreal anti-VEGF injections.

**Central S****erous Chorioretinopathy (CSCR)**

Choroidal hyperperfusion is proposed to be the main cause of CSCR. In patients with unilateral CSCR, a decrease in RI and arterial flow velocities in both eyes suggests a systemic etiology.

**Sickle Cell Disease**

Sickle cell disease causes early microvascular occlusion, an increased RI, and decreased flow velocity in the CRA. Subsequent retinal hypoxia causes vasodilation and increases the flow velocity in the OA.

**Behcet D****isease**

Behcet disease presents with widespread vasculitis, including orbital circulation. Vascular occlusion in the retina and the choroid leads to a high RI and reduced flow velocities in the CRA and the SPCA.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Orbital CDI is a rapid, non-invasive, and easily available modality for imaging of orbital vessels. Trained personnel can view the orbital vasculature changes and corroborate the diagnosis. Early management with a serial follow-up leads to positive visual outcomes. The ophthalmologist, the radiologist, and the nursing staff play an invaluable role in the efficient functioning of the team.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Minimal monitoring is required in the post-imaging period.