Maintenance of excellent communication skills by the caregivers helps the patient and family to make appropriate decisions in times of rough weather. Proved or suspected lymphangitic carcinomatosis typically represents an advanced underlying malignancy with very poor life expectancy. The usual complications and poor expected life span and the likely futility of invasive organ support measures need to discussed in detail with the patient and family members to help them to chalk out a clear plan of action. Attempts at definite histopathologic diagnosis in the form of transbronchial lung biopsy or surgical lung biopsy could be considered only in patients who are stable and safe for such procedures.

Many patients who are having advanced malignancy & who are unfit for a diagnostic procedure need have to be treated conservatively and palliatively with the presumptive diagnosis of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis. However, potentially reversible factors like a lower respiratory infection precipitating the acute respiratory crisis need to be always considered and merits a treatment trial on a case to case basis.

Occasionally the patient may present with signs and symptoms of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis without a history of underlying malignancy. Here again, extensive evaluation needs to carried out to reach a definite diagnosis of lung pathology, including the search for a potential primary. Here again, excellent communication skills by physicians and paramedical staff help the patient and family to endorse a concrete plan of action.