Blunt head trauma is a common presentation to the emergency room. The key to the treatment of blunt head trauma is prevention. Most cases are preventable, and hence the education of the public is essential. At the time of injury, the patient and family should be educated on using safety devices during sports and other high-risk activities. The caregiver of the elderly should be educated on the prevention of falls in the home and parents should be educated on child safety during driving and playground activities. Those who have a neurological deficit may benefit from physiotherapy and occupational therapy. The pharmacist should educate the patient on abstaining from alcohol and the use of sedative drugs. In addition, the patient should be warned about seizures and the need to take anticonvulsants.

**Outcomes**

The outcome after blunt head trauma depends on the type of injury, the severity of the injury, patient age, the presence of any neurological deficit, comorbidity and any secondary injury. The GCS at 24 hours is a strong predictor of cognitive recovery at 24 months after the injury. The mortality rates do vary from 4-40% at five years after blunt head trauma. Younger people fare much better than older individuals. Individuals with a neurological deficit and those taking oral anticoagulants at the time of injury often have a poor outcome. The pupillary function before and after the injury is also predictive of outcome. Those with bilateral unresponsive pupils tend to have a grave prognosis and a higher risk of remaining in a vegetative state. Finally, studies show that diabetics also tend to fare worse with blunt head trauma compared to nondiabetics.