The history can be quite variable depending on whether the vertebral artery injury is spontaneous or due to acute trauma. Many cases thought to be spontaneous have antecedent minor trauma as an associated factor. Spontaneous dissections are more common in patients with connective tissue disorders, but most patients will not present with any known history of connective tissue disease.

The most commonly reported symptoms are the head, and neck pain, vertigo, and dizziness but many patients with small dissections may be asymptomatic. In diagnosed cases, the presenting finding is often a transient ischemic attack or acute stroke. The risk of stroke is greatest in the first two weeks after the dissection occurs. Young patients presenting with acute stroke should have cerebrovascular dissection considered, especially if their symptoms are associated with a headache or neck pain. It is important to note that while neck pain is a common complaint, only 46% will initially report it. Additional clinical manifestations include scalp tenderness, tinnitus, bruits, or even cervical nerve root involvement. Vertebral artery dissection may also lead to lateral medullary infarction, posterior cervical vestibular symptoms, vision loss, or spinal cord ischemia.

Patients presenting with acute trauma should first have a primary and secondary survey and should undergo stabilization following Advanced Trauma Life Support guidelines. Like with spontaneous dissections, some patients may initially have no neurologic findings. In one study by Biffl et al., a time-lapse of 18 hours existed between the time of injury and onset of neurologic symptoms in 44% of cases. Patients with blunt cervical trauma who meet the modified Denver Screening criteria should undergo evaluation for cerebrovascular injury.

Denver Screening Criteria:

- Lateralizing neurologic deficit (not explained by head CT)

- Infarct on head CT

- Nonexpanding cervical hematoma

- Massive epistaxis

- Anisocoria /Horner syndrome

- Glasgow coma score (GCS) less than 8 without significant CT finding

- Cervical spine fracture

- Basilar skull fracture

- Le Forte II or III facial fractures

- Seatbelt sign above the clavicle

- Cervical bruit/thrill