Spinal motion restriction is the use of a cervical collar and cot to maintain neutral alignment of the spine during transport of the patient with concern for spinal injury. The goal is to reduce excessive movement of the spine that may worsen existing spinal trauma and neurologic deficit. While backboards may work for the initial extrication and movement of a patient, it is preferable to bring the cot or stretcher to the ambulatory patient and instruct them to lie down. Do not perform a vertical backboard takedown. The backboard requires removal as soon as practical before transport by emergency medical services (EMS) to the hospital. Recent studies suggest that full spinal immobilization does not limit motion during prehospital transportation as much as previously thought. While this was most notable in the non-compliant patient, the increased movement was seen in the compliant patient population.

Not all patients will be able to lie flat on their back on a stretcher. An alert patient with nausea and vomiting may need to have their head of the bed elevated or be rolled on their side to avoid aspiration. If a patient requires intubation, elevating the head of the bed has been demonstrated to improve oxygenation and hemodynamic stability.

While most spinal injuries are due to high force mechanisms, special care is necessary for geriatric patients (age 65 and older) who may present without typical physical exam findings (i.e., midline neck pain) after a ground-level fall (GLF). A 2013 retrospective review of 12,805 geriatric trauma patients found cervical spine fractures in over half of geriatric patients with ground-level falls. Overall, geriatric patients were more likely to sustain upper cervical fractures than non-geriatric patients, and researchers found GLFs to cause both isolated cervical fractures and significant intracranial pathology.