Granulomatosis with polyangiitis commonly involves a triad of a) upper respiratory tract (sinusitis, crusting rhinitis, saddle nose deformity, otitis media, mastoiditis, hearing loss), and lower respiratory tract (lung nodules, alveolar hemorrhage), b) systemic vasculitis, and c) kidney involvement (glomerulonephritis).

**Generalized Systemic Symptoms**

GPA usually presents with non-specific symptoms of generalized systemic disease, including fever, malaise, weight loss, polyarthralgia, and myalgia.

**Organ System Involvement**

Respiratory and pulmonary manifestations include

Upper respiratory tract involvement:

Studies show that 90% of patients have upper respiratory involvement. The earliest complaints are usually upper respiratory tract problems, including nasal and sinus pain, sinus stuffiness, purulent nasal discharge, nasal ulcerations, epistaxis, and otitis media. The presence of clinical signs of sinusitis, crusting rhinitis, otitis media, mastoiditis, and hearing loss should alert for GPA. Nasal inflammation can lead to septal perforation or nasal bridge collapse, causing a saddle nose deformity.

Lower respiratory tract involvement:

Symptoms include cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, sometimes pleuritic chest pain, and tracheal obstruction can be noted. Initially, nearly 50% of patients present with bilateral or unilateral pulmonary infiltrates. Pulmonary nodules (referred to as coin lesions) are seen as well. Pleural effusion has also been reported in 15%-20% of the cases. Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage in these patients is noted to cause significant morbidity and mortality.

Trachea and bronchi:

Subglottic stenosis and bronchial stenosis is also a potentially serious complication of GPA. Symptoms can range from initially being asymptomatic to developing hoarseness, cough, wheeze, or stridor.

Renal involvement:

Upon presentation, renal involvement is noted in only 10%-20%, but glomerulonephritis eventually develops in 80% of patients within two years of disease onset. The most common manifestation is rapidly progressive crescentic glomerulonephritis leading to chronic kidney disease or end-stage renal disease.

Eye involvement:

Eye involvement is common and is seen in more than half of the people with the disease. Scleritis and conjunctivitis are most commonly seen. Scleritis can lead to necrotizing anterior scleritis, eventually causing blindness. Peripheral ulcerative keratitis (PUK) is the most significant corneal complication of GPA that could lead to corneal melt syndrome. Other manifestations include episcleritis and anterior uveitis. In 10%-15% of the patients, orbital masses in the retrobulbar region can occur that are termed pseudotumors. These can cause diplopia, proptosis, or vision loss. Nasolacrimal duct obstruction is very often noted in GPA.

Ear involvement:

Both the categories of ear disease - conductive and sensorineural hearing loss are typical of the disease. Conductive hearing loss due to auditory tube dysfunction secondary to nasopharyngeal disease is noted in many cases of GPA. Sensorineural hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction are seen in some individuals. Middle ear involvement, including serous otitis media and mastoiditis, is also seen.

Skin:

Dermatologic involvement is reported in 50%-60% of the patients with GPA with purpura commonly involving the lower extremities. Other common manifestations, including cutaneous nodules, particularly involving the olecranon regions, are common and can be mistaken for rheumatoid arthritis. Less commonly ulcers, papules, vesicles, and subcutaneous nodules (granulomas) may be seen.

Nervous system:

Nervous system involvement is seen in about 30%-40% of the patients with peripheral neuropathies being most common. Neuropathy could lead to mononeuritis multiplex. Cranial neuropathies, pachymeningitis, seizures, and cerebritis have also been reported.

Musculoskeletal:

Arthralgia and myalgia are seen in 70% of patients. Joint symptoms are commonly seen, but diagnosis with this alone is rarely made without other manifestations. Arthralgias are more common than arthritis. The presence of joint pains along with subcutaneous nodules and rheumatoid factor positivity can often lead to misdiagnosis.

Cardiac:

Cardiac involvement is less common and involves valvular lesions or insufficiency, pericarditis, and coronary arteritis.