Modern tunnel boring machines are of variable diameters, work at many depths and require CAWs to assure they continue to function appropriately and timely.  The specific equipment used will depend on many factors such as the geology of the ground (rock vs. sand), depth at the face, groundwater levels and the potential presence of toxic substances such as methane gas. Although the tunnels are no longer excavated manually by the CAWs, the tools at the face of these machines (rippers and cutters) require periodic inspection and changing when worn down and no longer effective at performing their cutting and grinding functions; trained CAWs are needed to complete this maintenance.

Many hyperbaric interventions occur at depths that allow repetitive bounce diving multiple times per day with minimal risk. They typically use commercial diving companies to oversee and deliver these services, especially when hyperbaric interventions are necessary to depths greater than 2.5 Bar (82 FSW). There is a hyperbaric chamber ("medical lock"), specially designed and conveniently located to provide hyperbaric medical treatment. Medical locks are typically at the surface near the excavation area. The medical lock is required to treat those CAWs who might suffer from DCS. It is also useful before performing hyperbaric interventions to qualify CAWs with a "test dive" to assess their physical and psychological reactions to working under increased atmospheric pressure.  They perform this qualification or "checkout" dive (as they typically referr to it in the compressed air industry) at depths greater than the expected depth expected during the actual hyperbaric intervention. The medical team remains on site during hyperbaric interventions and for 24 hours after the completion of the hyperbaric intervention; this is to assure all CAWs are in good health following compression and do not require hyperbaric medical intervention and treatment before the medical team leaving the job site.

In a technique known as saturation diving, CAWs live at depth (under pressure) in the hyperbaric chamber (called the habitat) located on the surface.   The habitat is where the CAWs and divers live when not working.  It is pressurized at or near working pressure encountered at the tunnel boring machine face, the expected hyperbaric intervention pressure. CAW teams are compressed into the saturation chamber at the same time and use it as their home base or habitat for the duration of the job. They travel (typically in teams of two or more) to and from the habitat to the work site in the TBM face via this hyperbaric shuttle or transfer capsule.  The capsule or shuttle is a mobile hyperbaric chamber. Once the shuttle arrives at the TBM, it's mated with the TBM hyperbaric chamber or "man-lock" via a universal connection or collar.  These collars mount on the medical lock, transfer capsule and man-locks (hyperbaric chambers) in the front of the TBM.  All these connections occur at atmospheric pressure outside the chambers.  Once mated and pressure equalized, the workers transfer from the shuttle into the man-lock built into the TBM during its fabrication.  The CAWs pass through the man-lock to the TBM face. At times, small pressure changes are necessary to move from one lock to the next.  The TBM chamber undergoes pressurization to the pressure equivalent to that found at the face of the TBM or the "working pressure." The CAWs usually perform a 6- to 8-hour shift and return to the habitat via the shuttle, followed by replacement with the next CAW team from the habitat who exit the shuttle to allow the last working team to return.  This process continues around the clock until which time they complete the tasks. This saturation method only requires one compression at the start of the work and one decompression at the end of the hyperbaric intervention.  All workers undergo compression at the beginning and decompression at the completion of the hyperbaric intervention. There exist various gas mixtures used during saturation diving.  All the gases we breathe become toxic when their partial pressure increases. Different mixtures of oxygen, nitrogen, and helium are most commonly employed to mitigate adverse events of breathing gas toxicity.