Tests for potential vision are performed preoperatively to predict whether patients with anterior segment diseases such as cataracts can benefit from surgery. Tests for potential vision also evaluate the integrity of the retina and of the neural visual system. In cases with dense cataracts where the posterior segment cannot be visualized, several of these tests can evaluate the function of the macular.

If a macular or retinal disease is present in such a patient, the postoperative vision after cataract surgery will depend on the remaining visual function of the macula and thus will be less than optimum. This is useful in the counseling and management of patient expectations after surgery. Another application of these tests can be in estimating visual acuity in patients with hysterical blindness, children, and uncooperative, non-verbal, or unconscious adults.

Some tests, like the ERG, specifically evaluate the integrity of the retinal pigment epithelium, photoreceptors, and bipolar cells. While others, like VEP, test the intactness of the entire visual system, starting from the retina and reaching up to the visual cortex. The Photostress test, Maddox rod, 2-point-discrimination test, and entoptic phenomenon can be used as gross screening methods in the outpatient setting.

The Amsler chart can be administered for home monitoring of macular disease. Thus, tests for potential vision are important tools to examine the patient with less than 20/20 vision; hence, understanding their principles and learning to administer them is crucial.