# Continuing Education Activity

Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE) is a mosquito-borne disease endemic in regions of Central and South America that causes sporadic outbreaks of equine and human encephalitis. This activity outlines the pathophysiology, evaluation, and treatment of Venezuelan equine encephalitis and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Venezuelan equine encephalitis.
- Review the evaluation of a patient with Venezuelan equine encephalitis.
- Describe the common complications of Venezuelan equine encephalitis.

# Introduction

Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis Virus (VEEV) is the causative viral pathogen of Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis (VEE). Outbreaks frequently involve both equines – including horses, donkeys, mules, zebras – and humans.

# Etiology

VEEV is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA alphavirus in the Togaviridae family.

There are six subtypes (I-VI) and many antigenic variants within each subtype. The epizootic strains IAB and IC are responsible for causing encephalitis in equines and humans. These subtypes of VEE are highly pathogenic and can spread quickly through equine populations. Horses are the key reservoir species and amplification hosts for epizootic viral strains.

The enzootic strains (ID, IE, subtypes II-VI) are usually avirulent in horses and produce mild or no equine illness. However, these strains may still cause significant disease in humans. Enzootic strains are typically found circulating in rodents. Spillover from these enzootic transmission cycles between rodents and mosquitos may lead to human epidemics. There appears to be no clinical difference in disease caused by epizootic and enzootic strains of VEEV in humans.

# Epidemiology

Epizootic subtypes IAB and IC can cause significant disease in both humans and equines.

# Pathophysiology

Several species of mosquitos are capable of transmitting both the enzootic and epizootic strains of VEEV.Ochlerotatus taeniorhynchus appears to be the primary mosquito vector during epizootics, while Culex species transmit enzootic strains.

VEEV can cause a spectrum of disease from mild febrile flu-like illness to severe or fatal encephalitis.

# Histopathology

Examination of the spleen, GI tract, and lymph nodes of infected equines, rodents, and humans shows a significant depletion of lymphocytes.

# History and Physical

Clinical signs of VEEV infection include leukopenia, tachycardia, and fever. Patients may develop interstitial pneumonia. The physical exam may reveal conjunctival injection, pharyngeal inflammation, and muscle tenderness. The patient may complain of myalgias most typically in the thighs or lumbar back, occipital or retro-orbital headache, fever, and chills.

# Evaluation

Many cases of Venezuelan equine encephalitis are diagnosed clinically, and cases are probably frequently misdiagnosed as other more common febrile illnesses.

Laboratory testing may reveal leukopenia, lymphopenia, and elevated transaminases.

# Treatment / Management

Currently, no specific treatment exists for any of the encephalitic arboviruses, including Venezuelan equine encephalitis. Treatment is supportive or palliative.

Vaccine development for VEEV is ongoing. Though there is currently no FDA-approved human vaccine, TC-83 is a live-attenuated vaccine strain that has been used in both humans and equines.

# Differential Diagnosis

Several arboviruses circulate in overlapping regions throughout Central and South America. VEE clinically presents like other tropical arboviral diseases and may be indistinguishable without expensive confirmatory testing.

- Bacterial meningitis

- Chikungunya

- Dengue

- Eastern equine encephalitis

- HSV encephalitis

- Lyme disease

- Malaria

- Rocky mountain spotted fever

- Western equine encephalitis

- Yellow fever

- Zika

# Prognosis

Equine mortality is significant and is estimated to be 19-83% during epizootic outbreaks. Fatality rates are much lower in humans, and less than 1% of cases are lethal. Adults are more likely to develop febrile flu-like illness. Children are at greater risk for developing neurological disease or encephalitis.

# Complications

Neurological sequelae may persist following recovery from initial infection with VEEV. Though there is no specific therapy for VEEV, modern medical technology has improved supportive treatments, and many patients will survive even encephalitic disease.

Pregnant women may be at distinct risk of complications from arbovirus infections. VEEV was classified as the first teratogenic arbovirus. Pregnant women are at risk for congenital disabilities, miscarriage, preterm delivery, and stillbirth. Vertical transmission from mother to fetus has been documented. Ten fetal autopsies performed during an outbreak demonstrated VEEV in the brains of aborted fetuses.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As there is no specific treatment for Venezuelan equine encephalitis, avoiding infection is the best prevention. Outbreaks may be controlled by reducing mosquito populations, as arthropods serve as the primary vector of infection. Humans, especially those who have frequent contact with equines, should limit physical exposure to mosquitos, wear protective clothing, and use frequent applications of repellants. Aerosolized insecticide applications in endemic areas will also contribute to a reduction in mosquito populations.

Epizootic outbreaks may also be prevented through mass vaccination of horses with the TC-83 live-attenuated vaccine.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Global warming may facilitate the emergence of VEEV epidemics. Climate change can lead to longer transmission seasons, changes in rainy seasons, which increase mosquito populations, and increased geographic distributions of tropical mosquito vectors.

Enzootic VEEV exists continuously in tropical regions, and there is a risk of emergence of epizootic strains leading to equine and human outbreaks. In endemic regions, surveillance programs for early detection and implementation of mosquito control and equine vaccination will help control outbreaks.

VEEV was developed as a biological weapon by the United States and the former Soviet Union during the Cold War. It is classified as a biosafety level 3 by the Centers for Disease Control and as a category B priority pathogen by the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and treatment of Venezuelan equine encephalitis require a multidisciplinary approach. Healthcare providers in endemic areas must maintain a high degree of suspicion for the diagnosis. Patients will require supportive care for any degree of disease they develop, from mild illness to fulminant encephalitis. Following recovery, some patients will suffer from neurological sequelae and will require continued support from healthcare providers and the community. [Level 5]