The treatment and management of Fournier gangrene require an interprofessional team. Patients will often present to the emergency department or their primary care physician. Following diagnosis and admission to the hospital, Fournier gangrene management is best by a team of health care professionals, including an intensivist, urologist, pharmacist, infectious disease expert, and nursing staff. In the emergency department, prompt identification of the disease is of great importance. The faster a patient with Fournier gangrene gets evaluated and their workup initiated, the quicker they are accurately diagnosed and treated. Following an appropriate diagnosis, the patient will require admission and urological consultation for prompt surgical debridement. These patients will often require admission to an intensive care unit where their vitals will be continually monitored by nursing staff who will communicate any concerns regarding patient deterioration to the intensivist.

Pharmacy and infectious disease play crucial roles in determining the appropriate antibiotics, which should be given to the patient once culture sensitivities result. If the wound is left open, a wound care nurse should be involved with the dressing changes. A stoma nurse should assess the appliance and ensure that the skin around the stoma is protected. These patients require vigilent monitoring, and any member of the interprofessional team who notes a change in status, including relapse, therapeutic failure, or drug adverse events or interactions, must document their findings and alert appropriate team members immediately so interventions can commence. This global and systemic interprofessional approach to treating patients suffering from Fournier gangrene is crucial in lowering the associated mortality.

Fournier gangrene is a potentially fatal disease with a mortality ranging from 20% to 30%.