The branches of the abdominal aorta are as follows, along with their function:

- Inferior phrenic arteries are paired arteries that supply the diaphragm and branch to become the superior suprarenal artery to help supply the adrenal glands.

- The celiac trunk has three main branches:

- The left gastric artery supplies the lesser curvature of the stomach.
- The common hepatic artery branches into the hepatic artery proper to supply the gallbladder via the cystic artery and the right and left hepatic arteries to supply the liver. The common hepatic artery also branches into the gastroduodenal artery, which branches into the right gastroepiploic/right gastro-omental artery and superior pancreaticoduodenal artery. These branches supply the greater curvature and pancreas and duodenum, respectively.
- The splenic artery runs superior to the pancreas. In addition to supplying the spleen, it provides branches to the pancreas. This short gastric artery supplies the fundus and greater curvature of the stomach, the left gastroepiploic/gastro-omental artery that supplies the greater curvature of the stomach, and the posterior gastric artery, which as the name denotes, supplies the posterior aspect of the stomach.

- Middle suprarenal arteries are bilateral arteries that contribute to the supply of the adrenal glands.

- Lumbar arteries: There are usually four paired lumbar arteries, and they supply the Quadratus lumborum muscles bilaterally.

- The superior mesenteric artery supplies the small bowel (duodenum, jejunum, ileum) up to the proximal two-thirds of the transverse colon and supplies the pancreas.

- Renal arteries are bilateral structures that supply the kidneys.

- Testicular/ovarian arteries supply the gonads.

- The inferior mesenteric artery supplies the distal one-third of the transverse colon to the upper aspect of the rectum.

- The median sacral artery branches from the abdominal aorta before it bifurcates and supplies the sacrum and lumbar vertebrae.

The abdominal aorta bifurcates at L4 to become the right and left common iliac arteries, which eventually become the internal (hypogastric artery) and external iliac arteries that supply the pelvis and lower extremities, respectively.