The barium swallow exam technique can differ between institutions. Generally, the two components of barium swallow examination involve the evaluation of the hypopharynx/cervical esophagus and the thoracic esophagus using fluoroscopy. The steps are summarized as follows:

- Upright position - Administration of crystals (effervescent sodium bicarbonate granules) and consumption of water for distension.

- Upright position - Place the patient in the left posterior oblique position, have the patient drink a mouthful of thick barium while taking spot images from the cervical esophagus to the gastroesophageal junction. These constitute "double-contrast" images.

- Upright position - Place the patient in the lateral position, cone down to the hypopharynx and video record(~4 frames/second) while the patient swallows a mouthful of thin barium. Acquire a spot distension images while the patient phonates the sounds "aaaaa" and "eeee."

- Upright position - Place the patient in anteroposterior position, cone down to the hypopharynx, and video record(~4 frames/second) while patient swallows a mouthful of thin barium. Acquire a spot distension images while the patient phonates the sounds "aaaaa" and "eeee." A "trumpet Valsalva" spot image can also be obtained and aims to distend the throat with air.

- Horizontal position - While in the horizontal position, place the patient in the right anterior oblique position(ie patient should be prone). Have the patient drink thin barium with a straw and watch the contrast descend down the esophagus. Acquire a spot image of the gastroesophageal junction with and without Valsalva. Closely evaluate for a hiatal hernia, reflux, and for signs of dysmotility. Additional images to evaluate for reflux can be performed in the right posterior oblique position(supine) with provocative maneuvers such as coughing, although this might not be appropriate given the low yield of these maneuvers.

- Upright position - Have the patient swallow a barium tablet with a small amount of water. Observe for uneventful passage to the stomach. Additional sips of water can be consumed if the pill is not transiting to the stomach.

**Points to Consider**

- While in the right anterior oblique position, the left arm and knee will be flexed and the head rotated left, allowing for some elevation of the left side.

- The barium volume during each swallow is roughly 100 to 200 cc.

- The goal, typically, is to distend the esophagus for the best resolution.

- The contrast media may be further thinned with water if needed to reveal more subtle lesions.

- The exact thickness of contrast and amount will depend on the local radiology protocol and also the reason for the exam.

- Equipment with a still-image X-ray, while limited, can be sufficient.