The photopigment in rods is called rhodopsin. Human rhodopsin is a G-protein-coupled receptor made up of 348 amino acids arranged in seven transmembrane domains, and its gene is located on chromosome 3. Rhodopsin consists of a protein called scotopsin and its covalently-bound cofactor, retinal. The chromophore retinal lies in a pocket formed by the transmembrane domains of scotopsin. Retinal is a vitamin A derivative produced from dietary beta-carotene. Inactive, retinal exists in the 11-cis-retinal conformation. Upon exposure to light, retinal is isomerized to all-trans-retinal leading to a series of changes in conformation to the form metarhodopsin II (Meta II). Meta II activates the G protein transducin, after which its alpha subunit is released. The transducin alpha subunit, bound to guanosine triphosphate (GTP), then activates cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) phosphodiesterase.  cGMP is hydrolyzed by cGMP phosphodiesterase which inhibits its activation of cGMP-dependent cation channels and causes hyperpolarization of the rod cell and consequent release of glutamate which depolarizes some neurons and hyperpolarizes others. Reversion of rods to their resting state involves rhodopsin kinase (RK), arrestin, a regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) protein, and closure of cGMP channels. The activity of transducin is partially inhibited by the phosphorylation of the rhodopsin cytosolic tail by RK. Arrestin then binds the phosphorylated rhodopsin to inactivate it further. The RGS protein increases the rate of GTP to GDP hydrolysis to convert transducin into its "off" state. cGMP-sensitive channel closure decreases the concentration of calcium ions, which stimulates calcium ion-sensitive proteins to activate guanylyl cyclase causing restoration of cGMP levels and plasma membrane depolarization.

In contrast to rods, there are three different types of cones: S-cones (short wavelength-sensitive), M-cones (medium wavelength-sensitive), and L-cones (long wavelength-sensitive). The S-cone photopigment gene is encoded on chromosome 7, while those of the M-cones and L-cones are on the X chromosome. All cone receptors contain the protein photopsin in modified conformations to enable activation by different wavelengths of light. The different types of photopsin, which are also opsins combined with retinal, are the cone equivalent of rhodopsin in rods. The absorption maxima for photopsin I, photopsin II, and photopsin III are for yellowish-green, green, and bluish-violet light respectively. The increased visual acuity associated with cones is due to their individual connections to the optic nerve, which enables improved distinction between isolated signals. As compared to rods, each step in the generation of a response to light in cones is less effective, and the reactions responsible for termination of such a light response are faster. Melanopsin is located in some ganglion cells of the retina and is responsible for non-visual responses to light such as the regulation of circadian rhythms and the pupillary reflex. The function of melanopsin is similar to that of invertebrate opsins, it absorbs light and triggers a cascade that allows the brain to generate and modify the body's circadian rhythm. The absorption of blue light by melanopsin can disrupt the body's circadian rhythm and can lead to insomnia.

Signals from photoreceptor cells are transmitted through bipolar cells to the retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in the innermost layer of the retina, which carry the signals through the optic nerve (composed of bundled RGC axons) to the brain. Retinal horizontal cells are responsible for providing inhibitory feedback to photoreceptor cells. It is interesting to note that light exposure has an inhibitory effect on photoreceptor neurotransmitter release; glutamate is released in states of darkness, causing depolarization of the membrane at rest, and its release is inhibited by photon absorption.