In a pediatric patient fulfilling the above mentioned clinical triad of typical morphology, family history, and environmental factors, the next step is to confirm the type of intracranial anomaly by neuroimaging. Evaluation of holoprosencephaly can take place as early as the prenatal period. This is done by ultrasonography and MRI. In severe forms of holoprosencephaly, a USG can detect the anomaly as early as the first trimester. An MRI is used for diagnosis in the third trimester. Postnatal neuroimaging includes USG, which is the preferred imaging modality in infants with open anterior fontanelles. In older children, a CT or MRI may be considered. However, they come with their own risks. While the CT could cause excess radiation exposure, the risk of excess sedation exists with MRI. The pattern observed in imaging could include:

**Alobar holoprosencephaly:**This occurs due to diffuse cortical nonseparation, the corpus callosum and olfactory bulbs are absent entirely. The deep gray nuclei are fused, and a single midline ventricle is seen in these patients.

**Semilobar form:**There exists nonseparation of the frontal lobes, the anterior corpus callosum is absent, fused deep gray nuclei, and absent anterior horns of lateral ventricles.

**Lobar forms:**Nonseparation of basal frontal brains, absent corpus callosum adjacent to affected areas with hypoplastic olfactory bulbs, and the azygous anterior cerebral artery (anteriorly displaced) is associated with this defect.

**Middle intrahemispheric variant:**Nondisjunction between bilateral frontal and parietal lobes, an absent body of the corpus callosum, and azygous anterior cerebral artery are visible in these patients.

Once the diagnosis is confirmed, the patient is evaluated for a syndromic association. This changes the course of management in that it includes the evaluation of the coexisting features that may exist and might require further medical or surgical attention.

Following this, genetic testing is carried out to determine the existence of any chromosomal anomaly by conducting cytogenetic and molecular testing. If this reveals any kind of chromosomal or genetic anomaly that is associated with holoprosencephaly, it would further mandate genetic counseling for the parents, should they decide to conceive another child.