**Diffuse Esophageal Spasm**

Diffuse esophageal spasm is a condition that causes the esophagus to contract is an irregular, uncoordinated manner leading to dysphagia. An x-ray shows the characteristic "corkscrew" or rosary bead" esophagus. Manometry testing reveals episodes of dysfunctional peristalsis with irregular, repetitive, and ineffective contractions. Patients usually present with dysphagia and chest pain.

**Achalasia**

Achalasia is a condition characterized by failure of the lower esophageal sphincter to relax and the lower esophagus to contract in response to swallowing. Typically, a food bolus in the pharynx induces esophageal peristalsis and LES relaxation to allow food to pass to the stomach. In achalasia, smooth muscle cells in the LES fail to relax in response to a food bolus, owing to the loss of inhibitory nerve fiber signals. This, along with the failure of lower esophageal peristalsis, prevents the bolus from moving to the stomach. The patient perceives the condition as swallowing difficulty or dysphagia. Barium swallow reveals the classical "Bird's beak" deformity caused by barium hardly passing the contracted sphincter. It also shows a dilated distal esophagus due to the accumulation of barium proximal to the LES. Manometry confirms the diagnosis by showing the characteristic pressure changes in achalasia, i.e., very high pressure in the LES and absent peristalsis in the distal esophagus that fails to improve in response to swallowing.

**Scleroderma**

Scleroderma is an inflammatory autoimmune disease characterized by a widespread accumulation of collagen and fibrous tissue in various body organs. It typically affects the skin, but can also involve the gastrointestinal tract, especially the esophagus. When fibrosis affects smooth muscle cells in the lower esophagus, atrophy ensures, and the muscles no longer contract as they usually do. Fibrosis results in hypomotility of the esophagus and impaired function of the LES. As such, patients present heartburn and difficulty swallowing. Manometry confirms the diagnosis by showing the characteristic absence of effective peristalsis at the distal esophagus combined with low pressure in the lower esophageal sphincter.

**Esophageal carcinoma**

Esophageal carcinomas are usually either squamous cell carcinomas or adenocarcinomas. As esophageal cancer expands, the lumen of the esophagus narrows down, and dysphagia occurs due to mechanical obstruction. Upper endoscopy helps with, and biopsy confirms the diagnosis of esophageal cancer.

**Peptic Strictures**

Peptic strictures are a long-term consequence of chronic reflux esophagitis caused by repeated acid exposure from the stomach. As esophagitis progresses, inflammation and scarring from stomach acid and other irritants ensue, leading to esophageal narrowing and resultant dysphagia. Barium swallow studies and upper endoscopy with biopsy help confirm the diagnosis.

**Schatzki's Ring**

A Schatzki's ring is a band of excessive mucosa over the normal esophageal mucosa resulting in a decreased luminal diameter of the esophagus. It usually affects the lower esophagus and presents as dysphagia. Diagnosis is generally made based on EGD or barium swallow studies. The condition is often associated with hernias

**Zenker's Diverticulum**

Lack of UES relaxation can also trigger dysphagia. Any disease that increases the baseline tension of the UES muscles increases the risk of dysphagia. Zenker's diverticulum is an outpouching of mucosa and submucosa occurring just between the cricopharyngeus muscle and the inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscles. It occurs due to excessive pressure in the lower pharynx causing the weakest portion of the pharyngeal wall to balloon out. The inciting event is usually irregular contractions or reduced relaxation of the cricopharyngeus muscle. Besides the dysphagia that most patients with Zenker's diverticulum have, food regurgitation and halitosis (bad breath) also commonly occur.