As always, ABC is first. The patient's hemodynamic status must be assessed immediately, and intravenous access obtained. If the patient exhibits signs of volume depletion, the practitioner must start resuscitation with intravenous crystalloid fluids and assess the volume of blood loss. The potential for blood transfusion must be anticipated. The patient's vital signs, the rate of bleeding, and the overall condition must be monitored constantly for improvement or deterioration. Consider oxytocin administration in consultation with Ob/Gyn colleagues if uterine atony is highly suspected. If the bleeding persists, DIC should be considered, and the patient should be prepared for transfer to the operating room/intensive care unit.

In addition to volume resuscitation, patients with a triad of pain, bleeding, low-grade fever should be treated for pain with either non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or opioids, and broad-spectrum antibiotics must be started immediately, preferably intravenously. In most cases, the patient will require the evacuation of blood clots and/or retained products of conception. Thus an early Ob/Gyn consultation should be sought.

If uterine perforation, or bladder or bowel injury are suspected, patients need hemodynamic resuscitation and expedited transfer to the operating room.

If a septic abortion is suspected, sepsis treatment must be instituted according to institutional guidelines. Broad-spectrum antibiotics must be initiated as early as the diagnosis is considered, and arrangements need to be made to transfer the patient to the operating room.

In a hemodynamically stable patient, pelvic ultrasonography should be obtained to look for retained products of conception, failed abortion, continued pregnancy, or ectopic pregnancy.