First, as with any gynecologic procedure, the appropriate positioning of the patient must be ensured. The patient is positioned in the dorsal lithotomy position, taking care to avoid unnecessary pressure that may cause nerve injury. The table must be flat; Trendelenberg positioning should be avoided. The bimanual examination should always be performed before the start of any gynecologic procedure. An indwelling Foley catheter is not necessary; however, a straight catheter may be used to drain the bladder before starting the procedure. Next, the hysteroscope is set up, the camera is white-balanced and focused, and the inflow tract is primed. With the vaginoscopic entry technique, the need for the traditional instruments used for entry is avoided. The provider begins vaginoscopy by introducing the hysteroscope into the vagina. The vagina is then distended, and the cervix and external os may be located by gently advancing the scope. The posterior fornix is usually easily identified. Once the external os is located, the hysteroscope is carefully inserted and passed through the internal os into the uterine cavity. With the traditional techniques, a speculum is first inserted. The cervix is visualized and grasped anteriorly with a single-tooth tenaculum. The cervix is then dilated to the diameter of the hysteroscope being used, after which the hysteroscope is inserted. At the same time, counter traction is applied with the tenaculum to straighten the uterus.

Once inside the uterus, the entire uterine cavity may be inspected. Any pathology can be quickly identified, and a plan made for the operation. The bilateral tubal ostia should be identified at the beginning of the case.

Further technique varies depending on the type of intrauterine pathology. We will focus on the operative technique as it applies to fibroids, polyps, adhesions, and retained intrauterine devices. AUB is the most common indication for hysteroscopy with structural abnormalities such as polyps and/or fibroids, usually as root causes.

Hysteroscopic myomectomy can be performed in numerous ways. Submucosa myomas are accessible by operative hysteroscopy and are divided into types 0, I, and II based on their distribution within the myometrium. Type 0 is fully intracavitary, type I is mostly intracavitary, and type II is mostly myometrial. Since type 0 fibroids are usually pedunculated, they may be resected easily depending on their size, using sharp dissection, electrocautery, or a loop dissection device.

Pretreatment with GnRH agonists to shrink fibroids and correct anemia is not universally performed. Small studies have shown the benefits of GnRH agonist use for submucosal fibroids greater than 3 cm for a period ranging from 6 weeks to 4 months. However, this drug class causes unpleasant side effects, including hot flashes, decreased libido, and insomnia. One recent retrospective study found treatment before surgery was associated with longer surgical times and increased cervical resistance. Consider shared decision-making and patient individualization before prescribing medical pretreatment.

With hysteroscopy, it has become possible to remove a uterine septum or, in other words, perform a uterine septoplasty. Likewise, the resection of intrauterine adhesions spurred by a history of endometrial trauma is termed hysteroscopic adhesiolysis. These two abnormalities are associated with infertility and can be remedied with resection as long as they do not re-form. A Cochrane review published in 2017 suggests limited evidence for medical or IUD treatment in operative hysteroscopy to prevent intrauterine adhesion formation.

Hysteroscopy is a safe and effective method for retrieval of retained and/or embedded devices, the most common of which are intrauterine devices (IUDs). It may even be used in the first trimester of pregnancy to retrieve IUDs when strings cannot be seen on the pelvic exam. Pregnancies with retained IUD are associated with increased rates of miscarriage, preterm delivery, and chorioamnionitis. Hysteroscopic removal for retained IUD is an emerging option for treatment, especially when ultrasound-guided removal is not feasible.

Most patients tolerate diagnostic and operative hysteroscopy well and can be discharged from the postoperative recovery unit or office setting soon after the completion of the procedure. Vaginal spotting and discomfort are common. Recommendations for the timing of pelvic rest vary by provider, with some saying that normal activities may resume in 24 hours, especially when the vaginoscopy “no-touch” entry technique is used. A follow-up appointment should be arranged before discharge for an anticipatory review of pathology results.