The nasal tip is a pyramidal structure emanating perpendicularly from the plane of the face. The key anatomic structure is the unit formed by the paired lower lateral or alar cartilages. Their lateral crurae sit above the alar creases on either side of the nose, with the medial crurae resting adjacent to each other and forming the structure of the columella; between the medial and lateral crura are the domes, or intermediate crura, which underlie the tip-defining point of the nose. The paired alar cartilages together are frequently thought of as a tripod structure, or alternatively, as an "M-arch," with the domes at the peak of the structure and the bilateral lateral and paired medial crura forming the arms of the tripod or arches.

The arch of the alar cartilages is supported in space through its attachments to different structures, which contribute to the support in the nasal tip.

- The shape, size, and strength of the alar cartilages themselves

- The attachment of the medial crura to the caudal septum

- The attachment of the cephalic margins of the lower lateral cartilages to the caudal borders of the upper lateral cartilages, also known as the scroll region

So-called "minor" tip support mechanisms include the anterior nasal spine, the lateral sesamoid cartilages, the interdomal ligaments, the caudal membranous septum, the dorsal septum, and the skin and soft tissue envelope overlying the nasal tip. It is essential to realize that different support mechanisms may take on relatively more or less importance in a given patient.

Disruption of the structures mentioned above will have predictable effects on nasal tip support, and therefore projection. In general, adequate tip support must be reconstituted at the end of a rhinoplasty operation. A slew of secondary problems, both aesthetic and functional, can be traced back to overaggressive manipulation that disrupts tip support. Preoperative support assessment can be performed by evaluating tip recoil on physical examination, carefully studying the preoperative photographs, and thoroughly understanding the numerous patient factors that affect tip support, such as ethnicity, skin thickness, individual anatomy, and prior surgical procedures or trauma.

One critical anatomical concept to understand is that the alar rims are only comprised of soft tissue and lack any cartilaginous structure because the lower lateral cartilages curve cephalically. Therefore, the surgeon needs to consider the effect of changes made to the alar cartilages on the caudal alar margins, realizing that they lack strong support. Failure to recognize this has both aesthetic and functional implications. Upward migration of the alar margins, or alar retraction, is aesthetically displeasing. From a functional standpoint, the external nasal valve is particularly susceptible to damage, resulting in unacceptable postoperative problems with nasal breathing.