**Catabolism of Blood in General**

The extravasated blood in any tissue induces an inflammatory reaction, the extent of which in turn depends upon the amount of blood. Initially, polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) come into the picture, which dissolute fibrin.

The hemoglobin released from RBCs is first converted to methemoglobin (Fe3+) within mononuclear phagocytic cells, which is later cleaved into iron and biliverdin. The iron is either released into plasma or stored as ferritin or hemosiderin (more iron content than ferritin). Histologically, the hemosiderin can be stained blue with a Prussian blue reaction (Perl's reaction). The biliverdin (green), on the other hand, is converted into bilirubin (yellow) and released into the plasma. Hence over a period of time, the color of hemorrhage may vary from red-green to yellow.

**The Course of VH and Pathophysiology of Blood Catabolism**

Blood in the vitreous cavity behaves differently than when in other tissues

- Clot formation is rapid with sharp borders, as collagen in vitreous promotes platelet aggregation.

- Fibrin lysis is slower, due to a lack of early polymorphonuclear leukocyte response.

- RBCs are lysed extra-cellularly, unlike elsewhere, where lysis occurs after ingestion by macrophages.

- RBCs remain intact for months in the vitreous gel.

Iron in the blood promotes vitreous liquefaction.

Hemorrhage into spaces outside formed vitreous or hemorrhage in vitrectomised eye clears faster than in the formed vitreous.