Except for specific syndromes that include developmental delay, the vast majority of developmental delay is idiopathic.  Although the exact underlying pathophysiology is unknown, several mechanisms have been proposed by epidemiologic studies that lead to some sort of developmental delay and/or disabilities. Since some forms of developmental delay may run in families, genes have been assumed to play a significant role in developmental delay.

A multitude of genes and mechanisms for genetic transmission have been proposed.  While some causes of developmental delay such as Fragile X or Down syndrome have known genetic etiologies, for most others, it is unclear. Even for well-characterized disorders like autism spectrum disorder, there are over 100 risk alleles. Perinatal complications, profound deprivation, and poverty, among other environmental stressors, can play a role in causing developmental delays, but special causal links remain elusive.

The hypothalamic-pituitary axis (HPA) is responsible for the normal regulation of stress response in progenies. Psychosocial stressors during pregnancy, maternal immune activation (MIA), and modification of HPA may significantly affect fetal brain development, but there are no specific cause and effect relationships for most disorders. Boyce and his colleagues offered the concept of differential susceptibility. This suggests that the risk for developmental anomalies is increased by a variety of factors that create a biological vulnerability to environmental stressors but are only expressed when the environmental stresses occur. Furthermore, even vulnerable children can do well if environmental circumstances are highly favorable and foster resilience.