Lumbar puncture (LP), also known as a spinal tap, is a commonly performed invasive procedure in which CSF is removed from the subarachnoid space. LP is used in the measurement of intracranial pressure and the sampling of CSF. It is commonly indicated in the evaluation of acute headaches and infections of the central nervous system. During an LP, the patient is placed in the lateral recumbent position. A sterile spinal needle is then slowly inserted between vertebrae, usually at the level of L3/4 or L4/5, into the subarachnoid space. Needle insertion may be guided by fluoroscopy or ultrasound to improve success rates and reduce the incidence of trauma.

Once CSF begins to flow through the needle, it is collected serially into four sterile tubes. Once collected, CSF can be analyzed for abnormally present or elevated CSF components, aiding in diagnosis. For example, the presence of xanthochromia, a yellow-orange discoloration of CSF caused by red blood cell degeneration, indicates the possibility of a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Elevation in concentrations of immunoglobulins, termed oligoclonal bands, may indicate the presence of a systemic infection or an autoimmune disease.

Contraindications of LP include raised intracranial pressure, bleeding disorders, and local skin infection. The procedure is relatively safe with seldom serious complications. Complications of LP include infection, bleeding, radicular pain, or cerebral herniation. The most common complication is a post-LP headache with symptoms beginning within 24 hours of the procedure and often resolving by day 10.