CAWs are a diverse group of individuals working in both commercial diving and tunnel construction industries. There is a significant difference between the two groups of workers regarding training, education, and the medical fitness requirements necessary to work in a compressed air environment. Commercial divers are specially trained to work in extreme atmospheric pressure environments while enrolled in a recognized commercial diving school hosting a formal diving education program.  Commercial divers are trained to recognize the potential ill effects of compressed air work, know their limitations, and when to ask for help. They require a stringent medical health evaluation yearly while they work in the commercial diving industry; this is to assure they are fit to work in a compressed air environment and are also physically capable of performing the required duties.

CAWs employed by construction companies are hired to perform many duties, including those not necessarily limited to the compressed air environment. They work in the compressed air environment on an "as needed basis" when there is compressed air work to be performed.  They have no training in a formal educational program for compressed air work like commercial divers. They are also not explicitly trained regarding all the potential complications of CAW. Although they are required to submit to a periodic health evaluation, it is not necessarily specific to CAWs as are the health evaluations commercial divers are required to complete. This situation is an important consideration when the on-site dive medical team has the responsibility to clear CAWs for duty.

Commercial dive companies provide hyperbaric chamber operators and the support equipment necessary to carry out specific hyperbaric interventions. The hyperbaric commercial dive team works closely with the onsite hyperbaric tunnel medicine team to provide pre-hyperbaric intervention education, fitness to dive assessments, verify compression and decompression schedules, complete post-dive intervention examinations, provide first aid and emergency critical medical care when necessary.  Emergency critical care often initiates with the physician and members of the on-site medical team.  They must be able and willing to lock into the hyperbaric chamber to provide emergency care for CAWs who suffer traumatic injuries; especially when the injuries occur prior to meeting the necessary decompression obligation.  Having an on-site hyperbaric physician and medical team with appropriate emergency and hyperbaric expertise is critical and should be considered a priority by all companies partnered with the compressed air project. All companies involved are responsible for the health, safety, and well-being of their employees and must minimally abide by the rules and regulations of both NIOSH and OSHA.  Even when these federal regulations are followed and put in place, they have not been updated for many years, requiring applications for state dependant for every project.