Hypoglossal nerve stimulation is an alternative treatment for obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA). OSA often occurs due to a lack of tone of the tongue and pharynx within the airway and is frequently exacerbated by large tonsils, nasal obstruction, retrognathia, and adipose deposits in the neck.

It has been postulated that the muscle fibers in the posterior part of the tongue have a higher fatigue tolerance compared to anterior fibers. This explains the ability of the posterior tongue to contract for long periods of time during sleep to prevent upper airway collapse.

Surgical resection of malignant lesions of the tongue is another major source of tongue muscular dysfunction. The majority of tongue cancers are located on the lateral aspects and the base, the resection of which can alter tongue structure and function. Moreover, the hypoglossal nerve can be damaged in such surgeries, resulting in a malfunction of the extrinsic muscles of the tongue, except for the palatoglossus muscle, which is innervated by the vagus (X) nerve.

In some cases, a small partial glossectomy may cause only limited, temporary tongue weakness, but hemiglossectomies or more extensive resections have a hugely significant impact on patients' quality of life due to reduced ability to speak and swallow. Reconstruction with free soft tissue transfer is often necessary, but while these techniques may provide bulk that improves swallowing and potentially articulation, preoperative function does not generally return after major surgery.

Intraoperatively and preoperatively, the styloglossus muscle can play an important role in characterizing the location of tumors, particularly squamous cell carcinomas, and therefore facilitate staging and accurate prognosis.

Resection of the styloglossus muscle during a transoral approach for squamous cell carcinoma of the lateral oropharynx exposes many vascular structures, and thus a transcervical approach may be preferable. The potential use of the styloglossus muscle in staging for squamous cell cancers of the lateral oropharynx has significant implications for surgical oncology of the head and neck, particularly with respect to conservation of speech and swallowing function.