Dronabinol is an orally active cannabinoid (a synthetic form of the active Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol) that is available in round, soft gelatin 2.5 mg (white), 5 mg (dark brown), and 10mg (orange) capsules. Dronabinol is insoluble in water. As such, it is formulated in sesame oil (providers must inquire about patient allergies). Dosing for specific therapy is outlined below:

**HIV/AIDs-induced Anorexia**

The recommended starting adult dosage is 2.5 mg orally twice a day, one hour before lunch and dinner.

Dosing Considerations: Elderly patients may not be able to tolerate 2.5 mg twice daily. One may consider 2.5 mg once a day (later in the day may reduce unwanted CNS symptoms)) and titrate up to reduce unwanted CNS symptoms. The unwanted effects of feeling high, dizziness, confusion, and somnolence usually resolve in 1 to 3 days.

Titration and Maximum Dosage: Increase gradually to 2.5 mg 1 hour before lunch and 5 mg 1 hour before dinner. Most patients will receive the desired therapeutic effect with this dosage, but dosing can be increased slowly to a maximum of 10 mg twice daily.

**Chemotherapy-induced Nausea and Vomiting ('CINV') in Patients Who Have Failed to Respond to Conventional Antiemetics**

The recommended starting adult dosage is 5 mg orally, which should be taken 1 hour or up to 3 hours before chemotherapy, followed by 5 mg every 2 to 4 hours (4 to 6 total doses in a day). The initial dose should be on an empty stomach and generally is taken more than 30 minutes before a meal. The patient does not need to consider the timing of meals or food intake regarding subsequent doses after the first dose.

Dosing Considerations: Similar to dosing for anorexia, elderly patients may be started on a lower dose of 2.5 mg once daily before chemotherapy to reduce CNS symptoms.

Titration and Maximum Dosage: The drug can be titrated up in amounts of 2.5 mg. The maximum dose is 15 mg for each dose (4 to 6 total doses in a day).

Careful attention is necessary regarding the potential adverse effects of dronabinol during upward titration. See the 'Adverse Effects' and 'Monitoring' sections for further details.