The oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood and flow through the coronary arteries regulate myocardial oxygen supply. Oxygen-carrying capacity can be decreased in several conditions that include either decreased red blood cell concentration or decreased oxygen saturation of hemoglobin. For example, anemia is a lower than average number of healthy red blood cells. Even though the red blood cells may be fully saturated with oxygen, there are not enough of them to supply an adequate amount of oxygen to the muscle. Usually, it is caused by a nutritional deficiency in iron, vitamin B12, or folate which is easily correctable. However, there can be more devastating causes such as thalassemia, sickle cell anemia, and various inherent enzyme deficiencies that are more difficult to treat

Hemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying portion of a red blood cell, and it is fully saturated when it binds four molecules of oxygen. With every molecule of oxygen that hemoglobin releases to the tissues, it binds the remaining oxygen molecules with more affinity. Usually, hemoglobin only disperses one molecule of oxygen before it returns to the lungs to become fully saturated once again. Carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin with a much higher affinity than oxygen. When hemoglobin returns to the lungs to be re-oxygenated, it usually has usually one or two out of the total four binding spaces available

Since carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin with a higher affinity than oxygen, it secures the empty binding spots of hemoglobin more quickly than incoming oxygen. At this point, hemoglobin is fifty to seventy-five percent saturated with oxygen and twenty-five to fifty percent saturated with carbon monoxide. Even though hemoglobin has oxygen molecules attached, it will not release them into the tissues. This occurs because hemoglobin’s affinity for oxygen is inversely proportional to its oxygen saturation. Therefore, the resulting hypoxia is not due to a lack of oxygen, but rather hemoglobin’s higher affinity for oxygen when only partially saturated with it

Even though oxygen-carrying capacity can impact myocardial oxygen supply, coronary blood flow is the major determinant of supply. Coronary artery blood flow is a function of pressure divided by resistance. Myocardial oxygen consumption is equal to coronary blood flow multiplied by the arterial-venous oxygen difference. During diastole, the ventricles are receiving blood before systolic contraction. This filling phase of the cardiac cycle allows the coronary arteries to provide maximum blood flow to the heart. Additionally, this is the only phase of the cardiac cycle that allows blood to arrive at the subendocardium which is the most distal portion