The most classic presentation is with reported angina pectoris (commonly referred to as angina) where patients endorse chest discomfort, often left-sided and substernal, that occurs with exertion or emotion and is relieved with rest or nitroglycerin. The description of the chest discomfort itself can vary from heaviness to pressure, squeezing or tightness. Radiation to the left arm, neck, or jaw is also fairly common. The presence of chest “pain” per se, reproducibility with palpation, variation with respiration, or pinpoint localization by the patient makes ischemia less likely.

Patients also may present with “angina-equivalent” symptoms where chest discomfort is never quite present, but instead, exertional dyspnea or more atypical symptoms occur during exercise and limit their functionality. Older age, female gender, and diabetes are typical risk factors. In fact, silent ischemia (or silent myocardial infarction) is not a rare occurrence in the latter population.

Temporally, stable angina is differentiated from unstable angina by its chronicity and reproducibility with exertion. Symptoms will typically last for minutes (not seconds or hours) and after a predictable amount of exertion before being relieved with rest. If the stable, chronic nature of angina changes, where it occurs with less exertion, last for a longer duration of time, or becomes more severe, then urgent evaluation for unstable angina needs to be performed.

Clinically, if all three criteria are met (substernal chest pain, occurring with exertion and emotion, relieved by rest or nitroglycerin), then it is considered typical angina. This definition is meant to imply a high likelihood of ischemic heart disease as the cause of chest discomfort in the right clinical context. Frequently, patients will not fulfill all three criteria and will be further stratified into atypical angina or non-cardiac chest pain, depending on how many criteria they meet and the overall description of their symptoms.

Stable ischemic heart disease also may be completely asymptomatic, and in fact, studies have proven that atherosclerotic disease, the most common precursor to IHD, starts in childhood and develops over decades, during which patients are completely asymptomatic. It is only after the disease reaches a critical proportion, with coronary artery obstruction amounting to at least 50% of the vessel lumen, that symptoms, if any, may develop. During that period, clinicians will need to be proactive in screening patients at intermediate or higher risk in order to start therapy early.