RA, in some patients, is triggered by some sort of environmental factor in a genetically predisposed host. The best example is tobacco use in a patient with the HLA-DRB1 "shared epitope" gene and the development of ACPA-positive RA.

RA patients often have antibodies to citrullinated proteins. These antibodies have been identified in patients with RA since 1964 (antiperinuclear factor)

Anti-carbamylated protein antibodies(anti-CarP antibodies) are also found in patients with RA. Carbamlyation is the conversion of lysine to homocitrulline in the presence of urea and cyanate. Myeloperoxidase converts thiocyanate to cyanate. The molecular structure of homocitrulline is similar to citrulline; however, anti-CarP antibodies are distinct antibodies that have been associated with RA in both ACPA-positive and ACPA-negative patients.

The immune response in RA starts at sites distant from the synovial joints, such as the lung, gums, and GI tract.

Patients are genetically predisposed to develop an immune response to the modified proteins, anti-modified protein antibodies (AMPA). Citrullination is produced by the action of PAD on arginine. Isoforms PAD2 and PAD4 are most strongly implicated in RA. Anti-PAD4 antibodies are found in patients with RA, are highly specific for RA, and are associated with ACPA positivity.Porphyromonas gingivalis, which causes an inflammatory reaction. There is an influx of leukocytes that produce PAD4. P gingivalis also produces a PAD-like enzyme. These enzymes can citrullinate resident proteins, which then can act as autoantigens.

Autoantibodies appear before the onset of clinical arthritis.

Cytokines and chemokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) activate endothelial cells and attract immune cells within the synovial compartment.

All elements of the immune system are involved, including innate immunity and adaptive immunity, which includes the cellular (T cell) immune response and the humeral (B cell) immune response.

Resident fibroblasts-like synoviocytes (FLS) are activated by proinflammatory cytokines, PGDF, and chemokines to proliferate with invasive characteristics and produce matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and ADAMTS. Chondrocytes are activated by TNF, IL-1, and IL-17, producing matric enzymes resulting in cartilage damage. Resident mast cells produce vasoactive amines, leukotrienes, proteases, and TNF. Osteoclasts are activated by RANKL, which plays a vital role in producing bone erosions.

Adaptive immunity includes T cells and B cells which respond to antigenic stimuli. In RA, one of the main antigens triggering autoimmunity is modified proteins such as citrullinated proteins.

T cells interact with B cells, activating antigen-specific B cells to differentiate into plasma cells that produce RF and ACPA. These autoantibodies bind to their antigens forming immune complexes that can further the inflammatory response by activating the complement system.

Cytokines are produced in large amounts in the synovium and play an important role in propagating an intense inflammatory response resulting in bone erosions and cartilage loss.

**Cytokines and Chemokines (CXC) Involved in the Pathogenesis of RA**

FLS = fibroblast-like synoviocytes; MCP-1 = macrophage chemoattractant protein-1; ILC3 = innate lymphoid cell group 3; MMP = matric metalloproteinase; NO = nitric oxide; PG = prostaglandins

FLS activation and proliferation, resulting in pannus, activation of chondrocytes, osteoclasts, and endothelial cells.