**Endocrine Disorders**

a. Primary Hyperparathyroidism: PTH (parathyroid hormone) is the main regulator of calcium by its effects on the kidney and bone. In primary hyperparathyroidism, there is excessive bone turnover where the bone resorption exceeds the bone formation. The elevated PTH levels can increase the release of RANKL, which stimulates the receptors on osteoclastic precursor cells. The increased resorption is seen in both trabecular and cortical bone.

b. Cushing's Syndrome: Glucocorticoids exert their effects on bones through glucocorticoid receptors. The activity of the 11 B-HSD1 enzyme in osteoblasts determines the degree of reduced bone formation and glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (GIO). There is also disruption of the Wnt signaling pathway. Glucocorticoid administration results in a decrease in osteoprotegerin (OPG) and osteocalcin levels with an unopposed RANKL activity. There is also increased osteoblastic apoptosis.

c. Hyperthyroidism: The net effects of thyroid hormone are brought about by the changes it causes in the expression of T3-responsive genes in the target tissues. The normal bone remodeling cycle lasts for approximately less than seven months, but in the hyperthyroid state, its duration is half which is almost 2-3 months.  Since bone resorption requires much less time than bone formation, this rapid bone turnover results in net bone loss.

d. Hypogonadism:

Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI): Mechanisms for low BMD in patients with POI include insufficient attainment of peak bone mass, excessive bone resorption with estrogen deficiency, and the presence of other comorbidities.

Male Hypogonadism: High risk for osteoporosis results from a deficiency of both estrogen and testosterone since there is also decreased aromatization of testosterone to estrogen, and both hormones play an important role in bone health.

e. Diabetes Mellitus: Excessive bone fragility in T1DM results from various factors, including defective attainment of peak bone mass, as a result of insulin deficiency or decreased IGF-I. Hypercalciuria occurring as a result of hyperglycemia can cause impaired bone mineralization. Hyperglycemia also leads to excessive accumulation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs), which can accumulate in osteoblasts and impair their function. Growth factors and cytokines released from adipocytes can adversely affect bone remodeling commonly seen in obesity and insulin resistance.

**Chronic Inflammatory Conditions**

a. Rheumatoid arthritis: Rheumatoid arthritis affects bone health through a multitude of factors involving excess inflammatory mediators. Autoantibodies can stimulate inflammatory cytokines by upregulating RANKL/OPG pathway.  There is also a down-regulation of the Wnt signaling pathway. The use of glucocorticoids in the treatment of the disease can affect bone health as well.  Various studies have shown that patients who are on glucocorticoids for the management of rheumatoid arthritis have higher bone loss as compared to patients with RA without glucocorticoids.

b. Cystic fibrosis: Patients with cystic fibrosis have compromised trabecular and cortical microarchitecture from the poor attainment of peak bone mass.  This decreased peak bone mass is multifactorial, resulting from malabsorption due to pancreatic insufficiency, pubertal delay, and hypogonadism. Direct effects of CFTR dysfunction on bone have also been described. Guidelines suggest screening for low BMD with DXA from age 18 years old and above in all patients with cystic fibrosis or earlier if the patients have increased risk factors for further bone loss.

c. Chronic Obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): Inflammatory state and COPD drive excessive RANKL activity with decreasing OPG activity, ultimately resulting in low BMD.

**Chronic Kidney Disease–Mineral Bone Disorders (CKD-MBD)**

a. Osteomalacia: Inadequate bone mineralization is seen in early CKD. As early as stage 2 CKD, there is increased FGF23 and a decline in its co-receptor alpha Klotho. FGF23 has a phosphaturic effect and also inhibits the 1 alpha-hydroxylase action resulting in decreased calcitriol levels.

**Idiopathic Hypercalciuria**

Idiopathic hypercalciuria has increased calcium reabsorption from the gut, but at the same time, there is decreased calcium reabsorption from the kidneys resulting in increased calcium loss from the urine. The calciuria exceeds GI calcium absorption, resulting in a net negative calcium balance. Patients are at increased risk for osteoporosis and fractures.These patients should have an adequate calcium intake of at least 1200 mg/day and a high fluid intake. They should avoid dehydration and excessive sodium intake.

**Neuromuscular Disease**

Neuromuscular disorders have an excessive risk for osteoporosis due to several factors, with the most common being immobility, malnutrition, vitamin D deficiency, and the use of medications like steroids and anticonvulsants.  In patients with Parkinson disease, levodopa dosage is inversely associated with BMD.

**Gastrointestinal Diseases**

a. Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD): Bone health is affected in patients with IBD due to an inflammatory state with osteoclastogenic cytokines, including TNF alpha, interleukin-1, and interleukin-6. Malabsorption and a nutrient-deficient state resulting from reduced nutrient intake and decreased nutrient absorption may also affect bone health. IBD treatment using glucocorticoids combined with bowel resection contributes to poor bone health.

b. Celiac disease: Calcium and vitamin D malabsorption have been implicated to play a significant role in bone loss in patients with celiac disease.c. Cholestatic liver disease: Primary biliary cirrhosis has been associated with decreased osteoblastic activity due to decreased osteoblastic factors, including vitamin K and IGF-I.d. Noncholestatic liver disease: Inflammatory cytokines, including TNF alpha and interleukins- 1, 6, 13, 17, upregulation of RANKL, and decreased OPG activity stimulate osteoclastogenesis resulting in bone loss. Fracture risk is also increased in patients treated with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF), which can induce renal tubulopathy (Fanconi syndrome), resulting in hypophosphatemia, hyperphosphaturIa, and osteomalacia. Bone loss from TDF involves the hip and spine and occurs mostly in the first year after the initiation of therapy.Patients with NASH and NAFLD also have lower BMD as a result of increased inflammation compared to healthy subjects.

**Nutritional Conditions**

a. Anorexia nervosa: Fracture risk in anorexia nervosa is multifactorial, resulting from hypogonadism with an estrogen-deficient state, energy deficiency, altered gut microbiota, and vitamin D deficiency.  Other potential factors involved also include low levels of IGF-I and elevated cortisol levels.

d. Smoking and alcohol consumption: Tobacco smoking affects bone through both direct and indirect effects. The direct effect is through decreased osteogenesis and angiogenesis, and the indirect effect is through increased oxidative stress and decreased calcium absorption from decreased vitamin D activation to 1,25 form. There is also an increase in RANKL/OPG. Heavy alcohol consumption in the early years of life has been shown to affect osteogenesis and the attainment of peak bone mass while the effects are not reversed by stopping alcohol consumption.

**Glucocorticoid Induced Osteoporosis**

The mechanism of bone loss is described above.

Bone loss from glucocorticoids is maximum in the first three months of therapy.

**Post-transplant Osteoporosis**

Post-transplant osteoporosis results from using immune modulators and immunosuppressive drugs like cyclosporin, mycophenolate, tacrolimus, and glucocorticoids. As in glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, the bone loss in posttransplant osteoporosis is maximum in the first couple of months to a year after transplant. Preventive therapy in these patients should be administered to avoid this rapid bone loss.

**HIV/Infections**

Patients living with HIV infection are at high risk for bone loss from antiretroviral therapy and other coexisting conditions, including high-risk behavior like drug and alcohol use.  Also, low BMI, frailty, hypogonadism, and DM type 2 are more common in patients with HIV. Antiretroviral therapy, especially with protease inhibitors and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF), increases bone loss. The newer agent tenofovir alafenamide (TAF) results in less bone loss than TDF. Newer integrase inhibitors have the least osteoporotic effect.

**Cancer and Bone**

Osteolytic lesions in multiple myeloma result from bone marrow infiltration with the plasma cells and excessive RANKL activity and inhibition of the Wnt signaling pathway. Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance (MGUS) is associated with increased fracture risk and osteoporosis, even in the absence of lytic lesions.

**Genetic Diseases**

Thalassemia: Mechanisms for bone loss include hypogonadism, iron overload, renal dysfunction from a transfusion-dependent state, and renal calculi formation. Deferasirox, the major iron-chelating agent, has also been associated with calciuria.

Other genetic diseases causing bone loss include Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and osteogenesis imperfecta.