In cases of traumatic injury, systemic condition, and cardiorespiratory status should be stabilized first. Once the systemic stability is ensured, then a proper ocular examination should be carried out.

Patients of hyphema and vitreous hemorrhage are advised sitting or semireclined position.

Patients are advised to elevate the head end of the bed to a minimum of 30 degrees while sleeping so that blood settles inferiorly, allowing clearing of the visual axis.

Avoid coughing, sneezing, vomiting, and heavy weight lifting.

The patient should be advised to rest the eye, avoid excessive activities like reading, playing, watching TV, and computer works. Preferably eye patch should be applied to rest the eye.

The strict control of systemic predisposing factors like diabetes mellitus, hypertension, cardiovascular instability should be done.

Topical anesthetic agents like proparacaine can be instilled if the patient is not allowing proper eye examination.

Intraocular pressure should be regularly monitored, and if required, topical agents like beta-blockers (timolol maleate), alpha agonist (brimonidine tartrate), carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (dorzolamide, brinzolamide), prostaglandin analogs (latanoprost, travoprost, bimatoprost). Systemic agents like intravenous mannitol or oral glycerol or acetazolamide could be used in conditions of acute uncontrolled glaucoma.

Once the glaucoma is ruled out, cycloplegic agents like cyclopentolate or homatropine eye drops could be added for pain control, to allow reabsorption of blood, and to avoid pupillary play, which could stretch the injured blood vessels, thereby increasing the probability of rebleeding.

Topical steroid therapy with prednisolone acetate 1%or dexamethasone sodium phosphate 0.1% helps to reduce the inflammation and allows faster clearing of the blood and stabilizing the inflamed vessels to avoid the risk of rebleeding.

If the hyphema is responding to the medical line of management, surgical intervention could be avoided, and the hyphema could resolve completely with the medical line of management in most of the cases.

In conditions like corneal staining, penetrating corneal injury, and in cases of raised intraocular pressure not responding to medical line of management, surgical intervention with anterior chamber lavage and management of other associated complications should be carried out.

In patients with vitreous hemorrhage where the fundus is not visible, B- scan ultrasonography should be carried out to look for associated findings of retinal detachment. If the retina is attached, vitreous hemorrhage could be treated with the medical line of management and reviewed every 1 to 2 weeks.

If the patient shows signs of improving vitreous hemorrhage, the patient could be managed conservatively with the medical line of management. In patients of proliferative retinopathies with ischemic retina, if the retina is even sparsely visible, laser photocoagulation should be initiated to limit the ischemic stimulus. Laser photocoagulation converts the ischemic retina to an anoxic retina, reducing the anti-VEGF load, reducing the chances of rebleeding.  If the patient does not show signs of improvement, the patient should be considered for intravitreal Anti-VEGF medication.

Doses of commonly used intravitreal injections:

- Bevacizumab- 1.2 5mg/0.05 ml

- Ranibizumab - 0.5 mg or 0.3 mg /0.05 ml

- Aflibercept -2 mg/0.05 ml

- Pegaptanib- 0.3 mg/0.9 ml [only FDA approved for neovascular age related macular degeneration]

If the hemorrhage does not resolve with the above management, pars plana vitrectomy should be considered. Indication of Vitrectomy in diabetic patients include:

- Non-clearing vitreous hemorrhage (vitreous/subhyaloid/pre-macular)

- Tractional retinal detachment with macula off

- Combined tractional with rhegmatogenous retinal detachment

- Anterior segment neovascularization with the invisibility of the posterior segment

- Ghost cell glaucoma

- Thick epiretinal membrane

- Vitreomacular traction

Many surgeons nowadays inject intravitreal anti-VEGF medication in non-resolving vitreous hemorrhage 7 days prior for pars plana vitrectomy surgery.

In vitrectomy surgery, three pars plana ports are made, one for the infusion line, one for the light pipe, and the third for the microinstruments. A fourth port can be made if a chandelier light source is used in cases of bimanual vitrectomy.

Cryotherapy can be done to ablate the peripheral ischemic retina. Cryotherapy is thought to disrupt the blood-retinal barrier, induce inflammation, and thereby help remove RBCs.Because of the intense inflammation generation because of cryotherapy, it is not considered the first-line treatment for ablation of ischemic areas. It is indicated only in conditions of nonvisibility of fundus and to prevent port site neovascularisation.

Diathermy procedure is obsolete nowadays because of its side effects and difficult maneuvering.

In cases of rubeosis iridis, pan-retinal photocoagulation with or without anti-VEGF medication might be helpful in the early phases. In the advanced stages, the new vessels lead to fibrosis and contracture, leading to permanent distortion of the angles leading to refractory glaucoma, which might eventually require a glaucoma drainage implant). The prognosis is, however, poor in such cases. Painful blind eyes may need diode laser cyclophotocoagulation or cyclocryotherapy.

Isolated retinal hemorrhage not involving the macula can be observed, and systemic predisposing factors must be stabilized. Disc hemorrhages per se don't cause vision loss. Glaucoma should be ruled out, and if present appropriate antiglaucoma treatment should be started. Systemic metabolic dysfunction should also be corrected if disc hemorrhages are due to nonglaucomatous causes.

Roth spots are usually asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously with the management of the underlying condition.

Subhyaloid hemorrhage could be observed if not involving the macular area. Subhyaloid hemorrhage involving the macular area may lead to a drastic loss of vision. It could be treated with Q switched 1064 nm Nd: YAG laser (energy 2.1 to 11.5 mJ) focused at the anterior border of subhyaloid hemorrhage at the lower margin inferior and away from the fovea.

Suprachoroidal hemorrhage is an ophthalmic emergency, and prompt diagnosis and urgent management on the operating table are key to saving acute expulsion of the ocular contents. If SCH is detected on the table(intraoperative SCH), immediate closure of all the wound sites should be done, and tight sutures should be taken at all entry wounds. If the expulsion continues despite the attempt to close the wound site, posterior sclerotomies or 25 gauge trocar assisted transconjunctival suprachoroidal hemorrhage drainage should be attempted to soften the eye.

The Conservative line of management of postoperative SCH is the same as described above. If the IOP is continuously higher, causing severe ocular pain, surgical intervention might be required. Point of highest SCH is assessed, conjunctival peritomy is done at that quadrant, and scleral cut of around 3 to 4 mm is done radially until efflux of SCh occurs. If needed, slight pressure could be applied at the edge of the cut to expel out the blood from the suprachoroidal space.

Macular hemorrhage is a sight-threatening situation requiring timely intervention as long-standing heme accumulation at the macula could lead to photoreceptor degeneration leading to permanent visual loss.