**History**

Patients tend to present with a history of an acute event consistent with a medial blow to the knee while fully extended, or extreme noncontact varus bending. They will complain of sudden onset lateral knee pain, swelling, and ecchymosis after the injury. the patient may also report thrust gait, where they will complain of the foot kicking in mid-stance.

It is imperative to gain a complete history with regards to these patients, including but not limited to, bleeding/clot disorders, previous surgeries, occupation, gait, ambulation-assisted devices, living situation (stairs at home).

**Physical Exam**

A comprehensive full range of motion knee exam is imperative for all patients. Attention should focus on tenderness to palpation of the lateral knee, the most common exam finding; this may also be evident along the infrapatellar bursa, Gerdy's tubercle, and the patellar tendon attachment. Ecchymosis, swelling, and warmth may be present. Gait, when possible, should be examined for the classical "varus thrust" finding.

**Special Testing**

- Varus Stress Test: Studies show that this is the most useful test to assess LCL injury. The test is performed with the examiner's hand stabilizing the femur (monitoring the lateral joint line) while placing a varus force on the ankle. The test is first performed at 30 degrees. Any lateral compartment gaping is a positive indicator for LCL and potential PLC injury. The test is then done in full knee extension. If there is increased stability when tested in full extension, then it is positive for an isolated LCL injury. If instability persists when tested in full extension, then the test is positive for LCL and PLC injury.

- External Rotation Recurvatum Test: This test measures the posterolateral rotary stability of the knee. The patient lies in the supine position. The examiner places a downward force through the suprapatellar region while lifting the big toe off the table and externally rotating the tibia with the other hand. Excess hyperextension, compared to the uninjured knee, illustrates a positive exam. It is important to note that this exam is less than 10% accurate in identifying PLC injuries, but is more accurate in diagnosing associated ACL injuries.

- Posterolateral Drawer Test: Similar to the posterior drawer test, the patient lies in the prone position with the knee flexed to 90 degrees and externally rotated 15 degrees. The examiner grips the femoral condyles and directs a posterior force. Any excess posterolateral translation on the injured leg suggests a PLC injury.

- Reverse Pivot Shift: This test is performed in the same position as the posterolateral drawer test. The examiner monitors the lateral joint line and slowly extends the knee while applying a valgus and external rotating force. At 30 degrees, the ITB transitions from a flexion vector to an extension vector, and reduces the previously subluxated lateral tibial plateau seen at 90 degrees. The test is positive if there is an audible "clank" heard at 30-degrees. It is important to compare results bilaterally, as a large percentage of noninjured knees may show false-positive results.

- Dial Test: This test, which measures the external rotation of the femur, is useful in confirming PLC injury. The patient lies prone. The examiner places one hand, stabilizing the thigh, and uses the other hand to rotate the ankle and leg externally. This test is performed at 30 and 90 degrees of knee flexion bilaterally. Ten degrees or more of external rotation on the injured leg confirms PLC injury.

Due to the increased likelihood of associated ligamentous, meniscal, or soft tissue injuries, an examination should be thorough and must include all structures of the knee. Anterior and posterior drawer tests are necessary to rule out possible ACL or PCL injuries, respectively. The patella requires assessment for accompanying subluxation or dislocation.