The management of most skin disorders is with an interprofessional team. Healthcare workers will often see skin lesions whose diagnosis may not be obvious. In such cases, a dermatology consult is highly recommended. Once the diagnosis of erythrasma is made, there are a several topical and oral therapies. Unfortunately, recurrence is a common problem. Patients with extensive lesions usually require oral antibiotics. The disorder may be followed by the primary care providers who need to be familiar with the adverse effects of macrolides, which are frequently used to treat erythrasma.

The nurse and pharmacist should educate the patient on lifestyle changes that can reduce the risk of erythrasma. The patient should be encouraged to exercise and lose weight, as obesity is a major risk factor for erythrasma. Also, the patient should be educated on personal hygiene and keeping the crease areas of the body dry. Patients may apply talcum powder to areas of the body that are continually damp. If the environment is hot and humid, the patient should be encouraged to keep the home cool and wear cotton garments, which absorb moisture better than other fabrics. Finally, the patient should be told to eat healthy and limit the intake of sugary foods, because diabetes is also a major risk factor for erythrasma. If the patient is immunocompromised, then the primary care clinicians should refer the patient to a dermatologist for more intensive care. Open communication between the team members is vital for improving outcomes.

The outcomes in healthy people are excellent.