Occipital horn syndrome (OHS): OHS is the milder form of Menkes disease that usually manifests at 5 to 10 years of age with overlapping features of classical Menkes. At birth, infants present with hypothermia and prolonged jaundice. Connective tissue abnormalities are prominent in OHS, including umbilical and inguinal hernias. A characteristic feature of OHS is bony abnormalities of bones, typically symmetric exostoses from occiput. Neurological symptoms are less profound than Menkes, intellectual capabilities are usually low to borderline, and motor delays are secondary to hypotonia.

ATP7A related distal motor neuropathy: Adult-onset distal motor neuropathy similar to Charcot Marie tooth disease. It is characterized by progressive distal motor neuropathy with minimal to no sensory loss. Distal muscle weakness and atrophy get more prominent and may occasionally cause pes cavus. Biochemically the levels are normal.

Biotinidase deficiency: Typically occurs in the first few months of age. Presents with seizures, hypotonia, global developmental delay, ataxia, vision, and hearing problems. Skin rashes, hypopigmentation, and hair loss are common.

Hupke-Brendel syndrome: Rare autosomal recessive conditions characterized by bilateral congenital cataract, sensorineural hearing loss, and severe developmental delay. Patients usually die between 9 months and 6 years of age. Diagnosis is usually established in a proband with characteristic features and very low serum copper, and ceruloplasmin levels and biallelic pathogenic variants in SCL33A1 are identified by molecular genetic testing.