The adductor magnus is described as a large triangular muscle with a proximal tendinous attachment to the inferior ramus of the pubis, the ramus of the ischium, and the ischial tuberosity. The part of the muscle that is considered the adductor portion has its proximal attachment on the inferior ramus of the pubis and the ramus of the ischium. The part of the muscle considered the hamstring portion has its proximal attachment on the ischial tuberosity. Each portion of the muscle has separate and distinct distal attachment points.

The adductor portion of the adductor magnus can be divided into two parts, a more superior part that originates on the ramus of the pubis and the lower segment, which arises from the ramus of the ischium. The smaller, more horizontal portion from the pubis inserts on the medial side of the gluteal tuberosity, medial to the attachment of gluteus maximus. This portion of the muscle is in a plane that lies more anterior to the rest of the muscle and has also been termed the adductor minimus muscle by some authors. The larger portion arises from the ramus of the ischium and extends laterally to insert into a broad aponeurosis on the linea aspera and the proximal portion of the medial supracondylar line of the femur. This larger portion of the muscle contains 5 fibrous openings that are maintained by tendinous arches. The more superior four openings, being small, allow the perforating branches and the terminal portion of the profunda femoris artery to pass into the posterior compartment of the thigh. The larger fifth opening, known as the adductor hiatus, allows for the passage of the femoral vessels from the adductor canal into the popliteal fossa. The distal attachment of the adductor portion of the adductor magnus on the linea aspera blends with the proximal attachment of the short head of the biceps femoris muscle. This blending creates the ability of the 2 muscles to work in a coordinated fashion as a stabilizer of the femur and pelvis. The adductor portion of the adductor magnus is innervated by the posterior division of the obturator nerve (L2,3,4).

The hamstring portion of the adductor magnus is so named due to the similarity in structure, proximal attachment, and innervation to the hamstring muscles. This portion of the adductor magnus is nearly vertical in orientation as it extends from the ischial tuberosity to the adductor tubercle on the medial femoral condyle and through fibrous attachments to the supracondylar line of the femur. This portion of the muscle is innervated by the tibial portion of the sciatic nerve (L4).

The two parts of the muscle have similar and also differing actions as both portions of the muscle are adductors of the thigh. The adductor portion of the adductor magnus, besides adduction, also flexes the thigh while the hamstring portion adducts but extends the thigh. The two portions of this muscle also function synergistically during the gait cycle and control the pelvis for posture.

An article by Takizawa et al. examined the adductor magus of 10 limbs from embalmed cadavers. Based on the location of the perforating arteries, divided the muscle into four divisions rather than the three noted above. In their study, the authors noted that the part of the “adductor portion” that inserted on the inferior portion of the linea aspera and originated from the inferior ramus and ischial tuberosity (labeled AM3 in their study) received innervation from both the posterior division of the obturator nerve and the tibial portion of the sciatic nerve. In addition, the authors noted that the most proximal portion of the muscle has a different fiber morphology than the rest of the muscle, making this uppermost segment of the muscle more suitable for stabilization activities. In contrast, the rest of the muscle with longer muscle fibers length is more functionally related to muscles such as semitendinosus and is suited for moving the lever arm of the thigh through a larger range of motion.

Due to the depth of the adductor portion of the adductor magnus, surface EMG studies of this large portion of the muscle (approximately 70% of the muscle) are rare. Rather, most studies of the adductor magnus focus on the hamstring portion as it is accessible for surface EMG analysis. This muscle can potentially affect postural control of the pelvis and lower extremity during the gait cycle yet is largely unstudied.