Overweight and obese people can partake in the same exercise prescriptions as individuals with normal weight. However, special considerations must be made, such as current co-morbidities that may be associated with obesity like orthopedic risk (i.e., arthritis), pulmonary, and/or cardiac co-morbidities. However, this should not deter individuals from participating in exercise programs, as exercise is extremely important for overall health.

**A**. Patients must be cleared by their healthcare provider for any comorbid conditions by history and physical examination to maximize patient safety.

**B**. Minimum of 150 to 300 minutes of moderate physical activity per week or 75 to 150 minutes of vigorous physical activity weekly is essential to prevent weight regain, increase weight loss and improve fitness.

- The recommendation for inactive individuals is “start low and go slow” by starting with lower intensity activities and gradually increasing the frequency and duration of the activity.

- It is a good idea to spread out aerobic activity over the week, versus all the time in one day.

- Utilize appropriate gear and sports equipment and chose safe environments.

- Adjust exercises as necessary to decrease orthopedic risk or is non-ambulatory (if applicable). This can include cycling instead of running if an individual has arthritis. If individuals are not ambulatory or may have to modify exercise due to special circumstances, the exercise guidelines still apply. However, the patient can get creative to find ways to achieve them, such as utilizing limbs that are more ambulatory than others (e.g., moving arms faster in order to get the heart rate up if legs are not able to be used, upper body ergometer, etc.)

- Anaerobic training can be implemented and may even increase muscle mass. Anaerobic exercise has not been shown to be effective in altering energy expenditure or absolute weight loss.