The diagnosis of orthostatic hypotension is based entirely on a detailed history and physical exam. The physical exam must include orthostatic vital signs. All patients should be screened with orthostatic vitals, particularly in the case of the elderly. This simple and easy test is often forgotten in the clinical setting.

Patients often present with generalized symptoms of lightheadedness, dizziness, or syncope and less commonly with leg buckling, headache, or chest pain. It is important to determine preceding events or precipitating events and look at the medication list. One must perform a detailed cardiovascular and neurologic exam to rule out a cardiogenic origin of the symptoms. In the elderly, it is also important to rule out neurogenic causes and hypovolemia secondary to diuretics, blood loss, vomiting, and polypharmacy. Particularly in the case of syncope, it is important to rule out other common causes such as seizure and neurocardiogenic syncope (vasovagal syncope).

Some patients have no symptoms, and orthostatic hypotension is incidentally picked up on clinical examination. In an observational study, around a third of patients had orthostatic hypotension but were found to be asymptomatic.

Symptoms are usually triggered by changes in posture and are resolved by lying down or sitting. Patients may have a transient loss of consciousness or a fall. Symptoms could occur first thing in the morning on getting up from bed or along the course of the day, as they change posture from sitting to standing, lying to standing, or even lying to sitting. It is difficult to advise how diagnostic these symptoms are; however, if these happen relative to orthostatic changes, they should prompt testing for orthostatic hypotension.

The symptoms of orthostatic hypotension can be summarized in the following list:

**Common Symptoms**

- Lightheadedness (feeling faint)

- Dizziness (spinning sensation or feeling off-balance)

- Transient loss of consciousness

- Falls

**Less Common or Non-specific Symptoms**

- Blurry vision

- Visual field deficits

- Difficulty concentrating

- Cognitive slowing

- Weakness

- Fatigue

- Shortness of breath

- Chest pain

- Backache

- Lower extremity pain

- “Coathanger” headache (suboccipital headache and neck pain in the posterior cervical and shoulder areas)