Hematoxylin and eosin interpretation considered in tandem with immunohistochemistry and molecular markers are necessary for an accurate diagnosis of this benign mesothelioma. Also, the diagnosis should fit with the associated clinical, radiologic, surgical, and gross findings. Of equal importance is making certain the biopsy or specimen is adequate in amount and representation of the lesion in question to make an accurate diagnosis. Cellular mesothelial proliferations have varied histological appearances and should always be approached with caution as small biopsies may not represent the mass or lesion as a whole. It is also possible for benign or reactive mesothelial proliferations to exhibit worrisome features usually only encountered in malignant, atypical, or dysplastic neoplasms such as increased cellularity, cytologic atypia with increased mitotic forms, papillary formations, and even necrosis. Another worrisome feature that may deceptively lead one to wrongly assume a malignant nature is increased fibrosis encasing and surrounding benign mesothelial cells, mimicking invasion. Indeed, one of the most helpful distinguishing histologic features of malignancy is the presence of true invasion. Invasion is a key feature that may be focal and difficult to appreciate. Keratin stains are helpful in these cases to highlight invasive cells diving deep within the stroma.

Some features that are more common in mesothelial hyperplasia or benign mesothelioma are lack of invasion and no increased cellularity within the stroma; if papillary formations are present, they should be simple, small to medium, and lined by a single layer of cells with only mild to moderate atypia, growth should be uniform. Inflammation is a common associated finding, and although there have been reports of necrosis in association with benign mesothelial proliferations, this should be a rare and focal finding if present. Pathologists are often reluctant to definitively diagnose a benign mesothelial proliferation on cytology alone and prefer permanent tissue examination due to the rarity of these samples and the need for an adequate sample.

Another immunohistochemical indication of a benign diagnosis may be desmin positivity, while EMA, p53, GLUT-1, and IMP-3 may be markers of malignancy. Keratin is positive in both benign and malignant mesothelial cells.