Treatment involves draining the abscess, providing antibiotic support, pain control and removal of infectious tooth source. Often oral antibiotics with timely dentist appointment for dental carries intervention is sufficient. Dental abscesses may not require an admission to the hospital and administration of intravenous (IV) antibiotics unless the patient presents with worrisome features that include fever, dyspnea or airway compromise secondary to swelling. Most dental abscesses can be treated with antibiotics to cover gram negatives, facultative anaerobes, and strict anaerobes.

Penicillins and cephalosporins can be used in odontogenic infections, but there is increasing antimicrobial resistance due to B-lactamase production. This increase in resistance would make using penicillins in conjunction with other antimicrobials such as metronidazole or an antibiotic with an extended spectrum like ampicillin-sulbactam and ampicillin-clavulanate more appropriate.

- Dosing: Ampicillin-sulbactam 3 g intravenously (IV) every 6 hours

- Dosing: Amoxicillin-clavulanate: 875 mg orally every 12 hours

- Dosing: Penicillin G 2 to 4  IV every four to 6 hours PLUS Metronidazole 500 mg IV or orally every 8 hours

- Dosing: Cefoxitin: 1 to 2 g IV every 4 hours

- Dosing: Cefotetan: 2 g IV every 12 hours

Macrolides should not be used the first line unless the patient has penicillin or cephalosporin allergy. There is increased resistance to macrolides and the bacterial species that exhibit resistance are anaerobic Streptococci and Prevotella species that are major colonizers of the oropharynx and often culprits in a dental abscess.

Metronidazole has excellent coverage against anaerobic organisms but lacks sufficient coverage against aerobic gram-positive organisms. It is recommended to use metronidazole in conjunction with penicillin to extend antimicrobial coverage to include aerobic gram-positive organisms.

- Dosing: Penicillin G 2 to 4 IV every 4 to 6 hours PLUS Metronidazole 500 mg IV or orally every 8 hours

Clindamycin is a good option for patients with allergies to penicillins and cephalosporins. Clindamycin overs coverage against gram-positive organisms, anaerobes, B-lactam resistant organisms and has good bone penetration. It was demonstrated that Clindamycin was equally as effective in treating severe odontogenic infections as Penicillin V (Gilmore et al.).

- Dosing: Clindamycin 600 mg IV every 6 to 8 hours

For severe infections or in immunocompromised patients. Anti-pseudomonal antibiotics like fourth-generation or higher cephalosporins or extended spectrum penicillins like piperacillin-tazobactam should be considered. Carbapenems like meropenem should also be reserved for severe infections. Meropenem has activity against gram-positive and gram-negative organisms as well as resistant organisms.

- Dosing: Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g IV every 6 hours

- Dosing: Meropenem 1 g IV every 8 hours

- Dosing: Cefepime 1 to 2 g IV every 12 hours