Contraindications to menstrual suppression align with the general contraindications for hormonal contraceptives.

**Contraindications to Estrogen-Containing Contraceptives**

In the setting of medical comorbidities that may increase the risk of thromboembolism (including pulmonary embolism [PE], deep venous thrombosis [DVT], or stroke), estrogen-containing contraceptives are contraindicated. These conditions include:

- Hypercoagulable disorders (such as Factor V Liden deficiency)

- Active liver disease

- Migraine with aura

- Active smoking (particularly if over the age of 35)

- Valvular heart disease

- Diabetes with vascular sequelae

- Peripheral or cerebrovascular disease

- Prior history of PE, DVT, or stroke.

Additionally, estrogen-containing contraceptives are contraindicated in the setting of current or prior history of some hormone-sensitive cancers, especially breast cancer, due to the risk of cancer recurrence or growth stimulation.

These methods are also contraindicated in uncontrolled hypertension or known coronary artery disease due to the risk of worsening hypertension and increasing risk for adverse cardiovascular events, respectively.

In these clinical settings, patients should be counseled on progesterone-only alternatives, which are safer and equally effective.

**Contraindications to Progestin-Only Contraceptives**

Progestin-only pills have very few contraindications; the primary absolute contraindication is active breast cancer. Use is also relatively contraindicated in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with antiphospholipid antibodies, severely decompensated cirrhosis, liver tumors, and a history of bariatric surgery with malabsorptive procedures.

Initiating the levonorgestrel-releasing IUD is contraindicated in the setting of known anatomic abnormalities of the uterus, such as a septate or bicornuate uterus, active genitourinary infection, and current active breast, endometrial, or cervical cancer.

Injectable (and possibly oral) medroxyprogesterone acetate is relatively contraindicated in the setting of known low BMD, known risk factors for BMD loss, or in those with high risk for sequelae of BMD loss.

It is also relatively contraindicated as a first-line agent in adolescents who have not yet reached peak bone mass within the first few years after menarche.

**Interactions between CHCs/POPs and Anticonvulsant Medication**

Special consideration should be taken when selecting a menstrual suppression method for people prescribed anticonvulsant medications due to their known interactions with systemic CHCs and POPs.

Many anticonvulsants and other neuropsychiatric medications (including phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and, to a lesser extent, topiramate) induce the hepatic cytochrome P450 system and interfere with contraceptive efficacy and cycle control reliability.

In general, hormonal contraceptives do not affect the efficacy of anticonvulsant medications, except lamotrigine, which can have decreased efficacy when taken with estrogen.

**Before Menarche**

Except for care for transgender youth, menstrual suppression should **not**be initiated before menarche; adolescents must first demonstrate normal anatomy and typical pubertal development.