# Continuing Education Activity

Pronator teres syndrome (PTS), first described by Henrik Seyffarth in 1951, is caused by a compression of the median nerve (MN) by the pronator teres (PT) muscle in the forearm. The PT muscle is named because of its action and shape; it is a rounded muscle that pronates. In the majority of cases (66%), it arises from unequal two heads: the larger humeral head from the upper part of the medial epicondyle and the smaller ulnar head from the coronoid process of the ulna. They pass down to the forearm, form a common flexor tendon, and insert into the radial shaft. Before the two heads unite, the median nerve passes between them in 74% to 82% of the cases, innervating both heads from C6-7 roots. The absence of the ulnar head is rare (14%) and may reduce the risk of median nerve entrapment. This activity reviews the pathophysiology of pronator teres syndrome and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the pathophysiology of pronator teres syndrome.
- Review the presentation of pronator teres syndrome.
- Summarize the treatment and management options available for pronator teres syndrome.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and outcomes in patients with pronator teres syndrome.

# Introduction

Pronator teres syndrome (PTS), first described by Henrik Seyffarth in 1951, is caused by a compression of the median nerve (MN) by the pronator teres (PT) muscle in the forearm.

# Etiology

Quick and repetitive grasping or pronation movements (prolonged hammering, ladling food, cleaning dishes, tennis) may cause PT muscle hypertrophy and entrapment of MN, especially in those individuals who have additional fibrous brands.

# Epidemiology

Pronator teres syndrome is a rare condition that may be easily overlooked and mistaken for the more prevalent carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS).

# History and Physical

Pronator teres syndrome may manifest with pain in the volar forearm region, aggravated by resisted pronation of the forearm and flexion of the elbow, and a positive Tinel sign over the proximal edge of PT.

# Evaluation

It is important that nerve conduction studies (NCS) are done in pronator teres syndrome to rule out other neuropathies, but they seldom show abnormalities.

Pronator teres syndrome, among other entrapments within the upper limb, also can be diagnosed by ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging, but ultrasound is advantageous due to its dynamic character and lower cost.

# Treatment / Management

Conservative treatment includes rest, modification of activities that exacerbate the symptoms, physical and occupational therapy, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, and local injections with corticosteroids or local anesthetic.

Surgical treatment is indicated if a patient is symptomatic, has one or more objective findings in a physical examination of weakness or motor atrophy, and has abnormal electrodiagnostic studies.

An endoscopic release has advantages over open surgery because it does not compromise the nerve's blood supply, reduces scar formation, and has been reported to have excellent results.

# Differential Diagnosis

Due to similar clinical presentation, some authors combine pronator teres syndrome with the following proximal median nerve entrapment syndromes

- Ligament of Struthers entrapment - MN compression by a ligament running from medial epicondyle to a bony spur on a distal medial humerus, which is present only in 1-2 % of the population. The pain in the forearm and paresthesias in the median-innervated digits is exacerbated by supination of the forearm and extension of the elbow (versus pronation in PTS). The radial pulse may also be decreased as the brachial artery runs next to the median nerve.

- MN entrapment by hypertrophied lacertus fibrosis  (bicipital aponeurosis) - This is fascia attaching the biceps to the ulna and overlies the MN in the proximal forearm. The pain in the forearm and paresthesias in the median-innervated digits is exacerbated by resisted flexion of the elbow with the forearm in supination.

- MN compression by the sublimus bridge of the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle - The pain in a forearm and paresthesias in the median-innervated digits is exacerbated by resisted flexion of the proximal interphalangeal joint of the middle finger while other fingers are held in extension.

Pronator teres syndrome should also be distinguished from carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), MN entrapment at the wrist, which is the most common MN entrapment syndrome, as well as from AIN syndrome, brachial plexus injury, or cervical radiculopathy.

Pronator teres syndrome has a sensory loss in the entire median nerve distribution versus CTS, where sensation is spared over the thenar eminence because palmar cutaneous branch leaves the median nerve proximal to carpal tunnel but distal to PT muscle. In addition, pronation is spared in CTS, and nocturnal paresthesia symptoms are usually absent in pronator teres syndrome.

Because of overlapping symptoms, CTS is sometimes diagnosed, and more proximal pronator teres syndrome is missed when both are present in the same limb.

To distinguish AIN from pronator teres syndrome, the pronation should be demonstrated with the elbow flexed (PQ function) to avoid the contribution of the PT, which is the primary muscle to pronate with the arm extension.

In the case of brachial plexus injury or cervical radiculopathy, the examination may reveal a weakness in other muscles outside the median nerve territory. Neck pain that radiates to the arm is a common complaint, suggesting cervical radiculopathy.

One group of authors describe a neuralgic amyotrophy as a potential competing condition with pronator teres syndrome due to similar symptoms, but it usually involves multiple nerves, and pain is more commonly localized in the shoulder rather than in the forearm. Neuralgic amyotrophy is an idiopathic condition that usually improves spontaneously in 6 to 12 months.

# Prognosis

Pronator teres syndrome only requiring PT muscle release has a good recovery in most of the cases, and patients return to light duty in approximately 3 weeks and regular duty in 6 weeks.

# Complications

Complications of surgical treatment are rare. In one study of 72 patients treated with pronator teres syndrome, no complications were recorded during the operations with an overall postoperative satisfaction rate (very satisfied and satisfied) of 59%.

- Infection

- Seroma/hematoma formation

- Nerve injury

- Scar formation

# Deterrence and Patient Education

When considering conservative treatment, patients should be advised on minimizing their engagement of activities that involve frequent forearm pronation. These activities include:

- Hammering

- Ladling food

- Cleaning dishes

- Playing tennis

- Pouring drinks (an activity frequently performed by waitresses/bartenders)

- Carrying books (an activity frequently performed by librarians)

- Twisting of clothes

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Pronator teres syndrome can be often misdiagnosed as it shares symptoms with more common carpal tunnel syndrome. The etiology may vary, and it may affect various people ranging from a patient with multiple comorbidities (e.g., hemodialysis) to healthy individuals who are involved in sports or other physical activities requiring repetitive pronation movements of the forearm as well as people with specific anatomic variations of the elbow region. Different specialists may encounter patients with pronator teres syndrome including urgent care medical professionals, primary care physicians, sports physicians, and others. The role of a physiatrist or a neurologist who specializes in neuromuscular conditions and performs NCV/EMG studies is crucial in the diagnosis and treatment of this condition. The radiologist also plays a role in diagnosing pronator teres syndrome, but he/she will need proper guidance from the referring specialist. Physical and occupational therapists manage conservative treatment, but if it fails, the surgeon gets involved. Thus it takes an interprofessional group of specialists to manage patients with pronator teres syndrome. Existing evidence regarding pronator teres syndrome is inadequate. [Level 5]