Timely identification of the illness is of utmost importance as it is a psychiatric emergency. Postpartum psychosis usually has a sudden onset but is a brief and limited illness that responds rapidly to treatment. Mothers who are at risk for harm to themselves or the baby require immediate hospitalization. There are no current guidelines to manage postpartum psychosis, and the management depends on the cause. Once organic causes have been ruled out, medications to control acute psychosis may be started. These include mood stabilizers, atypical antipsychotics, and antiepileptic drugs. Common drugs from these classes include lithium, sodium valproate, lamotrigine, carbamazepine, benzodiazepines, quetiapine, olanzapine, etc.

Although prophylactic treatment for women with bipolar disorder throughout pregnancy is a recommendation for women at high risk of relapse, benefits and risks merit careful discussion.

For women with a previous history of postpartum psychosis, the recommendation is high therapeutic target level lithium prophylaxis (zero points eight to one mmol/liter) to prevent future episodes. In that case, lithium blood levels should be obtained twice a week for at least the first two weeks postpartum. Women should abstain from breastfeeding while taking lithium as it is eliminated in breast milk and may cause higher exposure levels in infants as their metabolic systems and mechanisms of drug excretion are underdeveloped.**.**

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is recognized as a means of treatment with a tremendous benefit in patients with psychosis related to schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder refractory to antipsychotic pharmacotherapy.

The patient and the family must make an informed decision, carefully weighing the risks and benefits of medication management during pregnancy. Of the main pharmacological options, lithium has a 2.8% rate of causing major congenital malformations, valproate is highest at 5 to 8%, and carbamazepine 2 to 6%.