Skeletal muscles enable humans to move and perform daily activities. They play an essential role in respiratory mechanics and help maintain posture and balance. They also protect the vital organs in the body.

Various medical conditions result from abnormalities in the skeletal muscles' function. These diseases include myopathy, paralysis, myasthenia gravis, urinary and/or bowel incontinence, ataxia, weakness, tremors, and others. Disorders of the nerves can cause neuropathy and cause disturbances in the functionality of the skeletal muscles. In addition, skeletal muscle/tendon ruptures can occur acutely in high-level athletes or recreational sports participants and generate significant disability in all patients regardless of activity status.

**Muscle Cramps**

Muscle cramps result in continuous, involuntary, painful, and localized contraction of an entire muscle group, individual single muscle, or select muscle fibers.

Exercise-associated muscle cramps are the most frequent condition requiring medical/therapeutic intervention during sports.

In specific clinical scenarios, the underlying etiology may relate to persistent, spastic muscle contractions that can significantly impact human function. A typical example of this condition manifests in the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Clinically, this is recognized in congenital torticollis or spasmodic torticollis.

Other relevant conditions in this realm include, but are not limited to the following:

- Exercise-induced and heat-related muscle cramping

- Piriformis syndrome

- Thoracic outlet syndrome (scalene muscle hypertrophy/spasticity)

**Palsy/Compression Neuropathy**

At the opposite end of the spectrum, various muscle palsies exist secondary to the long-term, downstream effects of various nerve conditions and neuropathies, potentially resulting in flaccid conditions (which may be permanent or temporary). These syndromes and conditions include but are not limited to the following:

- Bell's palsy

- Guyon canal syndrome

- AIN syndrome or PIN syndrome

- Carpal tunnel syndrome (secondary to compression neuropathy of the median nerve at the carpal tunnel)

- Supraspinatus and/or infraspinatus atrophy

- Klumpke palsy