Usually, an atrioventricular canal defect is diagnosed by a pediatric cardiologist who looks for symptoms of heart failure, or on examination hears a murmur. To support the suspicion of underlying heart disease, there might be additional tests done. They can include:

**Chest X-ray:**X-rays are used to take a picture of the heart and lungs.

**Electrocardiogram (ECG):**The test records the electrical activity of the heart.

**Echocardiogram (echo):**Sound waves (ultrasound) are used to create a picture of the heart and look for structural defects.

**Pulse Oximetry:**The test looks at how much oxygen is in the blood.

**Cardiac Catheterization:**The test measures blood pressure and oxygen inside the heart. It also lets the doctor look at the inside of the heart. The test is done with a long thin tube (catheter) that is put in through a blood vessel in the groin or other area and moved to the heart.

**Cardiac MRI:**This test gives 3-D images of the heart. It can show any defects.

They are usually treated early in infancy with heart surgery (the first 6 months of life). Sometimes, medications can help control the symptoms until the surgery is scheduled. They can include:

**Water Pills (diuretics):**These help rid the body of excess water. This reduces fluid in the lungs and may improve breathing.

**Digoxin:**This helps the heart pump blood with more force and improves how the heart works.

**ACE Inhibitors:**These make blood vessels relax and allow blood to flow more easily from the heart.