Fibular neuropathy is primarily an axonal sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy, which will be made apparent on electrodiagnostic studies.

**Sensory Nerve Conduction Studies**

In axonal or mixed axonal/demyelinating lesions, the superficial fibular SNAP amplitude is usually low or absent.

**Motor Nerve Conduction Studies**

Demyelinating lesions show a conduction block with a focal slowing in fibular motor studies performed across the fibular neck. Focal slowing is observed when there are a greater than 10 meters/sec difference from the distal conduction velocities. Conduction block is observed when there is a greater than 20% drop in amplitude of the proximal compound muscle action potential (CMAP).

- A reduction in fibular CMAP amplitudes (ankle, below the lateral popliteal fossa or fibular head) indicates an axonal loss. This is because the pickup is measured at a distal muscle (EDB muscle) whose nerve has experienced Wallerian degeneration. The motor nerve's conduction velocity and the distal latency can either be normal or slightly slowed, depending on whether there is a loss of the fastest conducting axons. The patient usually experiences a combination of axonal loss and demyelination in the injured area.

- Motor studies are usually recorded at the EDB muscle. However, the EDB muscle can be atrophied due to the patient's prior actions rather than a pathology. For example, a patient wearing tight shoes can lead to EDB muscle atrophy. If atrophy is present, the tibialis anterior muscle is a viable alternative to perform motor studies. This is especially important if a motor study at the EDB muscle does not show focal slowing or conduction block, while the tibialis anterior may display the deficit. Should there be any question of abnormal studies, it is acceptable to compare the result to the contralateral side. Additionally, sampling non-fibular muscles such as the tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus, or gluteus medius is also essential. These muscles are normal in fibular lesions but may be abnormal with L5 radiculopathy and lumbosacral plexopathy.

- When comparing proximal versus distal EDB muscle amplitudes, if the proximal amplitude is greater, one should consider the presence of an accessory fibular nerve.

- Late responses: When fibular neuropathy is present, F-wave responses at the affected side of the fibular neck may be prolonged or absent, while those on the unaffected side may be normal. The slowing of the fibular F-waves may be more apparent if performed with ankle stimulation. This is because the F-response crosses the area of slowing twice with ankle stimulation but only once with either fibular or popliteal stimulation. However, one must remember that these responses tend to be non-specific, and it is not recommended to use them to diagnose fibular neuropathy. Alternate diagnoses can be ruled out using H-reflexes, which would be normal in fibular neuropathy, given that they exclude fibular nerve involvement.

**Needle Electromyography**

This test tends to be abnormal in fibular axonal lesions if axonotmesis is present. Clinicians will find abnormalities in lesions distal to the fibular nerve innervated muscles. Axonal lesions will show fibrillation potentials, positive sharp waves, and spontaneous activity, with decreased motor unit action potential recruitment depending on the timing of an injury. The results can be used to determine the chronicity of an injury.

- Chronic axonal lesions may show evidence of decreased motor unit action potential recruitment. The morphology of motor unit action potentials in these lesions may be polyphasic, with high amplitudes and long durations. The study will show fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves.

- In principally demyelinating lesions, clinicians will find normal firing frequency with only decreased motor unit action potentials. These lesions will have normal motor unit action potential morphology.

- EMGs are critical to rule out other nerve lesions. For this reason, paraspinal and proximal leg muscles are tested concurrently to rule out radiculopathy. Additionally, muscles innervated by the tibial nerve are sampled distal to the knee. The tibial nerve supplies the hamstrings except for the short head of the biceps femoris muscle, which is innervated by the fibular nerve.

- Analyzing the results of the short head of the biceps femoris muscle can distinguish an injury of the fibular nerve at the fibular head versus an injury of the sciatic nerve. The fibular fibers are more susceptible to injury than the tibial fibers, especially in the gluteal regions and the sciatic notch. This is due to the unique anatomy of the sciatic nerve. If a patient experiences concurrent traumatic injuries to the buttock and the fibular head areas, the EMG result of the short head of the biceps femoris muscle is critical in distinguishing these lesions.