Diagnosis of fat embolism syndrome can be very challenging because the signs and symptoms can be vague. There are no universally accepted diagnostic criteria. Several authors based on experience and research have proposed diagnostic criteria for fat embolism syndrome.

Gurd et al. in 1970 and later Wilson in 1974 put forward the following diagnostic criterion requiring two major criteria or at least one major criteria and four minor criteria.

**Major Criteria**

- Petechial rash

- Respiratory insufficiency

- Cerebral involvement in non-head injury patients

**Minor Criteria**

- Fever greater than 38.5 C

- Tachycardia heart rate greater than 110 beats per minutes

- Retinal involvement

- Jaundice

- Renal signs

- Anemia

- Thrombocytopenia

- High erythrocyte sedimentation rate

- Fat macroglobulinemia

**Schoenfeld  Criteria**

Another report by Schoenfeld et al. proposed a quantitative means for the diagnosis of fat embolism syndrome.

A cumulative score greater than five is required for the diagnosis.

- 5 points - petechiae rash

- 4 points - diffuse infiltrate on x-ray

- 3 points - hypoxemia

- 1 point (for each) - fever, tachycardia, confusion

Lindeque Criteria

Lastly, Lindegue et al. suggested the use of respiratory symptoms alone as the diagnostic criteria for fat embolism syndrome. This criterion has not gained worldwide acceptance when compared to the Gurd, Wilson, and Schoenfeld criteria.

- Sustained Pa02 less than 8 kilopascal

- Sustained PC02 greater than 7.3 kilopascal

- Sustained respiratory rate greater than 35 breaths per minute despite sedation

- Dyspnea, increased work of breathing, anxiety, tachycardia

**Ancillary Studies**

Apart from the aforementioned diagnostic criteria, other ancillary studies are needed to aid in the diagnostic workup including the following:

**Complete blood count**

Anemia and thrombocytopenia are very common in fat embolism syndrome.

**Comprehensive metabolic panel**

Metabolic acidosis, increased level of BUN, and creatinine can be seen in patients with fat embolism syndrome.

**Arterial blood gas**

Ventilation-perfusion mismatch is a hallmark of fat embolism syndrome. The arterial blood gas analysis usually has a low partial pressure of oxygen, causing hypoxemia. An increased alveolar-arterial (A-a) gradient is common in fat embolism syndrome. The A-a gradient is the difference in the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveolus and the partial pressure of oxygen in the pulmonary artery. In fat embolism syndrome, there is occlusion of the pulmonary blood vessels, causing impairment of perfusion with normal ventilation. The end result of this in fat embolism syndrome is a ventilation-perfusion mismatch.

To calculate the A-a gradient, use the formula:

**A-a gradient = PA02 - Pa02**

- Pa02 is the partial pressure of oxygen in the pulmonary artery

- PA02 is the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveolar sac

To calculate the PAO2 and Pa02

- PAO2 = FiO2 (P atmospheric - P water vapor) – (PCO2/R).

- PaO2 = partial pressure of oxygen in the pulmonary artery.

PaO2 in arterial blood gas can be used as follows.

- FiO2 is the concentration of inspired oxygen expressed as a fraction.

This is around 0.21 at room air.

- P atmospheric is the barometric pressure (760 mmHg at sea level).

- P water vapor is the water vapor pressure (48 mmHg at 37 C).

- PaCO2 is the partial pressure of alveolar carbon dioxide.

If approximated, this is presumed to be equal to arterial PCO2. PACO2 is presumed to be equal to 40 mmHg

- R is the respiratory quotient and is equated to about 0.8 on a regular diet.

The normal alveolar partial pressure of oxygen is as follows:

- PA02 = alveolar partial pressure of O2 = FiO2 × (patmospheric - P water vapor) - (PCO2/R).

- 0.21 × (760 - 48) - (40/0.8) = 150-50 = 100 mmHg

The normal partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood is beween 75 to 100mmHg.

- PA02 - Pa02 = 100 mmHg - 75 mm = 25 mmHg

- PA02-Pa02 =100 mmHg -100 mmHg = 0 mmHg

This implies that the A-a gradient can have values that range from 0 to 25 mmHg

The normal A-a gradient is usually less than 10 mmHg. This can increased significantly in fat embolism syndrome because of ventilation-perfusion mismatch.

**Bronchoalveolar Lavage**

Bronchoalveolar Lavage (BAL) has been researching extensively as a diagnostic tool for fat embolism syndrome. Lipid inclusion in the macrophages might point to a diagnosis of fat embolism syndrome but is not specific, as this can be seen in other clinical conditions. Moreover, the procedure is time-consuming, invasive, and might not give the best diagnostic yield.

Attempts at developing biological markers for fat embolism syndrome have been disappointing because of low specificity. Lipase, free fatty acid, and phospholipase A2 have been demonstrated to be elevated in fat embolism syndrome, but this also can be seen in other disease conditions of the lung

Blood, urine, and sputum analysis might show the presence of fat globules. Again, this is nonspecific in fat embolism and fat embolism syndrome.

**Imaging Studies**

**Chest x-ray**

The chest X-ray will reveal the presence of the following:

- Diffuse interstitial marking

- Pulmonary edema

- Lung infiltrate

- Flake-like pulmonary marking (snowstorm appearance)31

**CAT scan of the chest**

- Area of  increased vascular congestion

- Pulmonary edema

**Imaging of the brain**

CAT scan

This is not a very sensitive imaging study of the brain in fat embolism syndrome, but it can be used to exclude other causes of altered mental status such as epidural, subdural or subarachnoid bleed.

MRI

This is the most sensitive test that can be used to demonstrated changes in the brain related to fat embolism syndrome. Takahashi et al. categorized these changes into the following four grades based on the size and distribution of the lesions in T2 weighted imaging:

- Grade 0 - normal

- Grade 1 - mild

- Grade 2 - moderate

- Grade 3 - severe

Lesions seen in fat embolism syndrome are distributed in the following areas of the brain:

- Centrum semi vale,

- Subcortical white matter

- Ganglionic regions

- Thalamus

The authors demonstrated that resolution of these lesions correlates well with clinical recovery from fat embolism syndrome. Some of these lesions develop as a result of vasogenic edema from free fatty acids (FFA) which is potentially neurotoxic.

Transesophageal echocardiography may be utilized intraoperatively to monitor the release of fat globules or bone marrow materials into the bloodstream during the process of intramedullary nailing and reaming. Fat emboli in the pulmonary artery can increase the pulmonary artery wedge pressure as well as the right ventricular afterload.