Radiographic imaging should be obtained in all patients.  Recommended views include mandatory orthoganol imaging:

- True AP view ("Grashey")

- Scapular Y

- Axillary lateral

- the velpeau view can be used in substitution depending on the patients ability to tolerate the axillary lateral radiographic position
- the velpeau view is performed with the patient's arm held in internal rotation in a sling, and the film is taken superior to inferior with the patient leaning backward into the beam field
- the west point axillary view can also be considered

- the technique for the West Point x-ray entails the patient being placed prone on the x-ray table. The affected shoulder is raised at the top of the table and cassette held against the superior aspect of the shoulder. The x-ray beam is centered at axilla. A tangential view of the anteroinferior rim of the glenoid rim is the resulting image of the shoulder.

CT scan aids in preoperative planning especially if the position of the humeral head or greater tuberosity is uncertain and intra-articular comminution.  Furthermore, information obtained from the CT scan can help guide the ideal operative management when considering whether fixation versus reconstruction is most appropriate.  MRI is rarely indicated however may be useful to identify associated rotator cuff injury

**Classification Schemes**

Neer’s Classification is based on the anatomic relationship of four segments: greater tuberosity, lesser tuberosity, articular surface, and shaft.

**One-Part Fracture**

- Fracture lines involve one to four parts

- None of the parts are displaced (less than 1 cm and less than 45 degrees)

**Two-Part Fracture**

- Fracture lines involve two to four parts

- One-part is displaced (greater than 1 cm or greater than 45 degrees)

**Three-Part Fracture**

- Fracture lines involve three to four parts

- Two parts are displaced (greater than 1 cm or more than 45 degrees)

**Four-Part Fracture**

- Fracture lines involve more than four parts

- Three parts are displaced (greater than 1 cm or greater than 45 degrees) with respect to the four.

AO Classification arranges fractures into three main groups and additional subgroups based on fracture location, the status of the surgical neck, and the presence or absence of dislocation.

- Type-A fractures are extra-articular, unifocal fractures that include the greater tuberosity or surgical neck. These include A1, a unifocal extra-articular tuberosity, A2, a unifocal extra-articular impacted metaphyseal, and A3, a unifocal extra-articular non-impacted metaphyseal.

- Type-B fractures are bifocal fractures that include some unusual dislocations. These include B1, bifocal extra-articular with metaphyseal impaction, B2, bifocal extra-articular without metaphyseal impaction, and B3, bifocal extra-articular with glenohumeral dislocation.

- Type-C fractures are all intra-articular anatomic neck fractures, including dislocation and splitting of the humeral head. These are divided into C1, articular with slight displacement, C2, articular impacted by marked displacement, and C3, articular with dislocation.