**Transmission**

S. pneumoniae spreads through respiratory droplets from people with Pneumococcal disease or healthy carriers with the bacteria in their nasopharynx. However, there is a little chance of having pneumococcal meningitis even after close contact. There are individual factors that make the person vulnerable to the development of pneumococcal meningitis, including immunocompromised, especially patients with asplenia, diabetes, leak of cerebrospinal fluid, cochlear implant, history of meningitis, cigarette smoking, and alcohol use.

GBS is a common finding in gastrointestinal and genital tracts. Women who become colonized with this bacteria can pass it on to their newborns during labor. In adults, most of the GBS meningitis is found in patients with comorbid conditions.

**Prevention**

Among all streptococcal meningitides, only pneumococcal is a vaccine-preventable condition. Two types of vaccines exist against Streptococcus pneumoniae: older pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV) and newer pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCV). PPSV is composed of 23 pneumococcal capsular polysaccharides, and it covers the broadest range of antigens out of all pneumococcal vaccines. Children less than two years old do not respond to this vaccination, though it is suitable only for patients over two years of age. In the meta-analysis by Falkenhorst et al., PPSV23 efficacy against IPD caused by any serotype was reported to be 73% in a pooled analysis of all included clinical trials enrolling adults aged above 60 years living in industrialized countries.

Meningitis caused by group B streptococci is also preventable by testing all pregnant women at 35 to 37 weeks of gestation for vagina and rectum colonization with GBS and using antibiotic chemoprophylaxis in colonized women. Approximately half of the colonized women will pass the bacteria to their neonates during labor or after membranes rupture. If not for intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis, up to 2% of those newborns will develop GBS EOD.