The etiology of thyroid eye disease is not well understood. TED involves a complex immune-mediated cycle involving the orbital fibroblasts, adipocytes, and lymphocytes.

Orbital adipose tissue is a unique fat depot. Robust orbital inflammation produces high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin IL-1 and prostaglandins.

Orbital fibroblasts are the target cells in the pathogenesis of TED. They have increased expression of TSH receptors and can differentiate into mature adipocytes.

TSH receptor (TSH-R) is the primary target of the autoimmune cascade within the orbit.

Another possible target molecule is the peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-gamma present on Thy-1 - fibroblasts.

The type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-1R) is another important autoantigen present on Thy-1 + fibroblasts.

In summary, the inflammatory cascade is a positive feedback cycle. Thy-1 – fibroblasts activated by TRAb differentiate into adipocytes, secrete IL-6, and recruit B-cells and plasma cells. Thy-1 + fibroblasts, on activation by IGF-1R, secrete IL-16 and RANTES to recruit T-cells. T-cells exhibit CD40-CD154 bridges and are responsible for stimulating IL-1 secretion from fibroblasts.

T-cells also produce interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) to stimulate myofibroblast activity and hyaluronate production. Under the stimulation of IL-6, B-cells produce more auto-antibodies TRAb within the orbit. With prolonged inflammation, the Thy-1 + cell cluster causes fibrosis of EOM - muscle-predominant orbitopathy. TED cases with Thy-1 + cell clusters show enlargement of the orbital adipose tissues - fat-predominant orbitopathy. Individuals younger than 40 years have a higher Thy-1 – response and show orbital fat expansion. TED cases over 70 years of age are more prone to Thy-1 + response and show fusiform muscle enlargement.