The five major illnesses associated with gluten are celiac disease, non-celiac gluten sensitivity, wheat allergy, gluten ataxia, and dermatitis herpetiformis. Each is distinct, but all are related and manageable.

Interprofessional work between primary care providers, gastroenterologists, nurses, dietician, and nutritionists are needed for optimal management.

A patient should not start a gluten-free diet until tests are done, and diagnosis is confirmed. Diet affects test results.

The first step in achieving a gluten-free diet is to eliminate all food, beverages, medication, and cosmetics that have gluten in them. When symptoms are gone, then new questionable items can be added one by one, and the response to them should be evaluated. In case of any symptoms or problems, the new item should be eliminated.

In general, flour, bread, crackers, baking mixes, pasta, cereal, sauce, condiments, processed meat, beer, ale, lager, and malt vinegar should be avoided. Rice, corn, potato, soybean, fruit, vegetable, meats, eggs, wine, and distilled alcoholic beverages are gluten-free and acceptable to eat or drink. Occasionally, gluten is used in preparing corn and potatoes, specifically, gluing them and packaging them, and can cause symptoms.

Many other items might not have gluten in them, but gluten could have been used in their preparation or packaging. Consult the manufacturer's website and labeling for ingredients.

Patients and primary care physicians should consult and follow up with a dietician. Gastroenterology nurses help coordinate care, monitor patients, provide education, and document for the team. [Level 5]

The prognosis for patients with gluten sensitivity is lifelong, marked by relapses and remissions. Some patients need life-long monitoring because of the small risk of intestinal malignancies; the quality of life of these patients is poor.