The initial evaluation of a patient suspected of a neuronal or glioneuronal brain tumor requires a detailed history and physical examination, as noted above. Importantly, although rare, patients that present with acute neurological status changes need an emergent evaluation of the airway status, breathing/oxygenation, and circulatory system (ABCs). This scenario may occur in patients with acute hydrocephalus and may also be true for patients presenting with generalized tonic-clonic or subclinical seizure activity. There should be a low threshold for intubation and resuscitation when there is compromise noted on the initial assessment of the ABCs. However, most patients present with focal partial seizures and signs of increased intracranial pressure, such as headaches.

**CT**

Patients presenting with acute deficit should first undergo a head CT without contrast after clinical stabilization due to the rapidity of the test and its ability to demonstrate common causes of acute status change such as hemorrhage. Its most useful feature is the ability to demonstrate hydrocephalus, which may require emergent surgical action.

Other CT findings include hyperdensity within the ventricular system for intraventricular lesions such as central neurocytoma and hypo- or iso-density in the brain parenchyma representing intraparenchymal lesions.

**MRI**

The imaging test of choice for evaluation of this group of brain tumors is MRI.

Other advanced MRI techniques such as MR spectroscopy (MRS), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), and functional MRI (fMRI) can also be useful. The most common MRI characteristics for each tumor are demonstrated in table 2. Due to the rare nature of many of these lesions, complete imaging characteristics are still being defined. Additionally, many of these lesions have heterogenous imaging characteristics, and individual tumors may not demonstrate the standard features noted here.

Table 2: MRI characteristics for individual neuronal and glioneuronal brain tumors.

Gangliocytoma

MVNT

Dysplastic cerebellar gangliocytoma

“Tiger-stripe” appearance corresponds to widening of the cerebellar folia; these are typically unilateral tumors; there is a prominent lactate peak and reduced choline peak on MRS.

Central neurocytoma

Extraventricular neurocytoma

Cerebellar liponeurocytoma

Ganglioglioma

DIG/DIA

DNET

DGONC

PGNT

RGNT

MGT

DLGNT

Most of the tumors within this group are primary intracranial lesions without dissemination or occurrence in other compartments within the CNS. However, patients with DLGNT, in particular, should undergo MRI with and without contrast of the entire neuroaxis due to its proclivity for dissemination throughout the neuroaxis. Consideration to imaging the spinal axis should also be given for other patients with focal neurological deficit or signs of myelopathy that cannot be explained by their intracranial lesion alone.

**EEG**

An important consideration for this group of brain tumors is electroencephalography (EEG) since they commonly present with seizures. Spot EEG may be useful in some cases, but continuous video EEG monitoring allows for better characterization of seizure semiology and assists with localization of an epileptogenic focus. Invasive EEG monitoring with either subdural strip electrodes or depth electrodes can also be considered in patients with seizures that cannot be localized to the region of the tumor with noninvasive recording techniques. The specific histologic characteristics of an individual tumor may affect EEG characteristics. Tumors with mostly neuronal histology often demonstrate continuous spiking.

**WADA Testing**

Many LEATs are in locations where surgical resection may compromise language function. WADA testing is typically employed in these patients before resection to identify language dominance and assist with surgical planning.

**Interprofessional Discussion**

LEAT patients should be discussed in interprofessional epilepsy conferences involving neurosurgeons, epilepsy neurologists, neuroradiologists, and neuropathologists to make appropriate diagnostic and treatment plans for these often-complicated patients. Furthermore, these patients and others with tumors that are identified for another reason should be discussed at an interprofessional tumor board conference consisting of neurosurgeons, neurologists, neuroradiologists, neuropathologists, radiation oncologists, and medical oncologists to assist with appropriate diagnostic and treatment planning.