Making a definitive diagnosis of pernicious anemia can be “problematic” due to the Schilling test becoming obsolete and the absence of a currently approved B12 absorption test.

- Initial serology: complete blood count (CBC), cobalamin level, folate level, iron panel (serum iron, total iron-binding capacity, ferritin), reticulocyte count

- Peripheral blood smear

- Follow-up serology: anti-IF antibodies, antiparietal cell antibodies

- Additional serology: MMA, fasting homocysteine, holotranscobalamin (HTC)

- Bone marrow biopsy

- Endoscopy with biopsies

A CBC may be significant for anemia, macrocytosis (mean corpuscular volume ≥100 fl), and pancytopenia (due to ineffective erythropoiesis and myelopoiesis). However, about one-third of patients with B12 deficiency may not have macrocytosis.

A peripheral blood smear may show macro-ovalocytes, hypersegmented neutrophils, and anisopoikilocytosis. Although hypersegmented neutrophils are often considered a hallmark of megaloblastic anemia, they are not specific, as they can be seen in other types of anemia, like iron deficiency anemia. Hypersegmented neutrophils typically precede macrocytosis and anemia; however, in advanced disease, they may be rare or absent.

An isolated serum cobalamin level has poor sensitivity and specificity for reliably detecting B12 deficiency.

In patients with serum cobalamin levels ≥200 ng/L diagnostic performance may be enhanced by measuring serum MMA, fasting homocysteine, and HTC.

Folate levels should be determined to exclude macrocytic anemia secondary to folate deficiency and because treating B12-deficient patients with folate alone may worsen associated neurologic damage.

Follow-up serology will include anti-IF antibodies with or without antiparietal cell antibodies. Anti-IF antibodies are 40 to 60% sensitive in detecting pernicious anemia, with the rate of positivity rising with disease progression. The specificity of anti-IF antibody testing is almost 100%. Although antiparietal cell antibodies are present in 90% of patients with pernicious anemia, they are less specific than anti-IF antibodies. Notably combining the two has been shown to significantly increase their diagnostic performance for pernicious anemia (73% sensitivity and 100% specificity).

A serum cobalamin of <200 ng/L plus the presence of anti-IF antibodies confirms a diagnosis of pernicious anemia.

According to the British Committee for Standards in Hematology, all patients with anemia, neuropathy, or glossitis, and suspected of having pernicious anemia, should be tested for anti-IF antibodies regardless of cobalamin levels. Secondly, the committee recommends anti-IF antibody testing in patients found to have a low serum cobalamin level in the absence of anemia and who do not have food malabsorption or other causes of deficiency to clarify whether they have an early or latent presentation of pernicious anemia. Thirdly, antiparietal cell antibody testing for diagnosing pernicious anemia is not recommended.

Of note, there are two types of IF autoantibodies: type 1 are “blocking autoantibodies” that inhibit B12 from binding to IF, preventing B12/IF complex formation, and type 2 are “binding autoantibodies” that bind to the B12/IF complex, preventing intestinal absorption. Type 1 is used in evaluating suspected pernicious anemia because it is highly specific and is the type present in approximately 70% of patients.

Histological examination after a bone marrow biopsy is usually unnecessary. When performed, it will show hypercellularity with a shift toward immaturity, including abnormal maturation of myeloid and erythroid cell lines.

As mentioned earlier, pernicious anemia is found in up to 25% of patients with AIG as a late-stage manifestation. Because autoimmune chronic atrophic gastritis is characterized by an elevated fasting serum gastrin level, the fasting serum gastrin assay can play a role in establishing a pernicious anemia diagnosis in difficult cases.

According to a 2021 American Gastroenterological Association clinical practice update, patients with a new pernicious anemia diagnosis who have not had a recent endoscopy should undergo endoscopy with topographical biopsies to confirm corpus-predominant atrophic gastritis for risk stratification and to rule out prevalent gastric neoplasia, including neuroendocrine tumors.