The surgical route of hysterectomy should be individualized to each patient. Uterine characteristics include size, mobility, and location, as well as the extent of gynecologic pathology. Prior history of abdominal surgery is important to consider since the anticipated extensive adhesive disease can increase the risk of complications. Other factors to consider include vaginal caliber, potential complication risks based on patient comorbid medical conditions, presence of concomitant pathology, patient preference, and surgeon experience. The technique of abdominal hysterectomy is as follows:

- Laparotomy: Accessing the peritoneal cavity is achieved through either a low transverse or midline vertical incision. The low transverse incision is usually preferred, though the midline incision is generally performed if a malignant disease is present or access to the upper abdomen is required. Other deciding factors include uterine size, prior surgical scars, and patient preference as long as adequate exposure is assured.

- Retraction: A self-retaining retractor is often placed into the abdomen, and the bowel is packed cephalad. Placement of the retractor should be done carefully in order to avoid bowel entrapment and nerve injury at the pelvic sidewall.

- Restore normal anatomy: Once the peritoneum is entered, the surgeon will explore the cavity, assessing for pathology, and performing lysis of adhesions in order to free the pelvic organs and afford good exposure of the pelvis.

- Uterine elevation: The round ligaments and utero-ovarian ligaments are clamped bilaterally at the cornua to elevate the uterus out of the pelvis.

- Division of the round ligament and accessing the retroperitoneal space: Retracting the uterus laterally facilitates the identification of the round ligament. The right round ligament and artery of Sampson are ligated bilaterally to expose the retroperitoneal space for blunt dissection.

- Bladder reflection: The peritoneal incision is extended transversely, distal to the bladder reflection, and the bladder is sharply dissected away from the cervix proximally in the vesicovaginal plane.

- Exposure of the iliac arteries: Gentle dissection through the retroperitoneum will eventually reveal the external iliac arteries on the medial surface of the psoas muscles and should be extended superiorly to the bifurcation of the common iliac arteries, where the ureters can be seen crossing the pelvic brim. The internal iliac arteries run parallel with the ureters into the deep pelvis.

- Division of the ovarian vessels: This is performed only if the ovaries are being surgically removed with the uterus. An opening is made in the medial peritoneum cephalad to the ovaries bilaterally, between the ureter and ovarian vessels. The vessels are doubly clamped and divided between the two clamps. Both pedicles are suture ligated, and the posterior peritoneum is released to the cornua to allow suspension of the distal pedicle to the cornual clamp.  This is performed bilaterally.

- Skeletonization of the uterine artery and vein: The uterine artery is usually found immediately adjacent to the uterus at the level of the internal cervical os. Sharp dissection of the areolar tissue away from the uterus allows for exposure of the vessels to facilitate clamping immediately adjacent to the uterus. This is performed bilaterally.

- Dividing the uterine vessels: The vessels clamped perpendicular to the uterus at the level of the internal cervical os, cut, and the pedicles are doubly ligated, ensuring hemostasis.

- Dissection of the rectum: If the rectum is adherent to the posterior cervix or vagina, it is sharply dissected free of the posterior uterus.

- Dividing the broad ligament: Once the cervix is freed anteriorly and posteriorly, tension is placed superiorly on the uterus to provide deeper exposure. The cardinal ligaments are clamped with a series of straight clamps along with the lateral cervix. The pedicles are cut and suture ligated. This is performed in serial fashion, incorporating the uterosacral ligaments, until reaching the cervical-vaginal junction.

- Dividing the vagina: A series of clamps are placed across the vagina below the cervix, including both the anterior and posterior vaginal wall. The vagina is then divided above the clamps and below the level of the cervix to free the surgical specimen.

- Closing the vaginal cuff: Suture ligatures are placed on the angles, incorporating the uterosacral ligament posteriorly for vaginal apex suspension, and a figure-of-eight stitch is placed in the middle of the cuff for complete closure.

- Final Examination and Closure: Warm saline is used to irrigate the pelvis, and inspection for hemostasis and injury is performed. Correct surgical counts are confirmed, and the surgery is completed with incisional closure. Many surgeons find it unnecessary to close the abdominal peritoneum. The fascia and skin are reapproximated separately to close the incision.

Special Considerations:

- Total vs. Subtotal (Supracervical) Abdominal Hysterectomy: Total abdominal hysterectomy involves removing the entire uterus as described above, including the uterine corpus and cervix. This approach differs from the subtotal hysterectomy, or supracervical hysterectomy, whereby the uterine cervix is left in situ after the upper portion of the cervix is transected just below the level of the uterine vessels. While supracervical abdominal hysterectomy has gained favor among the lay public amidst the beliefs that removal of the cervix will affect orgasmic and bladder function, prospective, randomized studies have revealed that when comparing the two approaches, there is no difference in sexual satisfaction, vaginal prolapse, or bowel and urinary tract dysfunction.

- Elective oophorectomy/salpingectomy: The decision to remove the ovaries and fallopian tubes should be individualized to each patient after a detailed discussion with the physician regarding advantages and disadvantages. In the absence of ovarian pathology or a familial cancer syndrome, most women who undergo hysterectomy for benign indications should conserve their ovaries, and there should be a discussion regarding the removal of the fallopian tubes. Prophylactic salpingectomy is considered a safe procedure for preventing high-grade serous cancer and can be performed during any kind of hysterectomy without affecting ovarian function or surgical outcomes.

- Prophylactic Vaginal apex suspension: Incorporating the uterosacral ligaments into the vaginal cuff angle at the time of closure can help minimize loss of apical support and pelvic organ prolapse. This technique requires minimal additional time and is performed with low risk during abdominal hysterectomy. The risk of future pelvic organ prolapse is highest in women with preexisting prolapse, regardless of symptoms.

- Cystoscopy: Postoperative visualization of proper flow within the ureters is recommended during instances where the ureter is not well visualized during the procedure or when there is suspicion for injury. Injury detection rates may be higher with the use of cystoscopy, and some studies urge its routine use after abdominal hysterectomy, given the increased morbidity and costs associated with unrecognized or delayed diagnosis of urinary tract injury, despite the increased procedural time.