The etiology of Riehl melanosis remains controversial, whether it is associated with intrinsic or extrinsic factors. The majority of cases occur clearly because of exogenous factors, leading the authors, as described below, to label it a contact dermatitis. It usually results from direct contact with several allergens. However, a few cases secondary to contact with airborne allergens have been also described. Ultraviolet (UV) exposure may play a role in some PCD since hyperpigmentation is often photo-localized, and some of the causative chemicals are known photosensitizers.

The common cosmetics allergens are as follow:

- Aniline dyes

- Red and yellow pigments

- Brilliant lake red r: widely used in cheek rouges and lipsticks until 1976

- Chromium hydroxide: pigment

- Carbanilides (photosensitizer): bactericidal agent

- Ricinoleic acid: bactericidal agent

- Hair dyes

- Henna

- Kumkum: a red-colored vermillion powder that adorns the forehead at the central parting line of the hair as a cultural symbol of their married status

The common perfume allergens are as follows:

- Geraniol oil

- Lemon oil (photosensitizer allergen)

- Musk ambrette (photosensitizer and airborne allergen)

- Hydroxycitronellal

- Benzyl-salicylate

- Ylang-ylang oil

- Jasmine absolute

- Lavender oil

The common textile allergens are as follows:

- Tinopal CH3566: Optical whitener in washing powder

- Naphthol AS: coupling agent for azo dyes

- PPP-HB: textile finish

- Mercury compounds: bactericides

- Formaldehyde: preservative

- Azo dyes: dye

- Rubber components

The common occupational allergens are as follows:

- Coal tar

- Pitch

- Asphalt

- Mineral oil

- Chromates

Other allergens had also been described like Plathymenia foliosa (wood dust; airborne allergen), minoxidil 5%, chromate (leather, soap), and nickel sulfate (metal product).

Nevertheless, a few cases due to endogenous factors have been also described such as nutritional effects suggested by Riehl, toxic factors, neurovegetative lability, and digestive disorders.

Repeated contact with low concentrations of these allergens explains why they do not provoke an eczematous reaction in the middle of the spinous cell but instead, their accumulation induces type IV allergic cytolytic reactions in the basal layer.