The procedure should begin with nasal decongestion with the medication of choice (0.05% oxymetazoline, 4% cocaine, or 1% phenylephrine). Local anesthesia is usually infiltrated within the nasal septum on the desired side. Out-fracture of the inferior turbinates with a Freer or Boise elevator allows for adequate instrumentation in most patients. Classically, Hadad and Bassagetuessy describe resecting the middle turbinate on the ipsilateral side for ease of access, though outfracture of the middle turbinate may be adequate.

The area of the anticipated defect is then measured and the extent of the flap planned. The dimensions of the septal flap can be extended caudally to the border of the membranous septum, variably through the nasal floor as lateral as the inferior meatus and cranially to the dorsum. Caution must be taken to avoid violating the olfactory epithelium in taking mucosa cranially. Still, the risk of adverse olfactory side effects must be weighed with the need for additional flap area. Before incising the flap, a skin marker can be used to color the mucosal side of the flap to aid in identification at the time of insetting the flap.

A standard dimension for the nasal flap involves two parallel incisions: one over the maxillary crest and another 1 to 2 cm below the superior aspect of the nasal septum to avoid the olfactory epithelium. Anteriorly the parallel incisions are joined with a perpendicular incision. The posterior incisions are the most critical as they are near the vascular pedicle. Superiorly, the incision is extended laterally over the rostrum of the sphenoid sinus at the level of the natural ostium; inferiorly, the incision is carried along the posterior edge of the septum and along the edge of the choana; this preserves the posterior septal artery as the pedicle of the flap.

Elevation of the flap is usually performed with a Cottle elevator, Freer elevator, or suction-Freer elevator beginning at the most caudal and anterior aspect in a submuchopericondrial plane. Before elevating, it is best to ensure that all planned incisions are complete, as providing tension for these cuts will be more challenging as the flap is raised.

As the flap is raised posteriorly, caution should not injure the pedicle overlying the sphenoid rostrum. Once raised, the flap should be tucked away for safekeeping (most commonly in the nasopharynx, although the maxillary sinus has been described if an antrostomy has been performed). When ready to reconstruct the skull base, it can be withdrawn and replaced along the septum to ensure appropriate orientation and avoid torsion.

The reconstruction of the defect is then case-dependent and surgeon-dependent. It can utilize many autologous grafts, synthetic materials, and local or free flaps depending on the degree of dural and extradural reconstruction needed. After placing the nasoseptal flap into the defect, absorbable packing is placed, and xeroform gauze or a Foley balloon is often used to support the packing. Care should be taken to avoid overinflating as this can displace the flap within the cranial vault or out of the defect.

A contralateral, anteriorly based septal flap can be used to cover the septal donor site and decrease surgical morbidity from the nasoseptal flap harvest. However, usage of this technique "burns" the contralateral nasoseptal flap. This must be carefully considered before use.