Amphetamines stimulate the central and peripheral nervous system. They cause an increase in biogenic amines that originate from the neuronal synaptic terminals, which in turn inhibit the reuptake of certain neurotransmitters. Amphetamines are lipid soluble and thereby crosses the blood-brain barrier rapidly after ingesting or injecting. Amphetamines increase the activity of the neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine. However, they also induce the release of epinephrine, serotonin, and histamine. Elevated serotonin can affect the hypothalamus and thereby, cause hyperthermia. Increased dopamine levels in the central nervous system (CNS) cause psychosis, euphoric effects, and other movement disorders. Amphetamine toxicity can also cause seizures due to neuronal death from the interaction between amphetamines and NMDA receptors. Catecholamine levels are also elevated in amphetamine overdose causing increased energy and increased stimulation with decreased lethargy. Tachycardia and other arrhythmias are due to the sympathomimetic effects of amphetamines. Amphetamines cause tachycardia and hypertension and can cause significant cerebral blood flow which increases by 30%. This is seen particularly in the left frontal cortex which can lead to hemorrhages and other forms of strokes. Several studies conclude that amphetamine abuse is strongly associated with coronary artery disease and with subarachnoid hemorrhages. Long-term use of amphetamines is associated with myonecrosis, cardiomyopathy, and myocardial infarction.