Management of an individual's diet can be quite challenging. It must take into account the daily intake of each person. While it may be challenging for an individual to accomplish it independently, it would be simpler if various levels of assistance were present, such as clinicians, advanced care providers, nurses, dietitians, and/or nutritionists, all functioning as a cohesive interprofessional team.

Clinicians or advanced care providers can help set the end goals patients can achieve with dietary lifestyle changes, such as lowering blood pressure or losing weight. They can provide the most current evidence on the effects of emphasizing both micro- and macronutrients and modifying patients' chronic medication regimens as their health improves. Nurses can support their patients' dietary goals by a variety of means. Examples include giving patients written instructions and/or precautions about dietary changes and goals, checking accurate vital signs to track how one's overall health is improving in response to dietary lifestyle changes, and stressing the significance of follow-up appointments to patients.

Dietitians and/or nutritionists can play a crucial role in assisting individuals in choosing a healthier diet. They can delve further into a person's dietary concerns and healthy eating practices and offer precise, ongoing feedback as the person makes changes. When people have trouble sticking to the suggested diet, they can also provide alternative methods to help with compliance.