Considerable controversy exists regarding the classification and identification of blue nevi, especially as it pertains to blue nevus-like melanoma. A more traditional term, malignant blue nevus, has been used to describe melanoma arising at the site of the blue nevus. The term is somewhat antiquated, as many have pointed out that the term implies that all cases involve a malignant transformation of an existing blue nevus, which is inaccurate. Melanoma may arise de novo with features of blue nevus, at the site of a previous blue nevus excision, or within a preexisting blue nevus.

It is essential that healthcare providers, particularly dermatologists and pathologists, understand the distinction and communicate appropriately to minimize morbidity and mortality and maximize patient outcomes.

Additionally, because blue nevi often get treated as melanomas, and clinicians may mistake the latter for benign lesions, primary care providers, including nurse practitioners, should be familiar with how blue nevi present clinically and recognize red flag signs that warrant biopsy and/or dermatology referral. Dermatologists should be comfortable and familiar enough with the presentation of blue nevi to avoid unnecessary procedures while maintaining a healthy respect for their malignant potential and appropriate clinical acumen to biopsy them when necessary. Dermatology specialized nursing staff can be valuable in assessing and treating these lesions, especially during excision and subsequent follow-up and patient counsel. All these clinicians, specialists, and nursing staff need to collaborate as an interprofessional team to guide these cases to optimal outcomes. [Level 5]