Worldwide, the International Shark Attack File notes 38 shark attacks on divers from 1990 through 1999. In the 10 years prior to this data, the number was 34, and only 20% of those attacks were fatal.

Of the 470 shark species, only 30 species of sharks have been found to have attacked humans, and only 4 of the 30 species make up the majority of attacks. Sharks with the most documented attacks are the Great White shark, the Tiger shark, and the Bull shark, but the oceanic whitetip shark is believed to have the most attacks even though many of these are undocumented due to attacks occurring at sea, rather than in the coastal waters where attacks are more easily reported. Oceanic whitetip sharks are the sharks that quickly congregate around ship and airplane accidents.

The scope of this problem is important. The United States is home to both the overall shark attack capital of the world (New Smyrna, Florida, although closely followed by South Africa and New South Wales) and the Great White shark attack capital of the world (California). While shark attacks receive an inordinate amount of media coverage, the likelihood of being bitten by a shark in the United States is less than 1 in 11.5 million. To put this in perspective, on average, 3300 individuals drown each year in the United States, while sharks attack affect only around 45 people, and on average only one of those cases is fatal.  Knowledge about shark attacks can provide insight into areas and species to avoid.

Almost half of all shark attacks are on surfers.