**Acute Thyroiditis**

Infectious thyroiditis is caused by gram-positive bacteria like streptococcus, staphylococcus, or fungi, mycoparasitic infection.

The destruction of thyroid parenchyma causes radiation-induced thyroiditis after exposure to radioactive iodine for treatment of Graves disease or thyroid cancer and high dose radiation to the neck for the lymphoma and other head and neck cancers.

**Subacute Thyroiditis**

This is caused by viruses like coxsackie A, B, echovirus. Granulomas are formed in the thyroid gland, which becomes fibrotic but can return to normal after treatment.

**Chronic Thyroiditis**

Hashimoto thyroiditis is an autoimmune phenomenon characterized by lymphocytic infiltration of the gland presumed to be due to similarities between thyroid protein and the viral structure resulting in cross-reacting antibodies. Anti-TPO antibodies that are present in 90% of patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis fix complement and are hence capable of inducing antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, causing the death of thyrocytes.

Postpartum thyroiditis is a destructive thyroiditis characterized by lymphocytic infiltration of the thyroid gland. Fetal cells that migrate to the maternal thyroid gland tend to survive the immunocompromised pregnancy state, and when the maternal immune system rebounds postpartum, it activates the autoimmune phenomenon and causes postpartum thyroiditis.

Drug-induced thyroiditis causing hyperthyroidism is usually caused by either an increase in the release and synthesis of thyroid hormone or by destructive thyroiditis caused by the release of preformed hormones. Whereas hypothyroidism is caused by a decrease in the synthesis and release of thyroid hormone or from hypophysitis causing secondary hypothyroidism. The iodine content of the drugs also causes thyroid dysfunction.

Reidel’s thyroiditis: Pathophysiology is not completely understood, but chronic inflammation by the mononuclear cells seems to play a role. It has also been claimed as IgG4 thyroid disease, which includes Reidel thyroiditis, autoimmune pancreatitis, interstitial pneumonia, and orbital pseudotumors.