There are few double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trials examining the treatment of CO poisoning, and controversy still exists regarding the best treatment recommendations. What is problematic with most of the studies is that the patient's baseline neurologic function is not known and assumed to be normal. Some studies have shown worse outcomes with HBO2 treated group than with the normobaric oxygen group (or sham-treated group), but there is a potential bias in the studies because more severely poisoned patients tend to get treatment with HBO2. There is also insufficient neuropsychiatric testing and long-term follow-up of the patients to differentiate long-term outcomes. More studies are needed to determine the best practice guidelines for CO poisoning.  However, the best evidence supports the use of HBO2 in acute CO poisoning, particularly Weaver's well done 2002 study.

It is better to err on the side of treating with HBO2 because the benefits of treating outweigh the risks.  The only major contraindication for HBO2 is a patient with untreated pneumothorax. The benefit of HBO2 is faster restoring of normal oxygenation of hemoglobin and improved oxygen delivery, and reducing reperfusion injury to ischemic tissue. Also, there is a benefit to the reduction and prevention of delayed neuropsychiatric syndromes, which are difficult to predict based on the poisoning. There is also the special case of treating pregnant patients in which the fetal hemoglobin has a greater affinity for CO than hemoglobin in the mother's red blood cells. The fetus acts as a sink for the CO, so pregnant patients may have fewer symptoms and lower COHb when compared to patients with similar exposures. Because of the increased toxicity of CO for the fetus and difficulty with evaluating, I recommend treating the pregnant patient with HBO2.