**Population Variations**

The stature of a person is a result of interactions between genetic adaptations and climatic conditions. The extremely cold climate favors short and round individuals, whereas individuals from hot climates are generally tall and thin, according to Allen's (1877) and Bergmann's rules (1847). Following Allen's rule, the distal limb segments in Equatorial Africans are longer than those from more temperate climates.

According to the definition, 97.5% of the population belongs to normal and tall stature and only -2 SD, i.e., 2.5% of the population has short stature. However, the prevalence rate may vary with the climatic conditions of the geographical area.

**Prevalence of Short Stature**

Saudi Arabia recorded a relatively high frequency of short stature, i.e., in boys; the study found a prevalence of 11.3% in children and 1.8% in adolescents. In girls, short stature was prevalent in 10.5% of children and 1.2% in adolescents.

A study on the Galician population from Spain has recorded 1% of children with short stature due to malnutrition among the 7438 recruited children.

A study from South India recorded the prevalence rate of 2.86% in school-going children. The study examined 15644 children, out of which 448 (2.86%) had short stature. The major reasons behind short stature were genetics and constitutional delay in growth in 66.67% of children, whereas 13.79% and 9.20% had hypothyroidism and growth hormone deficiency, respectively. Only 6.69% of children were reported to have short stature caused by malnutrition.

**Sex-related Short Stature**

A retrospective study in South China showed a difference in the frequency of hospital-reported cases. More boys were admitted than girls.

Meanwhile, the prevalence rate in Rosario, Argentina, was found to be statistically higher in females (16.4%) than males (8.4%) (p<0.001).

**Age-related Short Stature**

Any individual who has not attained skeletal maturation, i.e., the union of epiphyseal plates, can be affected.