Sertoli cell-only syndrome does not have a specific, exact, identified etiology, but various causes have been proposed. These include microdeletions on the Y-chromosome (particularly in the azoospermia factor (AZF) region), chemical or toxin exposure, radiation therapy, or severe testicular trauma. Recent data suggests a Y-chromosomal CDY1 deletion in Sertoli cell-only syndrome, and analysis of DAZ and CDY1 genes by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing may ultimately help predict this condition and evaluate the potential for finding any mature spermatozoa for assisted reproduction.

Sertoli cells have multiple vital reproductive functions in males. They play an essential role in the proper growth and development of spermatogonia by secreting substances required for their growth and nourishment. Sertoli cells also secrete the anti-Mullerian hormone, which leads to the regression of the Mullerian ducts in a male fetus.

Sertoli cells also secrete inhibin-B, which provides the down-regulatory effect of follicle-stimulating hormone secretion on the hypothalamus.

Activin is another product secreted by Sertoli cells. It provides positive feedback on the hypothalamus for spermatogenesis and leads to a higher FSH level.

The exact cause of most cases of Sertoli cell-only syndrome is unknown, but various etiologies have been proposed. These include microdeletions on the Y-chromosome (particularly in the azoospermia factor (AZF) region), chemical or toxin exposure, radiation therapy, or severe testicular trauma. Recent data suggests a Y-chromosomal CDY1 deletion in Sertoli cell-only syndrome and that an analysis of DAZ and CDY1 genes by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) may ultimately help predict this condition and the potential for finding any mature spermatozoa for assisted reproduction.

Sertoli cells in Sertoli cell-only syndrome express different microRNA than these cells in obstructive azoospermia, suggesting they may play some role in the syndrome's pathogenesis.

Ovol1 and Ovol2 are zinc-finger transcription factors found in spermatogenesis at the third stage of meiosis in male germ cells. Using RT-PCR techniques, researchers have found that these factors were not detectable in the testes of patients with Sertoli cell-only syndrome but were found in other men capable of spermatogenesis.

Klinefelters syndrome is classically associated histologically with Sertoli cell-only syndrome and Leydig cell hyperplasia.

A case of Sertoli cell-only syndrome associated with a varicocele has also been reported.