PNIs may be broadly categorized by the status of the adjacent integument. "Closed" injuries involve the nerve trunk with sparing of the integument, while "open" injuries involve damage to both the nerve trunk and the adjacent integument. Open injuries may result from clean, sharp injuries and/or ragged, contusion injuries. An example of a clean, sharp injury would be an incision using a scalpel with a resultant transection of the nerve. A ragged, contusion injury may result from a projectile with nerve involvement. The ragged injuries lead to an increased inflammatory response with nerve fiber disruption, fiber displacement, and potential foreign body contamination.

Closed injuries are the result of strain and/or contusion and may result from mechanisms such as joint dislocation and crush injuries. Missile injuries are considered a subset of closed PNI with aspects of concussive forces, thermal forces, and/or transection.

In general, neurapraxia follows compression or entrapment, axonotmesis is commonly the result of crush and stretch injuries, and neurotmesis is found after sharp, traction, avulsion, and toxic damage to a nerve.

Common traumatic injuries with their commonly affected nerve(s) include the following:

Seat belt - the upper trunk of brachial plexus, stab in the posterior triangle of the neck - spinal accessory nerve, shoulder dislocation - axillary nerve, humerus fracture - radial nerve, elbow dislocation - median nerve, pelvic fracture/hip dislocation-sciatic nerve, knee dislocation/fibular fracture - peroneal nerve.

Nontraumatic focal nerve injuries are less common in the population. Compression can be interrupted by repositioning in able-bodied and unimpaired individuals. Spontaneous bleeding, vascular injury, and the mass effect or invasion of solid tumors can cause nerve injury.

Examples of iatrogenic non-surgical injuries include nerve compression from an adjacent hematoma, compression from improper positioning of the surgical patient, neural tension or fibrosis from irradiation, tension, or compression from a tourniquet, direct needle injury, and dressing/device-related injury. Iatrogenic surgical injuries may result from high tension, compression, and/or transection of the involved nerve. Procedures that have been identified as carrying an increased risk of iatrogenic injury include varicose vein procedures, inguinal hernia repair, Baker cyst removal, carpal tunnel release, posterior cervical triangle biopsy, arthrodesis, osteotomy, and osteosynthesis. The accessory nerve from a lymph node biopsy of the posterior triangle of the neck and the median nerve from a carpal tunnel repair are two of the nerves that are most likely to be iatrogenically injured.