When assessing the need for McRobert’s Maneuver, the structure of the female pelvis becomes of primary importance.  Four bones compose the pelvis: Sacrum, coccyx, and the two innominate bones. The ilium, ischium, and pubic rami fuse to form the innominate bones.

Within the pelvis, there are three joints: two sacroiliac joints posteriorly, and the pubic symphysis anteriorly.  The pelvic type depends upon the manner in which the bones of the pelvis fuse.  The "Caldwell-Moloy" classification system has classified four basic pelvis shapes: Gynecoid, anthropoid, android, and platypelloid.  A transverse line at the greatest diameter of the pelvic inlet determines the pelvic type.  This transverse line separates the anterior and posterior portions of the pelvis.  The majority of patients have a gynecoid shaped pelvis with almost equal anterior and posterior regions. This creates the largest internal space, compared to the other pelvis shapes, and helps facilitate the delivery of the fetus.  Pelvic shapes that contain a decreased anterior to posterior diameter may increase the chance of shoulder dystocia and decreased likelihood of a normal descent of the fetus.

When defining the anterior-posterior diameter, also known as the conjugate, one must consider the confines of the pelvic inlet. The pubic symphysis anteriorly, the sacral promontory posteriorly, and the linea terminalis laterally altogether confine the pelvic inlet. The distance to the sacral promontory from the inferior margin of the pubic symphysis determines the diagonal conjugate. The obstetrical conjugate is the diagonal conjugate minus 1-2cm.