The most obvious sign seen in hyperkyphosis is the cosmetic deformity seen as a rounded back due to the excessive forward curvature of the spine. As mentioned above, this deformity starts to appear after the age of 40 in age-related kyphosis, whereas the excessive curvature can begin to be appreciated in adolescents for postural kyphosis (normal vertebral structures) and Scheuermann disease (vertebral structural deformity). In addition to the cosmetic deformity, patients will also commonly display back pain ranging from mild to severe, fatigue, the pain worsened with movement, increased forward posture of the head, and uneven shoulder height. With more severe cases, patients can have chest pain, shortness of breath, weakness, and/or loss of sensation, and bowel/bladder incontinence.

For the physical examination, the exam is generally broken down into observation, palpation, and range of motion testing. In severe cases, upon observation in the sagittal plane, the upper back will have a rounded appearance, oftentimes described as a "hump". In milder cases, the "hump" in the back may not be apparent. Upon palpation, the paraspinal muscles will typically be tender. Of note, tight hamstrings are associated with Scheuermann disease, which are thought to be "lumbar compensators" and can cause an overcompensation, thereby increasing the risk of imbalance in these populations.

Lastly, it is important to examine the neurological system for patients with hyperkyphosis. Although there are typically no neurological findings in most cases, the most severe kyphosis can present with numbness, tingling, weakness, bowel, and bladder incontinence. In these cases, an MRI should be ordered to rule out cord compression.