Invented in 1862 by a Dutch ophthalmologist named Herman Snellen, the Snellen chart remains the most widespread technique in clinical practice for measuring visual acuity.

The Snellen Chart uses a geometric scale to measure visual acuity, with normal vision at a distance being set at 20/20. The numerator represents the distance that the patient is standing from the chart (in feet), while the denominator represents the distance from which a person with perfect eyesight is still able to read the smallest line that the patient can clearly visualize. For example, a patient standing 20 feet away from the chart who can clearly read until the line of font that a person with normal visual acuity can read from 40 feet away would be measured as 20/40 vision. A similar assessment for testing near vision can be done using a pocket card held about 14 inches from the patient's eyes. There are only nine letters on the chart, known as optotypes: C, D, E, F, L, O, P, T, and Z. Finally, the sizing of letters is geometrically consistent, meaning that optotypes representing 20/40 are twice the size of those representing 20/20.

Other notable visual acuity charts include the following:

- ****Bailey–Lovie****:****Recognizing the concerns of the Snellen chart, which are covered in the next section below, in 1976, the Australians Bailey and Lovie redesigned the Snellen chart. The Bailey-Lovie chart contains 14 rows, each with five letters. The size of the characters decreases from the first to the last row. The accuracy of this chart is considered superior to the Snellen chart.

- **ETDRS**: Developed in 1982 by a researcher named Rick Ferris, the ETDRS is a modification of the Bailey-Lovie chart to overcome the limitations of the Snellen chart. The ETDRS chart is tested from a shorter distance (13 feet rather than 20 feet), has the same amount of letters in every row (five letters each), and has an equal spacing of both the letters and the rows on a logarithmic scale. Shamir et al. found the ETDRS to be significantly more accurate and reproducible than the Snellen chart, yet its adoption in clinical practice has been limited due to its cost, longer testing time, and size of the chart.

- **Jäger**: Invented in 1854 by the Austrian ophthalmologist Jäger, this chart tests near vision. The card contains 11 short paragraphs, which are numbered from 1 (smallest font) to 11 (largest font). The card is held roughly 14 inches from the nose at a comfortable reading distance for testing.

- **Tumbling E:**Dr. Snellen also developed this chart, which he designed for children and those unable to read or unfamiliar with the Roman alphabet. This chart displays a capital letter E facing in various directions. While observing each character, the patient points in the direction that the E is facing.

- **Landolt C:**Comparable to the Tumbling E, this chart displays a C - which some say appears more similar to a broken ring - facing in various directions. The chart was developed by the Swiss ophthalmologist Landolt and is regarded as a laboratory standard by the International Council of Ophthalmology.

- **LEA Symbols Chart**: This chart was designed for visual acuity screening in children to eliminate the problems of language barriers. The chart utilizes symbols and creates a play environment to entertain the pediatric patient during the exam. Vivekanand et al. determined that the LEA symbols chart performs better than the Snellen chart for visual acuity assessments in preschool children.

- **Freiburg Visual Acuity Test (FrACT)**: The FrACT is an automated, computerized test that displays large Landolt C optotypes on a monitor screen. The monitor randomly presents Landolt C characters in various sizes and orientations. Schulze-Bonsel et al. determined that the FrACT can be utilized to quantify the visual acuities previously characterized as "hand motion" and "counting fingers."

**Snellen Chart Procedure**

- Position the patient sitting 20 feet from the chart. Note that projecting the chart on a mirror can be a useful way to simulate the 20-foot testing distance in shorter clinical lanes.

- Ensure that the room and Snellen chart are adequately illuminated.

- The patient may wear his/her current corrective lenses to assess for corrected visual acuity.

- In the absence of corrective lenses, a pinhole may be used, which often resolves the refractive error. This is done by assessing visual acuity while looking through a pinhole.

- Test the eyes one at a time, beginning with the worse eye while covering the good eye.

- Ask the patient to begin reading letters from the top.

- The smallest line read represents the visual acuity.

- Patients unable to read the large E on the chart (Figure 1) when wearing the best corrective lens have a visual acuity measuring less than 20/200, which is termed "legally blind" in the United States.

- For patients unable to see the eye chart, check if they can count fingers (CF vision), see hand movements (HM vision), or perceive the light from a flashlight (LP vision). If the patient fails to identify the light, record this as no light perception (NLP).

- Repeat the procedure to measure the opposite eye.