As there is a lack of good-quality clinical trials in HTC, given the rarity of the disorder, the treatment options are mainly based on previous observational studies, case series, and case reports. As such, the medical management for HTC continues to evolve as newly published evidence becomes available. The medical therapies chiefly focus on lowering serum phosphate levels and decreasing the levels of inflammatory markers. However, the ideal therapy for the heritable form of HTC would be gene-replacement therapy for the defective gene. Until the time becomes available, research should also focus on hormone replacement therapy with iFGF23 to regulate serum phosphate levels.

The medications currently prescribed for phosphate reduction include sevelamer, lanthanum, aluminum hydroxide, acetazolamide, probenecid, nicotinamide, and niacinamide.

On the other hand, nicotinamide and niacinamide contribute by inhibiting the sodium-phosphate cotransporters in the proximal renal tubules of kidneys and intestines, thereby decreasing the urinary and intestinal absorption of phosphorus.

Patients with hyperostosis and inflammatory signs and symptoms require non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). There have been reports of the use of short-term steroids also for such conditions.

Surgical excision of the calcific masses needs to be done in severe cases, with the swellings causing significant limitation of joint movements and disability. However, often these surgeries have to be repeated when regrowth of the swellings occurs.