The flexor carpi ulnaris is important for many surgical exposures, including exposure of the shaft of the ulna. When treating for open reduction and internal fixation of ulnar fractures, osteotomy of the ulna, ulnar lengthening, ulnar shortening, or treatment of the fibrous anlage of the ulna in cases of ulnar clubhand, the primary surgical exposure aims to exposure the ulnar shaft through the inter-nervous plane between the extensor carpi ulnaris and flexor carpi ulnaris muscles. The ulnar nerve travels down the forearm under the flexor carpi ulnaris, and the surgeon must be careful to strip the flexor carpi ulnaris from the ulna epiperiosteally. The ulnar nerve may be damaged if dissection into the flexor carpi ulnaris is achieved, and thus the surgeon must identify the ulnar nerve between the two heads of the Flexor carpi ulnaris before flexor carpi ulnaris stripping off the ulnar shaft.

The flexor carpi ulnaris is surgically important for the volar approach to the ulnar nerve at the wrist. This volar approach is used to decompress the canal of Guyon in cases of ulnar nerve compression. The volar carpal ligament is seen as a continuation of the deep palmar fascia and flexor carpi ulnaris fibers. The flexor carpi ulnaris fascia must be incised to allow muscle retraction to reveal the ulnar nerve and artery. The ulnar nerve and artery lie just beneath the flexor carpi ulnaris and volar carpal ligament, and care must be taken during superficial and deep surgical dissection to protect the ulnar nerve.

During subcutaneous transposition of the ulnar nerve for cubital tunnel syndrome, the deep and superficial aponeurosis covering the two flexor carpi ulnaris heads are released. A transverse arc of fascia is found distal to the flexor carpi ulnaris ulnar hiatus and released to avoid iatrogenic compression. The surgeon must be careful to avoid ligating the flexor carpi ulnaris motor branches during flexor carpi ulnaris release.