# Continuing Education Activity

Aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) is a rare congenital skin defect characterized by a focal or extensive absence of the epidermis, dermis, and occasionally subcutaneous tissue. The exact etiology of ACC is not well understood; however, it is likely due to impaired prenatal skin development. The disease presents as solitary or multiple lesions and can appear on any part of the body, although 70 to 90 percent of lesions are localized to the vertex of the scalp. ACC has been classified into six subtypes, some of which are associated with congenital dermatologic syndromes. Although most lesions are self-healing, certain locations and clinical characteristics should prompt a more thorough workup to screen for underlying soft tissue anomalies that can potentially be life-threatening. This activity examines when aplasia cutis congenita should be considered on differential diagnosis and how to properly evaluate it. This activity highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of aplasia cutis congenita.
- Review the presentation of aplasia cutis congenita.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for aplasia cutis congenita
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care and outcomes in patients with aplasia cutis congenita.

# Introduction

Aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) is a rare congenital skin defect characterized by a focal or extensive absence of the epidermis, dermis, and occasionally subcutaneous tissue.

A classification for ACC was proposed in 1986, which is still accepted today, and presented below.

- Group 1: Scalp ACC without multiple anomalies

- Group 2: Scalp ACC with limb abnormalities

- Group 3: Scalp ACC with epidermal and organoid nevi

- Group 4: ACC overlying congenital malformations

- Group 5: ACC with associated fetus papyraceus or placental infarct

- Group 6: ACC with epidermolysis bullosa

- Group 7: ACC localized to extremities without blistering

- Group 8: ACC due to specific teratogens

- Group 9: ACC associated with malformation syndromes

# Etiology

The etiology of ACC is likely multifactorial. Genetics and exogenous factors likely play a role in developing lesions. The suspected exogenous causes include placental infarcts, teratogenic substances like methimazole, intrauterine infections, trauma, and neural tube defects.

Adams-Oliver syndrome is ACC on the scalp plus skull defect plus cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenital plus limb defects plus cardiac anomalies.

Bart syndrome is ACC of lower extremities plus epidermolysis bullosa.

Setleis syndrome is bilateral temporal ACC plus "leonine" facies.

# Epidemiology

ACC is a rare congenital condition with an incidence of approximately 1 to 3 out of 10,000 births.

# Pathophysiology

As previously stated, the exact pathophysiology of ACC is not well understood. A 2013 study looking at 5-generation, autosomal-dominant ACC found a mutation in the BMS1 gene, which plays a role in skin morphogenesis.

# Histopathology

The diagnosis of ACC can typically be made solely from clinical examination. Many providers withhold performing a lesional biopsy given the patient's age demographics and typical scalp involvement. When a biopsy is necessary to aid in the diagnosis, proper workup, including imaging of the lesion with ultrasound (US) or MRI, is important to ensure there are no underlying malformations that can be damaged during the biopsy procedure.

# History and Physical

ACC can have a variable presentation at birth including an erosion, ulceration, membrane-covered defect, or scar, indicating intrauterine healing. Solitary scalp lesions make up approximately 70% of all ACC cases, although multiple lesions affecting the face, trunk and extremities can also be seen.

# Evaluation

ACC can be associated with underlying morphologic abnormalities in approximately 37% of cases, according to Mesrati et al.

# Treatment / Management

The approach to managing patients with ACC varies based on the size of the lesion and whether underlying defects are present. For small lesions, less than 4 cm without additional findings, daily cleansing of the lesion(s) with an application of topical antibacterial ointment is recommended until healing is complete.

# Differential Diagnosis

ACC is often distinguishable with a good clinical exam, but lesions with similar presentations at birth should be considered and ruled out. A meningocele is a serious neural tube defect where the neural sac protrudes from the CNS and can present as a midline skin or membrane-covered defect, commonly on the scalp.

# Prognosis

Although isolated ACC without an underlying defect can have a relatively benign course when complications occur, the risk of mortality dramatically increases. The estimated mortality rate ranges from 20% to 55% as a result of serious complications.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of aplasia cutis congenita can be straightforward unless underlying abnormalities are present. Complications can occur, requiring an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals to help diagnose and manage these cases. With complications, the morbidity and mortality of ACC are very high, which reiterates the necessity for good communication between providers involved.

- Lesion size greater than 4 cm

- Presence of hair tufting

- Neurologic deficits

- Hemorrhagic lesion

- Membranous-type ACC

If imaging with ultrasound or MRI shows concern for an underlying abnormality, surgical intervention is usually necessary to prevent complications such as superior sagittal sinus hemorrhage, meningitis, thrombosis, among others. When isolated cases without underlying defects are present, the prognosis is quite good with simple wound care and close monitoring by pediatricians and/or dermatologists.