To perform the lower extremity duplex scanning, the patient should be examined supine with slight abduction and external rotation of the hip. The duplex scanning initiates at the inguinal crease. The transducer should be placed transversally over the common femoral artery. A typical feature of superficial and deep femoral arteries, and femoral vein just distal to the inguinal crease, on the transverse duplex, is a mickey mouse face. However, the longitudinal scanning reveals an inverted-Y feature for CFA, SFA, and DFA. The scanning would be continued by moving the transducer distally. The popliteal artery examination starts from the popliteal fossa while flexing the knee and continues proximally to the level of the Hunter canal. The alternative left lateral and prone positions are recommended to evaluate the popliteal fossa arteries, including popliteal, posterior tibialis, and peroneal.

The popliteal artery is located centrally in the popliteal fossa between the medial and lateral heads of the gastrocnemius muscles. The examination of the posterior tibialis starts from the distal end, posterior to the medial malleolus. To scan the peroneal artery, the lateral aspect of the posterior calf parallel to the fibular bone should be followed. To scan the anterior tibialis artery, the arterial course from the distal end at the talar bone neck should be followed proximally. Alternatively, the arterial course could be followed from the proximal arterial end at the tibiofibular plane and continued distally.

Angle-corrected spectral Doppler waveforms are acquired from longitudinal images proximal to, at, and distal to the sites of suspected stenosis.

Doppler beam angle of equal to or less than 60 degrees relative to the transducer insonation beam and the arterial wall of interest should be used to provide optimal pulsed spectral Doppler recordings.

Diagnostic criteria for hemodynamically significant stenosis (50 to 99% stenosis) require that the PSV at the site of stenosis is double or more when compared with a more proximal segment.

While evaluating suspected pseudoaneurysms, the size of the pseudoaneurysm, measurements of the residual lumen, and that of the communicating channel(length and width) should be documented using grayscale and color doppler techniques. Color doppler will show the characteristic 'yin-yang' sign due to the blood swirling within the pseudoaneurysm.

Characteristic Duplex feature of a femoral pseudoaneurysm is a "to and fro" flow pattern in the stalk of the aneurysm and sac emptying during the systolic and diastolic phases, respectively. Spectral Doppler waveforms obtained in the communicating channel demonstrate a 'to and fro' (bidirectional) flow pattern. The waveform will have a rapid systolic upstroke with exaggerated deceleration and an elongated reverse flow component.

Arteriovenous fistulas (AVF) are less common than pseudoaneurysms.

On spectral doppler, there will be arterialization of flow within the vein.

While evaluating peripheral aneurysms, their location and widest diameter of the aneurysm should be documented on grayscale images. If present within the aneurysm, their patency, and intraluminal thrombus should be documented using color doppler. Popliteal artery aneurysm is the most common peripheral aneurysm contributing to 80% of all cases. It is often misdiagnosed as Deep vein thrombosis (DVT), peroneal nerve palsy, ruptured Baker's cyst, and other causes of acute limb ischemia(ALI).