The major blood supply for the primary auditory cortex is the middle cerebral artery. The middle cerebral artery is a branch of the internal carotid artery and supplements the anterior cerebral artery as part of the anterior circulation of the brain. The most proximal segment of the middle cerebral artery (M1) runs lateral to the optic chiasm after branching from the internal carotid artery and travels through the lateral sulcus. The middle cerebral artery runs along the lateral sulcus in an anterior to posterior fashion to supply much of the lateral cerebral cortex and insula as part of the M2 region. The middle cerebral artery then, most commonly, bifurcates to form terminal branches that supply much of the cortex.

The first branch that comes off of the middle cerebral artery to supply the auditory regions is the frontal-opercular artery and provides the primary blood supply to the anterior insula by running superior from its branch point. The next artery is the central sulcus artery, which supplies the posterior insula and much of the anterior parietal lobe. The following three arteries then branch inferiorly from the middle cerebral artery are the anterior, middle, and posterior temporal arteries and provide blood to the middle temporal gyrus and posterior temporal gyrus. Lastly, the angular artery, as well as parts of the middle cerebral artery itself, supply blood to the primary auditory area, the angular gyrus, and the supramarginal gyrus.

Vascular injury, such as an ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke, is the most common form of insult to the primary auditory cortex. Cortical ischemia and necrosis that result due to a reduction in blood supply and nutrients to the middle cerebral artery or any of its branches can cause irreversible damage to the primary auditory cortex and associated auditory areas. The majority of input to the primary auditory cortex originates in the contralateral ear; one would expect vascular insults to have a greater auditory deficit in the contralateral ear when compared to the ipsilateral ear.