There are several studies performed to estimate the prevalence of burnout among medical residents. Rosen et al., in 2006, reported that 4.3% of internal medicine residents meet the criteria for burnout according to the MBI at the beginning of the intern year, and this percentage increases to 55.3% by the end of the intern year. Another study reported that 76% of internal medicine residents at the University of Washington met the criteria for burnout, regardless of the postgraduate year of training.

Specialty wise, the results of different studies are mixed. A systematic review conducted by Rodrigues et al. concluded that residents in general surgery, anesthesiology, orthopedics and obstetrics, and gynecology have the highest prevalence of burnout syndrome. A possible reason for this is the high-stress work environment, dealing with life-threatening emergencies and overloaded shifts. These factors could also explain why specialties with lesser shifts and more outpatient and non-emergent work such as plastic surgery, dermatology, and otolaryngology are associated with significantly lower burnout levels.

In 2004, Martini et al. conducted a study that compared burnout rates among different specialties using the Maslach Burnout Inventory. They reported an overall burnout rate of 50%, with the specialty wise rates being the following: 75% in OB/GYN, 63% in internal medicine, 63% in neurology, 60% in ophthalmology, 50% in dermatology, 40% in general surgery and psychiatry each, and 27% in family medicine.

Burnout increases the likelihood of committing a medical error, with an 11% increase in likelihood for every one-point increase in the depersonalization score on the MBI and a 5% increase in likelihood for every one-point increase in the emotional exhaustion score.