The results and conclusions of the following studies highlight the substantial impact of acute stroke, regardless of type or subtype, and reinforce the need for joint efforts to improve acute stroke care, secondary prevention, and subsequent long-term prognoses.

According to the 2019 systematic analysis of stroke for the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study, the annual number of strokes (ischemic, ICH, SAH, and all strokes combined) and deaths due to stroke increased substantially from 1990 to 2019.

A United Kingdom population-based cohort study showed that 5 years after a first stroke (ischemic, ICH, SAH, and uncertain type), 47% of patients had died, and 39% were disabled.

Based on a longitudinal observational study of the Swedish Stroke Register (Riksstroke), at 30 days after a first stroke, 89.9% of patients with ischemic stroke were alive compared to 69.3% of patients with ICH. Although early mortality was higher for patients diagnosed with ICH than ischemic stroke, it was determined that beyond 30 days, survival declined at about the same rate for both groups, but the proportion of functionally dependent survivors was consistently higher for patients diagnosed with ICH at all time points. Survival at 5 years was 49.4% for ischemic stroke and 37.8% for ICH. The authors concluded that 5 years after a first stroke, over 65% of patients with ischemic stroke and over 75% of patients with ICH, were either dead or functionally dependent.

In a large national cohort of stroke patients in Australia and New Zealand, 52.8% of patients hospitalized with a first stroke (ischemic, ICH, SAH, and unspecified) survived at 5 years and 36.4% at 10 years. The cumulative incidence of stroke recurrence was 19.8% at 5 years and 26.8% at 10 years.

A population-based study in the Netherlands of patients aged 18 to 49 years who were 30-day survivors of a first stroke (ischemic, ICH, and stroke not otherwise specified) showed the risk of mortality remained higher than the general population up to 15 years later.

In a United Kingdom population-based cohort study, the rate of stroke recurrence at 5 years reduced from 18% in those who had their stroke (ischemic, ICH, and SAH) in 1995 to 1999 to 12% in 2000 to 2005, but there has been no reduction since 2005.

A study using Danish nationwide health registries showed the overall 1-year and 10-year risks of recurrence were 4% and 13% following a first ischemic stroke and 3% and 12% following a first ICH. Additionally, the 1-year and 10-year all-cause mortality risks for ischemic stroke were 17% and 56% after a first stroke and 25% and 70% after a recurrent stroke. For ICH, the 1-year and 10-year all-cause mortality risks were 37% and 70% after a first stroke and 31% and 75% after a recurrent stroke.