# Continuing Education Activity

Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is a rare clinical entity characterized by diffuse intra-abdominal gelatinous ascites with mucinous implants on peritoneal surfaces. Proper diagnosis and management of pseudomyxoma peritonei can majorly impact a patient's lifespan and quality of life. This activity outlines the evaluation and management of pseudomyxoma peritonei, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the pathophysiology of pseudomyxoma peritonei.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with pseudomyxoma peritonei.
- Summarize the management considerations for patients with pseudomyxoma peritonei.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination amongst interprofessional team members to improve outcomes for patients affected by pseudomyxoma peritonei.

# Introduction

Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is a rare clinical entity, characterized by diffuse intra-abdominal gelatinous ascites, the so-called “jelly belly,” with mucinous implants on peritoneal surfaces.

# Etiology

Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) demonstrate an increased risk of developing mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix. KRAS mutation has also been present in 70 % of appendiceal adenomas.

# Epidemiology

The estimated incidence of pseudomyxoma peritonei is approximately 1 to 4 out of a million annually.

# Pathophysiology

There are several steps involved in the pathogenesis of pseudomyxoma peritonei. Initially, tumor cells originating from the mucinous epithelium of the appendix continuously produce mucus into the appendiceal lumen and form a mucocele, which eventually ruptures. Free-floating mucinous epithelial tumor cells then implant in various parts of peritoneal cavity following the intraperitoneal fluid current and gravity, thanks to their absence of adhesive properties. It is termed as the so-called ‘redistribution phenomenon.’

Mobile organs such as the small bowel and its mesentery are usually less likely to be involved compared to more fixed parts such as antrum, duodenojejunal flexure, ligament of Treitz, ileocecal and rectosigmoid region, early in the disease process. But in the end-stage disease, the entire peritoneal cavity could be engulfed.

# Histopathology

Macroscopic Findings:

Macroscopic examination often reveals abundant gelatinous pelvic or abdominal mucin or mucinous ascites accompanied by cystic epithelial implants on peritoneal surfaces. These lesions vary in size from a few mm to a few centimeters. A large ‘omental cake’ is also frequently found.

Histopathology:

Multiple histological grading systems have been proposed for pseudomyxoma peritonei. Ronnett et al. first divided pseudomyxoma peritonei into two groups: disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis (DPAM) and peritoneal mucinous carcinomatosis (PMCA).

- Acellular mucin: Mucin within the peritoneal cavity without neoplastic epithelial cells.

- Low-grade mucinous carcinoma peritonei (synonymous with DPAM) presents as mucin pools with low cellularity (less than 10%), bland cytology and non-stratified cuboidal epithelium. Tumor cells are arranged in strips or gland-like structures. Infiltrative growth is not present.

- High-grade mucinous carcinoma peritonei (synonymous with PMCA): Mucin pools with high cellularity, moderate/severe cytological atypia, numerous mitoses, and cribriform growth pattern. Destructive infiltrative invasion of underlying organs is often present.

- High-grade mucinous carcinoma peritonei with signet ring cells: Any lesion with a component of signet ring cells, classified separately because of their worse prognosis.

Immunohistochemistry:

Researchers have suggested MUC 2 over-expression as a molecular marker for PMP of intestinal origin.

# History and Physical

At the initial stage, pseudomyxoma peritonei is often asymptomatic or presents with non-specific signs and symptoms sometimes misdiagnosed as irritable bowel syndrome. As the disease progresses, patients may present with appendicitis-like symptoms, increased abdominal girth, the presence of pelvic masses or new-onset hernia. More advanced disease may result in abdominal distension, ascites, bowel obstruction, and nutritional compromise. Reports also exist of superinfected pseudomyxoma peritonei and subsequent sepsis.

Physical examination may reveal a distended abdomen with a palpable omental cake. A rectal exam may reveal deposits in the pouch of Douglas or the rectovesical pouch. Ovarian masses may be palpable in females.

# Evaluation

Imaging studies:

CT scan with contrast of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is currently the imaging modality of choice for the diagnosis of pseudomyxoma peritonei. Typical CT appearance is ‘scalloping’ of the surface of the liver and spleen caused by loculated accumulations of mucin, which distinguishes mucin from fluid ascites. The mucinous material is similar in density to water. There are also islands of higher attenuation due to scattered solid elements and calcification within mucinous material. However, the primary appendiceal lesion might be absent or hard to identify on imaging. Compared to CT, gadolinium-enhanced MRI is more sensitive in localizing the tumor, and in assessing the small bowel as well as the hepatoduodenal ligament. PET/CT scan might be helpful in more aggressive variants by detecting extra-abdominal disease.

Circulating tumor markers:

Tumor markers are found to have prognostic value and are useful for follow up of patients after treatment. CEA and CA 19.9 are found to have a high level in PMP with an appendiceal origin. CA 125 is also found to be high but with ovarian involvement.

Histopathology:

The final diagnosis relies on histopathological examination of the biopsy and surgical specimen through laparoscopy or laparotomy, especially when the clinical and radiological manifestations are not specific. Percutaneous image-guided biopsies are of limited value since the resultant material may be acellular mucin.

# Treatment / Management

Traditional periodic surgical debulking has been less favored because of inevitable disease recurrence and a higher risk of repeated surgeries.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Ascites from another origin (cirrhosis, CHF)

- Ruptured mucinous cystadenomas of appendix or ovary

- Endometriosis with myxoid change

- Ruptured viscus with mucus extravasation

- Soft tissue neoplasms with myxoid changes

# Prognosis

Prognosis of pseudomyxoma peritonei correlates closely to histopathological classification. The ten-year survival rate of patients with low-grade tumors/DPAM is 63% compared to 40.1% in patients with high-grade tumors/PMCA and 0% in patients with high-grade tumors with signet ring cells following the treatment of CRS/HIPEC in one recent study.

# Complications

Major complications after CRS/HIPEC include thromboembolism, anastomotic leak, bowel perforation, fistula formation, abscess, and wound dehiscence. There is also a high risk for neutropenia, sepsis, pleural effusion, and respiratory insufficiency.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patient with a newly diagnosed pseudomyxoma peritonei is recommended to undergo CRS/HIPEC if medically fit with the goal of achieving complete cytoreduction.  Even though the long-term outcomes after treatment are impressive for patients with low-grade histology, there’s still a significant recurrence of the disease. Regular follow-up is essential to monitor disease progression.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Most cases of pseudomyxoma peritonei are discovered in an advanced stage due to its indolent behavior. Pathological diagnosis is crucial to determine the treatment plan. When suspicious lesions are encountered incidentally during laparoscopy or laparotomy, the best strategy is to take generous biopsies, remove appendix if accessible, and only proceed with further treatment after pathological confirmation of the diagnosis and clinical assessment of the patient. During follow-up, the primary care provider, nurse practitioner or internist should be aware of recurrence and consider imaging studies and referral to the oncologist. Pseudomyxoma peritonei treatment is best in an interprofessional team approach including specialists, oncology trained specialty nursing, and when necessary, pharmacists, collaborating for optimal patient care and outcomes. [Level V]