**Route of Entry**

The actual route of entry into the eye is not clearly understood. Proposed routes include the bloodstream, sheaths of the posterior ciliary arteries, and nerves, cerebrospinal fluid, and sheath of the optic nerve.

**Anterior Segment**

Ocular pathology involves both anterior and posterior segments, and the mechanisms are not completely understood. The presence of microfilariae in the eye and indeed in the skin usually does not cause much problem. On the other hand, dead or dying microfilariae trigger an inflammatory cascade that leads to tissue damage associated with the disease. Specifically, it is known that the sclerosing keratitis that leads to cornea blindness is mediated through modification of ICAM-1 expression and production of IL-4 and IL-13.****While cataract is a common complication seen in onchocerciasis as a result of induced changes in anterior chamber physiology, only a handful of cases have reported glaucoma as an independent complication of onchocerciasis.Onchocerca volvulus, Wolbachia plays a central role in the immunogenic response to dead microfilariae.

**Posterior Segment**

It, however, appears that mechanisms leading to chorioretinal and optic nerve damage may be mediated along a different pathway. Past literature has confirmed the evidence of persistent deterioration in posterior segment pathologies in some patients despite clearance of microfilariae from the anterior chamber of the eye or after years of repeated ivermectin treatment.O. volvulus antigens (Ov39) and the retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) antigen (hr44) may contribute to posterior segment diseases.