There are few absolute contraindications to dental extraction, especially when presented with an acutely symptomatic tooth. However, there are circumstances where a patient should be better optimized before extraction is performed. In all cases, a thorough risk vs. benefit discussion of tooth removal must be had with the patient. This discussion must encompass an understanding of the patient's medical background and the specific tooth or teeth being extracted.

**Uncontrolled Medical Conditions Which Impact Dental Extractions**

In all cases where a patient presents with an uncontrolled medical diagnosis, all reasonable efforts should be made to liaise with the patient's medical team or general medical practitioner to allow them to control the patient's condition. Once this has been achieved, it would be suitable to reassess the patient for their extraction.

**Neurological Conditions**

Conditions such as uncontrolled epilepsy put patients at an increased risk of aspiration or injury if a seizure occurs during an extraction.

Patients with a history of hypertension or cerebrovascular disease are at a higher risk of stroke. It is important to clarify if they have had any previous transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs). If a patient is at an increased risk of stroke without any medical management, it is advisable to resolve this before dental extractions. It is important to note that while not a contraindication to dental extractions, many stroke-risk or post-stroke patients are on blood thinning medication, and appropriate hemostatic measures should be considered.

**Respiratory Conditions**

Respiratory conditions, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), are not a total contraindication to dental extractions. However, many of these patients will prefer to be treated sitting up due to breathlessness experienced when lying flat.

**Cardiovascular Conditions**

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a term that covers a range of conditions, including ischaemic heart disease, infective endocarditis, hypertension, and dysrhythmias. Infective endocarditis (IE) is often discussed in the context of dental treatment. Prior to 2008, a range of clinical guidelines recommended antibiotic prophylaxis for certain cases where patients were at risk of developing IE.

**Renal Impairment**

Patients who have severe renal impairment can be complicated to manage. They are often at risk of increased bleeding and contracting infections. Where possible, it is appropriate to avoid surgical intervention for these patients. Due to their increased risk of infection, antibiotic prophylaxis is also often appropriate. Renal patients may also be immunosuppressed if they have received a transplant. A clear understanding of a patient's renal diagnoses and liaising with the patient's renal team is advisable before dental extraction.

**Immunocompromised Patients**

Immunocompromised patients are at risk of developing systemic infections following invasive dental treatment such as extractions. They must be carefully handled, and liaison with their medical teams is advised. Antibiotic prophylaxis in this group is not necessarily required as there is no clear evidence that prophylactic antibiotics reduce post-operative infection. Each case should be assessed individually, and appropriate advice should be sought.

Other conditions, such as hematological and hepatic conditions and diabetes, pose similar issues relating to dental extractions, as outlined above.

**Medical Factors**

**Antiresorptive Agents**

Antiresorptive agents, such as bisphosphonates and denosumab, are primarily used to treat osteoporosis, cases of hypercalcemia related to malignancy, multiple myeloma, Paget's disease, and other skeletal changes.

A thorough dental assessment should be conducted before a patient begins a course of antiresorptive drugs. This allows any tooth with a poor prognosis to be removed before introducing MRONJ risk. However, it cannot always be avoided that a tooth requires extraction during or after antiresorptive treatment. Therefore, in these scenarios, a thorough risk vs. benefit discussion must be had with the patient prior to planning for an extraction.

Bisphosphonates can be administered in various ways, including orally and intravenously. A thorough history of bisphosphonate type, administration, and duration of use must be taken, as this will dictate the patient's risk of developing MRONJ. Higher risk factors have been identified, including over five years of use, concurrent steroid use, and advanced patient age.

Drug holidays are not advised with these drugs, as omitting doses does not negate the cumulative effect of these drugs. If a tooth does need to be removed following bisphosphonate therapy has begun, a thorough history should be taken from the patient, liaising with their medical team should be done if appropriate and clear consent and follow-up should be conducted with the patient.

**Steroid Use**

Steroids are prescribed to patients for a variety of reasons. Over time, they impair healing, which must be considered with dental extractions. Additionally, some evidence suggests the benefit of doubling one dose of steroids prior to extraction to compensate for adrenal suppression. However, this depends on the type and dose of steroid a patient takes; if required, liaising with the patient's steroid prescriber can be advisable.

**Anticoagulants and Antiplatelet Drugs**

Anticoagulants and antiplatelets are widely prescribed, so familiarity with them and their impacts on dental treatment are imperative. A clear understanding of why a patient is on such a drug and their medical background is essential when considering omitting doses of such medication to allow for dental treatment. Evidence suggests that omitting doses of anticoagulants and antiplatelets is not routinely indicated, as the risk of missing doses on the patient's overall health must be balanced against the risk of oral bleeding, which can usually be locally controlled.

Warfarin management is straightforward, as the international normalized ratio (INR) test is easily done in dental surgery and provides a quantitative measure of the patient's bleeding tendency. Evidence indicates that if a patient has an INR of under 4.0, they are suitable for dental extractions in the primary care setting and that over 4.0, they should be treated in secondary care.

The introduction of novel oral anticoagulants (NOACs) has partially replaced warfarin usage. There is no INR-equivalent test for the NOACs; therefore, the management of these patients is a clinical judgment.

Local hemostatic measures include the use of oxidized cellulose materials in extraction sockets and the use of sutures to help minimize post-operative bleeding.

**Radiotherapy**

Patients undergoing or undergoing radiotherapy, especially in the head and neck region, are at risk of developing osteoradionecrosis (ORN).

**Tooth-specific Factors**

**Proximity to Vital Structures**

Proximity to the inferior dental nerve (IDN) is a common reason for deciding against dental extractions, primarily wisdom teeth. Radiographic signs of mandibular third molars close to the IDN include banding of the roots, loss of cortication of the IDN, and deviation of the IDN. Cone beam computerized tomography is useful in cases where the relationship between a mandibular molar and the IDN needs further investigation and visualization. The introduction of coronectomy techniques, where the coronal portion of the crown is removed to below the level of the cementoenamel junction, and the roots brought to at least 3 mm below the level of the surrounding bone, has provided an alternative treatment to total extraction of the tooth in scenarios where there is concern over IDN injury risk.

Proximity to the antral sinuses can be a reason for caution when planning an extraction due to the potential to create an oroantral communication (OAC). However, if a tooth is acutely symptomatic, a high risk of an OAC may not be a sufficient reason to avoid extraction. Radiographic signs that a root apex sits in the sinus include deviation of the sinus floor, a lack of continuity of the sinus floor, and long roots visually invading the antral space. A clear consent process with the patient is key in these scenarios.