Prasugrel has extensive use among cardiologists, ED physicians, mid-level practitioners (NPs and PAs), and internists. The choice of an antiplatelet medication depends upon the clinical situation. The addition of thienopyridine to aspirin is the standard of care for patients with acute coronary syndromes and patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. There have been concerns about clopidogrel treatment failure, defined as the inability to achieve adequate antiplatelet effect in an individual taking clopidogrel. An individualized DAPT approach may be potentially guided by genetic or platelet function testing; however, routine screening in percutaneous coronary intervention is not recommended. However, platelet function testing merits consideration for DAPT de-escalation.

Nurses are the ones to administer the drugs to the patients when the patients are inpatient and also the first responders when adverse effects occur during an inpatient stay. They can also provide patient counseling on dosing and signs of bleeding and serve as a contact point for ongoing care.

The role of a pharmacist is essential to look for any drug-drug interaction with any medication, and they can recommend discontinuation of any drugs that can alter the effectiveness of prasugrel if they are nonessential. They are the most accessible healthcare provider for patients. They can verify dosing, counsel patients on administration and adverse events, and report any concerns to other interprofessional team members.

As premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy is associated with stent thrombosis, myocardial infarctions, and increased cardiovascular events, it is crucial to educate the patient regarding compliance. Regular follow-ups are essential for the monitoring of bleeding. Discontinuation of DAPT for an elective procedure is an interdisciplinary decision, and DAPT should continue for 6 to 12 months after PCI.

Dual antiplatelet therapy requires interprofessional communication and a team approach, including primary care clinicians, specialists, nursing staff, and pharmacists, coordinating their activities and recording their findings in the patient record, so all healthcare team members operate from the same data. This approach to patient care will enhance outcomes and mitigate adverse events. [Level 5]