When performing brow lifting of any kind, it is crucial to obtain a detailed history, including determining the duration of the problem and what exactly bothers the patient. Besides the clinical examination, the surgeon should get a sense of the patient's psychological status to avoid patients who are likely to become depressed, combative, or aggressively dissatisfied postoperatively. The surgeon and patient should have a detailed discussion of the proposed surgery, addressing the anticipated outcomes and potential complications.

**Patient Consultation**

When assessing brows for height and shape, the patient should be sitting upright. If a patient likes how their brows, forehead, and eyelids used to look, it can be informative for the surgeon to view photographs of the patient at that age. However, care must always be taken when viewing photographs with patients or when using photograph manipulation software because doing so may lead to unreasonable expectations despite appropriate preoperative counseling. During the consultation, it is important for the surgeon not to impose their own aesthetic sensibilities upon the patient but rather provide guidance based upon experience. While the patient is holding a mirror, the surgeon should lift the brow medially, centrally, and laterally to determine the best position and arch. Doing this can also illustrate how secondary dermatochalasis of the upper eyelid is reduced and how crow's feet wrinkles are improved. Doing this also helps the surgeon estimate how much upper eyelid surgery may need to be performed along with the brow lift.

It is important to discuss surgical incisions, advantages, disadvantages, limitations, and likely scarring expected with different approaches to the operation. Before-and-after photographs of previous patients are useful in showing brow lift candidates the sort of results that are achievable and also to encourage them to ask questions based upon what they see. Photographs of scars should be shown to prospective patients as well. Standardized photographs should be taken for preoperative planning, intraoperative decision-making, and postoperative counseling. The latter is particularly useful in the event that the patient notices an imperfection after surgery - due to increased vigilance in the mirror - and the surgeon needs to assure the patient that the problem was preexisting and not a result of surgery.

Informed consent for a mid-forehead browlift should include the following points:

- The brow height and contour will not be absolutely symmetrical, as no person has perfectly symmetrical brows.

- Over the first few weeks, it is normal for the brow to settle, and therefore, the initial brow height will not be the final brow position.

- The aim is to create a natural-looking brow height and shape.

- Some degree of numbness always occurs, and in the majority of patients, it decreases over weeks but sometimes takes months.

- The brows will droop again with age and with time.

- The most significant risk is the risk of dissatisfaction with the result, but other risks include pain, bleeding, numbness, scarring, infection, and need for further surgery.

Clinical photographs are obtained from the following viewpoints:

- Full face, frontal

- Full face, 45 degrees right

- Full face, 45 degrees left

- Full face, 90 degrees right

- Full face, 90 degrees left

- Close up of both eyes, forehead, brows, and upper and lower lids at similar angles

For standardization purposes, patients should be sitting upright, with the head oriented in the Frankfort horizontal plane.

**Preoperative Preparation**

Forehead surgery, in general, and mid-forehead surgery, in particular, will cause impressive bruising. Therefore, aspirin and aspirin-containing products and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications are stopped one week before surgery, including most vitamins and herbal supplements. Arnica montana, however, may help to mitigate the ecchymosis. Patients must remove all makeup the night before and come in without false eyelashes. The skin is cleansed by the patient the night before and again, the morning of surgery to ensure the removal of all makeup products.

Scheduling at least two consultations before surgery allows the patient sufficient time to express desires and concerns. Furthermore, and just as importantly, it allows the surgeon to get to know the patient well. Certain patients are not suited to surgical intervention, and this may become apparent during subsequent visits. While both the patient and the surgeon must agree to proceed with an operation, either party may decide to abort the plan at any time before induction of anesthesia.