Tissue reactions to the suture material are rarely reported. The immune status of the recipient plays a role in the immunologic response to the suture antigen. However, people with a predisposition to allergies and autoimmune diseases are more likely to develop hypersensitivity reactions. Conversely, immunosuppressed individuals may be less likely to develop hypersensitivity. In one study, suture specimens were obtained from 12 renal transplant patients. All were receiving azathioprine and, most of them, steroids. Catgut, silk, nylon, and dacron were examined. The transplant had been less than 30 days earlier in four patients and ranged from two months to five years in the others. The remarkable finding was the minimal response, either fibroblastic or histiocytic, to the sutures. Actually, in some sections, the stitches appeared to have displaced adjacent healthy tissue without any cellular response.

Chronic irritant dermatitis, allergic contact dermatitis, and contact urticaria are among the responses related to suture reactions. Suture materials related to such responses are silk, catgut, and chromicized catgut. Such reactions are less common in synthetic absorbable sutures such as polyglactin 910 and poliglecaprone 25. In the case of non-absorbable stitches, such as polyamide 6/6 and nylon, both containing the monomer e-caprolactam, the risk of allergic reaction is low. Hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in cases where polypropylene and sterilized sutures with ethylene oxide and triclosan were used. The addition of dye for coloring sutures has also been reported as a cause of hypersensitivity.

Other materials related to hypersensitivity reactions are acrylic resin, cyanoacrylate, and 2-octyl cyanoacrylate. These materials are commonly found on adhesives, plastics, paints, inks, and topical skin adhesives. In the surgical setting, acrylates are found in adhesives and surgical strips for wound closure. Other causes of prior sensitization with acrylates are from sculptured nails, and bone and dental cement. This increases the risk of hypersensitivity reactions. Other allergens commonly found in adhesives besides acrylates are colophony, abitol, abietic acid, benzoyl peroxide, rubber accelerators, and antioxidants. Cases of hypersensitivity reaction while using a hydrocolloid dressing is due to colophonium.

Silk, when compared to catgut, is not only cheaper but is also more easily sterilized.

Vicryl sutures are among the preferred sutures of clinicians due to the low antigenicity, and sparse inflammatory infiltrates. Vicryl suture hypersensitivity is very rare. However, cases of suture allergies have been reported as pruritus, edema, pain, and seroma formation. At the moment, no standardized method to test this reaction has been reported. Still, simple placement of a single interrupted suture in the skin can evaluate a suture hypersensitivity.