There are both medical and surgical options for lichen sclerosus of the penis. Asymptomatic balanitis xerotica obliterans does not require therapy. For symptomatic lichen sclerosus, topical steroids are the main treatment. Betamethasone and triamcinolone are common options and typically require twice a day dosing. The patient is monitored for a response, and the frequency of topical steroids can be reduced to every other day or every third day if a good response after two months.

Poor response is typically seen when the patient is not compliant with the application. Topical calcineurin inhibitors have also been used but are considered second-line therapy. These include pimecrolimus and tacrolimus. There is no benefit to systemic oral steroids in the treatment.

Surgical options are required in the setting of symptomatic phimosis. The treatment is circumcision. Topical steroid use first may help reduce the inflammatory burden before surgical intervention.

When the urethra is involved, cystourethroscopy can be performed to identify the location of the disease. Direct visualization is important to identify the severity of stricture disease related to lichen sclerosus and exclude other causes of symptoms. Treatment for stricture may involve dilation and direct visual internal urethrotomy, or in more advanced cases or previous treatment failure, urethroplasty may be warranted.

Patients should be followed yearly for disease recurrence or evidence of progression to squamous cell carcinoma.