**Interruption of Antithrombotic Therapy Prior To Endoscopy**

**Elective Endoscopy**

In patients who need elective endoscopic procedures, if the indication for anti-thrombotic therapy is short-term, the procedure is best delayed until after that period. For patients on long-term or life-long antithrombotic treatment, the decision to temporarily hold the treatment for endoscopy should occur after a discussion with the patient and the concerned providers (primary medical provider, cardiologist, neurologist, or hematologist). In some high-risk patients, these agents cannot be interrupted, in which case the surgeon and patient must consider the risks and benefits of the procedure. A simplified summaryfigure 1 (anticoagulant therapy) and figure 2 (antiplatelet therapy).

**Parenteral anticoagulants**

Unfractionated heparin (UHF) administered as a continuous intravenous infusion can be stopped 3 to 4 hours before the procedure, given the short half-life. Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), including enoxaparin and dalteparin, should be stopped 24 hours prior to the procedure.

**Warfarin**

The therapeutic effect of warfarin is measured in terms of the International Normalized Ratio (INR). The INR decreases to less than 1.5 in over 90% of patients when holding treatment is held for five days.

**Direct Oral Anticoagulants**

The use of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) has been on the rise over the last decade. This trend includes anti-Xa agents, rivaroxaban and apixaban, and the direct thrombin inhibitor dabigatran. There are no reliable laboratory assays to assess the anticoagulant effect of these agents at this time. The duration before high-risk endoscopic procedures that the DOACs have to be held depends on the patient's renal function. The anti-Xa drugs should be held for 1 to 2 days if the creatinine clearance (CrCl)is 60 mL/min or more, for three days if the CrCl is between 30 mL/min and 59 mL/min, and for four days if the CrCl is less than 30 mL/min.

**Antiplatelets**

Aspirin and thienopyridines (clopidogrel, prasugrel, and ticagrelor) are the most commonly used antiplatelet agents. Aspirin irreversibly inhibits cyclooxygenase systems. It takes 7 to 9 days to regain platelet function following the discontinuation of aspirin.

**Emergent Endoscopy**

The most common indication for emergent endoscopic procedures is GI bleeding. The common etiologies for acute upper GI bleeding are peptic ulcer disease, variceal bleeding, and gastritis or esophagitis, while lower GI bleeding is most commonly diverticular in origin. The decision to discontinue antithrombotic therapy and reversal of anticoagulation must be weighed against the risk of incurring a thromboembolic event. Correction of INR to between 1.5 and 2.5 is adequate for diagnostic and intervention purposes and is comparable to patients not on any form of anticoagulation. Therapeutic measures to achieve hemostasis in patients with GI bleeding are effective even with a moderately elevated INR.

If an urgent reversal of anticoagulation is necessary for patients on UFH therapy, they can receive a slow infusion of protamine sulfate. The dose is calculated based on the dose of heparin administered and the duration of therapy. The anticoagulant effect of dabigatran is reversible with idarucizumab. Idarucizumab is approved for life-threatening bleeding or before emergent surgery.

**Resumption Of Antithrombotic Therapy After Endoscopy**

Anticoagulation should generally be resumed upon completion of the procedure unless there remains a continued risk of major bleeding.