Disorders affecting the coagulation cascade and platelet function cannot be differentiated based solely on clinical presentation. Further evaluation of coagulation studies and factor levels need to be accounted for to yield an accurate diagnosis.

- **Coagulation cascade abnormalities:**Performing coagulation tests can help differentiate various protein and factor deficiencies. Hemophilia A and B are the most common bleeding disorders and are always included in the differential. Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency), B (factor IX deficiency), or C (factor XI deficiency) all present with isolated prolongation of the aPTT. A normal PT and the measurement of factor VIII, IX, or XI levels can help distinguish these from factor V deficiency. A prolonged PT and aPTT with a normal TT can also result from other common pathway factors (II or X), combined factor V and factor VIII co-deficiency, deficiency of the vitamin K-dependent clotting factors (II, VII, IX, X), or liver disease. Afibrinogenemia, hypofibrinogenemia, and dyshypofibrinogenemia also result in prolonged PT and aPTT; however, in these cases, TT will be prolonged. These patients may present with either thrombotic or hemorrhagic events, although many are asymptomatic.

- **Platelet dysfunction:**Providers should also consider von Willebrand disease (VWD), the most common inherited bleeding disorder, which can vary in presentation from mild mucosal bleeding in type 1 to more severe hemorrhages that mimic hemophilia in type 3. Patients with vWD may have prolonged or normal aPTT, normal PT, normal to low platelet count with a normal to low factor VIII level. Platelet function defects, such as Glanzmann Thrombasthenia and Bernard Soulier syndrome, while rare, should also be considered. The PT and aPTT will be normal in platelet function disorders, as these are dysfunctions of platelet adhesion and aggregation, independent of the coagulation cascade.