A thorough and accurate history is the cornerstone of approaching any new breast mass.

**Timing**

It is not always possible to establish the duration for which the mass has been present. Patients who do not regularly carry out breast self-examination may take longer to notice a breast lump. Indeed, a proportion of breast lumps are identified through routine screening, so this is not necessarily an accurate way of determining the acuity of such a mass.[7] More important is to establish whether the mass had developed in association with trauma or other symptoms and how rapidly the mass appears to be growing or changing, if at all.

**Associated Symptoms**

**Localized**

An acutely tender breast lump is more likely to be an abscess or hematoma secondary to trauma. Cancerous breast masses rarely present with pain, although the presence of pain should not exclude neoplastic lesions from the differential. Nipple changes or discharge merits attention, as these can correlate with some less common breast tumors, as well as changes to the overlying skin, including ulceration, eczema, or tethering.

**Systemic**

As is the case with every new patient assessment, a careful systems review should seek evidence of disseminated disease. History of weight loss, dyspnoea, and bone pain are important in highlighting potential sites of metastasis.

**Family History**

Family history would be one of the key risk factors for breast cancer, particularly if family members were young (>50) at the age of diagnosis. Establishing an accurate family history is crucial, and it should also include relatives diagnosed with non-breast cancers, especially if at a young age. Detailed family history can be instrumental in generating an accurate risk profile.

**Medical History**

A detailed understanding of the patient's medical history and medications is crucial in the initial work-up of any new patient. A patient who is taking oral contraceptive medication, hormone replacement therapy, corticosteroids, or other steroid medication such as spironolactone must understand the implications of these, and a medication review may be necessary before carrying out further investigations.

For a patient presenting with a breast mass and highly suspicious for breast cancer, based on history, physical examination, and tissue diagnosis, several further evaluations are indicated to assess the disease burden. These step-wise diagnostic approaches include systematic lung, bone, and liver evaluations with obtaining chest x-ray, bone scan, liver ultrasonography, and abdominal  CT-scan. However, the mentioned diagnostic approaches should be limited to patients with a moderate to high risk of cancer metastasis. Accordingly, performing these evaluations in patients with ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast would not be recommended.

**Triple Assessment**

**Physical Examination**

Clinical examination of a breast lump is the first stage in the triple-assessment approach. Both breasts and axillae should be examined meticulously by the clinician, as well as carrying out a physical examination of other body systems as indicated by the history. Although it can be tempting to bypass the physical examination in favor of other, more targeted investigation modalities such as mammography or sonography, the findings of the physical examination are crucial for effective diagnosis and management of breast disease.

Clinical breast examination is often conducted with a chaperone present to make the patient feel more comfortable. The entire chest and abdomen should be exposed. Each breast and axilla should undergo a visual inspection, looking for skin changes, nipple discharge, visible masses or asymmetry, and tethering to underlying structure; this feature can be exaggerated by asking the patient to place their hands on their hips lift the arms.

The breasts can most easily be palpated by asking the patient to lie back at approximately 30 degrees and rest their palm up underneath their head. Palpation of the breast must proceed in a structured manner; generally, clinicians will use a four-quadrant approach (upper outer, upper inner, lower outer, lower inner quadrants), followed by palpating the areola and then the axillary tail. Particular attention should focus on the inframammary fold and the axillary tail. The normal breast is examined first, and the tissue is assessed for its overall consistency. Masses are most often detected in the upper outer quadrant, as most breast tissue is located here.

Palpable breast masses should be described in location, size, shape, tenderness, fluctuance, mobility, texture, and pulsatility. If the patient describes nipple discharge that is not immediately visualized, it is appropriate to ask the patient to express the discharge themselves before the clinician attempting to do so.

Following palpation of the breast, the clinician must always palpate the axilla and supraclavicular region for lymphadenopathy. This area may present with enlarged, tender, or firm nodes, the number, and nature of which should be documented. During the examination of the axilla, the weight of the patient's arm should be taken by the clinician to relax the pectoralis muscles.