# Continuing Education Activity

Electrodiagnostic testing can aid the clinician in deciphering between numerous neurologic conditions that may present similarly to lumbosacral radiculopathy. This activity illustrates the invaluable electrodiagnostic findings and highlights the role of the interdisciplinary team in evaluating patients with lumbosacral radiculopathy.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for electrodiagnostic testing in lumbosacral radiculopathy. 
- Describe the nerve conduction study findings in a patient with lumbosacral radiculopathy.
- Review the electromyographic findings in a patient with lumbosacral radiculopathy. 
- Outline the significance of communication among the interprofessional team to enhance the delivery of care in patients with lumbosacral radiculopathy.

# Introduction

Lumbosacral radiculopathy is a pathological disorder affecting the nerve root in the lumbosacral region of the spinal cord. Radiculopathy is commonly the result of compression of the nerve root from a structural lesion (i.e., herniated nucleus pulposus, calcified facet joint, or vertebral osteophyte), but may also result from irritation secondary to an infection, tumor, or surrounding tissue inflammation.

Numbness, tingling, weakness, and radiating neuropathic type pain are all common symptoms of radiculopathy, which typically present unilaterally.

# Anatomy and Physiology

In the lumbosacral region of the spine, there are eleven pairs of spinal nerves (five lumbar, five sacral, and one coccygeal) that emerge from the spinal cord.

L2-L4 radiculopathies are typically grouped together. It is challenging to distinguish an isolated spinal lesion due to the broad L2-L4 myotomal overlap of the anterior thigh muscles (as well as adjacent root overlap).

The most common level of lumbosacral disc herniation occurs at L4. Clinical presentation of numbness and tingling at the medial lower leg may occur. Diminished patellar reflexes may also present.

Diminished sensation along the anterolateral aspect of the lower leg and dorsum of the foot, accompanied by foot drop, and difficulty with heel walking, are common features that may suggest L5 radiculopathy. Of note, it is essential to be knowledgeable on other causes of foot drop and sensory changes along the lateral lower leg; additional causes include common fibular and sciatic neuropathy and lumbosacral plexopathy.

A patient presenting with difficulty toe walking, a diminished or absent Achilles reflex, and/or weakness in plantar flexion may represent S1 radiculopathy. Of note, sciatic neuropathy and lower lumbosacral plexopathy may present similar to S1 radiculopathy. An abnormal H-reflex (a recordable mon-synaptic S1 reflex response elicited with electrical stimulation) observed when stimulating the tibial nerve during the nerve conduction study can be seen in S1 radiculopathy.  The H-reflex response is sensitive, although not specific for the detection of an S1 radiculopathy.

Of note, in the lumbosacral spine, the nerve roots exit below their corresponding vertebral level. For example, the L4 nerve root exits at the L4-L5 disc space.

# Indications

Electrodiagnostic testing is indicated in a patient who presents with sensory and motor signs and symptoms in a limb without imaging studies to explain the pathology. Signs and symptoms may include numbness, pain or paresthesia along a dermatomal distribution, weakness along a myotomal distribution, and or diminished or absent deep tendon reflexes corresponding to a specific nerve root.

# Contraindications

Although nerve conduction studies and needle electromyography are considered safe diagnostic procedures, there are a few precautions and safety measures that should be addressed prior to their performance. It is imperative to review patients’ medication lists, as taking an anticoagulant is classified as a relative contraindication to performing needle electromyography.

If a patient has an uncontrolled bleeding disorder, however, needle electromyography is contraindicated. Needle electromyography should also be avoided in areas of active skin infections such as cellulitis and should also be avoided in limbs that present with lymphedema as it can act as a nidus for infection.

# Clinical Significance

**Nerve Conduction Studies**

- Sensory: Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAP) are typically normal in radiculopathy because the lesion is proximal to the corresponding dorsal root ganglion, and because if this, the axon and its cell body remain intact. If the SNAP is abnormal, other lesions must be a consideration.

- Motor: The majority of muscles in the extremities receive innervation from more than one nerve roots, and typically there is overlap with the root levels above or below. Therefore it is unlikely that the amplitude of a compound muscle action potential (CMAP) will be abnormal on motor nerve conductions studies in isolated radiculopathy.

The above indicates that the nerve conduction study is primarily useful to rule out other causes of similarly presenting conditions to lumbosacral radiculopathy. The diagnostic findings are mostly through the needle electromyography portion of the exam.

**Needle Electromyography**

In diagnosing lumbosacral radiculopathy, needle electromyography is the most useful diagnostic study. Findings of positive sharp waves and or fibrillations illustrate spontaneous activity. The examiner should perform the needle electromyography on at least three muscles, specifically one paraspinal muscle and two limb muscles supplied by the same nerve root but innervated by different peripheral nerves. Spontaneous activity found in all muscles sampled following the above protocol (along with normal SNAP and CMAP findings) supports a diagnosis of lumbosacral radiculopathy. The utility of testing the paraspinal muscles in the work-up of lumbosacral radiculopathy is its use in deciphering between radiculopathy from a plexopathy, as needle electromyography of the paraspinal muscles is typically normal in a pure lumbar plexopathy.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Lumbosacral radiculopathy has a prevalence of about 3 to 5% of the population.