Education on weight and its conversion started in grade school. Therefore, the most important teaching of weight conversion between a pound to a metric weight, either grams or kilograms, is crucial throughout one's education. Universally, weight the following shorthand units are used in writing.

- Pound = lb.

- Ounce = oz.

- Kilogram = kg.

- Gram = gm.

Generally, 2.2 pounds roughly converts to 1 kilogram, and a kilogram equals approximately 2.2 pounds.

Commonly in healthcare and medical practices, the metric system is used for weighing mass. The metric system has increments at the tenth power for calculations. This weight conversion is used daily among scientists and healthcare providers.

- 1 kilogram (kg) = 1000 grams (gm) = 1,000,000 milligrams (mg) = 1,000,000,000 micrograms (mcg)

Another weight unit used in medical communities includes grains. Here is another weight conversion commonly used in the pharmaceutical industry.

- 1 grain (gr) = 60mg

In the US, weight units of the pound and ounce are almost universal.

- 1 pound (lb) = 16 ounces (oz)

Specific mathematical processes and formulas are necessary for density calculations utilizing fluid weight in scientific experimentation. Liquids can be useful for measuring as in fluid weight measurement terminology, not to be mistaken as a dry weight for concrete materials or substances.

Fluid weight is commonly measured using the metric system for density calculations. Every liquid has a characteristic density (D) cataloged by scientists in the Density Table of Metals and Elements. It is defined as the ratio of its mass (m) to its volume (v) or, in mathematical terms, D = m/v. Density is usually given in units of kilograms/meter. However, measuring small quantities using grams and cubic centimeters in this conversion is more convenient.

- 1 kg/m = 0.001 g/cm; 1 g/cm = 1,000 kg/m

Due to the usage of both the metric and non-metric systems, clinicians receive training to be fluent in calculating common weight conversions in the patient weight for monitoring purposes, specifically in newborns or congestive heart failure patients. In addition, weight conversion is necessary for record-keeping, which is usually in the metric system, and for educating patients using a non-metric system. These are some common conversion factors:

- 1 lb   =  16 oz      =   453 g   =   0.45 kg

- 1 oz  =  0.063 lb  =   28 g    =   0.03 kg

- 1 kg  =  1000 mg =   2.2 lb     =   35 oz

- 1 gm =  0.04 oz   =   0.001 kg

- 1 gm= 1000 mg

- 1 teaspoon= 5 ml

- 1 tablespoon= 15 ml

Vitamins may be prescribed in International Units. However, FDA has published guidance for converting units of measurement for vitamin labels.

- Vitamin A:  1 mcg RAE = 1 mcg pre-formed vitamin A (retinol) =2 mcg supplemental β-carotene

- Vittamin D:  1 mcg cholcecalcifarol= 40 IU vitamin D3

- Vitamin E:  1 mg alpha-tocopherol = 1 mg alpha-tocopherol = 2 mg all-rac-alpha-tocopherol (synthetic vitamin E)

**Weight changes are expected in the following clinical scenarios, which may require further investigations and monitoring.**

- Congestive heart failure

- Hypothyroidism

- Diabetes mellitus

- Hyperthyroidism

- Cushing disease

- Unexpected weight loss can be from underlying malignancy

**Medication-induced weight gain is common with the following drugs.**

- Mirtazapine

- Olanzapine

- Quetiapine

- Risperidone

- Gabapentin

**The equation to calculate body mass index is based on weight and height.**

- BMI= weight in kg/ (height in meter^2)

This formula is used for the classification of obesity. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists guidelines recommends pharmacotherapy for individuals with BMI ≥ 30 kg/m^2  or BMI ≥ 27 kg/m^2 with comorbidities. The following medications are approved for weight loss.

- Semaglutide

- Liraglutide

- Bupropion-naltrexone

- Phentermine-topiramate

- Orlistat

The limitation of BMI-based risk factor classification is that visceral adiposity (not measured by BMI) is associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular risk, and metabolic syndrome.

It is essential to recognize that the drugs used for resuscitation can be dosed according to ideal body weight(IBW) or total body weight(actual weight).

- Epinephrine and magnesium sulfate are hydrophilic drugs, and the dose must be calculated according to IBW.

- Atropine and naloxone are lipophilic drugs, and the dose is calculated according to total body weight.

- Drugs may need adjustment based on therapeutic drug monitoring(e.g., digoxin), especially in patients with obesity.