Ondansetron is a widely prescribed medication for nausea and vomiting from various causes. The drug is relatively safe, but prescribers, including nurse practitioners, primary care providers, internists, surgeons, and emergency department physicians, need to monitor the drug in specific populations. Due to the potential for dose-dependent QTc interval prolongation, clinicians should monitor EKG, potassium, and magnesium levels in a susceptible population. It includes the elderly or patients with electrolyte abnormalities such as hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, heart failure, bradyarrhythmias, or patients on other medications that may prolong the QTc interval. Current evidence does not demonstrate a need to pre-screen this population before administering ondansetron for patients without any of the above risk factors.

An interprofessional team approach is critical for diagnosing and managing symptoms, treating patients with nausea and vomiting, and managing the adverse effects of the treatments. Clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs) usually prescribe ondansetron for labeled indications. Oncologist consultation is necessary for CINV. Pharmacists should ensure proper dose, perform medication reconciliation and consult prescribers about any concerns. Nursing staff should monitor patients administering medicine and inform clinicians of any side effects observed. Emergency department physicians should rapidly stabilize the patient in case of arrhythmia. Severe cases may require consultation with an intensivist and MICU/IMC level of care. Medical toxicologist consultation may become necessary in the overdose. If the overdose is intentional, psychiatric consultation is essential. An interprofessional team approach would maximize the efficacy and minimize potential adverse drug reactions for the patients requiring ondansetron, resulting in better patient outcomes. [Level 5] A prospective study involving 789 patients demonstrated that an interprofessional team approach among clinicians, residents, clinical pharmacists, and oncologists reduced potential medication errors, eventually enhancing patient safety. [Level 3]