Degenerative spondylosis is a significant etiology of lumbar spinal stenosis. With aging, wear-and-tear changes, and traumas, amongst other factors, the intervertebral discs can degenerate and protrude posteriorly, causing increased loading of the posterior elements of the vertebrae. These changes can lead to posterior vertebral osteophyte formation (uncinate spurs), facet hypertrophy, synovial facet cysts, and ligamentum flavum hypertrophy, which in turn will cause spinal stenosis.

Degenerative spondylolisthesis is another cause of lumbar spinal stenosis. When degenerative changes of the spine occur, the pars interarticularis can be fractured, and the resulting instability can lead to forward translation of the vertebra.  Sufficient anterior slippage of one vertebra on top of the next vertebral segment (most commonly L4-on-L5) can narrow the spinal canal, leading to stenosis.

Other acquired conditions, although rarer than the conditions mentioned above, should also be considered by the clinician. These include space-occupying lesions, post-surgical fibrosis, and rheumatologic conditions as well as other skeletal diseases such as ankylosing spondylitis or diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis.

Even more rarely, lumbar spinal stenosis may be secondary to congenital causes such as achondroplasia, which can lead to short pedicles with medially placed facets.

Lumbar spinal stenosis can be classified anatomically into central stenosis usually caused by a combination of hypertrophied ligamentaum flavum anteriorly and bulging disc posteriorly with consequent thecal sac compression; Lateral recess stenosis which is due to facet joint arthropathy with overgrowth of the superior articular facet and osteophyte formation. This results in compression of the descending nerve roots. Foraminal stenosis is due to loss of disc height, foraminal disc protrusion, or osteophyte formation with resultant compression of the exiting nerve root. And finally, extraforaminal stenosis which is usually due to far lateral disc herniation again with resultant exiting nerve root compression