Further evaluation may not be warranted in a straightforward chronic primary headache disorder. Still, many clinicians will advise baseline laboratory testing and brain imaging to exclude the secondary treatable causes.

The necessary information that has to be gathered consists of these simple questions:

- Demographic features of the patient: age, gender, race, profession

- When did the headache start?

- Where does it hurt? Location, irradiation.

- What is the intensity of the pain?

- How is the pain? Which are the qualitative characteristics of the pain?

- How long does the pain last?

- At which moment of the day does the pain appear?

- How has it evolved since it started?

- What is the frequency of appearance?

- What are the triggering situations?

- Simultaneous symptoms?

- Is it related to sleep?

- How does it get better or worse?

- Which medications do you take to make it better? What is the frequency of this medication?

Laboratory workup includes a complete blood count to look for infection. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is increased in giant cell arteritis and other vasculitides. A metabolic panel looks for metabolic causes of headaches and endocrine testings to look for pituitary gland abnormalities.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain is the imaging modality of choice.

**Medication Overuse Headache by Drug Class****and Duration of Headache**

- Ergotamine--> ten days/month for over three months

- Triptan--> ten days/month for over three months

- ASA-->15 days/month for over three months

- NSAIDs-->15 days/month for >3 months

- Acetaminophen/paracetamol-->15 days/month for over three months

- Opioids--> ten days/month for over three months

- Combination analgesics--> ten days/month for over three months

- Multiple drug classes--> ten days/month for over three months