Sickle cell anemia management can be considered in two categories, health maintenance, and management of complications. The goal of health maintenance is to screen and identify risk factors and early signs of complications. There is evidence that pneumococcal vaccination, penicillin prophylaxis (early infancy until at least age five and education of the management of fever have considerably reduced mortality and morbidity from invasive infections. Routine screening with transcranial Doppler (TCD) of large intracranial blood vessels may predict the risk of stroke in children with sickle cell disease, but this may not be universally available. Further, the treatment (chronic transfusion therapy) is not feasible in many developing nations.

Management of sickle cell complications is tailored to the type of complication. VOC management consists of rapid pain assessment, early initiation of analgesic therapy, and maintaining this analgesia (consider PCA pump) and hydration until there is symptom relief. For most patients with mild pain, acetaminophen or NSAIDs may suffice, but for moderate and severe pain, opiates with or without NSAIDs are indicated. More recently Ketamine in sub-dissociative doses has shown to reduce opiate use. Patients presenting with fever should be immediately assessed for life-threatening infections including the performance of complete blood count (CBC) with differential, reticulocyte count, blood culture, and urine culture if urinary tract infection (UTI) suspected, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy should be initiated. For most other complications like acute chest syndrome splenic sequestration and strokes, meticulous supportive care (oxygen, judicious fluid administration) and transfusion therapy are needed. Among patients who have frequent and severe complications, hydroxyurea has been shown to offer significant benefits. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (bone marrow transplantation) shows great promise as a cure for sickle cell disease. Antihistamines (diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine) may reduce itching caused by the opiates and may have some opioid-sparing effect. For acute chest syndrome, empirical antibiotics (cephalosporin and macrolide), adequate analgesics, oxygen supplementation, simple or exchange transfusion, beta-agonist inhalations, and incentive spirometry may be needed.