**Examination Kit**

A clinical examination must be performed before performing any oral surgical procedure. A standard kit consists of a dental mouth mirror, probe, and tweezers. These instruments can be combined within separate disposable kits or included within a standard oral surgery procedure kit.

After administering local anesthesia, its efficacy can be tested using objective signs, which can put the patient at ease before initiating the surgical procedure. This includes applying firm pressure with a probe adjacent to the tooth to be extracted and down the periodontal ligament to ensure the absence of pain.

**Local Anesthetic Delivery Systems**

Local anesthesia is essential in dentistry to eliminate pain and anxiety during dental procedures. Conventional syringes and needles are commonly used with a handle to administer local anesthesia.

In the 1990s, computer-assisted systems were developed, which aim to provide predictable pulpal anesthesia, lowering the overall dose delivered and, in turn, reducing the risk of collateral anesthesia.

Needles and sharp instruments can pose a risk of needle-stick injury to the operator. Modern safety syringes minimize this risk through the application of a sheath that, when activated, locks over the needle, preventing potential accidental injury.

**Periotomes and Luxators**

These fine instruments are used to shear the periodontal ligament and act as a wedge to expand the socket.

Where the root apex fractures within the socket, a root pick elevator is useful in luxating the apical tip. Where the surgeon struggles in finding a definitive application point, bone removal at the level of the apical root tip may be required to improve access. These fine instruments have a posterior curve of the working end, allowing for successful application and luxation.

**Elevators**

A variety of dental elevators exist to 'lever' and mobilize teeth. They are used to apply forces to the tooth, which in turn sever the periodontal ligament and expand the socket. Care is necessary not to apply so much force that damage is caused to surrounding structures, ultimately leading to iatrogenic injury, like alveolar fractures.

The most commonly used elevators are Coupland, Warwick-James, and Cryer elevators.

Cryer elevators have a sharp point and impart rotational forces. When engaged in the interseptal bone, it is particularly useful to remove either a mesial or distal root of a mandibular molar.

Warwick James elevators are a set of three; straight, curved left, and curved right.

Coupland elevators commonly come in a set of three sizes, and as more space is created, a larger size can be used to elevate the tooth further.

**Dental Extraction Forceps**

Dental extraction forceps are used to remove teeth from their sockets and grip onto either the crown or the root surface. They usually act as levers; however, some will also create a wedge effect.

A variety of forceps is available to use depending on whether the tooth is in the maxillary or mandibular arch, a molar, premolar, or anterior tooth. Maxillary root forceps are suitable for use with any maxillary root, and similarly, mandibular root forceps can be applied to any mandibular root. Cowhorn forceps can be used for either the maxillary molar or mandibular molar teeth and are designed so that their beak is seated into the furcation of molar teeth. Application of pressure then luxates the tooth coronally, which subsequently allows for simple delivery. They can sometimes also be used to section molar teeth, which facilitates individual root delivery. Care should be taken to not fracture the buccal plate due to excessive force.

**Mouth Props**

Mouth props or bite blocks are placed in the mouth to hold the teeth apart. Certain oral surgical procedures require patients to keep their mouths open for extended periods. The use of mouth props allows patients to bite on these, so they do not have to hold their mouths open for the duration of the procedure.

Gutters are present within the top and bottom of the prop, in which the teeth or alveolar ridge sit. They are usually made of rubber and have an attached chain that sits outside the mouth to retrieve the prop easily.

**Retractors**

These instruments retract soft tissue structures, such as raised flaps.

The Lack's tongue retractor helps to stabilize the tongue, improving visualization.

**Scalpel Handle and Blade**

A scalpel is required for certain oral surgical procedures, such as raising a mucoperiosteal flap; commonly, a 15-blade is used in a Bard Parker Handle.

**Periosteal Elevators**

When raising a full-thickness mucoperiosteal flap, the mucosa and periosteum must be cleanly reflected together completely down to the bone to limit trauma to the underlying tissues and improve the healing process when the flap is repositioned. This is usually carried out with a periosteal elevator, such as Howarth's periosteal elevator, in a pushing motion. Sometimes periosteal elevators are also used to retract the flap for purposes such as lingual nerve protection.

The Ward's periosteal elevator has one spoon-shaped end, which is useful in scooping up and reflecting mucoperiosteal flaps.

**Surgical Straight Handpiece**

A surgical straight handpiece that does not expel air into the surgical site can be used to section teeth and remove bone when necessary. It is prudent to use a handpiece that does not expel air to avoid surgical emphysema, and it must be cooled with sterile saline.

Most commonly, round burs are used to remove the alveolar bone. Surgeons may use a fissure bur for crown and root sectioning during tooth removal.

Bone rongeurs are instruments that are also used to aid bone removal. They can remove bony prominences or irregular ridges, which can then be smoothed using a bone file, allowing for improved healing.

**Suction**

Good suction is necessary to facilitate a clear field for good visualization of the surgical site and prevent ingestion or aspiration by the patient.

Yankauer suction is usually plastic tubing, while Frazier suction is usually a metal suction tip.

**Sutures**

Various suture materials can be utilized depending on the procedure and clinician preference. They can be grouped into resorbable or non-resorbable. Resorbable sutures include those made from polygalactic, polydiossanone, and polyglycolic acid. Non-resorbable sutures include those made from silk, polyamides, and polyesters.

Suture needles are available in different shapes, sizes, and alloys depending on the size and depth of the tissue being closed.

**Scissors**

A variety of scissors are available in different shapes and sizes to cut soft tissues, sutures, and materials such as oxidized resorbable cellulose and also to dissect tissues.