Allopurinol, a drug that blocks the conversion of hypoxanthine and xanthine to uric acid by inhibiting the xanthine oxidase enzyme, is the mainstay of treatment for hyperuricemia. Decreasing uric acid overproduction reduces the complications of urolithiasis, nephrolithiasis, tophi, and gouty arthritis. Since hyperuricemia is present from birth, the earlier the medication is started, the better is the prevention of complications. Long-term efficacy and safety of allopurinol have been studied, which revealed no adverse effects, as long as the dose has been maintained to avoid the formation of xanthine calculi. However, allopurinol treatment does not have any effect on neurodevelopmental and cognitive outcomes. Allopurinol treatment can rarely cause drug hypersensitivity syndrome, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Febuxostat, another xanthine oxidase inhibitor, can be used in such cases.

As the pathophysiology behind neurological dysfunction is not precisely known, formulation of treatment strategy is hindered. Decreased dopaminergic neuron concentration in basal ganglia is postulated as the cause. But the use of dopaminergic drugs does not alleviate the symptoms as expected. Treatment with L-DOPA increased dystonia and hyperactivity. Treatment with S-adenosyl methionine, along with an antipsychotic like risperidone, helped with dystonia and self-injurious behavior. The effectiveness of the combination is likely age-dependent, and further studies are required to prove efficacy and complications.

Behavioral symptoms are managed with psychiatric, physical, and medical interventions. Most cases need a combination of these interventions. Stress increases self-mutilation, and so stress management has shown to be effective. Aversion techniques tend to increase self-mutilation, and so such techniques need to be sidestepped. Physical restraints like elbow restraints, dental guards, lip bumpers are helpful temporarily. Most patients feel relieved with restraints, while some patients themselves request to be restrained when compulsive thoughts set in. Interventions such as extraction of teeth are the long-term treatment for those in whom the conservative measures cannot effectively protect the patient.

Therapies like bone marrow transplantation and exchange transfusion have been tried but were not found successful.

Currently, studies are in progress for the use and efficacy of treatments like deep brain stimulation