Antibiotic resistance occurs when bacteria evolve to evade the effect of antibiotics through multiple different mechanisms. Dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes is an ecological and public health concern. Certain bacteria are able to neutralize an antibiotic by altering its component to render it ineffective. Others might be able to export the antibiotics out of the bacteria, and some can modify their outer structure and receptors so that antibiotics cannot attach to them. These mechanisms might lead to some bacteria surviving the use of the specific antibiotic and developing a resistance that can be passed to other bacteria as they multiply. Bacteria also can become resistant through mutation of their genetic material.

The mechanism of antibiotic resistance is commonly categorized into the following four groups:

- **Intrinsic Resistance:**Bacteria might survive an antibiotic due to intrinsic resistance through evolution by changing their structure or components. For example, an antibiotic that affects the wall-building mechanism of the bacteria, such as penicillin, cannot affect bacteria that do not have a cell wall.

- **Acquired Resistance:**Bacteria can obtain the ability to resist the activity of a particular antimicrobial agent to which it was previously susceptible. Bacteria can acquire resistance through a new genetic mutation that helps the bacterium survive or by getting DNA from a bacterium that already is resistant. An example is Mycobacterium tuberculosis resistance to rifamycin.

- **Genetic Change:**Bacterium DNA might change and alter the production of protein, leading to different bacterial components and receptors which render the bacteria unrecognized by the antibiotic. Bacteria sharing the environment might harbor intrinsic genetic determinants of resistance that would alter the genomics of the bacteria. An example is Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Haemophilus influenza resistance to trimethoprim.

- **DNA Transfer:**Bacteria can share genetic components with other bacteria and transfer the resistant DNA through a horizontal gene transfer. Usually, bacteria acquire external genetic material through three main stages:

- Transformation (through naked DNA incorporation)

- Transduction (through the process of phagocytosis)

- Conjugation (through direct contact).

An example is Staphylococcus aureus resistance to methicillin (MRSA).

Several organisms are resistant to multiple antibiotics. For example, isolated E. coli and Enterococcus that are inhibited by cefoxitin, ciprofloxacin, or erythromycin are usually resistant to at least one antibiotic and sometimes multiple antibiotic types including macrolides, tetracyclines, beta-lactams, quinolones, sulfonamides, tetracyclines, and rifamycin.