The management of UMN lesions should focus on ascertaining the cause of the lesion. Indications for surgical treatment are in very few specific diagnoses such as intracranial aneurysms, hematomas, malignancies, or abscesses.  The remainder of surgical management does not focus on the UMN lesions but instead on the sequelae of the damage such as spasticity and contractures. Prompt evaluation and a detailed history and physical exam are necessary to provide patients with optimal treatment of their lesions and symptoms. Upper motor neuron syndrome has a variety of long-lasting symptoms that can drastically affect a patient’s quality of life. The long-term management of patients with UMN syndrome includes extensive rehabilitation. Muscle spasticity can lead to abnormal postures and joint contractures in the long term. This would result in decreased angles of passive motion and thus reduced quality of life. Prevention of contractures is an essential goal in the management of patients recovering from UMN lesions. If conservative medical management and rehabilitation fail to decrease the spasticity and contractures, surgical intervention may be the proper course of management. Surgical management includes the lengthening of spastic muscles to enhance levels of function. The patients who are candidates for surgery can be stratified based on their volitional control of extremities. The goals of surgery are dependent on the functional potential of patients. Surgical management centers around the muscular pathology identified in surgical candidates. The muscular abnormalities that are surgical candidates include:

- Shoulder adduction and internal rotation

- Elbow flexion

- Forearm pronation

- Wrist and finger flexion

- Hand intrinsics spasticity

- Clenched fist deformity

- Thumb-in-palm deformity

- Inferior subluxation of the glenohumeral joint

After identification of the muscle pathology, the basis of surgical intervention is on whether a patient has volitional control. Patients with volitional control may undergo tendon fractional lengthening, muscle origin release, or a joint osteocapsular release. Patients that are found to have no volitional control may undergo muscle origin release, myotomy, tenotomy, neurectomy, arthrodesis, and joint osteocapsular release. The specific procedure used is based on the surgically targeted muscle and the goals of the procedure.