The internal iliac artery is one of two major arteries arising from the common iliac artery. The right and left common iliac arteries begin at approximately the level of the fourth or fifth lumbar vertebra (L4-L5), marking the terminal end of the abdominal aorta. Each common iliac artery bifurcates into an internal and external iliac artery, usually just anterior to the sacroiliac joint. The external iliac artery traverses along the pelvic brim to ultimately serve the lower extremity, while the more medially situated internal iliac artery crosses the pelvic brim to enter the lesser, or true, pelvis. The internal iliac artery descends posteromedially within the pelvic cavity and divides into anterior and posterior divisions, or trunks, near the superior margin of the greater sciatic foramen.

**Anterior Division**

The anterior division of the internal iliac artery produces several branches that mostly supply visceral territories within the pelvis, but also parietal areas in the pelvis, gluteal region, and thigh. Despite considerable variation in these arteries, six branches of the anterior division of the internal iliac artery commonly exist. These branches include the umbilical artery, obturator artery, inferior vesical artery (in males), middle rectal artery, internal pudendal artery, and inferior gluteal artery.

One of the first branches of the anterior division, the umbilical artery, travels anteroinferior to cross the pelvic cavity lateral to the bladder. Post-birth, the umbilical artery is continuous with a non-patent fibrous cord called the medial umbilical ligament that continues to the deep surface of the lower anterior abdominal wall. In both sexes, the umbilical artery provides a branch to the superior surface of the bladder called the superior vesical artery. The umbilical artery also gives off the uterine artery serving the uterus in females. Subsequently, the uterine artery gives off the vaginal artery that serves as a major blood supply to the vagina. In males, the umbilical artery supplies the prostate and ductus deferens indirectly via the artery to the ductus deferens and prostatic branches that arise from the superior vesical artery.

The obturator artery is most often an early branch of the anterior division of the IIA but arises from the external iliac artery either directly or via the inferior epigastric artery in approximately 19% of individuals.

Usually only present in males, the inferior vesical artery is the next branch of the anterior division that supplies the inferior aspect of the bladder. The inferior vesical artery has branches that serve the prostate and seminal vesicles, and sometimes the ductus deferens. The inferior vesical artery may share a common trunk with the middle rectal artery, or these arteries may arise from the anterior division of the IIA separately.

The middle rectal artery travels inferiorly from its origin to supply blood to a large segment of the middle and inferior rectum. It contributes to the rich arterial collateral circulation of the rectum, especially proximal to the pectinate line.

The internal pudendal artery and inferior gluteal artery are the terminal branches of the anterior division of the IIA. The internal pudendal artery exits the pelvis via the greater sciatic foramen, curves past the closely situated ischial spine, and enters the perineum via the lesser sciatic foramen. Within the perineum, the internal pudendal artery travels with the internal pudendal vein and pudendal nerve through the pudendal, or Alcock, canal, which is located on the lateral wall of the pelvis and formed by the obturator membrane and muscle. Through its numerous branches, the internal pudendal artery serves as the primary blood supply to structures of the perineum.

After arising from the anterior division of the IIA, the inferior gluteal artery commonly descends along the superficial aspect of the piriformis to leave the pelvis and enter the gluteal region via the greater sciatic foramen. The inferior gluteal artery supplies blood to several muscles in the gluteal region, including the gluteus maximus, piriformis, obturator internus, superior and inferior gemellus, quadratus femoris, and proximal hamstrings.

**Posterior Division**

The posterior division of the internal iliac artery supplies parietal structures of the pelvis and gluteal region.

The lateral sacral arteries are two branches of the posterior division that may arise from a common trunk or separately. These arteries, a superior and inferior lateral sacral artery, run inferomedially just anterior to the sacrum and piriformis and produce branches that supply the meninges and lower back muscles. The lateral sacral artery shares a collateral circulatory channel with the median sacral artery, a direct branch of the abdominal aorta.