Diagnosis of PACNS is difficult due to the absence of a biomarker in the setting of a variety of non-specific presentations. Laboratory investigations like erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), rheumatoid factor, anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibody (ANCA) are neither sensitive nor specific for the diagnosis of PACNS. The only useful laboratory investigation is cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination which shows an abnormality in more than 90% of the cases. A mild increase in the leukocyte count or total protein or both is seen in a majority of cases. Radiographic findings are quite useful in cases of PACNS, an abnormal MRI is seen in more than 90% of a case of PACNS, with ischemia being the most common abnormality noted.

The diagnostic criteria for PACNS formulated by Calabrese and Mallek are used for diagnosis, and a diagnosis is made if all of 3 diagnostic criteria are met. These include the presence of an unexplained acquired neurologic deficit after extensive investigation for other causes, the presence of evidence of an inflammatory arteritic process within the CNS by either angiography or histopathological examination or both; and no evidence of any other system vasculitis or any other disorders to which the angiographic or histopathologic features can be secondary.

Henceforth, the principal tools in the diagnosis of PACNS are conventional angiography and central nervous system biopsy. Abnormal findings noted in angiography include alternating segments of stenosis and normal or dilated segments and arterial occlusions. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) may be used in the diagnosis instead of conventional angiography. However, it has a lesser sensitivity compared to a conventional angiogram. CNS biopsy can also be used in the diagnosis of PACNS, however, the sensitivity of biopsy is lower and the specificity higher.

A diagnostic approach which combines the clinical, laboratory and radiologic findings with angiography and, if a required biopsy is most prudent.