Lunotriquetral instability frequently poses a diagnostic dilemma as many injuries could be a mimic of this pathology. Patients will present with general wrist pain to an urgent care facility or emergency department. There is usually no apparent deformity, and the pain is generalized over the ulnar region of the wrist. With non-specific signs such as these, an accurate and precise physical exam is vital in correctly identifying the abnormality. Often this will require a team of specialists which include an emergency physician, orthopedic surgeon, and radiologist for accurate diagnosis.

Imaging of the wrist will almost always be involved with generalized ulnar-sided wrist pain. A well-trained x-ray technician will aid by obtaining quality imaging for more accurate diagnoses by the radiologist. If no findings on the initial radiographs are present, MR imaging of the wrist can be obtained, and a well trained MRI technician is also utilized for a radiologist to make a diagnosis of LT ligamentous injury.

If intervention is indicated once the diagnosis of LT instability is made, an orthopedic surgeon and their staff including nurses, surgery technicians, and accompanying anesthesiologists will be involved for proper surgical fixation.

Almost always, even if surgery is not indicated, physical therapists will help with recovery of mobility, functioning and with pain relief. Physical therapists can also guide orthopedic surgeons in determining improvement or lack thereof for decisions on intervention with more invasive stabilization procedures.