Non-functional pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors present late as they mostly produce mass effect symptoms. This late presentation leads to excessive growth or metastasis on presentation. They can present with jaundice, back pain, diarrhea, indigestion, abdominal pain, or a lump in the abdomen.

The presentation of functional neuroendocrine tumors depends on the specific type.

Gastrinoma is the type in which the tumor releases gastrin and its precursors i.e., progastrin.  These substances copy the action of physiologically produced gastrin by the G-cells of the antrum.

Insulinoma presents with hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia in patients. The disease is manifested as the Whipple triad. This includes symptoms of low blood glucose, along with the symptoms of hypoglycemia. Moreover, the symptoms should settle with glucose intake.

VIPoma in a patient can cause watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and achlorhydria. This is called VIPoma syndrome or WDHA syndrome.

Glucagonoma can cause glucagonoma syndrome. This includes weight loss, anemia, diabetes mellitus, thromboembolism, neuropsychiatric symptoms, gastrointestinal disturbances, etc. Necrolytic migratory erythema is a characteristic rash that appears with glucagonoma. It appears as erythematous plaques with irregular borders. The center of the lesion forms a bulla. This bullae then erodes and crust, eventually leading to the healing of the center of the lesion.

Carcinoid syndrome is the prevalent feature in the carcinoid tumor of the pancreas. The main manifestations include cutaneous flushing, valvular disease, and diarrhea. Serotonin is produced by the tumor, which leads to this characteristic triad of symptoms.

Liver metastasis occurs in the majority of these cases. However, there have been few cases reported without any liver metastasis. Moreover, the absence of carcinoid syndrome does not rule out carcinoid tumors of the pancreas.