Advanced Trauma Life Support protocols should be followed during the initial evaluation of the geriatric trauma patient. A complete geriatric assessment should be pursued, including medical, cognitive, functional, and social assessments. Due to the possibility of subtle pathological disease states or occult injury, a thorough evaluation should be considered even if a reliable history of a mechanical fall can be established.

Another aspect that is very important in managing the geriatric trauma patient is performing an evaluation for frailty upon admission. Frailty is considered a syndrome of physiologic deterioration that occurs with aging. It is often characterized as an inability to adapt to acute illness or stress placed on the host which leads to a greater number of complications, discharge to a care facility, disability and even death.

One important concept about frailty is that it is not solely defined by age. In fact, there are many patients who have chronically poor health who are younger than 65 years of age who would meet the definition of frailty. Frailty has traditionally been thought of as a physical deterioration in which patients exhibit weight loss, loss of lean muscle mass with associated weakness and decrease in walking speed all secondary to biologic deterioration. However, newer views of frailty incorporate this concept with the idea that there is also a concurrent deficit accumulation such as social impairment and cognitive decline.

There currently is not a gold standard test available to detect frailty in the elderly, however, there have been many tools developed which have helped determine who is most at risk for an adverse outcome or prognosis. One of these easily applied screening tools is the FRAIL scale. Where fatigue, resistance, ambulation, illnesses and loss of weight make up the questions that are asked and each is assigned either a 0 or 1.  A score of 0 is best and 5 is worst where scores of 3-5 are considered frail, 1-2 pre-frail and 0 good health. One geriatric trauma-specific frailty index has been developed which utilizes 15 variables which can be abstracted from a patient’s chart to help aid clinicians in planning discharge disposition.

Other tools have been developed to aid in the prognostication for in-hospital mortality in elderly trauma patients. One of these is: The Geriatric Trauma Outcome Score (GTOS; [age] + [2.5 × Injury Severity Score] + 22 [if packed RBC transfused within ≤24 hours of admission]. This has been validated as a prognostic indicator for in-hospital mortality.