Antiviral medication is the mainstay of treatment for the herpetic epithelial disease. They interfere with DNA synthesis by inhibiting viral DNA polymerase. Acyclovir and Ganciclovir specifically inhibit thymidine kinase and polymerase and are least toxic. Topical Acyclovir 3% ointment, Ganciclovir 3% gel, and Trifluridine 1% solutions are used regularly at five times/day. Oral preparations are Acyclovir 400 mg 5 times/day and Valacyclovir 500 mg thrice daily. Intravenously Acyclovir 10mg/kg thrice daily is the usual dosage. Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment for stromal keratitis and Keratouveitis. 1% prednisolone acetate or 0.1% dexamethasone are commonly used under antiviral cover to prevent recurrence and reactivation of HSV infection.

- Neonatal conjunctivitis: Intravenous Acyclovir 60 mg/kg/day every 8 hours for 14 days for SEM (Skin-Eye-Mouth) disease. Extend the treatment for 21 days for central nervous system involvement and the disseminated disease.

- Blepharoconjunctivitis: Resolves spontaneously in a week or two. Some patients might need acyclovir eye ointment for keratitis or lid vesicles.

- Dendritic ulcer: Most cases resolve spontaneously. Topical antivirals provide faster resolution in marginal ulcers, ulcers larger than 4 mm, and ulcers with stromal inflammation. Topical antivirals provide faster resolution with less scarring. Topical acyclovir 3% ointment or Ganciclovir 0.15% gel applied five times a day for two weeks will heal most of the ulcers. Surface debridement of the ulcer helps in reducing the viral load and offers better penetration of the medication. Toxicity is uncommon but presents as diffuse punctate erosions or follicular conjunctivitis. Most of the time, adding preservative-free lubricating eyedrops would be enough.

- Disciform keratitis: The mainstay of treatment is corticosteroid eyedrops under topical Acyclovir cover for ten weeks. The antiviral cover is essential as any reactivation of the infection under steroid drops would lead to devastating stromal necrosis. Disciform keratitis is prone to recurrence leading to dense corneal opacity impairing vision. Recurrent episodes need long term oral acyclovir prophylaxis (400 mg bid) as it is proven to be beneficial in preventing recurrent attacks as per the Herpetic eye disease study.

- Metaherpetic keratitis: The mainstay of treatment is first to eliminate the main cause for the persistent epithelial defect. Drug toxicity should be detected and avoided. Dry eye being an aggravating factor for neuropathic keratitis, is treated with preservative-free lubricating drops, punctal occlusion, and cyclosporin eyedrops. Epithelial healing is promoted by autologous serum eyedrops and bandage contact lenses. Resistant cases are treated with an amniotic membrane graft, Gunderson conjunctival fap, or with a central tarsorrhaphy. Cautious use of low potent topical corticosteroids like Fluorometholone is used to treat the underlying inflammation. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory eyedrops are avoided as they might induce corneal melting leading to perforation.

- Stromal keratouveitis: Topical steroids either 1% prednisolone acetate or 0.1% dexamethasone resolves the underlying immune-mediated inflammation and prevents scarring. The topical antiviral cover is essential as HSV reactivation causes severe epithelial disease or stromal necrosis. Oral Acyclovir 400 mg twice daily for six months to one year prevents recurrences.

- Acute retinal necrosis(ARN): ARN is an ophthalmic emergency and needs to be treated immediately. The goal is to protect the fellow eye from the infection. Intravenous Acyclovir 10 mg/kg 3 times daily for 5 to 10 days depending on the response followed by oral acyclovir 800 mg five times daily orally for six weeks to 3 months.

Surgery is usually done for dense stromal scarring, non-healing ulcers, and impending perforations as in stromal necrosis.

- Stromal melting: Penetrating keratoplasty may be needed with antiviral medication coverage. Long term oral acyclovir prophylaxis needed to prevent the recurrence of herpes simplex infection in the graft

- Corneal perforation: There needs to be cyanoacrylate glue application or placement of a corneal patch graft

- Persistent epithelial defect: Amniotic membrane grafting or Gunderson conjunctival flap or central tarsorrhaphy is usually performed. The amniotic membrane acts by lowering the inflammatory cells and matrix metalloproteinase levels on the corneas enabling better healing of the epithelial defect. Amniotic membrane causes reduced expression and activity of MMP-8 and nine and increases expression of TIMP-1 and 2.

- Dense stromal scarring: Penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) is done 6 months after the infection is fully controlled. It has a poor prognosis with high graft recurrence and rejection rates. Prophylactic acyclovir 400 mg twice daily should be started prior to the surgery and continued until a year after the surgery to prevent recurrences.