Chest radiographs are useful to confirm the presence of effusion. The findings of effusion vary with the amount of effusion. On an upright posteroanterior (PA) view, a minimum of 200 ml of fluid is required to obliterate the costophrenic angle, called the meniscus sign of a pleural effusion. However, in a lateral view, 50 ml of fluid can be diagnosed with this sign. Ultrasound of the chest is more sensitive and useful for the diagnosis of pleural effusion and also helps in planning thoracentesis. All unilateral effusion in adults needs thoracentesis to determine the cause of pleural fluid. This is also known to improve the patient's symptoms and facilitate recovery.

Determining whether the fluid is an exudate or transudate narrows the differential. However, Light’s criteria should be interpreted in the clinical context since it misdiagnoses 20% of transudates as exudative. An example would be a patient who has been chronically diuresed for heart failure, can increase the pleural fluid protein level, and can be classified as an exudate.

Commonly performed tests on the pleural fluid to determine etiology are a measurement of fluid pH, fluid protein, albumin and LDH, fluid glucose, fluid triglyceride, fluid cell count differential, fluid gram stain and culture, and fluid cytology. Exudates are characterized by elevated protein, elevated LDH, and decreased glucose. Pleural fluid LDH greater than 1000 U/L may be seen in tuberculosis, lymphoma, and empyema. Low pH (pH less than 7.2) indicates complex pleural effusion in the setting of pneumonia and almost always requires chest tube insertion for drainage. Other causes of low pH may be an esophageal rupture and rheumatoid arthritis.

Fluid cell counts in transudates show predominantly mesothelial cells. In parapneumonic effusions, lupus pleuritis, and acute pancreatitis, there is a neutrophilic predominance in cell counts. Some causes of lymphocyte-predominant effusions include malignancy, lymphoma, tuberculosis, sarcoid, chronic rheumatoid pleural effusion, and malignancy. Eosinophilia in pleural effusion is rare and usually in the presence of air (pneumothorax), blood (hemothorax), a parasitic disease, or drug-induced effusion.

The presence of organisms by gram stain or culture leads to a diagnosis of empyema and necessitates a chest tube for drainage of pus. Cytology is necessary for determining the presence of malignant cells in the pleural fluid. The sensitivity of pleural fluid cytology in the presence of malignant effusion in the first thoracentesis is around 60%, and the yield increases with further attempts, approaching 95% by three samples on different days.  However, if a malignant effusion is strongly suspected and cytology is negative, then medical thoracoscopy with pleural biopsy can be performed after two to three thoracenteses to obtain a diagnosis.

Other tests that can be performed on the pleural fluid to determine etiology include adenosine deaminase (ADA), which, when elevated, is suspicious for tuberculosis in areas of a high prevalence of tuberculosis. In esophageal rupture, the presence of amylase in pleural fluid is diagnostic. In heart failure, an elevated NT-proBNP level may be seen in pleural fluid. The presence of more than 110 mg/dL of triglycerides in the pleural fluid indicates a chylothorax. Pleural fluid is usually straw-colored, and if it is milky white, then a chylothorax should be suspected. Diagnosis of hemothorax can be made if the pleural fluid hematocrit is more than 0.5 times that of serum hematocrit.

The chest x-ray may reveal a mediastinal shift to the contralateral chest cavity. There may also be displacement of the trachea towards the ipsilateral side if the bronchus is obstructed. Ct scan is useful to determine the cause, such as a malignancy.