**Grave's Disease**

Grave's disease is an autoimmune condition that most commonly affects young women under the age of forty. The hallmark about the disease is the presence of autoantibodies that exert TSH-like effects, called thyroid-stimulating antibodies (TSIs). TSIs stimulate TSH receptors on thyroid follicular cells leading to both hyperthyroidism and thyroid gland enlargement, hence a goiter. As T3/T4 levels increase, TSH goes down through negative feedback inhibition. In addition to the classical signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, Grave's disease also causes ophthalmopathy, which manifests as exophthalmos (bulging eyes), eye irritation, double vision, and possibly vision loss. Grave's ophthalmopathy most likely happens due to TSIs binding to receptors on the soft tissues and muscles behind the eyes. This initiates an inflammatory cascade that causes ocular symptoms to occur.

**TSH-secreting Pituitary Adenoma**

A functioning pituitary adenoma is a pituitary tumor that secretes active hormones. It usually arises from prolactin-secreting cells, also known as lactotrophs. It can also arise from TSH-secreting thyrotrophs leading to a rise in TSH levels. TSH-secreting adenomas are often macroadenomas that not only produce excessive amounts of TSH but also create mass-effects on adjacent structures. Patients usually complain of compressive symptoms (headaches, vision problems) as well as symptoms of hyperthyroidism. High TSH causes the thyroid gland to enlarge, and patients typically develop a goiter.

****Non-functioning Pituitary Adenoma****

A non-functioning pituitary adenoma usually arises from gonadotrophs (gonadotropin-secreting cells). Healthy gonadotrophs secrete active LH and FSH, consisting of both alpha and beta-subunits. In contrast, a non-functioning pituitary adenoma secretes an inactive form of gonadotropins that has the alpha chain but lacks the active beta-subunit. Symptoms usually do not occur until the tumor becomes large enough to compress adjacent structures. Common compressive symptoms include headaches and vision problems. Additionally, the large mass might compress the adjacent pituitary cells leading to decreased TSH as well as other pituitary hormones. A drop in TSH levels might lead to hypothyroidism if the tumor is not adequately managed.