The technique of Mohs surgery is as follows:

- The tumor is first outlined prior to injection with a local anesthetic. After anesthetized, any visible tumor is removed or “debulked,” with a curette, flexible blade, or scalpel.

- Prior to removal, the tissue layer is carefully oriented by placing small superficial etch marks with a scalpel (often at 3 o’clock, 6 o’clock, 9 o’clock, and noon) around the tissue layer and corresponding in-situ skin.

- A thin margin of tissue is then removed circumferentially around and deep to the debulked tumor defect. This “layer” of tissue is removed with a beveled angle of approximately 45 degrees, which facilitates tissue processing (see below).

- Once removed, the tissue layer is often cut into halves or quadrants and then marked with colored dyes to facilitate precise mapping of the tumor. The tissue is then pressed flat, so the epidermal edge occupies the same tissue plane as the deep margin. The “beveled” edge acquired tissue removal facilitates this flattening process.

- The tissue is then cut and processed in a horizontal direction so that virtually 100% of the peripheral and deep margin can be examined on the same tissue section under the microscope. This is in contrast to the traditional vertical, or “breadloafed,” tissue processing which examines only a small portion of the tumor margin.

- If residual tumor is identified under the microscope, then the Mohs map is marked and the corresponding in-situ tissue is precisely removed from the patient in that portion that was found to still have tumor. This process is repeated until the tumor is histologically negative, thus ensuring complete tumor removal with maximum conservation of healthy tissue.

- Once the tumor has been removed, a variety of techniques are used to close the defect, including primary closure, flaps, grafts, and second intention healing. A recent tabulation of Mohs stages per case for experienced Mohs surgeons showed a median of about 1.7 stages per tumor to clear. Obviously, that number can be much higher for more complicated cases.

Tissue stains most commonly used for Mohs surgery are hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and toluidine blue. While the majority of Mohs surgeons use H&E routinely, a significant minority prefer toluidine blue for processing basal cell carcinoma, since mucopolysaccharides and hyaluronic acid that are associated with BCC stain metachromatically with a magenta coloration.

The Mohs procedure depends upon the presence of continuous tumor growth (no "skip" areas) to be maximally effective. Fortunately, this characteristic is present in most cancers that occur on the skin.