**Pre-anesthetic Assessment**

Neonates/infants presenting with PRS present significant challenges to anesthesia providers in intraoperative and postoperative periods, especially with airway management. Preoperatively, anesthesiologists should obtain a detailed history of the patient's symptoms, including recent upper respiratory infections, features suggestive of reflux and aspiration, and details of the previous anesthetic intervention.

A detailed physical examination emphasizing airway evaluation and cardio-pulmonary examination is imperative to formulate an appropriate anesthetic management plan. Airway evaluation should include assessing the mouth opening, presence of cleft palate, degree of airway obstruction, the severity of micrognathia, presence of other craniofacial skeletal abnormalities. In addition, it is crucial to identify patients with features of OSA as it helps to predict intraoperative and postoperative airway complications and those who do not tolerate supine positioning. Physical examination should include oxygen saturation at room air in addition to heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure.

Preoperative workup should encompass complete blood counts and other tests depending on comorbidities present, including serum electrolytes, renal function tests, video laryngoscopy, chest X-ray, and computed tomography (CT). If PRS is associated with other syndromes, a preoperative echocardiogram should be performed, especially in the presence of a murmur.

**Induction and Airway Management**

Anesthesia providers should anticipate difficulty with ventilation, oxygenation, and intubation. Intubation can be performed with or without sedation and general anesthesia. The main objective of managing the anticipated difficult pediatric airway should be to maintain spontaneous ventilation under sedation or general anesthesia. Upper airway obstruction is very common in syndromic children and can be relieved with 2-handed jaw thrust and airway adjuncts like oropharyngeal airway, nasopharyngeal airway, or laryngeal mask airway (LMA). Otorhinolaryngology (ENT) surgeons should be available for emergency tracheostomy or bronchoscopy.

Several techniques have been described to secure the airway in Pierre Robin patients, including Laryngeal Mask Airway, fiberoptic scope, retrograde wire, and other proprietary intubation devices. While using direct laryngoscopy to intubate, the right paraglossal approach is found to be more effective than the standard technique. However, this approach makes passing an endotracheal tube more challenging, and a bougie may be required to aid intubation.

For awake fibreoptic intubation in neonates, intravenous access is obtained ideally before induction. The pharynx and oral cavity are anesthetized using topical lidocaine (2%) atomizer and jelly. The dose of lidocaine should be limited to 4 or 5 mg/kg. A vagolytic (atropine/glycopyrrolate) is administered to prevent bradycardia and as an anti-sialogogue. If intubating orally, an intubating supraglottic device may be helpful. On visualizing the vocal cords, an intravenous induction agent can be administered. A neuromuscular blocking agent is administered prior to passing the scope through the vocal cords to avoid laryngospasm.

Anesthesia can be induced with both volatile and intravenous anesthetic agents like propofol. Sevoflurane is the most commonly used volatile agent in pediatric practice and is recommended to manage a difficult airway. Isoflurane can also be used as an alternative. Desflurane should be avoided in patients with bronchial hyperreactivity as it can cause laryngospasm, coughing, and increased secretions.

In addition to inhalational agents, anesthesia can be maintained with opioids and alpha-2 agonists such as clonidine or dexmedetomidine, which may reduce opioid requirements and have analgesic and sedative properties. It can also reduce the incidence of emergence agitation.

Dexmedetomidine is a centrally acting alpha-2 receptor agonist which decreases the central sympathetic outflow. An exceptional characteristic of dexmedetomidine is the preservation of respiratory drive. It is associated with a low rate of occurrence of apnea, respiratory depression, and airway obstruction. Dexmedetomidine is highly favorable in children prone to airway collapse or respiratory depression. These features of dexmedetomidine, combined with a short half-life, make it a helpful sedative agent for ambulatory pediatric procedures (CT/ MRI).

Intraoperative monitoring should include neuromuscular monitoring, rectal/ nasal temperature in addition to an electrocardiogram (EKG), non-invasive blood pressure (NIBP), end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2), pulse oximetry. Complete reversal of neuromuscular block with monitoring and awake extubation should be conducted. A nasopharyngeal airway can be inserted before extubation to prevent postoperative airway obstruction.

Patients with PRS have preexisting airway obstruction, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), chronic hypoxia, and increased opioid sensitivity making them increasingly prone to develop postoperative respiratory complications. Prolonged surgical duration and pressure exerted on the base of the tongue by retractors and airway edema may worsen the preexisting obstruction.