The male urethra is unique because it is a relatively long structure that passes through several compartments in the body and therefore, receives blood supply and innervation from a broad array of sources. The male urethra receives blood supply from the inferior vesical artery, bulbourethral artery, and the internal pudendal artery. The sympathetic, parasympathetic and visceral innervation to the male urethra gets delivered through the prostatic plexus.

The male urethra can subdivide into four parts, each part containing unique gross and histological features.

- Pre-prostatic urethra

- Location: Extends inferiorly from urinary bladder and ends prior to entering the prostate gland. 
- Gross Features: It is embedded within the walls of the urinary bladder and is typically 0.5 to 1.5 cm in length.
- Histological Features: transitional epithelium (urothelium)

- Prostatic urethra

- Location: Completely encompassed within the prostate gland. 
- Gross Features: This is generally the widest part of the male urethra, and contains the urethral crest, seminal colliculus, prostatic utricle, and the orifices of the prostatic ducts - typically 3.0 to 4.0 cm in length.
- Histological Features: Urothelium immediately surrounded by the glandular and stromal tissue of the periurethral zone of the prostate.

- Membranous urethra

- Location: Begins immediately outside of the prostate and ends just prior to entering the bulb of the penis. 
- Gross Features: Passes through the deep perineal pouch, the external urethral sphincter, and the perineal membrane. Bulbourethral (Cowper) glands lie just posterior to this portion - typically 1 to 1.5 cm in length.
- Histological Features: The urothelium changes into pseudostratified columnar epithelium. Thick layers of skeletal muscle is present at the level of the external urethral sphincter. Bulbourethral glands may be seen in a cross-section view.

- Spongy urethra

- Location: Travels the entire length of the penis via the corpus spongiosum. 
- Gross Features: Widens initially as it enters the bulb of the penis and widens again in the glans of the penis, forming the navicular fossa. Bulbourethral and urethral glands empty into this portion. Typically around 15 cm in length.
- Histological Features: Pseudostratified columnar epithelium except for the terminal portion which is stratified squamous epithelium. The corpus spongiosum is immediately surrounding this portion of the urethra.