The therapeutic options available for treatment are limited due to the lack of any controlled trials or clinical studies. Certain medications have become part of a clinical practice based on in-vitro studies or case reports.

- Amphotericin B (AMB) has been the most widely used medication for PAM. The Center of Disease Control (CDC) recommends conventional amphotericin B over liposomal amphotericin B (for both intrathecal and intravenous administration) as in-vitro studies have shown a higher MIC against N.fowleri for liposomal AMB compared to conventional AMB.

- Miltefosine is an anti-neoplastic drug for breast cancer. Its use for treatment in Naegleria seems promising after two patients on this treatment survived in 2013 and another one in 2016. Initially, Miltefosine was once only available through the CDC but is now commercially available.

- Azoles including fluconazole and voriconazole have good CNS penetration and are used as adjunctive therapy with AMB.

- In-vitro studies and in-vivo studies in mice have shown azithromycin activity against N. fowleri. Synergistic effects of azithromycin with AMB have also been described.

- Rifampin has been part of standard therapy for PAM; however, its potential for drug-drug interaction caused by the induction of the cytochrome system and the resultant effects on effective AMB and fluconazole levels should be taken into account.

- There have been three recent survivors from the United States in 2013 and 2016. These included a 12-year-old girl (2013,) an 8-year-old boy (2013), and a 16-year-old boy (2016). Controlled hypothermia was used on the 12-year-old girl and 16-year-old boy. Patients who underwent controlled hypothermia showed full neurological recovery and were able to return to school. The full neurological recovery seen with controlled hypothermia is an encouraging result in a previously morbid territory.