The follicular cells take up the iodinated thyroglobulins from the colloid present within the lumen of the thyroid follicle. This process is under the influence of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Afterward, lysosomal digestion and intracellular proteolysis release the thyroid hormone in the form of T3 and T4. These amino acid derivates are so small that they can easily escape the follicular cells and enter the bloodstream through fenestrations present in the capillaries.

The thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) secreted by the anterior pituitary gland affects not only the changes in the follicular cells but also the thyroid follicles and the activity of the gland itself. TSH stimulation occurs when there is a low iodine level in the diet by a negative feedback mechanism on pituitary thyrotrophs. TSH increases the size of the follicular cells (hypertrophy) and increases the number of follicular cells (hyperplasia). Thus under the influence of the TSH, the follicular cells become tall and columnar, demonstrating the heavy activity of the follicular cells and the follicles. The TSH also enhances the exocytosis, synthesis, and iodination of thyroglobulin. It also enhances endocytosis and intracellular breakdown of colloid. Thus the intraluminal colloid is greatly reduced, which manifests externally by the enlargement of the thyroid gland. Usually, enlargement of the thyroid gland is called **goiter,**which is a diseased state. But in this condition, the enlargement of the thyroid gland is because of the hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the parenchyma. Hence it is called**parenchymatous goiter.****colloid goiter.******If this condition becomes longstanding with recurrent stages of hyperplasia and involution, it leads to a more irregular enlargement as a multinodular goiter

If there is no stimulation of TSH, it leads to a decrease in the size of follicular cells to the cuboidal and later squamous cells.

In Graves's disease, the follicular cells are tall, columnar, and overcrowded, resulting in small papillae formation. These papillae will project into the follicular lumen. The colloid is pale and shows scalloped margins. The interstitium becomes infiltrated with T lymphocytes.

In the case of adenoma, the follicular cells are uniform and contain colloid in the lumen. They show atypia and prominent nucleoli and focal nuclear pleomorphism. They are well encapsulated in an intact capsule, which distinguishes them from follicular carcinoma. The papillary carcinoma shows typical "**Orphan Annie eye**" nuclei, which are due to finely dispersed chromatin.**psammoma bodies**(calcified concentric structures).

The parafollicular cells secrete calcitonin whenever the plasma calcium level exceeds its normal limit. The target site for calcitonin in the bone is the osteoclast cells, thus reducing their number and action. Calcitonin also promotes the excretion of phosphate and calcium through urine. No significant clinical manifestations have been observed due to an increase or decrease of calcitonin, and hence, its role in humans is debatable. In parathyroid adenomas, the predominant cells will be chief cells, with few nests of oxyphil cells.