Microcystic adnexal carcinoma is a locally aggressive, deeply infiltrative tumor with a propensity for perineural invasion. Although metastasis is uncommon, it has been reported. There is a high propensity for recurrence in the setting of perineural invasion, especially when removed without full margin control.

Histologic margins often extend beyond the clinical margins, and MMS provides the highest cure rate for these tumors. Several cases in the literature have demonstrated that MAC is not only radioresistant, but that radiation may indeed induce conversion to a more aggressive tumor clinically and histologically. Long-term follow-up is recommended for patients with MAC, as cases of local recurrence have been reported decades after initial treatment.

Untreated tumors are locally aggressive and result in local and regional invasion. Distant metastases and death have been reported, although this is rare. A few key statements that can be made based on prior literature are the following:

- Skin lesions suspicious for MAC require a deep biopsy that includes the deeper dermis and subcutis.

- MAC is best treated by surgery that examines the surrounding and deep margins of the removed tissue.

- The role of radiation therapy is debated. Use is limited to adjuvant therapy for MAC, cases of incomplete surgical treatment, or patients who are poor surgical candidates.

- Patients should be seen every 6 to 12 months for the first five years after treatment.

- Patient education on photoprotection, as well as periodic skin examinations, is advised.