The aortic valve is a semilunar valve with three leaflets, which lies at the junction of left ventricle and aorta. It allows unidirectional blood flow from the left ventricle to the aorta and the rest of the body. Because of the highly complex and sophisticated cellular and molecular functions, the thin valve leaflet can withstand extreme mechanical and hemodynamic forces with every cardiac cycle.

Although bicuspid aortic valves (BAV) are the most common congenital abnormality, congenital valve defects can range from aortic atresia (missing or incomplete closure of aortic valves) to a sub or supra-valvular stenosis. BAV is reported to have an incidence of 1 to 2% with a male predominance. Lack of microfibrillar proteins during valvulogenesis has been reported to affect the leaflet development where two leaflets are fused to form one large leaflet. It frequently correlates with aortic abnormalities such as aortic dilation (root, ascending and arch) and coarctation of the aorta.

Congenital abnormalities including BAV can lead to various valvular complications including aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation leading to an increased risk to infective endocarditis, which has a reported incidence of 12 to 39% in BAV.

Aortic stenosis (AS) is a narrowing of the valve aperture reducing the aortic valve area. Increased resistance to blood flow and transvalvular pressure gradient causes increased left ventricle workload causing hypertrophy. Its prevalence increases with age and can be as high as 4.6% in people greater than age 75 years. Being the most common valvular disease in Europe and America, estimates are that 3.5 million people in England alone will have AS by the year 2020.

AS can be asymptomatic or can cause symptoms of syncope, angina and heart failure.

Aortic regurgitation (AR) is the backflow of blood from the aorta to the left ventricle when the valve leaflets fail to coapt. Common causes include congenital defects, calcific degeneration, infective endocarditis, rheumatic fever, and trauma.

On physical examination, AR murmur is blowing, high-pitched, diastolic, and decrescendo, beginning soon after the aortic component of S (A); it is loudest at the 3rd or 4th left parasternal intercostal space. It also has associations with various other murmurs including:

- “Mid-systolic murmur” because of rapid ejection of an overload of blood from the left ventricle,

- “Austin Flint” murmur is mid-to-late diastolic murmur due to partial closure of mitral valve during ventricular systole because of regurgitant flow from aortic valve,

- “Cole-Cecil” is a diastolic murmur due to the fusion of an aortic murmur with the S3 because of simultaneous filling of the left ventricle from left atrium and AR

**History of Valvular Surgery**

Dr. Theodore Tuffier, in 1912, used his finger to free the fused leaflets of a stenosed aortic valve.

**Mechanical heart valves**are known to last for approximately 25 years. Seventy different mechanical heart valves have been developed since 1960.

Increased thrombogenicity has been a significant issue, for which valves underwent several modifications such as measures to reduce metal contact by covering the struts with cloth and using Silastic shields. Other issues included hemolysis due to excessive rubbing of the ball against the sewing ring and occlusion of coronary ostia because of high profile. Despite these issues, these valves showed the feasibility of prosthetic valve enabling Starr-Edwards to draw design criteria. Basic points included that the valves should be chemically inert, biocompatible, a-traumatic to blood, and non-thrombogenic.

In 1965, Kay-Shiley’s non-rotating disc valve replaced the ball with a single disc but demonstrated poor hemodynamics and hemolysis and was discontinued. Bjork-Shiley in 1969 developed a tilting-disc valve, which overcame the problems with the single-disc valve. Free rotation of disc between metal struts allows it to open by tilting at a 60-degree angle. Bjork-Shiley replaced the flat with the convexo-concave disc to create a larger orifice in 1975 but were the object of a recall due to fracture of welded struts.

Medtronic Hall valve developed by Dr. Karl Hall and Robert Kaster is the most common tilting disc valve. Perforation in the middle of the disc served as a guide and an improved tilting angle.

Predisposition for thrombosis, embolism, need for lifelong anticoagulation therapy are drawbacks of mechanical valves.

**Bioprosthetic valves**can either be an allograft (cadaver or Ross procedure) or, a xenograft (native or pericardium). The Ross procedure involves replacing the diseased aortic valve with the patient’s own pulmonary valve (autograft) and replace the pulmonary valve with aortic or pulmonary allograft. The pulmonary autograft grows with the patient and does not induce an immunologic response. The most common xenografts are porcine aortic valves and bovine pericardial valves.

Lonescu-Shiley developed xenograft valves by using bovine pericardium on a titanium stent in 1971 but was later withdrawn in 1987 due to structural failure including abrasive tears because of fabric-tissue interface and leaflet calcification. Carpentier-Edwards bovine pericardial valve overcame those issues by making some structural modifications, like stitching pericardium to the inside of the fabric and using flexible stent posts.

Although biological valves have better hemodynamics compared to mechanical valves, they have a shorter lifespan because of calcification, which stiffens the valve leaflets.

Tissues engineering, a field in regenerative medicine restores and maintains the function of living tissues. Skin graft for burn victims is an example. **Tissue engineered heart valves (TEHV)**are perceived to be non-thrombogenic, and infection resistant. With advancement in material science and culturing techniques, there is the possibility of a TEHV valve that is capable of growing, remodeling and repairing itself as the patients grow.

**Polymeric valves**have been around for over 50 years, but because the earlier versions were prone to calcification and degradation, they were not widely used and instead only used in bridge devices like artificial hearts and left ventricular assist devices. Besides the advantage that they can be produced in various shapes and sizes,