The following are the potential complications:

- Postoperative pancreatic complications can be some of the most feared complications in surgery. The complications can gravely affect the patient if not diagnosed and managed in a quick manner.

- Postoperative fistulas are one of the most common complications occurring after pancreatectomy. Each surgical procedure described above has a risk for the possible development of a fistula. Some reports have a fistula rate occurring as high as 20-60%. The majority of the reported fistulas are grade A and management consists of continued drainage as most of these types of fistulas will heal without other intervention. Occasionally a patient may need a percutaneous drain placed into a small fluid collection (grade B). Rare patients requiring ICU care for sepsis and multisystem organ failure of their pancreatic leak (grade C complications), but when recognized, need swift surgical intervention, which may end in completion pancreatectomy save the patient.  Pancreatic fistula is a serious complication and can greatly impact patient recovery and overall health.

- Splenic infarction can occur after ligation of the splenic vessels during the Warshaw procedure. This at times leads to the development of an abscess. Ligation of the splenic vessels can also result in gastric varices formation.

- Delayed gastric emptying is a variable post-op complication that can occur in up to 50% of patients. It is diagnosed when there is significant nasogastric tube output. Delayed emptying can prolong the hospital stay and make the patient have a poor life quality until resolution. Prokinetics offer mixed results for potential relief of the motility issue.

- An anastomotic leak from the newly created anastomotic sites is a major cause of postoperative complications. Multiple studies have been performed which show that regardless of the technique for the creation of the anastomosis there is still a large risk for a leak.

- Intra Abdominal hemorrhage after pancreatic surgery can occur from multiple different etiologies. Early in the post-op course, it is likely due to the operative failure of hemostasis. The latter portion of the postoperative course is seen with pancreatic leaks causing erosion into a vascular structure or causing a breakdown to an anastomotic site.

- Wound complications are also another complication that can occur following surgery. This is a broad topic as many patients have different pathologies but undergo pancreatic surgery. Patients with poor nutrition or those undergoing preoperative biliary stenting or other endoscopic biliary procedures have higher rates of wound complications and well as patients with diabetes and obesity.