Hemiballimus is a consequence of damage in the basal ganglia structures involved in the inhibitory pathways. With the decreased excitatory transmission of the globus pallidus internus (GPi) and the disinhibition of the thalamus, it creates an overactivation of the corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts with random firing. Subsequently, efferent innervation is sent to muscles on the contralateral side. Intraoperative monitoring studies show decreased firing of cells in the GPi after a pallidotomy, a surgical treatment to decrease hyperkinetic movements. The neurology-neurosurgical team uses the perioperative rate of firing to assess the efficacy of their targeted intervention.

To better understand the pathophysiology of hemiballismus, a review of the complex basal ganglia inhibitory and excitatory pathways is mandatory. The cortex input is generated and sent to the nuclei of the basal ganglia, with a subsequent output directly to the motor neurons in the frontal lobe and brainstem, leading to planned activation or inhibition of movement. The basal ganglia nuclei consist of the caudate, putamen, globus pallidus, STN, and substantia nigra. The fibers from the globus pallidum convert into a white matter tract called the lenticular fasciculus that forms a bundle called the thalamic fasciculus as it enters the thalamus. The latter is an important relayer of excitatory signals to the motor cortex and somatosensory signals coming from the body. Strokes causing hemichorea-hemiballismus usually localizes to a common functional network with lesions occurring in regions functionally connected to the posterolateral putamen, reinforcing the hyperkinetic movement disorder theory.

- Excitatory or direct pathway: It starts with excitatory glutamate-driven input from the cortex to the striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen). The activation of the striatum sends D1-dopamine receptor driven inhibitory GABAergic signals to the GPi. The inactivation of the GPi allows excitatory glutamate signals to be generated in the thalamus (also called disinhibition of the thalamus), relaying fibers to multiple areas in the motor cortex, including the pre-central sulcus, prefrontal, and supplementary motor areas. Upon activation of these areas, upper motor (efferent) first-order networks are fired, leading to downstream activation of corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts, hence generating movement.

- Inhibitory, or the indirect pathway: It starts in the cortex; however, the activation of the D2-dopamine receptor in the striatum leads to the firing of the globus pallidus externus (GPe). Subsequently, the GPe sends inhibitory signals to the STN. Paradoxically, the STN activates the GPi, which puts inhibition on the thalamus, leading to decreased activation of the cortex, and subsequent blunting of the corticospinal tracts, leading to inhibition of movement.