American Indians and Alaskan natives have been associated with high rates of mental disorders and psychiatric diagnoses such as post-traumatic stress disorder, substance use disorder, and suicidal behaviors compared to other ethnic and racial groups.

**PTSD**

Research has found a high rate of American Indians and Alaskan natives with PTSD and PTSD-related symptoms compared to other races and ethnicities. In the general U.S. population, the prevalence of lifetime PTSD is 4.8% to 6.4%.

For a long time now, AI/ANs have served in the US Armed Forces at high rates, and this may be one of the contributing factors for the high prevalence of PTSD among this group.

**Substance Use Disorder**

High rates of substance use which includes both illicit drugs and alcohol use, is another major issue that should be recognized when addressing the specific needs in caring for mental health in AI/ANs. In one study which screened a group of 489 American Indian females at an Indian Health Service (IHS) institution, the lifetime prevalence for any substance use disorder was greater than 60%.

Given the high number of adolescent AI/ANs with substance use disorders, it may help explore different interventions that may help prevent the early initiation of substance use. Of note, alcohol use was a large contributing factor for the significantly higher rate of premature deaths in AI/ANs than other races in the United States.

**Suicide**

Suicide rates have historically been higher amongst the AI/AN population compared to the total US population. In 2015, the National Violent Death Reporting System (NVDRS) found that the suicide rates in the 18 participating states were more than 3.5 times higher than when compared to ethnic groups with the lowest suicide rates.

Compared to other ethnic groups, AI/AN adolescents were found to have more severe negative experiences such as victimization, substance abuse, and depression and may contribute to increased suicidality.

There may be some utility in early identification and intervention amongst AI/ANs who experience suicidality. Suicidal behaviors have also been found to co-occur with substance use, including alcohol and drug use, in many AI/AN communities. Previous research on this topic has identified potential targets for intervention, including increasing coping skills, reducing the stigma of mental health services, and building an organized community infrastructure for health care for AI/ANs.