**Cardiac Physiology Changes During Pregnancy**

During pregnancy, the heart adapts to excess fluid volume levels. Pregnancy entails a 50% increase in intravascular volume, with the largest volume burden during the third trimester of pregnancy.

Cardiac changes happen early in pregnancy, with cardiac output increasing by 20% at 8 weeks gestation.

The heart itself also undergoes significant changes over the course of pregnancy. Ventricular wall mass and end-diastolic volumes increase without an increase in end-diastolic pressure. The heart develops a "dilated cardiomyopathy-like" picture with accompanying increases in contractility. Echocardiography can be a valuable tool early in pregnancy to establish a baseline with which to compare later in pregnancy. Heart rate typically increases by 10 to 20 beats per minute.

The gravid uterus has a profound effect on hemodynamics. A pregnant mother lying in the supine position may reduce up to 25% in cardiac output simply from the uterus compressing the inferior vena cava and inhibiting venous return to the heart.  If a mother is experiencing hypotension or if there is suspected compromised blood flow to the uterus, it is not uncommon for the mother to be asked to lie in a left lateral position to take pressure off the inferior vena cava and improve preload to the heart. Poor cardiac output is equivocal to poor uterine blood flow and, by association, poor blood flow to the fetus.

Labor is particularly taxing on the heart and can have significant consequences for those with cardiovascular disease. Cardiac output increases by about 15% during the first stage of labor and 50% during the second stage of labor. Uterine contractions are associated with an auto-transfusion of up to 500 mL of blood back into the bloodstream and a resulting increase in systolic blood pressure of up to 20%. Patients sensitive to volume overload, such as those with mitral stenosis, can have rapid declines in cardiopulmonary function from this phenomenon. After relieving the inferior vena cava obstruction from the gravid uterus in the post-partum period, cardiac output increases 60 to 80% compared to pre-pregnancy levels, and there is a massive transfer of fluids from the extravascular space to the intravascular space.  Women with cardiovascular issues are at the greatest risk of pulmonary edema in the second stage of labor and during the postpartum period.