Concerning the events of the cardiac cycle, it is important to compartmentalize their sequence. The contraction of the atria (both the right and left) physiologically precede that of the ventricles (both right and left). This contraction sequence allows the separation of the right and left heart, at least functionally, as two separate circuits. Due to this functional similarity between the right and left side, this article will often only comment on the left ventricle, with it known that a similar sequence of events is taking place in the right heart as well.

Cardiac cycle events can be divided into diastole and systole. Diastole represents ventricular filling, and systole represents ventricular contraction/ejection. Systole and diastole occur in both the right and left heart, though with very different pressures (see hemodynamics below).

Diastole begins with the closing of the aortic valve (or pulmonic) and ends with the closing of the mitral valve (or tricuspid). This period encompasses the ventricular relaxation and filling. Diastole represents when the blood vessels return blood to the heart in preparation for the next ventricular contraction.

Systole begins when the mitral valve (or tricuspid) closes and concludes with the closure of the aortic valve (or pulmonic). This stage of the cardiac cycle represents ventricular contraction, forcing blood into the arteries. When a ventricle contracts, the pressure within the ventricles will (barring pathology) become greater than adjacent blood vessels, and the valves will allow the blood out.