XLA patients are at risk for complications of the disease itself as well as secondary to treatment.

Complications associated with XLA usually arise from infections, especially those that have become recurrent. Susceptible individuals can become chronically ill and suffer organ damage.  For example, repeated episodes of acute pneumonia may culminate in chronic lung disease and lead to bronchiectasis, which has the potential to reduce life expectancy. The likelihood that chronic infections will evolve into serious, life-threatening conditions increases with the length of delay in diagnosis. The later treatment begins, the more difficult it is to eradicate the causative organisms and prevent the systemic spread of infection to joints and vital organs.

Complications associated with chronic infections are, by far, the most common problem confronted by patients with XLA.  Other, less common complications include the increased risk of developing malignancy, inflammatory conditions, or autoimmune disease.

Complications associated with treatment are mainly those which arise from immunoglobulin replacement therapy. The replacement of immunoglobulin is a lifelong requirement for individuals with XLA.  Indeed, regular immunoglobulin replacement therapy is known to increase life expectancy, lower the rate and severity of infections, decrease the number of hospitalizations, and reduce the need for antibiotics. Unfortunately, it also correlates with side effects and must, therefore, have careful monitoring. Clinicians can overcome complications associated with immunoglobulin replacement therapy by changing (1) the time interval between immunoglobulin infusions, (2) the route of administration, (3) the rate of administration, or (4) the product used for replacement.

Immunoglobulins used in therapy derive from the pooled serum of thousands of healthy donors who have had screening for transmissible diseases. The donor serum is processed to retain maximal amounts of IgG and only trace amounts of IgA and IgM, thus reducing the likelihood of triggering anaphylactic reactions to IgA or developing kidney damage from complex formation induced by IgM.

The length of time between infusions varies according to the route of administration. The two most common routes of administering immunoglobulins are intravenous (IVIG) and subcutaneous (SCIG).  The interval between IVIG infusions can be as long as a month, while the maximum interval between SCIG infusions is usually no more than a week.

The rate of delivery and hence, the final immunoglobulin concentration obtained is another important factor. The higher the rate of delivery, the greater the likelihood of complications. In situations where higher immunoglobulin levels are needed to combat a recalcitrant infection, the clinician must balance the decision to increase the infusion rate against the side effect profile.

Differences in the exact composition of the product used for immunoglobulin replacement also contributes to tolerability. The purity and constituents (i.e., additives used to reduce the aggregate formation and enhance delivery) vary according to the manufacturer, and the reactions elicited vary in different individuals.

Reactions to immunoglobulin infusion therapy can be immediate or latent. The most common immediate side effect is a headache. Headache occurs within minutes and is managed using over-the-counter medications, although it can often be avoided altogether by simply slowing the rate of infusion.

Other common infusion reactions include nausea, malaise, fever/chills, chest tightness, and migraines. Infusion reactions can also categorize according to the system affected. Cardiovascular reactions include tachycardia, palpitations, flushing, and hypotension; neurologic reactions include anxiety, nervousness, irritability, tremor, fainting and seizures; respiratory system reactions include cough, chest tightness, dyspnea, wheezing, and bronchospasm; dermatologic reactions include erythema, urticaria, and eczema; musculoskeletal reactions include low backache, arthralgia, and myalgia; and gastrointestinal reactions include abdominal pain, distention, and liver dysfunction.

More serious complications can also arise. These are much less common and occur after a period of latency. Examples include aseptic meningitis, anaphylactic reactions, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, erythema multiforme, acute renal failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, transfusion-associated lung injury, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary edema, pulmonary embolism, cardiac arrest, shock, coma.