One of the most effective treatment modalities to mitigate specific phobias is behavioral therapy. Behavioral therapy includes implementing the principles of operant conditioning and extinction learning via systematic desensitization and flooding. In methodical desensitization, the patient is exposed to a list of stimuli ranking from the least to the most anxiety-provoking. With this method, patients are taught various techniques to deal with anxiety such as relaxation, breathing control, and alternative cognitive approaches. The cognitive-behavioral approach includes reinforcing the realization that the phobic stimulus is safe. As the patient masters these techniques, they are taught to use them in the face of anxiety-provoking stimuli and induce relaxation. As the patients become desensitized to each stimulus on the scale, they keep moving up until the most anxiety-provoking stimuli no longer elicit any fear or anxiety.

Patients with a blood injection injury phobia are advised to tense their bodies and remain seated during the exposure to avoid the possibility of fainting from a vasovagal reaction. Also, beta-blockers and benzodiazepines can be used in patients when the phobia is associated with panic attacks.

Other forms of treatment that may also be considered include virtual therapy in which the patient is exposed to or interacts with the phobic stimulus on a computer screen. This field of treatment is relatively novel and requires more research. Other treatment modalities include hypnosis, supportive therapy, and family therapy. The goal of all forms of therapy is to help the patient recognize that the feared stimulus is not dangerous and to provide emotional support.