Following the physical examination, a complete blood count (CBC), a chest X-ray, or computed tomography (CT) scan may be used to evaluate SCC, provided that the tumor is of sufficient size. The presence of a cavity, filled by either gas or fluid, within a tumor mass is a classic sign of SCC.

Suspected lung malignancies require a diligent workup tailored to the extent of the disease. For small incidental nodules discovered on the chest CT, please see the Fleischner Society guidelines for management recommendations. If a diagnosis of lung cancer is especially high, then proceeding with the staging workup rather than obtaining tissue as a first priority may actually be more efficient as areas of metastasis may be detected. These areas could be more accessible and easier to biopsy, thus confirming the diagnosis and establishing the stage.

High-quality imaging is essential to the staging process. A Positron emission tomography (PET) scan, typically fused with a CT of the body, is utilized. False positives may occur in situations such as infection, sarcoidosis, rheumatoid nodules, etc. False negatives can occur with carcinoid tumors, ground glass opacities, and or lesions under 1.5 cm in size. For lesions under 1.5 cm in size, the false negative rate approaches 15%. Although PET/CT staging is generally widespread, they are not indicated in patients with pure ground glass opacities or peripheral cT1a type tumors.

Despite imaging advances, invasive mediastinal nodal evaluation is indicated in a broad cross-section of patients. Even with PET/CT scans, the false positive and false negative rates are 15 to 20% for mediastinal involvement.

Multiple techniques can be utilized to sample the mediastinum and can be divided into surgical, endobronchial, or esophageal, and differ in the number of locations of accessible nodes. Surgical techniques include mediastinoscopy, video-mediastinoscopy, anterior mediastinoscopy, and video-assisted thoracic surgery. Traditional mediastinoscopy can access levels 1, 2R/L, 3, 4R/L, and 7, while video-assisted mediastinoscopy can also obtain levels 5, 8, and 10R. The false negative rates for these procedures are approximately 2%, but this is likely dependent on the operator.

Endobronchial techniques involve the use of an ultrasound probe to identify specific landmarks associated with certain mediastinal nodal levels. Endoscopic bronchial ultrasound with needle aspiration (EBUS-NA) is one of these techniques. It can access nodal levels 2R/L, 3, 4R/L, 7, 10, 11, and 12. Esophageal ultrasound with needle aspiration (EUS-NA) can be utilized to access 4L, 5, 7,8, and 9. The false negative rate may be as high as 20% but is highly dependent on the skill and experience of the operator and institution. EBUS or EUS is typically the first approach offered to patients requiring mediastinal nodal evaluation.

Baseline pulmonary function testing is also important, especially in patients that may be surgical candidates. The use of PFTs as part of the evaluation will be discussed in the surgical oncology section of this article.

Assessment of PD-L1, EGFR, ALK fusion oncogene, and other mutations are also performed as there may be targetable mutations.