Fat particles or globules are released from the organs of primary origin and enter the microcirculation, causing damage to the capillary beds. The disruption affects the microcirculatory hemostasis in the following organs:

- Brain

- Skin

- Eyes

- Heart

Two main theories try to explain the development of fat embolism syndrome.

**Mechanical Theory**

This theory was postulated by Gassling et al. According to Gassling, large fat droplets are released into the venous system. Elevation of the intramedullary from trauma or surgery leads to the release of fat into the venous sinusoids. From the venous system, these fat globules are deposited in the pulmonary capillary bed where they travel to the brain via the arteriovenous shunt into the brain. Initially, there was no valid explanation for the development of fat embolism syndrome in patients with no patent foramen ovale, but the presence of an arteriovenous shunt clarifies this. Also, intravascular fat droplets are deformable, hence their ability to transverse the pulmonary vasculature. The pathophysiological changes produced by fat droplets include the following:

- Elevated pulmonary artery pressure

- Impairment of oxygen exchange from ventilation-perfusion mismatch

- Systemic effects on end-organs such as the brain, kidney, and skin.

Deposition of the fat droplets in the brain produces a cascade of reactions and leads to a systemic inflammatory response syndrome, local inflammation, and ischemia as a result of disruption of microcirculation. The release of inflammatory mediators and vasoactive amines like histamine, serotonin leads to an increase in vascular permeability and vasodilation with ensuing hypotension and hypoperfusion.

**Biochemical Theory**

Baker et al. proposed this theory for the development of fat embolism syndrome. According to this theory, the precipitating event, whether traumatic or nontraumatic, triggers a hormonal change in the body system. This leads to release of free fatty acid (FFA) and chylomicrons. The presence of acute phase reactants, such as C-reactive protein, causes the chylomicron to coalesce and migrate. Baker et al. attribute the development of fat embolism syndrome to FFA. Pneumocyte hydrolysis of fat particles generates FFA which migrate to other organs, causing multiple organ dysfunction syndromes. The biochemical theory helps to explain the development of fat embolism syndrome in nontraumatic patients.