Abacavir is an FDA-approved drug used to treat HIV-1 infection in conjunction with other antiretrovirals. Like other nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), abacavir use is typically combined with other HIV medications. Abacavir is not recommended for use by itself.

Singh R. et al. conducted a clinical trial with abacavir 600 mg/dolutegravir 50 mg/lamivudine 300 mg on 12 patients (four men and eight women) of Japanese ancestry to determine the safety and pharmacokinetics in a single dose tablet after fasting for eight hours. Many clinical trials are conducted with patients of European ancestry. It is helpful to enroll patients of many different ethnic backgrounds to determine any differences in the pharmacokinetics and safety of the medications being studied. The researchers collected blood samples over 72 hours after dosing to determine several pharmacokinetic parameters. The geometric mean maximum plasma concentrations for abacavir, dolutegravir, and lamivudine were 5.22, 4.13, and 3.35 micrograms/ml, respectively. The time to maximum concentration for abacavir, dolutegravir, and lamivudine were 1.01, 3.50, and 2.98 hours, respectively. The geometric mean area under the concentration-time curve for abacavir, dolutegravir, and lamivudine was 18.2, 71.6, and 16.6 micrograms times hour per ml. The research subjects did not report any adverse drug effects. The pharmacokinetic parameters for abacavir and lamivudine were similar to previously reported clinical trial data from healthy Japanese and European or African ancestry subjects. Dolultegravir was found to have a higher area under the concentration-time curve in this study compared with the two previously mentioned studies.

Archary M. et al. conducted a study on the pharmacokinetics of abacavir and lamivudine in severely malnourished children (N = 75) with human immunodeficiency virus from South Africa. The children's ages ranged from 0.1 to 10.8 years and were dosed based on World Health Organization (WHO) weight-band recommendations. The children were randomized to receive treatment with abacavir and lamivudine within 14 days (early) or after nutritional recovery (delayed). Abacavir and lamivudine pharmacokinetic parameters were measured on days 1 and 14. The children received follow-up to week 48. Abacavir demonstrated a 2-compartment pharmacokinetic model. The early treatment cohort demonstrated a 31% increase in their bioavailability of abacavir. The apparent clearance (CL/F) of abacavir increased from a mean of 3.33 to 5.86 L/Hr/7 kg from day 1 to day 14. Lamivudine demonstrated an A 1-compartment pharmacokinetic model. Variability in the apparent clearance was best explained by age maturation. Archary M. et al. concluded that the WHO weight-band dosing recommendations are appropriate, and the pharmacokinetic variability of abacavir and lamivudine treatment in severely malnourished children did not affect its efficacy.