SBS can be classified by anatomical, pathophysiological, and postoperative criteria. Anatomically, there are three types of SBS: end-jejunostomy, jejunocolonic anastomosis where the jejunum is in continuity, most commonly, with the left colon, and jejunoileal anastomosis. The pathophysiological criteria can also be subdivided into categories where the colon is in continuity and those where it is not.

The primary pathophysiological mechanism of chronic intestinal failure secondary to SBS is intestinal malabsorption due to the loss of intestinal absorptive surface and more rapid intestinal transit. The successful rehabilitation of a patient with SBS depends upon the management of the three phases of SBS: acute phase, adaptation phase, and maintenance phase.

The acute phase of SBS lasts 3 to 4 weeks and involves metabolic derangement and significant intestinal losses as well as gastric hypersecretion due to the lack of inhibitory hormones that are normally released from the terminal ileum. It requires close monitoring in the hospital setting to avoid sequelae such as dehydration with acute kidney failure, acid-base abnormalities, and electrolyte deficiencies.

The adaptation phase of SBS lasts 1 to 2 years and involves adaptive changes of remaining small bowel to increase the area of bowel available for nutrient absorption, slow down intestinal transit to maximize the time available for absorption, and adaptive hyperphagia. These processes are promoted by the presence of nutrients in the bowel, pancreatic and biliary secretions, and hormones released by the ileum and colon. Chronic intestinal failure – the condition that exists when the adaptation phase fails to occur – is more likely to be reversible in the following situations:

- When there are more than 35 centimeters of small bowel along with a jejunoileal anastomosis and an intact ileocecal valve and colon

- When there are more than 60 centimeters of small bowel with a jejunocolonic anastomosis

- When there is more than 115 centimeters of small bowel with an end jejunostomy

The third and final phase of SBS is the maintenance phase. This phase is managed with special diets, oral or intramuscular supplementation of nutrients, and pharmacological treatments.