The bulk of the umbilical cord consists of Wharton's jelly since it does not have any voluntary skeletal muscles. However, the umbilical vasculature has several smooth muscle layers of various compositions and thicknesses. The walls of umbilical vessels consist mainly of three layers: tunica externa, tunica media, and tunica interna.

**Tunica externa**

Also referred to as the tunica adventitia, it is the outermost layer of the umbilical vessels that consists of fibrous and elastic connective tissue with varying amounts of collagen and elastic fibers. The connective tissue of this layer is quite dense near the tunica media. It transitions to loose connective tissue as it extends toward the periphery of the umbilical vessels. The umbilical arteries have denser connective tissue in their tunica externa compared to that of the umbilical vein.

**Tunica media**

This section is the intermediate layer within the wall of the umbilical vessels. It represents the muscular bulk of the vessels and consists mainly of smooth muscle. It provides structural support for the vessels. It is also responsible for changing the diameter of the umbilical vessels. Thus, it contributes primarily to regulate blood flow and blood pressure. It is commonly the thickest layer within the vascular wall. It is much thicker in the umbilical arteries compared to the umbilical vein. Moreover, tunica media of the umbilical arteries contain well-defined internal and external elastic membranes that may be less defined or absent in the umbilical vein wall.

**Tunica interna**

Also called the tunica intima, it is the innermost layer of the umbilical vasculature. It is composed of simple squamous epithelium resting on a basement membrane consists of connective tissue rich in elastic fibers. Those layers together form the endothelium of the umbilical vessels. The tunica interna of the umbilical vein contains valves that direct the blood flow in one direction and prevent its regurgitation in the opposite direction. Those valves are absent in the wall of the umbilical arteries.