Performance-based simulation is now widely accepted as a form of effective simulation training based on the experience of training in military settings, mass casualties, nuclear power plant operations, and the aerospace industry.

The NBME endorses the standardized patient’s report as a primary evaluation tool and as a basis of scoring in the assessment of clinical skills of students and candidates. Using standardized patients in multiple station sessions has contributed to the understanding of moving from paper and pencil knowledge tests to performance-based assessment and teaching. Clinical skills can be evaluated and/or taught with the use of SP encounters in a standardized, systematic, and quantifiable manner. Interpersonal skills, diagnostic abilities, communication, patient management, physical examination maneuvers, and medical history interviews can be objectively itemized as necessary and scored. Formative educational opportunities can be provided in medical schools with the use of outstanding realistic SPs in high stakes testing.

Research has shown that OSCE scores can be reliable, and results can help to improve the medical school curriculum. Multiple sessions and raters can improve the reliability of the assessment of a learner’s performance. Interrater reliability should be assessed to ensure consistency of grading of the same activity. The SP director should help coordinate SP and external observer activities and review the consistency and agreement of assessments by these individuals. Standardized patients can add to the ability to evaluate learners if the SP program director and the content expert can appropriately define the expected performance criteria and train the SP in assessing these skills.