Echolalia is one of the most common echo phenomena and is a non-voluntary, automatic, and effortless pervasive behavior. Other examples of echo phenomena include echopraxia (the involuntary repetition of movements), echolalioplasia (repetitive sign language), echomimia (imitative facial actions), echographia (written repetition of speech), coprolalia (automatic repetition of obscene and socially inappropriate words), klazomania (compulsive shouting), and palilia (repetition of one’s own words).

- **Autism spectrum disorder:**Recent studies have shown that echolalia is a coping mechanism for children with autism to communicate when they cannot produce spontaneous speech. Prizant et al. have reported echolalia as evidence of "gestalt" processing in children with ASD to acquire language.

- **Gilles de la Tourette syndrome:**Tourette syndrome (TS) is a childhood-onset neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by vocal and motor tics. Echolalia, coprolalia, and echopraxia are some features of TS. Motor tics present in TS include jerks, twitches, and tics. The disorder has a wide range of severity and is associated with other behavioral and psychiatric disorders. TS is often associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Tourette syndrome has a waxing and waning course. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is the first-line treatment for TS. Pharmacotherapy is used if behavioral therapy alone does not work. Medications like clonidine, risperidone, fluoxetine have been used.

- **Stroke:**In adult patients, echolalia after stroke is seen in transcortical motor aphasia. Positron emission tomography scans can show increased uptake in frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes.