Repeat phosphate estimation should take place to confirm hyperphosphatemia.

Several factors affect the levels of serum phosphate. Serum phosphate exhibits a marked circadian rhythm, with a peak around 3:00 am and a nadir around 11:00 am. As hemodialysis removes phosphate, the timing between sampling and the last dialysis session is also important.

As there is intraindividual variation in phosphate levels in CKD patients, the clinician should take serial measurements before deciding on phosphate lowering treatment. Serum phosphate level and Urinary total phosphate excretion are not reliable markers of the state of body phosphate load. Serum phosphate does not rise above normal until the glomerular filtration rate falls below 30 ml/min per 1.73 m^2.

Fractional phosphate excretion is a better marker and reflects the body’s adaptation to excrete increasing amounts of phosphate per remaining functional nephron.

Renal function tests, vitamin D, Serum calcium, and PTH levels also require assay. An increased BUN and creatinine with normal or elevated PTH and low calcium levels suggest renal insufficiency. PTH-based diagnostic approach should serve to evaluate hyperphosphatemia that is not due to kidney failure. Vitamin D intoxication characteristically demonstrates high calcium and phosphate levels and an increase in vitamin D levels.

Marked hyperphosphatemia with accompanying hypocalcemia and hyperkalemia and hyperuricemia suggests tumor lysis syndrome. Creatine phosphokinase levels and serum uric acid are elevated in rhabdomyolysis, while tumor lysis syndrome shows normal or marginally elevated creatine kinase and markedly elevated serum uric acid.

Patients with normal renal function require urinary phosphate assessment. These levels can help in differentiating between increased renal reabsorption ( extracellular fluid volume contraction and tumoral calcinosis) and extrarenal causes (rhabdomyolysis, laxative or enema use, or phosphate toxicity)

Tumoral calcinosis characteristically demonstrates hyperphosphatemia and elevated or normal serum 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D and calcitriol levels with normal serum calcium, alkaline phosphatase, and PTH concentrations.

X-ray imaging may demonstrate metastatic calcifications.

For blood phosphate estimation, serum or plasma is an option. For plasma, lithium heparin is the agent of choice as anticoagulants such as EDTA, oxalate, and citrate may interfere with the formation of the phosphomolybdate complex in routine assays.

Urine samples can be collected in plain bottles. Acidified urine is also useful to reduce the formation of insoluble calcium phosphate complexes. A 24-hour urine collection should accompany a paired serum sample for the calculation of renal tubular absorption of phosphate.

The most common measurement of serum inorganic phosphate is the reaction of phosphate ions with ammonium molybdate, in acidic pH,  to form a colorless phosphomolybdate complex that can be measured directly by ultraviolet (UV) absorption at 340 nm, or after reduction to colored molybdenum blue at 600 to 700 nm. Currently, no reference method exists for the measurement of serum phosphate.

**Monitoring**

As per KDIGO guidelines, serum phosphate, along with calcium, intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH), and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels are estimated in all patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m^2.

If the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is between 30 to 59 mL/min/1.73 m^2, serum phosphate, and calcium should be measured every 6 to 12 months. In patients with estimated eGFR 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m^2, serum phosphate and calcium require assessment every three to six months.