A variety of commonly used medications affect cardiac preload. These are some of the first-line treatments for heart failure, myocardial ischemia, and hypertension. Drugs that decrease preload and the mechanism by which they work are detailed below

- Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors – interrupts the RAAS system.

- Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) - interrupts the RAAS system.

- Nitrates – causes nitric oxide-induced vasodilation.

- Diuretics – promote the elimination of salt and water, resulting in a decreased overall intravascular volume.

- Calcium Channel Blockers – blocks calcium-induced vasoconstriction and decreases cardiac contractility.

These drugs have utility in cases such as the acute management of heart failure where the goal is to reduce the volume of blood the failing heart has to pump. By decreasing the volume overload experienced by the patient, using one or more of the above-listed medications, symptoms such as dyspnea and edema can improve rapidly. Long term, use of ACE Inhibitors or ARBs has shown to lower mortality in chronic heart failure patients by decreasing the amount of filling pressure in the heart and downregulating the compensatory neurohormonal stimulation.

Additionally, several non-pathological states may result in increased preload.

- Pregnancy

- Exercise

- Excessive sodium intake

- IV fluid

Finally, manipulations in preload, using several bedside maneuvers, may help diagnose murmurs associated with several different conditions. For example, rapid squatting causes an increased volume in the LV at the end of diastole. This increase in preload increases the intensity of murmurs such as aortic stenosis, mitral regurgitation, and ventricular septal defect. A later onset, signified by a click, will be heard in mitral valve prolapse. In contrast, maneuvers that decrease preload, such as the Valsalva maneuver or standing up, increase the intensity of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and cause an earlier onset in the click heard in mitral valve prolapse.