The superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) provide blood supply to the colon. Communication between these two vessels happens via the marginal artery, which runs parallel to the length of the entire colon. The branches supplying specific portions of the bowel are as follows:

- The cecum is supplied by the ileocolic artery, which is a terminal branch of the SMA. The ileocolic artery gives rise to the appendicular artery to supply the appendix.

- The ascending colon and the right colic flexure are supplied by the ileocolic and right colic arteries, both branches of the SMA.

- The arterial supply to the transverse colon is mostly from the middle colic artery, which is a branch of  SMA. It may also receive blood supply from the anastomotic arcades between the right and left colic arteries, which collectively form the marginal artery.

- The descending and sigmoid colon receive their blood supply from the left colic and sigmoid arteries, which are branches of the IMA. The transition of blood supply at the left colic flexure from the SMA to the IMA indicates the embryological transition from the midgut to hindgut that occurs at this point, respectively.

- The rectum and anal canal are supplied by the superior rectal artery, which is a continuation of the IMA. They also receive supply from branches of the internal iliac arteries, the middle and inferior rectal arteries. Further, the inferior rectal artery is a branch of the internal pudendal artery.

Venous drainage usually accompanies arterial colonic supply. Ultimately, the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) drains into the splenic vein, while the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) joins the splenic vein to form the hepatic portal vein. Lymphatics of the large intestine drain into the lymph nodes associated with the main vessels that supply them.