To determine if a patient has an IgE mediated penicillin allergy, the only validated test currently available in the united states is penicillin skin testing. A board-certified allergist should perform the test. It involves a skin-prick with the application of the major and minor determinants as well as a control. The area of skin is examined 15 minutes later. If a wheel of at least 3 mm and concomitant erythema develop, the test is positive. The test should not be performed if the reaction to penicillin was a severe non-IgE mediated reaction.

If skin testing is negative, intra-dermal testing can then also be performed using the same antigenic determinants. Just as with skin testing, a positive intradermal test is characterized by the development of a 3 mm or more wheal and erythema at the site of injection. Readings are taken at 15 min for a history of immediate reaction and at 48 and 72 hours with a history of delayed reaction.  Patients may need to wait up to 6 weeks after initial testing before undergoing intra-dermal testing.

A graded-dose challenge can also be performed when skin testing is negative. Here the patients receive anywhere from 1/100, if initial reaction was anaphylactic, to 1/10 of a dose with progressively increasing doses after that. After each dose administration, the patient has a 30 to 60 minute observation period. If no reaction occurs, the patients then receive a full dose, again followed by a period of observation. Testing must be performed by a board-certified allergist and should be performed at least 4 to 6 weeks after an acute reaction, use of steroids or anti-histamines or any signs of asthma or urticaria. The graded-dose challenge is also contraindicated if the initial reaction was a severe non-IgE mediated reaction such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) or toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN).