The optimal management of patients with posterior shoulder instability requires an interdisciplinary effort, which most commonly includes athletic trainers, physical therapists, primary care physicians, and orthopedic specialists. Athletic trainers (ATCs) are often the initial point of contact with athletes who develop symptoms of posterior shoulder instability. They should have a close relationship with team physicians or other orthopedic specialists in the area to help facilitate the necessary care required for these patients. Whether seeking nonoperative management or in the postoperative period, the role of a physical therapist is vital to guiding the athlete back to play. Physical therapists will be required to detail their progression and any barriers to improvement. The orthopedic surgeon is ultimately responsible for the management of the patient’s condition and should be in close communication with their physical therapist and athletic trainer to monitor progress. [Level 5]

In the case of a posterior shoulder dislocation, other disciplines may play an important role. When a patient presents to the emergency department with a posterior shoulder dislocation, the emergency room physician must properly diagnose the condition and subsequently reduce the shoulder. The emergency room physician should direct the patient to the care of an orthopedic surgeon for further management. In patients with epilepsy causing shoulder dislocation, patients will need the care of a neurologist for anti-epileptic management. [Level 5]