The etiology of RA has a significant basis in genetics. It is thought to result from the interaction between patients' genotypes and environmental factors. In a nationwide study of 91 monozygotic (MZ) and 112 dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs in the United Kingdom, the overall MZ concordance rate was 15%, and in dizygotic twins, 5%.HLA-DRB1*04, HLA-DRB1*01, and HLA-DRB1*10. These HLA-DRB1 alleles contain a stretch of a conserved sequence of 5 amino acids referred to as the "shared epitope" (SE) in the third hypervariable region of their DRB1 chain, which has been associated with the risk of developing RA.

Polymorphisms in other genes are associated with RA, including PAD14, PTPN22, CTLA4, IL-2RA, STAT4, TRAF1, CCR6, and IRF5.PSORS1C1, PTPN22, and MIR146A genes are associated with severe disease.

The term epigenetics refers to heritable changes without altering the DNA sequence. These changes may be present in chromatin or the DNA. These include DNA methylation, histone modification, and non-coding RNA-mediated regulation. RA-FLS (fibroblast-like synoviocytes) overexpress tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, coded by gene PTPN11, compared to synoviocytes from osteoarthritis (OA) patients, promoting the invasive nature of RA-FLS. The enhancer region of the PTPN11 intron contained two hypermethylated sites, resulting in abnormal epigenetic regulation of the gene and alteration of the function of RA-FLS.

Cigarette smoking is the strongest environmental risk factor associated with rheumatoid arthritis. Studies have shown in anti-citrullinated protein antibody (anti-CCP) positive individuals, there is an interaction between the shared epitope (SE) and smoking that increases the risk of RA.

Other environmental triggers may play a role as a trigger for RA, which is more closely associated with seropositive RA. These include silica, asbestos, textile dust, and P gingivalis.****This suggests that external exposure to various antigens in parts of the host distant from the joints then triggers an autoimmune inflammatory response in the joints. These distant locations include the lungs, oropharynx, and GI tract.Actinobacteria, Collinsella, Eggerthalla, and Faecalibacterium. Collinsella alters gut mucosal permeability and has been related to increased rheumatoid arthritis disease severity.

**Genes Associated with Increased Risk of RA**

Gene                                                                                                                                          Gene product

**Environmental Factors Associated with an Increased Risk of Developing RA**