The evaluation of impulse control disorder (ICD) requires at least two assessment methods. It is paramount to obtain family history and parenting styles. Providers should interview teachers and get a developmental history, as well as academic records. Recent studies reveal that the Minnesota Impulse Disorders Interview (MIDI) has proven diagnostic value in the assessment of ICD.

DSM-V offers evaluation criteria to help distinguish different impulse control disorders.

**Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD)**

ODD is the most common comorbidity with ADHD in children. The presenting symptoms of ODD fall in 3 domains, which include angry and irritable mood, vindictiveness, and argumentative/defiant behaviors. The child should have at least four symptoms and signs from these three domains for a minimum of six months for a diagnosis of ODD. The symptoms of ODD may be confined to one setting (predominately home). These behaviors occur during interaction with at least one individual who is not a sibling. ODD cannot be diagnosed with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. About 1/3 of children with ODD develop conduct disorders.

**Conduct Disorder (CD)**

Conduct disorder is defined as the persistent and repetitive violation of major societal norms and the basic rights of others. For a diagnosis of CD, the child should have at least three symptoms in the past 12 months from the following domains -aggression to people and animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, and serious violations of rules. These symptoms include bullying, threatening, initiating physical fights, cruelty to animals and others, forcing others into sexual activity, setting fires and destroying property, stealing and breaking into a house or car, etc. Other symptoms include breaking curfew, running away from home, and school truancy. CD has three ages of onset, including childhood-onset, adolescents onset, and unspecified onset. The diagnosis of CD does not automatically transform into antisocial personality disorder at age 18.

**Intermittent Explosive Disorder (IED)**

IED is defined as a lack of capacity to control aggressive impulses. This disorder presents as verbal aggression, on an average of 2 times per week for three months or three behavioral outbursts or tantrums destroying property within 12 months. (Individuals are at least six years of age or older and not in the context of adjustment disorder).

**Pyromania**

Pyromania is defined as recurrent failure to refrain from impulsive fire setting. There is a heightened tension before firesetting and after firesetting. The fire setting is not in the context of anger, or vengeance o improving living conditions. The arson is not better explained by CD, mania, or antisocial personality disorder.

**Kleptomania**

Kleptomania is defined as the recurrent urges to steal objects with no monetary value. There is a heightened tension before committing the theft and relief after committing the theft. These acts of stealing do not occur during a hallucination or a delusion or mania or conduct disorder.