Labs, including complete blood count, blood cultures, and preoperative labs, are necessary if a retropharyngeal abscess is suspected. However, obtaining these labs should be delayed if phlebotomy will cause additional distress to the patient. This additional distress to the patient can cause early upper airway obstruction to become complete upper airway obstruction, especially in younger children. Both aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures should be obtained. In patients with retropharyngeal abscess, white blood cell counts are greater than 12,000 in 91% of individuals.

Lateral neck radiographs are typically the imaging study of choice in the initial evaluation of suspected retropharyngeal abscess, especially in young children. Lateral neck radiographs have the benefit of lower radiation exposure and tend to be better tolerated by patients who are exhibiting signs of airway compromise. Lateral neck x-rays should be obtained during inspiration with the neck held in normal extension. Improper techniques in obtaining this imaging study can result in false positives for retropharyngeal infection.  When the retropharyngeal infection is present, the depth of the prevertebral space will be increased on the lateral neck x-ray. In healthy individuals, the upper limit of normal prevertebral space is 7 mm at C2 and 14 mm at C6 in children. In healthy adults, the upper limit of normal prevertebral space is 7 mm at C2 and 2 mm at C6. A width of 30 mm at C6 indicates abscess collection.

Additionally, patients who are presenting with a concerning story for retropharyngeal abscess, which is also reporting chest pain, should have a chest x-ray obtained to investigate for mediastinal involvement.

CT of the neck with intravenous contrast is the most definitive imaging modality to evaluate patients with a retropharyngeal abscess. If there is a concern for airway compromise in these patients, a clinician who is trained in emergency airway management should be present while the CT scan is being obtained. Patients may require an emergent surgical airway if upper airway obstruction occurs. The sensitivity of CT scan for detecting retropharyngeal abscess varies in the literature ranging from 64% to 100%.

In children, ultrasound is preferred as it does not involve radiation and is portable. In experienced hands, ultrasound can help determine the size and location of the abscess.