**FGR infants are susceptible to both short term and long-term complications.**

Short term

Short term complications occur soon after birth and include respiratory distress, perinatal asphyxia, meconium aspiration syndrome, hypoglycemia, polycythemia, hyperviscosity, non-physiological hyperbilirubinemia, sepsis, hypocalcemia, poor thermoregulation, and immunological incompetence. They are prone to be born prematurely and, if so, may suffer from prematurity related morbidities, such as respiratory distress syndrome, necrotizing enterocolitis, patent ductus arteriosus, intracranial hemorrhage and retinopathy of prematurity.

Long term

Perinatal mortality is increased in infants with FGR, the occurrence being related directly to the severity of growth restriction and inversely to the maturational status at birth. It rises abruptly if the birth weight drops below the 6 percentile. Among the survivors, the moderately affected infants may attain normal growth parameters, whereas, the severely affected ones frequently stay shorter compared to those born appropriate for gestational age at comparable maturation, through adolescence.

FGR infants have an increased risk of adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes. Some of the common problems are:

- Poor academic performance

- Decreased cognitive performance

- Behavioral problems and hyperactivity

Cognitive and neurodevelopmental abnormalities are more common in growth-restricted preterm infants. These anomalies include poor cognitive test scores, a need for special education, variable fine and gross motor dysfunction, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and cerebral palsy. Such infants are also more prone to growth failure.

FGR infants are reported to be at increased risk of obesity, cardiovascular diseases, metabolic syndrome, hypercholesterolemia, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and renal diseases later in life.