In treatment, assessment of the patient and the injury should proceed systematically according to ATLS guidelines. The primary survey should come first, ruling out any life-threatening injuries. Then, the examiner can manage the ankle fracture, first checking if there is any neurovascular damage that requires an urgent ankle reduction to regain the foot's vascularity and to avoid long-term sequence. A skin integrity examination is essential because open fractures can be treated primarily by external fixators. Open fractures can lead to delayed union, infection, and skin necrosis.

Most bimalleolar fractures are unstable fractures and require treatment with open reduction internal fixation (ORIF). The management plan can be for either operative or non-operative treatment.

**Non-operative**

Uses a below-knee cast for six weeks or a total contact cast for three months in patients with diabetes; indicated if the fracture is stable or when the patient cannot tolerate surgical fixation. It needs repeat ankle X-rays in a week to check for any displacement. Also, patients should be on thromboprophylaxis.

**Operative**

ORIF is indicated when the fracture is unstable, such as in a talar shift. The technique uses fibula fixation using plates and screws (lateral malleolus) and medial malleolus fixation using cannulated screws or tension band wiring or plate over medial malleolus in certain types of medial malleolus fractures (Lauge-Hansen supination-adduction fracture pattern). Once the medial and lateral malleoli are reduced and fixated, the syndesmosis should be inspected for injury. If there is a syndesmotic injury, syndesmotic screws should be inserted (there are some intraoperative tests to check syndesmosis integrity, one of them called the Cotton test). If the posterior malleolus fracture is more than 25%, a CT scan is necessary, and it requires posterior fixation using cannulated screws or, in some situations, plating.

In the two options, thromboprophylaxis is necessary until the patient achieves full weight bearing to avoid the risk factor of DVT.

Previously, surgeons stated that a reduction of the lateral malleolus was the critical element in treating ankle fractures. Today it is accepted that the deep deltoid ligament is the primary ankle stabilizer preventing lateral talar shift and external rotation of the talus.