The primary function of vitamin K2 is adding carboxylic acid groups to glutamate residues (Glu) to form gamma-carboxyglutamate residues (Gla) during the creation of clotting factors. The presence of two carboxylic acid groups on a single carbon that resides in the gamma-carboxyglutamate residue allows for the chelation of calcium ions. The binding of calcium ions in this fashion is of crucial importance for vitamin K-dependent clotting factors, permitting the perpetuation of the clotting cascades. Vitamin K is also responsible as a factor in synthesizing prothrombin, factor VII, factor IX, and factor X.

Vitamin K becomes reduced in the cell to a metabolic form called vitamin K hydroquinone. The catalyst for this process is the enzyme vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR). Subsequently, vitamin K hydroquinone gets oxidized by gamma-glutamyl carboxylase (also known as vitamin K-dependent carboxylase). This enzyme carboxylates Glu to Gla, eventually creating vitamin K epoxide. The carboxylation and epoxidation reactions are supposed coupled (occurring simultaneously). Next, vitamin K epoxide is reconverted to vitamin K by VKOR. This entire process has the name of the vitamin K cycle. Vitamin K1 deficiency is not common in humans because it constantly recycles within cells.

Warfarin is a compound used for anticoagulation that blocks the action of VKOR and results in decreased amounts of vitamin K and vitamin K hydroquinone, which prevents any efficiency by the glutamyl carboxylase enzyme and prevents the carboxylation reaction from occurring. As a result, clotting factors get produced without an adequate number of Gla amino termini. These ‘inactive” factors can no longer create stable bonds to blood vessels endothelium; therefore, no clot formation will result even after endothelial injury. In conclusion, the enzymes that participate in the vitamin K cycle include gamma-glutamyl carboxylase (GGCX), vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR), and an as-yet-unidentified vitamin K reductase (VKR). Vitamin K is a lipophilic compound and leads to the belief that vitamin K cycle enzymes are integral membrane proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. Mutations in these enzymes result in the patient that possesses bleeding disorders or resistance to anticoagulation.