Lymphedema is a progressive disease, and early diagnosis and treatment are paramount. Therefore, it is critical to diagnose and treat both mild and early onset cases to halt the progression of this lifelong and often debilitating condition. For patients to improve their knowledge base and learn helpful evidence-based management and coping strategies, patients must be referred to a specialist holding certification in lymphedema treatment and management. This specialist may be a physician, an occupational therapist, or a physical therapist.

**Therapy**

- Decongestive lymphedema therapy (DLT): Is the primary treatment for moderate-to-severe lymphedema and mobilizes lymph and dissipates fibrosclerotic tissue.

- Manual lymph drainage (MLD): Light lymph massage designed to increase lymph flow

- Compression: Helps with drainage, but the improper application can result in skin irritation and increase the risk of infection

- Skincare: Fastidious skin care is essential to prevent secondary skin infections

- Exercise: Light exercise promotes lymph drainage and protein absorption via muscle contraction.

- Drug therapy: Adjunctive only for pain control or secondary infection

- Surgery

- Debulking is often ineffective
- Microsurgical techniques

- Vascularized Lymph Node Transfer (VLNT)
- Lymphaticovenous Anastomoses (LVA): VLNT and LVA are microsurgical procedures that can improve the patient's physiologic drainage of the lymphatic fluid and eliminate the need for compression garments in some patients. These procedures have better results when performed when a patient's lymphatic system has less damage.
- Suction-Assisted Protein Lipectomy (SAPL): Is more effective in later stages of lymphedema and allow removal of lymphatic solids and fatty deposits that are poor candidates for conservative lymphedema therapy or VLNT or LVA surgeries