Learning the Leloir pathway is important in understanding galactose metabolism defects.

Minor pathways exist, including conversion of galactose to galactonate by galactose dehydrogenase and the reduction of galactose to galactitol by aldose reductase. The minor pathways are generally not significant when the Leloir pathway is active. When the major pathways are blocked (GALK, GALT, and GALE), the minor pathways become significant. This blocking leads to the accumulation of galactitol in the lens, causing osmotic swelling of lens fibers, rupture of the cell membrane, and protein denaturation causing cataract. Cataract changes are reversible only if galactose is withdrawn from food before the rupture of the cell membrane.

There are clinical reports of mental retardation in a few patients on long term follow up. The molecular and biochemical basis of mental retardation in galactokinase does not have a satisfactory explanation so far. Possible hypotheses include poor compliance with dietary restrictions. Accumulating galactitol with other toxic analytes could be a neurotoxin. Galactitol reduces the glutathione redox potential and causes cytotoxic effects. The possibility of mental retardation from GALK deficiency adds a compelling reason for strict dietary restriction.

Unlike classical galactosemia, gal-1-phosphate does not accumulate in galactokinase deficiency. Galactose-1-phosphate is the toxic metabolite in Type 1 galactosemia. Toxic effects may be due to its inhibitory effect on other enzymes such as phosphoglucomutase and depletion of high energy phosphates restricting the availability of ATP for uridyltriphosphate synthesis.