# Continuing Education Activity

A carbuncle is an infection of the hair follicle(s) that extends into the surrounding skin and deep underlying subcutaneous tissue. They typically present as an erythematous, tender, inflamed, fluctuant nodule with multiple draining sinus tracts or pustules on the surface. Systemic symptoms are usually present, and regional lymphadenopathy may occur. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment of carbuncles and highlights the role of the healthcare team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of carbuncles.
- Outline the typical presentation of a patient with a carbuncle.
- Summarize the treatment options available for carbuncles.
- Describe the importance of collaboration and communication among the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients affected by carbuncles.

# Introduction

A carbuncle is a contiguous collection of two or more furuncles.

# Etiology

Bacterial infection within the hair follicle causes carbuncles.

Staphylococcus aureus can normally be found on intact skin most commonly in intertriginous areas such as the groin, axilla, buttocks, and neck.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of carbuncles is uncertain; however, they are considered relatively common.

Predisposing conditions that lead to a compromised or broken down skin barrier include eczema, diabetes mellitus, alcohol use disorder, malnutrition, immunodeficiency, obesity, and poor hygiene.Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonization, living in crowded conditions, hyperhidrosis, and anemia.

# History and Physical

A patient presenting with a carbuncle typically provides a history of a slowly enlarging tender nodule. The patient may state that it started as a "pimple" or pustule that they tried to pop, however over several days to weeks, the lesion grew progressively larger and became tender and fluctuant. Carbuncles are known to cause systemic symptoms; however, this is not mandatory for the diagnosis. Systemic symptoms may include regional lymphadenopathy, fever, fatigue, and malaise.

A carbuncle classically presents as a red, erythematous, painful nodule, with multiple overlying pustules.

# Evaluation

A carbuncle diagnosis is typically made based on physical examination findings. When a carbuncle is suspected, it is important to obtain a bacterial culture and sensitivity from the purulent fluid within the carbuncle.

# Treatment / Management

Carbuncles typically require medical and surgical interventions. Carbuncles are usually incised and drained (I&D), in-office, and under local anesthesia. The I&D is usually performed with a #11 scalpel blade, curette, and iodoform packing strips. The #11 blade is used to make an incision into the carbuncle cavity and pressure is manually applied to express the purulent material within. Bacterial culture and sensitivity are usually obtained from the purulent material at this step. Next, a curette or hemostat is used to break up any loculations that may be present, and another attempt to express material is made. Once the majority of purulent material has been expelled, the lesion is typically packed with iodoform strips or gauze to assist with further drainage. The packing is typically left in place for 24 to 48 hours and then removed.

After incision and drainage, oral antibiotics are typically initiated; this is of particular importance if the patient has any systemic symptoms or if there is any surrounding cellulitis. Common first-line oral antibiotics include dicloxacillin and cephalosporins. If MRSA is suspected or cultured, oral antibiotics such as clindamycin, tetracyclines, trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole, linezolid, or glycopeptide may be used. Oral antibiotics can be further adjusted once bacterial culture sensitivities are known.

Topical antibiotics such as clindamycin or mupirocin may be used as adjunctive therapy.

In patients with recurrent carbuncles, prophylactic measures may be taken. This includes having patients bath with a benzoyl peroxide wash or antibacterial soap and attempting to decolonize the patient’s nares.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for carbuncle includes cystic acne, hidradenitis suppurativa, cellulitis, osteomyelitis, orf, anthrax, and arthropod bite.

# Prognosis

A carbuncle develops over several days to several weeks, reaching a diameter of 2 to 10 cm. After approximately one week, multiple pustules develop and protrude from the surface. The lesion drains a serosanguinous fluid. Healing occurs over several weeks and will result in a scar. Rarely, if left untreated, mortality can occur from sepsis or diabetic ketoacidosis in those with comorbid conditions or immunosuppression. With proper treatment, carbuncles are cured, and the prognosis is excellent, resulting in only a cosmetic scar.

# Complications

Potential complications from carbuncles include septicemia, cavernous sinus thrombophlebitis (rare), and scar.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients require education on the deterrence of carbuncles, including practicing good hygiene, weight loss, good diabetic control, proper nutrition, and adequate treatment of any underlying diseases or immunodeficiency. Furthermore, staphylococcal decolonization of the nares can be accomplished by applying mupirocin twice daily to the inner nares for 12 to 30 days.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Carbuncles typically present as an erythematous, tender, inflamed, fluctuant nodule with multiple draining sinus tracts or pustules on the surface. Most patients with a carbuncle will present to the emergency room, family physician office, or a dermatology practice. All of these entities encompass both physicians and nurses; thus, interprofessional communication is imperative to optimize outcomes.

Carbuncles have a predilection for individuals with a compromised skin barrier. Thus, maintaining a healthy skin barrier can reduce incidence and recurrence. In any hospital or long-term care facility, nurses often play a vital role in maintaining a patient’s skin health. This includes applying daily moisturizers, bathing, wound dressing, and administering oral and topical medications. Therefore, physicians must give nurses clear instructions for proper patient skincare to reduce the incidence and recurrence of carbuncles. To encourage standardization and promote understanding, physicians and organizations can implement the usage of skincare algorithms. An example is an algorithm for dry skin to be used by nurses when caring for patients. If a patient’s skin is dry, frequent bathing/washing should be avoided, and exposure to water should be minimized. Additionally, lipophilic products should be applied daily. With the use of algorithms for patient’s skincare, the number of skincare products will be reduced, and the skincare approach standardized, leading to a reduction in errors and improvement in outcomes.