The diagnosis is made both on tissue sampling and radiographic studies. Tissue sampling procedures including fine needle aspiration (FNA) and core needle biopsy which can be done in an outpatient setting. These procedures are associated with very low tumor seeding rates.

FNA can determine whether the tumor is malignant in nature with an approximate sensitivity of 90%. Core needle biopsy is more invasive but provides more accurate histological typing of the tumor with a diagnostic accuracy of around 97%. Immunohistochemistry may prove to be supportive in delineating the different cell components.

CT examination a pleomorphic adenoma usually appears as smoothly marginated or lobulated homogeneous soft tissue density globular mass. Necrosis can be seen in larger masses. Few foci of calcification are common. Smaller tumors show early homogenous prominent enhancement while in the case of larger tumors enhancement is less marked and delayed.

MRI is similar to CT; smaller masses appear well-circumscribed and homogeneous whereas larger tumors appear heterogeneous.

- T1: usually of low intensity.

- T2: usually of very high intensity (especially myxoid type) 6 often have a rim of decreased signal intensity on T2-weighted images representing the surrounding fibrous capsule.

- T1 C+ (Gd): usually demonstrates homogeneous enhancement.

- The presence of either T2 hypointensity or ill-defined margins after contrast administration can be a simple MR imaging malignancy test for parotid tumors, with a sensitivity and specificity of 0.70 and 0.73, respectively.

- Post contrast STIR images help the delineate the perineural spread of tumor in case of malignant change.

Ultrasound pleomorphic adenomas characteristically appear hypoechoic in texture.  They usually show a lobulated distinct border with or without posterior acoustic enhancement. Ultrasound guided biopsy or FNA are minimally invasive and cost effective procedures.

Angiography (DSA) can also be considered.