After mastectomy is completed, the skin flaps are assessed to ensure that the blood supply is not compromised. The surgeon can look at the capillary refill, color, dermal bleeding, and temperature of the skin. Other techniques include laser-assisted indocyanine green or fluorescein angiography.

When performing immediate breast reconstruction, there are two options: single-stage vs. 2-stage reconstruction. The 2-stage approach is most commonly performed; the however single-stage approach is gaining popularity.

In the single-stage approach, an all-in-one adjustable tissue expander and implant are placed at the same time. The adjustable expander has a subcutaneous port for post-operative adjustments to be performed by the patient in the outpatient setting. The benefit of this approach is the patient undergoes only one surgical intervention under general anesthesia. The subcutaneous port can be removed in the clinic setting under local anesthetic. The complications from this approach are comparable to the 2-stage approach.

In the 2-stage approach, the tissue expander is placed immediately after mastectomy and left in place for sequential expansion until the desired breast volume is achieved. Patients must then undergo a second surgical intervention to remove the tissue expander and replace it with permanent implants that match the breast volume achieved.

The subpectoral space (or submuscular) implant-based reconstruction is created by releasing the inferior and medial attachments of the pectoralis major muscle; the external oblique muscle aponeurosis released inferiorly; serratus anterior muscle laterally and costal cartilages medially.

For the pre-pectoral (subcutaneous) space, the implant is attached to a mesh or acellular dermal matrix before fixation within the space. Attachment points are at the inframammary fold inferiorly and to the pectoralis major muscle fascial superiorly.

It is important to mention the use of acellular dermal matrix (ADM) or synthetic mesh in either one or 2-stage reconstruction. This is attached at the inframammary fold to create a sling for the adjustable implant/tissue expander, or it can be utilized to cover the tissue expander circumferentially. In some studies, the use of ADM/synthetic mesh has shown decreased rates of complications with subcutaneous implant placement.