Data collection is the process of gathering relevant information to address a specific need. The need for data collection is increasing in the field of medical education, including simulation education, but increasing data sources and regulation is making it difficult to retain and process information.

Data is imperative to track simulation utilization, along with demonstrating and documenting the need for space, equipment, and personnel. Various data points simulation centers collect include, but are not limited to, time for set-up, tear down, and the time for the educational activity itself. Common utilization and cost metrics may include learner contact hours, and the amount of time faculty and healthcare simulation technology specialists spend preparation, facilitating, teaching, and evaluating a session. Room and equipment utilization are also important considerations for growth and strategic planning. The total duration of an activity and the number of individuals involved must be considered with percent utilization to help form an effective model for scheduling efficiency.

Capital equipment is an essential component of simulation training and, in many instances, is a unique factor that will attract customers to the simulation center. By tracking capital equipment utilization, purchasing decisions can be based on the number of uses and frequency of use. Understanding and tracking these items can help directors and financial stakeholders understand the needs for warranties and estimate useful life before replacement. Appropriate data to support these business decisions will help ensure the sustainable delivery of simulation-based education. The type and the sheer number of learners is an important detail for stakeholders, as the simulation center adapts to the type of learners most utilizing the simulation center.

A critical aspect of data collection relates to the cost of operation. Contact hours are defined as the number of hours that a simulation activity was run multiplied by the number of learners impacted. Contact hours in simulation can be used in lieu of clinical hours in some specialties, such as nursing, but this is not universally viewed as equivalent across specialties.

Beyond just the amount of time a student may spend in a simulation activity, their performance is of greater importance as educational programs move to competency-based mastery learning.

While capturing data can provide a better understanding of how students learn, it can also put simulation centers at risk of breaching the confidentiality of learners. Traditional sources of evaluation data come from manual records from the learner notes, and direct observations of performance. Healthcare simulation adds more electronic sources of data for evaluation, such as automated performance reports from manikin and task trainer systems, and now online, and virtual learning activities may allow even more sources.