**Variants of COP**

**Secondary Organizing Pneumonia**

Organizing pneumonia (OP) due to a secondary cause has similar clinical, radiological, and histological features as COP; hence, these causes have to be rigorously excluded prior to diagnosing COP. Secondary OP is associated with autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis and polymyositis/dermatomyositis or after radiation exposure to lung or associated with hematological malignancies or secondary to drug exposures. It is important to distinguish from COP because treatment varies and a secondary OP has a worse prognosis.

**Acute Fulminant COP**

Fulminant COP is suspected when patients present with rapidly-worsening respiratory failure and hypoxemia, often requiring invasive mechanical ventilation. The clinical presentation is similar to adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) but histologically resembles OP without overt fibrosis. Clinically and radiographically it cannot be distinguished from acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP). Patients progress to worsening respiratory failure and have high mortality. If the diagnosis is made, reports have shown a rapid response to glucocorticoids.

**Acute Fibrinous and Organizing Pneumonia (AFOP)**

This rare entity presents as an acute respiratory failure but radiographically and histopathologically appears similar to organizing pneumonia. It is typically idiopathic but may be associated with collagen vascular disease, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, or drug reaction.

**Fibrosing COP**

Fibrosing COP is a rare entity with similar clinical and histological appearance to COP but with variable amounts of fibrosis. The fibrosis may or may not be evident radiographically but is seen on pathologic examination. These patients have a poor response to glucocorticoids or other agents. Patients often succumb to progressive respiratory failure. These cases may represent overlap with other idiopathic interstitial pneumonia.

**Unifocal COP**

Unifocal COP is typically diagnosed during the evaluation of a solitary pulmonary nodule concerning for lung malignancy. No relapses have been reported.

**Other Causes**

**Infectious Causes**

Bacterial, fungal, or viral pneumonia are appropriately the first considered diagnosis in a patient presenting with fever, cough, and shortness of breath along with radiographic findings.

**Inflammatory Causes**

Other interstitial lung diseases could give a similar radiographic appearance including idiopathic interstitial pneumonia such as NSIP and UIP. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis could have a very similar clinical presentation, but radiographic changes are usually upper lobe predominant, and there is an identifiable exposure history. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis and COP share a lymphocyte predominant BAL, but histopathology reveals chronic inflammation with poorly formed granulomas in hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia has a similar clinical and radiologic presentation but is differentiated by BAL fluid or peripheral eosinophilia and histology.

**Malignancy**

Radiographically pulmonary malignancies such as primary pulmonary lymphoma or adenocarcinoma in situ could have an appearance similar to a focal area of COP. The diseases can be typically differentiated based on the clinical presentation and histopathologic examination. Low-grade primary pulmonary lymphoma may have some response to glucocorticoids thus mimicking COP. Adenocarcinoma-in-situ tends to have associated nodules and do not respond to glucocorticoids.