Within the forearm, the radius is positioned laterally and is shorter than the ulna. The radial head is cylindrical and covered with hyaline cartilage. It has two points of articulation proximally: the radiocapitellar joint, articulating with the capitulum of the distal humerus, and the radial notch of the ulna, where it also has support from the annular ligament.

The ulna is typically considered the stabilizing bone of the forearm. Proximally, the trochlear notch of the ulna articulates with the trochlea of the humerus and is covered with hyaline cartilage. The olecranon is a proximal extension of the shaft of the ulna, easily palpable, and lies within the olecranon fossa of the humerus when the elbow is fully extended. The radial notch of the ulna articulates with the radial head. Distally, the head of the ulna articulates with the articular disk of the distal radioulnar joint with no direct contact with the carpal bones. Bony prominences of the ulna include the coronoid process and the ulnar tuberosity proximally, and the styloid process of the ulna distally.

The radius and ulna are connected via the interosseous membrane of the forearm, a fibrous fascial layer that runs obliquely between the two bones. It is comprised of five ligaments: the central band, accessory band, distal oblique bundle, proximal oblique cord, and dorsal oblique accessory cord. Besides the obvious physical connection, this membrane also serves to conduct forces received by the hand and radius to the ulna and subsequently the humerus. It further functions to separate the anterior and posterior compartments of the forearm.

Functionally, the radius and ulna together serve as the primary support structure of the forearm articulating with the humerus and carpal bones as described above. Both bones also serve as origins and insertions for muscles responsible for flexion and extension of the forearm, wrist, and fingers. Additionally, because the radius can pivot around the ulna, supination and pronation of the forearm are possible.