By instituting these measures, unplanned traumatic Foley catheter removals can be minimized:

- Identify patients at risk, especially those with new Foley catheters, delirium, dementia, agitation, mental status changes, confusion, or a prior history of traumatic Foley catheter extractions.

- Increase monitoring and observation of patients identified as being at risk.

- Pay extra attention to Foley catheters during patient transfers.

- Look for signs of a mal-positioned Foley such as high bladder residuals on bladder scan, decreased urinary drainage, low urine output, new gross hematuria, or a "long catheter" sign.

- Use Foley stabilization devices properly.

- In higher-risk patients, add more of the following Foley catheter security measures early.

- Secure the catheter by repositioning the Foley to pass under the patient’s thigh, then secure with tape directly to the skin without leaving any gaps and cover with a wide elastic wrap.

- Diapers and mesh underpants can be placed over a taped, secured catheter and make it even harder for confused patients to grab their catheters. May also use anti-edema stockings such as TED hose and similar.

- Use “decoy” catheters when appropriate for extra protection.

- If the Foley is pulled out anyway, check the catheter carefully to see if the balloon is intact and chart it appropriately. Keep the old catheter for examination by the physician.

Using these measures, one might expect similar results to those reported at Creighton University Medical Center in Omaha (unpublished data) where the traumatic Foley catheter extraction rate decreased from 1 or even 2 per week to almost none.