The treatment of intermittent claudication is surrounded by controversy. The past belief that exercise therapy alone could improve the disease and symptoms is now known to have many shortcomings. The older studies were never standardized, did not use adequate measures of outcomes, and were heterogeneous- meaning that the patient population was not controlled and the type of exercise was not controlled. While the debate continues, experts agree that the prevention of claudication is perhaps the best way to manage the disease. The pharmacist and nurse are in the ideal position to educate the patient on the risks of smoking and lack of exercise. Patients with intermittent claudication must be advised to eat a healthy diet, control the blood sugars and hypertension, lower the levels of cholesterol and glucose, and participate in an exercise program. There is ample evidence showing that undertaking these measures improves the quality of life and reduces the burden of many medical disorders.

**Outcomes**

The latest data suggest that in patients with intermittent claudication, endovascular surgery, open surgery, and exercise therapy are superior to medical management in terms of walking distance and symptom relief. (Level V) However, there are no good long-term studies to determine which of the procedures is more effective. The data on exercise therapy alone are conflicting and only of short-term duration. What is also not known is how many additional endovascular procedures will be required in the future to keep the patient symptom free. Whether any of these treatments can improve claudication over the long term still remains to be seen.