The main issue of concern with the wound classification scheme is that it has low inter-rater reliability among healthcare providers.

The American College of Clinical Wound Specialists (ACCWS) emphasizes how difficult it is to find a common wound denomination. Each tissue that has to heal or the cause that induces the wound will necessarily have a different iter, a different approach. To give some examples, the peritoneal cavity or the intrauterine space have membranes with a substantial repair capacity, but the percentage of producing adhesions or fibrosis is high. The reparative processes will depend heavily on genetic, molecular, and immune factors. The same surgical approach may give different results: laparoscopy, hysterectomy, laparotomy.

The American Burn Association (ABA) points out that, despite advances in patient care and survival, there are still difficulties in administering the most appropriate treatments depending on the global geographic area. Furthermore, not only biological factors but also psychological ones merit consideration.

According to the statistical research of 2020, abdominal wounds are most likely to be incorrectly classified as clean wounds, delaying the patient's recovery.

Muscle injuries will respond differently depending on the cause: traumatic causes of sports activities or traumatic causes of war. Or, when the loss of muscle volume is significant, the metabolic environment will create anti-reparative molecular responses (lower amount of IGF-1 and pro-fibrotic activity).