# Continuing Education Activity

Postpartum infections account for a significant, and often preventable, portion of the global healthcare burden. Puerperal sepsis is one of the top five causes of maternal deaths worldwide and accounts for 10-15% of deaths in the postpartum period. This activity outlines the most common potential sources of postpartum infection, reviews the evaluation and management of infections in the postpartum period, and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving outcomes for these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of postpartum infections.
- Describe the appropriate steps for the evaluation of postpartum infections. 
- Outline the management options available for postpartum infections.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication in the treatment of postpartum infections and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Maternal morbidity and mortality are global socioeconomic and healthcare burdens, and postpartum infections account for a significant, and often preventable, portion of that burden. The postpartum period is traditionally defined as the six weeks following delivery, and infections are relatively common, affecting an estimated 5 to 7% of women during this time. Puerperal sepsis is one of the top five causes of maternal deaths worldwide and accounts for 10 to 15% of deaths in the postpartum period. Infections are also the most common cause of death following spontaneous or induced abortions. The medical burden of these infections is compounded by the alarmingly rapid increase in bacterial resistance to commonly used antibiotics.

Postpartum infections also present a significant social burden: they increase maternal anxiety and the risk of postpartum depression, interfere with bonding, and negatively impact breastfeeding.

# Etiology

The majority of postpartum infections result from physiologic and iatrogenic trauma to the abdominal wall and reproductive, genital, and urinary tracts that occur during childbirth or abortion, which allows for the introduction of bacteria into these normally sterile environments.

# Epidemiology

In contrast to encouraging global trends, maternal mortality in the United States has been increasing in the past four decades, rising 140% between 1987 and 2013, and the United States has one of the highest pregnancy-related mortality rates of high-income countries.

Studying rates of postpartum infections and their effects is difficult, as most of these infections occur following maternal hospital discharge, and decreasing hospital stay following childbirth further inhibits the detection of postpartum complications, including infection.

The latest data from the Centers for Disease Control show that infections are the leading cause of pregnancy-related deaths in Hispanic women in the United States and disproportionately affect ethnic minorities.

The risk of postpartum infections is likewise increased in patients at the extremes of maternal age or with high body mass index, diabetes, hypertension, immune compromise, bacterial vaginosis, group-B streptococcus positive status, and sexually transmitted infections.

# Pathophysiology

Postpartum infections can be roughly grouped into those caused by ascending vaginal microflora into the reproductive tract and those which result from iatrogenic trauma to the abdominal wall or perineum during delivery. Because of the complexity of the birthing process, it is important to remember that ascending vaginal flora plays a role in surgical site infections, and surgical intervention likewise plays a role in the ascension of vaginal microflora into the reproductive tract.

Infections resulting from ascending infection into the reproductive tract include endometritis and septic abortion. Endometritis is an infection of the endometrium and myometrium. Endometritis occurs most commonly in the postpartum period, as childbirth allows ascending vaginal bacterial flora to infect the upper reproductive tract. This infection is five to ten times more common following cesarean section compared to vaginal delivery.Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella pneumonia.

Chlamydia trachomatis should be suspected in endometritis presenting > 7 days postpartum and in high-risk populations, such as women under age 25. Septic abortion is an infection of the products of conception following spontaneous or induced abortion.

As the pregnancy progresses, the placenta enlarges, and there is more tissue to become infected; thus, mortality from septic abortion increases with increasing gestational age.

Surgical site infections (SSI) are relatively common following birth, complicating 2-7% of cesarean deliveries.

Incisional site infections present with erythema and purulent drainage at the site and can be associated with systemic symptoms such as fever and malaise. Like endometritis and septic abortion, SSI can be caused by contamination of the wound with microflora from the genitourinary tract; however, they can also be caused by commonly isolated skin flora.Ureaplasma urealyticum, Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, and Staphylococcal species.

More rarely, necrotizing fasciitis of the surgical site can develop, characterized by rapid necrosis of the fascia and subcutaneous tissue with relative sparing of the musculature. Postpartum patients who develop necrotizing fasciitis typically have underlying medical comorbidities, with diabetes being the most commonly reported. Type I necrotizing fasciitis results from polymicrobial infection with aerobic and anaerobic organisms; type II results from infection with group A streptococcus. Both types can occur in the postpartum period and can complicate cesarean deliveries as well as episiotomies.

# History and Physical

In addition to the classic portions of the history of present illness, important details to elicit during history taking include:

- Time of delivery or abortion

- Surgical or vaginal delivery

- Prior surgical and medical history history

- Gestational age at the time of the delivery or abortion

- Complications of the pregnancy, including gestational diabetes, intrapartum infections, premature or prolonged rupture of membranes, chorioamnionitis, or preeclampsia/eclampsia

- Complications of the delivery, including prolonged labor, need for operative vaginal delivery, unplanned cesarean section, and postpartum hemorrhage

- GBS status

- Presence of foul-smelling lochia or excessive vaginal bleeding

Physical examination should include:

- Evaluation of the surgical incision (if present)

- Examination of the skin for crepitance, bullae, erythema, induration or drainage

- Palpation of the abdomen and the uterine fundus

- Sterile speculum and bimanual examination

In endometritis, fever is often the first sign, with uterine tenderness, bleeding, and foul-smelling lochia as additional signs. Patients presenting with signs of severe systemic illness, shock, and/or abdominal pain out of proportion to examination findings should raise suspicion for infection with GAS, which can cause endometritis associated with toxic shock syndrome as well as necrotizing fasciitis.

Fever is common in septic abortion but may not be present.Clostridium species or toxin-producing strains of Escherichia coli.

Superficial incisional site infections typically present with erythema, warmth, and pain at the site; purulent drainage may also be present.

Deep incisional infections may show minimal external examination findings, in fact, pain out of proportion to examination is a hallmark of necrotizing fasciitis. Unlike superficial site infections, deep incisional infections are more likely to be associated with fever and hemodynamic compromise.

Septic pelvic thrombophlebitis (SPT) should be suspected in patients with persistent pain, leukocytosis, and fever despite adequate antibiotic therapy for the above conditions for more than 3 to 5 days.

# Evaluation

As in all infectious conditions, evaluation should include blood and/or wound cultures prior to the initiation of antibiotics. Laboratory findings typical of infection include leukocytosis with neutrophilia and a left shift as well as lactic acidosis. Notably, no postpartum infection can be excluded based on lab work alone, and clinicians should not be falsely reassured if laboratory diagnostics are unremarkable. Endometritis is largely a clinical diagnosis. Findings suggestive of endometritis include fever, abdominal tenderness, and foul-smelling lochia. If septic abortion is suspected based on history, an ultrasound should be obtained to evaluate for retained products of conception.

If the infection has spread to the uterus, gas may be seen in the myometrium on plain film or computed tomography (CT).

# Treatment / Management

Knowledge of the microbiological profiles of different postpartum infections, local resistance patterns, and the severity of the patient’s illness should guide antibiotic choices. As a general rule, antibiotic regimens, particularly in very sick patients, should have a broad-spectrum of antimicrobial coverage at the beginning and should be narrowed as more clinical evidence from cultures or pathology specimens becomes available. Pharmacists can often help tailor initial antibiotic choices and aid in narrowing the spectrum as care progresses. Consideration should be given to whether the patient is breastfeeding, and all efforts should be made to use antibiotics that will allow the patient to continue breastfeeding safely.

While antibiotic regimens may differ for specific postpartum infections, the foundation of the treatment of most infectious conditions is the same. In patients with hemodynamic compromise, balanced crystalloid fluids should be given to a maximum of 30 ml/kg of ideal body weight.

The treatment of endometritis varies with severity. Patients with mild, early endometritis may be able to receive outpatient treatment; shared decision-making between the provider and the patient should always precede the decision to treat on an outpatient basis. Intramuscular and oral regimens can also be used in low-resource settings where intravenous antibiotics may not be an option. In patients who are appropriate for outpatient treatment, potential 14-day regimens include clindamycin 600 mg orally every 6 hours plus gentamicin intramuscularly 4.5 mg/kg every 24 hours; amoxicillin-clavulanate 875 mg orally twice daily; cefotetan 2g intramuscularly every 8 hours; meropenem or imipenem-cilastatin 500 mg intramuscularly every 8 hours; or amoxicillin 500 mg and metronidazole 500 mg every 8 hours.

The listed regimens are safe for breastfeeding patients and resulted in a greater than 85% cure rate in early endometritis.

The mainstay of treatment for septic abortion is the removal of the infected products of conception. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be initiated within an hour of making the diagnosis.

For mild superficial surgical infections without systemic symptoms or purulence, an oral course of antibiotics is typically sufficient. A first-generation cephalosporin like cephalexin should be used when there is no associated purulence.Staphylococcus aureus and expand coverage accordingly.

Necrotizing fasciitis is a surgical emergency that cannot be sufficiently treated with antibiotics. However, pending emergent surgical intervention, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be started. A common regimen is vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam with clindamycin, which is used for its anti-toxin activity.

Finally, treatment for SPT is intravenous ampicillin (2 g then 1 g every 4 hours), gentamicin (5 mg/kg daily), and clindamycin (900 mg every 8 hours).

# Differential Diagnosis

Postpartum fever is defined as an oral temperature ≥38.0°C (≥100.4°F) on any two of the first 10 days postpartum, excluding the first 24 hours.

Unfortunately, there is no documented cut-off point for what temperature is too high just to be caused by breast engorgement. The presence of myalgias and breast erythema suggest mastitis rather than engorgement as the diagnosis.

Causes of hyperthermia include serotonin syndrome, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, an overdose of sympathomimetic or anticholinergic agents, withdrawal from ethanol or benzodiazepines, aspirin toxicity, and thyroid storm.

The hallmark physical examination finding for serotonin syndrome is hyperreflexia and clonus, while for neuroleptic malignant syndrome, lead-pipe rigidity is characteristic.

The overdose of sympathomimetic agents presents with tachycardia, hypertension, diaphoresis, and agitation. Withdrawal from benzodiazepines or ethanol can present with tremors, tachycardia, hypertension, and hyperthermia and progress to seizures.

# Prognosis

Morbidity from postpartum infections affects 5 to 10% of pregnant patients.

# Complications

All postpartum infections can progress to sepsis, bacteremia, shock, and death if not treated appropriately. Necrotizing fasciitis is especially notable for its rapid progression to fulminant infection and death. A notable complication of endometritis and deep space infections of the pelvis is SPT. Endometritis affects the endometrium and myometrium but can progress beyond the uterus to include abscess, peritonitis, and pelvic thrombophlebitis.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Poor access to healthcare is not only an important risk factor for developing postpartum infections but a direct factor in treatment delays and associated morbidity and mortality.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

While many patient economic and health risk factors cannot be modified in the peripartum period, healthcare providers can modify several factors to decrease the patient risk for infection. Care bundles of evidence-proven measures have been shown to reduce infection associated with cesarean delivery.

Prior to delivery, interventions can be taken to reduce patient risk for infection. Shaving before delivery should be avoided, and patients should be counseled on this prior to their expected delivery date.

During labor, limiting vaginal examinations during labor and avoiding internal fetal monitoring, if possible, can decrease the risk of postpartum infections.

Finally, outbreaks of GAS infection in postpartum women have often been linked back to colonized or infected health care providers prompting the CDC to recommend health care worker screening when two or more episodes of postpartum GAS infection cases are identified over a six-month period.