Surgery is the primary means of treatment for squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. Mohs micrographic surgery is the treatment of choice for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Mohs Surgery is also the treatment of choice for squamous cell carcinoma in immunosuppressed patients, recurrent squamous cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma with aggressive histologic features, and squamous cell carcinoma greater than or equal to 2 mm of depth. Actinic keratosis with focal squamous cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma in situ may or may not be treated with various modalities, including Mohs surgery, curettage or excision, depending on clinical and histologic circumstances. As an aid in decision-making, the American Academy of Dermatology has developed guidelines available as a smartphone app listed under “Mohs Appropriate Use Criteria (AUC).” These guidelines help to select those cases that would most benefit from the Mohs procedure, while conserving health care expenditures. Other therapies include oral or topical retinoids to help reduce the risk of development of squamous cell carcinoma. Photodynamic therapy and topical 5-fluorouracil (5FU) or imiquimod may also be used to decrease the development of squamous cell carcinoma. For in situ disease, electrodesiccation with curettage, or topical treatment with 5FU and imiquimod have been used successfully.

Patients with cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma should be counseled in the protection of their skin from UV damage through the use of sunscreen, protective clothing and avoidance of the sun during periods of maximal intensity. Also, they should be followed regularly, with the actual frequency based on their frequency of squamous cell carcinoma development. Patients with a history of a few squamous cell carcinomas and some actinic keratoses may be followed every six to 12 months, while those with many squamous cell carcinomas or aggressive tumors likely will need to be seen much more often.