Typical history in the patients with cholesterol embolization will most commonly include recent endovascular procedures such as heart catheterization, valve replacement, stent placement in the vasculature, or carotid endarterectomy. Usually, the patients will have risk factors similar to risk factors for atherosclerosis. The patients are likely to have a medical history of coronary artery disease, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, cerebrovascular accident, transient ischemic attack, diabetes, abdominal aortic aneurysm, peripheral vascular disease, or renal failure.

Patients with cholesterol embolization syndrome frequently present with constitutional symptoms such as fever, fatigue, weight loss, myalgia, and anorexia. Besides, there are organ-specific clinical manifestations.

In the kidneys, atheroembolism causes two types of manifestations: acute to subacute or chronic.

The involvement of the GI tract leads to the development of symptoms that include abdominal pain, flank pain, back pain, GI bleed, bowel ischemia, infarction, or obstruction, splenic infarction, pancreatitis, cholecystitis, abnormal liver enzymes, and diarrhea.

The most characteristic finding in skin includes retiform purpura, blue or purple toes, ulcers, gangrene, livedo reticularis, small nail bed infarcts, and foot or toe pain.

Other organ manifestations include eye symptoms such as sudden blindness, amaurosis fugax, or retinal plaque (Hollenhorst crystals).

When CNS is affected, clinical manifestations include headache, altered mental status (AMS), stroke, transient ischemic attack (TIA), paresthesia, spinal cord infarction.

On lab work, usually, signs of systemic inflammation are seen. Complete blood count (CBC) can show evidence of anemia, leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia. Hypereosinophilia, hypocomplementemia, elevated amylase, lipase, lactate, elevated LDH, elevated ESR, and high CRP levels are also possible. Urine analysis (UA) can show hematuria, eosinophiluria, and proteinuria of varying degrees. The renal function panel shows evidence of chronic kidney disease or acute kidney injury.