Cardiac tamponade is a surgical emergency and patients may present to the emergency department or on the cardiac surgery floor. To prevent death, the condition is best managed by an interprofessional team of clinicians and nurses.

The nurse must be aware of this disorder as time is of the essence. The condition can rapidly lead to hypotension, shock, and death. While the team is summoned the nurse should provide oxygen, elevate the patient's legs and have two large-bore IV lines. The ICU nurses should be informed about the patient transfer.

Once the condition is diagnosed, the patient is best monitored in the ICU until the fluid is evacuated from the pericardial sac. The operating room should be notified and in almost all cases, the pericardial decompression is done under local anesthesia or mild sedation. After treatment, the patient needs to be monitored to ensure that the fluid does not re-accumulate. If a drain is left in the pericardial sac, the nurse should monitor the drainage. A follow-up echo is usually done prior to discharge.

**Outcomes**

Once cardiac tamponade is diagnosed, treatment is required. Without treatment, the condition is universally fatal. Data show that cardiac tamponade following open-heart surgery is often fatal. In all cases, the underlying cause must be treated. When the cause of the pericardial effusion is a malignancy, it carries an 80% mortality within 12 months, whereas patients with a non-malignant cause have a mortality rate of less than 15%.