**Sternocleidomastoid Muscle Function Evaluation**

The assessment begins with a patient sitting to observe any hypotrophy of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) and postural abnormalities of the neck and head, shoulder and scapula, clavicle, and sternal manubrium.

The patient is asked to perform some voluntary actions with the neck to evaluate motor or pain limitations and perform a forced inhalation and mimic chewing to observe how the SCM behaves.

The reflexes are evaluated with a small tendon hammer at the clavicular insertion of the SCM. To assess muscle strength, the patient moves the head (flexion, rotation, and inclination) against minimal resistance applied by the examiner.

Lesions affecting the SCM can affect the accessory nerve (CN XI), but they are infrequent.

**There are Different Types of Torticollis**

- Paralytic torticollis due to injury of cranial nerve XI.

- Congenital torticollis is a condition often associated with other intrauterine packaging disorders, such as metatarsus adductus, developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH), acetabular dysplasia, and congenital hip dislocations.

- Spasmodic torticollis is a phenomenon of segmental dystonia.

- Ocular torticollis, where diplopia influences the posture of the SCM.

- Symptomatic torticollis has variable etiologies, including pain, inflammation, infection, or cervical vertebral positioning.

- "Psychic pillow" torticollis is a condition commonly seen in severe neurological diseases such as Parkinson disease or catatonic disorders, where patients maintain the head bent forward as if they were resting on a pillow, even when supine.

- Psychogenic torticollis is characterized by fear of correct neck movements due to the onset of pain or vertigo symptoms.

The precise diagnosis of these disorders often requires an electromyographic examination and imaging studies such as magnetic resonance, computed tomography, or ultrasonography.