Variations in structure may occur during gestational growth as the aorta forms in conjunction with the endocardial tube around day 21 of development. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the currently accepted gold standard for the imaging of the aortic arch. MRI is able to provide imaging of both the structural relationship between the aorta and its branches to the trachea and bronchi as well as the arterial branching pattern. Other imaging modalities that may be used for assessment of the aorta and which provide the ability to accurately assess aortic pathology include transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), computed tomography (CT), chest radiographs (CXR), transesophageal echocardiography (TOE), and invasive catheter angiography. Several anatomical abnormalities or variations are possible.

**Coarctation of the aorta**is a relatively common cause of congenital heart disease (CHD). This particular anatomical variation makes up 5-7% percent of all CHD cases. Coarctation of the aorta is an abnormality in which there is a narrowing of the aorta resulting in decreased blood flow. Presenting symptoms and time to diagnosis may vary from patient to patient based on the severity of the narrowing. The severity of the obstruction can range from a milder narrowing which often takes longer to diagnose to more severe blockages which will often be diagnosed in early infancy.

**Hypoplasia of the ascending aorta**results in diminished blood flow and typically occurs alongside hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS). HLHS is severe and if untreated may result in death.

**Patent ductus arteriosus**is yet another potential pathological variation that may occur. It results when the ductus arteriosus fails to close following birth. The ductus arteriosus allows for the flow of blood between the aorta and pulmonary artery during intrauterine development and typically closes within a few days of delivery. An interrupted aortic arch is also a pathological variation that may occur with the aorta. In this abnormality, a portion of the aorta is missing which results in interrupted blood flow and is therefore of significant concern. This particular variant correlates with high rates of mortality.

**Pulmonary sequestration**is a rare anomaly that may occur involving the aorta in which a section of lung tissue obtains its blood supply from an abnormal source such as a systemic artery that originated from the aorta or one of its branches.

**Aortic ductus diverticulum**is an aortic variation in which there is an outpouching of the thoracic aorta. This condition is seen in about 9% of individuals and may be mistaken for an acute injury. Ductus diverticulum is most common at the aortic isthmus, distal to the origin point of the left subclavian artery. This variant may resemble a pseudoaneurysm of the aortic isthmus, and therefore differentiation between the two is of particular importance.