The ischioanal fossa is susceptible to the formation of abscesses. If not recognized and left untreated, they can cause fistulous connections within the anal canal, usually just above the dentate line. Often several fistulous tracks end blindly in the fatty tissue.The most common etiologies for an anal fistula are Crohn's disease, foreign bodies, infections (tuberculosis), actinomycosis, and lymphogranuloma venereum. Trauma, hemorrhoidectomy, and episiotomy are also possible causes of an abscess. In rare cases, an anal adenocarcinoma may present with features of a chronic anal fistula. Anal fistulas and ischioanal abscesses tend to be more common in males between the ages of 30 and 48.

Primary pathologic conditions originating in the ischioanal fossa proper are rare. Lesions include lipomatous tumors, aggressive angiomyxoma, vascular lesions, and neurogenic tumors.

The medial border lesions of the ischioanal fossa include urogenital and anorectal diseases. Urogenital space lesions include in the female: Bartholin gland cysts, Skene gland cysts, urethral diverticulum, trauma, and cervical and vaginal cancer. Endometriosis is a rare but possible occurrence. In males, the differential diagnosis for a mass in the ischiorectal fossa is limited to trauma or malignancy (prostate and penile cancer). Both sexes may have urethral or bladder carcinoma.

Congenital and developmental disorders that involve the ischiorectal fossa include Gartner duct cyst, Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, tail-gut cyst, labial cyst, and rectal duplication. Posterior perineal hernias are usually acquired and occur through a defect in the levator ani muscle; congenital defects are rare in this location.