# Continuing Education Activity

Epstein Barr virus (EBV) is a herpesvirus in which over 90% of the population worldwide has been infected. EBV infection can range from asymptomatic to infectious mononucleosis. Complications are rare, but important to recognize. This activity reviews the evaluation and management of the Epstein Barr virus and explains the role of the interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology and epidemiology of Epstein Barr virus.
- Review the physical exam findings and lab results of patients with Epstein Barr virus.
- Outline the treatment options and possible complications of Epstein Barr virus.
- Describe the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients affected by Epstein Barr virus.

# Introduction

Epstein Barr virus (EBV) is a double-stranded DNA virus that infects B lymphocyte cells. It is in the herpesvirus family and was discovered in 1964.

# Etiology

Epstein Barr virus is a herpesvirus with double-stranded DNA enclosed by proteins. The envelope of the virus has glycoproteins, which are important for attachment and entry into the host cells (B cells and epithelial cells). EBV targets B cells by utilizing their molecular machinery to replicate the viral genome. The virus causes B cells to differentiate into memory B cells, which then can move into the circulatory system, or become latent until a trigger causes reactivation.

The transmission of the Epstein Barr virus occurs in several ways, such as deep kissing or food-sharing. Increased levels of viral DNA are found in salivary secretions after the initial infection. Children can be infected after eating food that has already been chewed by an EBV infected individual.

# Epidemiology

Nearly 95% of the world’s population of adults have been infected with the Epstein Barr virus.

Worldwide prevalence rates of Epstein Barr virus vary. In England, the Epstein Barr virus prevalence rate for children ages 11 to 24 was 74.6%. Younger patients 11 to 14 years old had a lower prevalence rate of Epstein Barr virus when compared to older children. Young adults 22 to 24-year olds had 93% seropositivity.

One study found that the infection rates tend to increase between June and August, most likely due to increased human interaction during the summer months.

# History and Physical

Determining if a patient has Epstein Barr virus requires a thorough history and physical. Infection with Epstein Barr virus can cause a variety of symptoms, ranging from asymptomatic to a spectrum of illnesses. In children, infection with Epstein Barr virus can often be asymptomatic or present with vague symptoms.

# Evaluation

Determining if a patient has an infection due to Epstein Barr virus is usually most effective through serological testing. Atypical appearing lymphocytosis is most commonly present on peripheral smear.

# Treatment / Management

Epstein Barr virus is treated symptomatically with medications that can reduce fever and pain.

# Differential Diagnosis

Several other diseases need to be considered as part of the differential diagnosis. Bacterial pharyngitis presents with a sore throat, cervical lymphadenopathy, pharyngeal swelling, and tonsillar exudates. Viral pharyngitis usually includes fatigue, fever, rhinorrhea, or conjunctivitis.Herpesviridae family that presents similarly to EBV with a sore throat, fevers, chills, elevated liver function tests, and fatigue. Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy are less common CMV symptoms.

# Prognosis

Infectious mononucleosis caused by Epstein Barr virus is a self-limiting disease with a relatively good prognosis, as most patients will improve over time.

# Complications

Epstein Barr virus has several associated complications. One dangerous complication is splenic rupture due to infectious mononucleosis. In one case study, splenic rupture occurred 6 days after symptoms of infection. It can be treated conservatively or surgically. Pain control and close monitoring are appropriate conservative management strategies reserved for hemodynamically stable patients. Another non-surgical management option is splenic artery embolization. The surgical option is splenectomy which requires post-operative immunizations, antibiotics, and close follow-up.

Another complication of infectious mononucleosis from EBV is airway obstruction from tonsillar edema of the pharyngeal tissues. Treatment of airway obstruction includes steroids, tracheotomy, or intubation. Airway obstruction is a rare (1-3.5% of cases) but an important complication of infectious mononucleosis that occurs mostly in children.

Acute acalculous cholecystitis is a complication that can be treated conservatively with pain medication and antiemetics.

There are many other complications from Epstein Barr virus infection that can occur, such as myocarditis, encephalitis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, pancreatitis, and autoimmune hemolytic anemia.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Infected patients should avoid sharing utensils, drinks, and kissing others since EBV is transmitted through saliva.

Patients in sports should be cleared by a clinician before resuming activities. A minimum of three weeks and full resolution of splenomegaly is standard to decrease the risk of splenic rupture.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with EBV infection should be under the care of an interprofessional team including primary clinicians, nurses, and pharmacists to improve outcomes. As shown in a prospective study done by Rea et al., symptoms can last for several months (Level 5).