Postmenopausal symptoms are primarily attributed to the decreased level of circulating estrogen. Hot flashes, vulvovaginal atrophy, and sexual dysfunction result from the complex changes that occur around menopause. At the level of the ovary, there is a depletion of ovarian follicles, especially the granulosa cells. The ovary, therefore, is no longer able to respond to the pituitary hormones. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) level increases due to lack of feedback inhibition, and ovarian estrogen, progesterone, and inhibin production cease. However, the androgen production continues in the remaining ovarian theca cells and adrenal gland, which gets converted to estrogen through peripheral aromatization.

**Hot Flashes**

The etiology of hot flashes is complex. There is thought to be resetting and narrowing of the thermoregulatory system secondary to the fluctuations or loss of estrogen production. Hot flashes have also been thought to be due to alteration in both estrogen and FSH levels. It may also be related to the up-regulation of the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor (5-HT2A) in the hypothalamus in response to the reduced serotonin level. The reduction is thought to be due to decreased estrogen levels.

**Vulvovaginal Atrophy**

Urogenital tissues are highly sensitive to estrogen, and lack of estrogen causes atrophy and shortening of the vagina, uterine prolapse, and dyspareunia. Decreased estrogen levels affect the urinary tract, including the bladder and urethra, and many develop urinary incontinence. Unlike vasomotor symptoms, vulvovaginal atrophy does not improve over time without treatment.

**Sexual Dysfunction**

Unlike hot flashes and vulvovaginal atrophy, the etiology of sexual dysfunction does not correlate with hormonal changes. The decreased libido could also be attributed to the vasomotor symptoms, sleep disturbance, and mood changes in postmenopausal women.