Diabetes insipidus is caused by a problem with vasopressin production in the pituitary gland (central) or the action of vasopressin in the kidneys (nephrogenic). Based on the site of its pathology, it can be divided into central diabetes insipidus (CDI) and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI).

**1. Central Diabetes Insipidus (CDI)**

Based on a literature review, the most common cause of Central diabetes insipidus (CDI) is idiopathic diabetes insipidus (DI).

a) Idiopathic CDI

Approximately 30 to 50 percent of cases of CDI are idiopathic. They are suggested to be associated with an autoimmune etiology in most patients.

Another study of 150 patients with CDI evaluated their association with other autoimmune diseases and their correlation with imaging findings. The study reported etiology of CDI was idiopathic in 43 percent, familial in 4 percent, granulomatous in 8 percent, and an acquired cause like cranial trauma, tumor, or surgery in 45 percent of cases.

Antibodies to vasopressin cells were found in approximately one-third of the patients with idiopathic disease and about one-quarter with non-idiopathic disease.

The autoantigens involved in idiopathic CDI are not entirely elucidated. In patients with lymphocytic infundibuloneurohypophysitis (LINH), autoantibodies to rabphilin-3A, a regulator of secretory vesicle trafficking, are found in a large majority of patients.

b) Familial and congenital disease

Many familial and congenital diseases have been associated with CDI. These include familial CDI, Wolfram syndrome, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1 (PCSK1) gene****deficiency, and congenital diseases such as congenital hypopituitarism and septo-optic dysplasia.

- Familial CDI, also called familial neurohypophyseal DI or FNDI, is an autosomal dominant disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding antidiuretic hormone (ADH; also called arginine vasopressin or AVP).

- Wolfram syndrome or DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness) syndrome is characterized by CDI, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness, with cognitive and psychiatric issues that may appear later in life

- Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin-type 1 (PCSK1) gene deficiency — The PCSK1 gene encodes a 753-amino acid precursor, preproPC1/3, which is processed in the ER into its proenzyme form, proPC1/3. ProPC1/3 is then modified by cleavage of its prodomain into active PC1/3.

- Congenital hypopituitarism — CDI has been described in patients with congenital hypopituitarism with or without ectopia of the posterior pituitary lobe.

c) Neurosurgery or trauma

Traumatic injury to the hypothalamus and posterior pituitary or neurosurgery with a transsphenoidal approach usually induces DI.

Despite the relatively high frequency of CDI in patients undergoing neurosurgery, most cases of polyuria in this setting are **not**due to CDI.

d) Cancer

Primary or secondary (most often due to lung cancer, leukemia, or lymphoma) tumors in the brain can involve the hypothalamic-pituitary region and lead to CDI.

e) Hypoxic encephalopathy

Hypoxic encephalopathy or severe ischemia (as seen with cardiopulmonary arrest or shock) can lead to diminished ADH release.

f) Infiltrative disorders

Infiltrative disorders like Langerhan's cell histiocytosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, autoimmune lymphocytic hypophysitis, and sarcoidosis are associated with CDI.

**2. Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus (NDI)**

Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI) refers to a decrease in the urinary concentrating ability of the kidney that results from resistance to the action of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). The pathology can be due to resistance at the ADH site of activity in the collecting tubules or interference with the countercurrent mechanism due, for example, to medullary injury or decreased sodium chloride reabsorption in the medullary aspect of the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle.

The most common causes of NDI are hereditary nephrogenic DI in children, chronic lithium ingestion, and hypercalcemia in adults. Acquired causes are often partially reversible with cessation of the offending drug or correction of hypercalcemia.

a) Hereditary nephrogenic DI — Hereditary nephrogenic DI is an uncommon disorder resulting in variable degrees of resistance to ADH.AVPR2 gene is located on the X chromosome (Xq-28).

b) Vasopressin V2 receptor gene mutations — Approximately 90 percent of cases of hereditary nephrogenic DI have X-linked inheritance. They are due to mutations in the AVPR2 gene, which encodes for a dysfunctional vasopressin V2 receptor (V2R).

c) Aquaporin-2 gene mutation — The second form of hereditary nephrogenic DI is caused by a defect in the aquaporin-2 gene that encodes the ADH-sensitive water channels in the collecting tubule cells. This variant may have autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant modes of inheritance.

d) Lithium toxicity - About 20 percent of patients on chronic lithium therapy develop polyuria causing NDI. The adverse effect of lithium is mediated by the entry into the principal cells in the collecting tubule via the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC).

e) Hypercalcemia - A plasma calcium concentration persistently above 11 mg/dl (2.75 mmol/L) can impair renal concentrating ability.

f) Hypokalemia - Persistent severe hypokalemia can impair urinary concentrating ability. The mechanisms by which this occurs are incompletely understood. Downregulation of urea transporters may also contribute to the impairment of urinary concentrating ability induced by potassium depletion.

g) Other: NDI has been described in numerous other conditions.

- Kidney disorders: Symptomatic nephrogenic DI can be seen in sickle cell disease or trait, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease and medullary cystic kidney disease, renal amyloidosis, and Sjögren syndrome.

- Drugs: Other than lithium, various other medications like cidofovir, foscarnet, amphotericin B, ofloxacin, ifosfamide, and orlistat have been shown to cause NDI. Drug-induced nephrogenic DI is typically reversible, at least in part.

- Pregnancy: A transient form is noted in a few patients during the second half of their pregnancy.

3. **Pregnancy-Induced/Gestational Diabetes Insipidus**

- Increased vasopressin metabolism induced by placental cysteine aminopeptidase.

4. **Primary Polydipsia**

a) Psychogenic polydipsia

b) Drug-induced: Anticholinergics, phenothiazines

c) Intracranial etiology: Hypothalamic tumors, tuberculous meningitis, sarcoidosis

d) Lowering of the hypothalamic threshold for thirst - dipsogenic DI