Ginger root has gained worldwide popularity in recent years. We will review the health and medical benefits of ginger in this article.

Ginger root has been used for centuries around the world in preparing cuisine. Ginger root has been mentioned in traditional Ayurvedic and Chinese medical literature. Southeast Asian countries are the largest producers of the root. Ginger’s name originates from the ancient Sanskrit word, srngaveram, translating to “horn root.” The root itself originates from the root of the Zingiber officinale plant, a tropical plant with green-purple flowers and a fragrant stem known as a rhizome.

Ginger root is a member of the family of roots consisting of turmeric and cardamom. There are over 1300 different species of ginger root plants. Its strong aroma and taste are due to ketones called gingerols, a primary component of the root. It is high in vitamin C, vitamin B6, micronutrients like magnesium, potassium, copper, manganese, fiber, and water. It is also high in phytochemicals and polyphenols. Gingerols, shogaols, and paradols are the three major active components from terpenes found in ginger, and the suggested serving size ranges from 170mg to 1g of powder a day. A primary metabolite of gingerol is known as (S)-[6]-gingerol-4’-0-β-glucuronide. Ginger and its metabolites appear to accumulate in the gastrointestinal tract and exert their effects by relieving pain through anti-inflammatory effects, soothing the digestive system through carminative effects, and alleviating nausea. Recently, research has focused on the mechanism of action of ginger and its various components.

Studies have shown ginger’s promising preventative properties against chronic diseases, such as hypertension and CHD, as well as its contribution to the overall improvement of immune system action. One study showed increasing ginger intake by 1g per day based on a proper diet could provide such preventative benefits.