There are numerous short and long term complications associated with each stage of palliation. The highest rate of interstage mortality is between the first and second stages of surgical palliation for single ventricles.  Patients who have undergone BT shunts are at risk for a variety of complications, including shunt obstruction. The mortality rate among patients who have undergone a modified BT shunt in the current era is still high. A recent study looking at outcomes in patients after BT shunt showed that in-hospital mortality after a modified BT shunt was 12%, with an additional 6% interval mortality. BT shunt thrombosis and or stenosis occurred in 20% of patients. Non-cardiac complications such as necrotizing enterocolitis and cerebral vascular accident are not insignificant occurrences after BT shunts.

Complications encountered after PA band placement include migration of band. The band may be too lose requiring re-intervention. Additionally, research has described pulmonary artery stenosis or distortion of the pulmonary artery. A recent study showed that the use of bilateral PA bands, especially those with smaller diameter bands and longer band placement, requires a significant number of pulmonary arterial interventions.

The Glenn surgery has excellent short and long term outcomes with operative mortality less than 1% and 5-year survival of 87%.

There are myriad long-term complications associated following the Fontan. Such complications include arrhythmias, ventricular dysfunction, cyanosis, and protein-losing enteropathy.

Systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction is known to be a long term complication of single ventricle palliation. In the neonatal period after the BT shunt, the single effective ventricle is exposed to increased volume load, potentially leading to valvular regurgitation, which causes increased hemodynamic stress on the myocardium. The myocardium is also subject to chronic hypoxia in the context of intracardiac mixing. Following the Fontan, the ventricle goes from being volume overloaded to volume-depleted. This status can lead to acute systolic and diastolic dysfunction in the short term. However, shifting volume load and ventricular mass ratios may also have a long term impact on ventricular mechanics.

Arrhythmia is not uncommon after the Fontan. They are mostly atrial tachycardias, which result due to suture lines placed in the right atrium. These suture lines may interfere with atrial conduction. The incidence of this complication has decreased with the extracardiac modification of this surgery.

Thromboembolism can present in these patients. The overall prevalence of thromboembolism is around 11% and may occur in the Fontan conduit, right atrium, lungs (pulmonary embolism), or brain (stroke-systemic arterial emboli.) The risk of thromboembolism increases with the presence of an atriopulmonary connection or atrial arrhythmias.

Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) is a well-described complication caused by lymphatic congestion, which can lead to spillage of lymph-rich material into the low-pressure intestinal tract. It occurs in 5% to 12% of patients after Fontan.

Patients with the Fontan procedure may have cyanosis for a variety of reasons. There may be some degree of right to left shunting across the fenestration in a Fontan. Systemic venous and pulmonary venous collaterals may develop, resulting in right-to-left shunting from the Fontan pathway to the atrium. Cyanosis may become exacerbated during exercise. Some patients may benefit from transcatheter fenestration closure or venovenous occlusion.

Other long-term complications experienced in TA include but are not limited to:

- Fontan associated liver disease (liver fibrosis and cirrhosis)

- Renal dysfunction

- Somatic growth problems

- Psychosocial and neurodevelopmental issues

- Decreased exercise tolerance