Once the patient is intubated endotracheally, the pressure exerted by the tube incites an inflammatory reaction at the areas of contact, which could explain the basic mechanism for the development of laryngeal edema. Prolonged endotracheal intubation can result in inflammation, swelling, and ulceration of laryngotracheal areas of contact, especially the vocal cords, and the inflated cuff areas. An early study published by Darmon et al. in 1992 which involved 700 consecutive patients requiring endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation, noted the duration of ventilation more than 36 hours, and female gender as the risk factors for post-extubation laryngeal edema.

Another study by François et al. conducted on 761 intensive care unit (ICU) patients found trauma at admission, female gender, short duration of intubation (< 1 week), lesser height to tube diameter ratio, and absence of pre-treatment with methylprednisolone as risk factors for the development of post-extubation laryngeal edema.

Severe post-extubation (intubation) laryngeal edema requiring tracheostomy in a patient who had undergone bilateral modified radical neck dissection about seven years before the current urologic intervention has been reported with a probable explanation for increased edema risk being the destruction of lymphatics, or venous engorgement of the neck.

In brief, the risk for post-intubation laryngeal edema can be summarized into three categories intubation factors, post-intubation factors, and patient factors.

Intubation factors:

- History of difficult intubation (prolonged intubation attempt)

- Large tube size (smaller height-to-tube diameter ratio)

Post-intubation factors:

- Prolonged endotracheal intubation

- High cuff pressures

- Agitation while intubated

- High cuff pressures

- Self-extubation and reintubation

The patient, setting, and surgery-related factors

- Type of surgery (e.g., head and neck surgery)

- Prone positioning during neurosurgical procedures

- Pregnancy

- Fluid resuscitation

- Neck and airway injuries

- Inhalational injuries and burns

- Lower Glasgow Coma Scale score

- Non-sedation treatment

- Female gender

- Body mass index (>26.5)

- Gastro-oesophageal reflux