An Addisonian crisis most often occurs in a patient with known adrenal insufficiency, either primary or secondary. Primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison Disease) is characterized by low cortisol and high ACTH from the destruction of the adrenal glands. Secondary adrenal insufficiency is characterized by low cortisol and low to normal ACTH caused by decreased ACTH secretion from the pituitary. Most cases are patients with known adrenal insufficiency who experience an acute stress event, who do not adjust their usual dose of glucocorticoid therapy and their body's cortisol stores are quickly depleted leading to an Addisonian crisis as these patients cannot produce their own cortisol. Roughly half of the patients have undiagnosed Addison disease and present to the emergency room in acute crisis and shock after an acute stress event.

The most common precipitating cause is acute infection, such as from a gastrointestinal upset. mycobacterium tuberculosis leading to chronic infectious adrenalitis and fibrosis, or have acute Meningococcal meningitis causing Waterhouse-Friderichsen Syndrome and massive bilateral adrenal hemorrhage.  One of the more common presentations of the Addisonian crisis is a patient who is on chronic steroid therapy, who abruptly stop their usual doses of corticosteroid due to the long-term suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary Axis.

**Primary Adrenal Insufficiency (Addison disease)**

- Autoimmune Adrenalitis

- Medication-Induced

- Ketoconazole
- Rifampin
- Phenytoin
- Mitotane
- Immunotherapy with a checkpoint inhibitor
- diuretics

- Infiltrative diseases

- Sarcoidosis
- Amyloidosis
- hemochromatosis

- Infectious

- Most commonly due to an acute illness from a viral or bacterial infection
- Tuberculosis
- HIV/AIDs
- CMV

- Adrenal hemorrhage

- Waterhouse-Friderichsen Syndrome

- Other:

- Trauma
- Pregnancy
- Sepsis
- Myocardial infarction
- Physical overexertion and dehydration
- Surgery
- Other endocrinopathies (DKA, thyrotoxicosis, myxedema coma)

**Secondary Adrenal Insufficiency**

- Iatrogenic after the rapid withdrawal of corticosteroids without tapering

- oral and inhaled steroids

- Pituitary causes

- Pituitary adenoma
- Infiltrative disorders
- Lymphocytic hypophysitis
- Sheehan's syndrome
- Pituitary apoplexy
- Trauma