The initial presenting symptom can vary from patient to patient. The most common feature is an insidious onset and progressive course of muscle weakness which manifests as the following:

- Difficulty in climbing stairs or arising from a chair (pelvic girdle)

- Decrease in walking speed (hip flexors)

- Frequent falls due to buckling of the knees (quadriceps)

- Foot drop and frequent tripping (ankle dorsiflexion)

- Difficulty in combing hair and in reaching overhead cabinets (shoulder girdle)

- Decrease in grip strength (finger flexors)

Neck muscle involvement can result in difficulty in lifting the head from a pillow.

The distinguishing features of IBM from other forms of inflammatory myopathies are the following:

- Asymmetric and distal muscle involvement: The predilection for wrist or finger flexors and foot extensors.

- Insidious onset: The disease course is slow and progressive. The average duration of symptoms before making a diagnosis is 5 years.

- Muscle atrophy: Wasting of finger flexors, wrist flexors, and quadriceps accompany weakness and worsens with progression of the disease. In another inflammatory myositis, muscle atrophy happens as a sequela of the damage caused by the disease, and is, therefore, a late finding in contrast to IBM where it can be present during the initial evaluation

- Dysphagia: is seen in approximately 30% to 50% of the patients with IBM. It can lead to nasal regurgitation of liquids and pulmonary aspiration. Pharyngeal muscle weakness can also result in dysphonia.

Physical examination will help in objectively assessing the distribution of muscle weakness and atrophy. The clinical hallmarks of IBM are weakness and atrophy of the quadriceps and forearm flexors. Weakness in the distal finger flexor is the earliest finding which can be demonstrated by isolating and testing the flexion at the DIP joint of finger flexors.