# Introduction

The retina is a layer of photoreceptors cells and glial cells within the eye that captures incoming photons and transmits them along neuronal pathways as both electrical and chemical signals for the brain to perceive a visual picture. The retina is located in the posterior segment and forms the innermost boundary among the other major layers of the eye that include the vascular choroid and the fibrous sclera. Disease manifestations can occur in the retina at different stages of life, many of which severely compromise visual ability and consequently the quality of life.

# Structure and Function

The following topics relating to the structure and function of the retina appear below:

- Photoreceptor cells

- Layers of the retina

- Macula

**Photoreceptor Cells**

Photoreceptor cells include rods and cones and are uniquely located towards the posterior aspect of the retinal sublayers, further away from the pupil where light enters the eye. Rods are more sensitive in dim light (scotopic vision) and reside in the periphery of the retina. Cones are more sensitive in daylight (photopic vision) and capture wavelengths of colored light. Cones localize in the center of the retina at the fovea. There are approximately 6 million cones and often more than 100 million rods within the retina.

**Layers of the Retina**

The retina, more specifically, subdivides into ten distinct layers that are described in order from the innermost layers closer to the pupil to the layers further towards the posterior and periphery of the eyeball:

- **Inner Limiting Membrane**– the innermost layer of the retina that forms a smooth boundary against the vitreous humor which fills the vitreous chamber of the eye. The peripheral boundary of this layer consists of Müller glial cells, which function to maintain retinal homeostasis by upholding retinal lamination and by supporting other cells.

- **Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer**– the layer composed of retinal ganglion cell axons mixed with astrocytes and the processes of the Muller cells. The inner limiting membrane serves as the basal lamina for the cells of the retinal nerve fiber layer.

- **Ganglion Cell Layer**– the layer of ganglion cell bodies that project their axons, eventually to form the optic nerve.

- **Inner Plexiform Layer**– this layer is where the axons of bipolar cells synapse onto the ganglion cells. The dendrites of amacrine cells also synapse at this zone and function in modulating the electrical conduction between the bipolar cells and ganglion cells, preventing lateral potentiation.

- **Inner Nuclear Layer**– the layer composed of the cell bodies of bipolar cells, horizontal cells, and amacrine cells. Bipolar cells function as channels that transmit and encode various synaptic inputs from photoreceptor cells onto ganglion cells.

- **Outer Plexiform Layer**– the region where projections from photoreceptor cells synapse with the dendrites of the cells residing in the inner nuclear layer.

- **Outer Nuclear Layer**– the layer containing the cell bodies of both rods and cones.

- **External Limiting Membrane**– the region that is composed of gap-junctions between photoreceptor cells and Muller cells; it separates the cell bodies of the rods and cones from their inner segments and outer segments.

- **Photoreceptor Layer**– the region consisting of the inner segments and outer segments of rods and cones. The outer photoreceptor segments consist of membrane-bound discs that contain the light-sensitive pigments such as rhodopsin that are necessary for phototransduction. The inner segments house the abundance of mitochondria needed to meet the high metabolic demands of the photoreceptor cells.

- **Retinal Pigment Epithelium**– the outermost retinal layer that spans a width of a single cell located between the neural retina and the Bruch membrane, adjacent to the highly-vascularized choroid layer. The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) contributes to the blood-retinal barrier in conjunction with the endothelium of the retinal vessels and has many functions including ion and water transport and secretion of growth factors and cytokines.trans-retinal back into 11-cis-retinal and its delivery back to the cones and rods to be used again for phototransduction.

**Macula**

The macula, also called the macula lutea for its yellowish pigmented appearance, makes up the most sensitive area of the retina, offering the highest visual acuity. It is found temporally from the optic disc upon fundoscopic examination. Lutein and zeaxanthin are carotenoids that make up the macular pigments and produce the yellow coloring. These macular pigments are known to have anti-inflammatory and blue-light filtering properties.

The macula further subdivides into the following sequentially-smaller concentric zones that characteristically show decreasing rod density and fewer layers of cells covering the photoreceptor cells:

- Perifovea

- Parafovea

- Fovea

- Foveal avascular zone

- Foveola

- Umbo

# Embryology

The retina arises from the diencephalon of the embryo as the optic vesicle during the first month and forms an invagination called the optic sulcus.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Blood vessels and the choroid vascularizes the retina. The choroid supplies the outer layers of the retina while branches of significant blood vessels supply the inner retinal layers. Descriptions of the individual vessels that contribute to the vascularization of the retina appear below.

**Central Retinal Artery**– the major vessel that supplies the inner layers of the retina; it travels inside of the optic nerve sheath and similarly penetrates the eye at the optic disc. The central retinal artery divides into superior and inferior arcades that will form the blood-retina barrier.

**Central Retinal Vein**– the main drainage pathway of the retina and travels alongside the central retinal artery within the sheath of the optic nerve.

**Long Posterior Ciliary Arteries**– these two vessels branch from the ophthalmic artery and pierce the sclera on the posterior of the eye near the entry zone of the optic nerve. The long posterior ciliary arteries supply the choroid in the medial and lateral horizontal planes and, eventually, the anterior structures of the eye.

**Short Posterior Ciliary Arteries**– these vessels arise as a few branches from the ophthalmic artery and subsequently branch into 10 to 20 smaller vessels that penetrate the posterior sclera in a ring around the optic nerve.  These branched vessels anastomose to form the circle of Zinn that encircles and supplies the area of the optic cup at the level of the choroid. Perpendicular terminal arterioles from the short posterior ciliary arteries also supply the Bruch membrane and the outer retina.

**Choroid**– the second major layer, or tunic, of the eye that vascularizes the outer layers of the retina.

The retina does not contain lymphatic vessels.

# Nerves

The optic nerve is the primary sensory tract for visual information collected by the photoreceptor cells of the retina to travel to the brain. The axons of the ganglion cells that form the optic nerve converge and exit from the globe at the optic disc where there is an absence of rods and cones, resulting in a deficit within the visual field called the blind spot.

# Physiologic Variants

Myopia is a common refractive disorder where the focal convergence of light that passes through the cornea and the lens falls short of the fovea, resulting in nearsightedness. One cause of myopia is the axial elongation of the globe, which results in the straining of the retina. High myopia, which is approximately an error of refraction between -6.0 to -8.0 diopters, is a risk factor for retinal detachment and is common in Eastern Asia.

Ocular albinism is an X-linked disorder where there is hypopigmentation of the fundus that often presents with congenital nystagmus, iris translucency, severely reduced visual acuity and strabismus.

# Surgical Considerations

Round hole retinal detachment is often surgically repaired by laser demarcation which promotes adhesion between the neural retinal layers and the retinal pigment epithelium.

In cases of vitreous cloudings, such as steroid hyalosis or vitreoretinal traction where the degradation of the vitreous pulls on the retina, a vitrectomy is a commonly performed procedure. Vitrectomy involves vitreous removal, done through the pars plana of the sclera.

# Clinical Significance

The following are pathologies relating to the retina:

- Retinal detachment

- Retinal artery occlusion

- Age-related macular degeneration

- Glaucoma

- Diabetic retinopathy

- Cytomegalovirus retinitis

- Retinopathy of prematurity

- Retinitis pigmentosa

- Retinoblastoma

- Central serous chorioretinopathy

- Color vision deficiency

**Retinal Detachment**– the disconnection of the retinal layers occurring between the retinal pigment epithelium and the inner neural layers of the retina resulting in ischemia and subsequent photoreceptor degeneration. Permanent vision loss can be prevented with early detection and treatment, as retinal detachment is usually an ocular emergency.  Prominent risk factors for retinal detachment include myopia, trauma, cataract surgery, diabetic retinopathy, and old age.

**Retinal Artery Occlusion**– the blockage of either the central retinal artery or the branch retinal arteries resulting in retinal ischemia and severe vision loss. Central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO) is an ophthalmic emergency that is often caused by atherosclerosis or an embolism originating in the carotid arteries.

**Age-Related Macular Degeneration**– a neurodegenerative disease that compromises the junction between the neural retinal layers and the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and results in severe central vision loss. Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) categorizes into two types that include the non-neovascular atrophic type known as “dry” macular degeneration and the neovascular type that is known as “wet” macular degeneration. Dry AMD demonstrates characteristic lesions of the RPE as a result of the build-up of cellular debris called lipofuscin, which, in turn, causes the formation of the pathognomonic yellowish, amorphic deposits called drusen between the RPE and the underlying the Bruch membrane.

**Glaucoma**– the gradual degeneration of ganglion cells and their axons resulting in the loss of peripheral and, eventually, central vision.

**Diabetic Retinopathy**– retinal microvascular pathology that results from elevated blood sugar and presents with both type I diabetes and type II diabetes. It is the most common complication within diabetic eye disease which is the leading cause of blindness in adults under 75 years of age in developed countries.

**Cytomegalovirus Retinitis**– an opportunistic viral infection of the retina caused by cytomegalovirus (CMV) which is a member of the herpes virus family. CMV retinitis is characterized by progressive retinal necrosis and scarring that can lead to retinal detachment, macular edema, and vision loss.

**Retinopathy of Prematurity**– the abnormal proliferation of blood vessels and subsequent incomplete vascularization of the retina in the developing newborn as a result of premature birth. The pathological growth of the retinal blood vessels is due to hypoxia and in extensive cases can lead to a retinal detachment which may result in blindness if left untreated.

**Retinitis Pigmentosa**– a group of inherited rod-cone dystrophies characterized by the gradual loss of rods from the periphery followed by the loss of cones that are more centrally located in the retina. This progressive degeneration often results in tunnel vision and, in extensive cases, complete vision loss. Retinitis pigmentosa is also known as hereditary retinal dystrophy and is the most common inherited retinal disease.

**Retinoblastoma**– a malignant tumor of the developing neural retina of young children due to a loss-of-function mutation in the Rb1 tumor suppressor gene.

**Central Serous Chorioretinopathy**– a macular disease where the retinal pigment epithelium is compromised, resulting in fluid leakage from the capillary lamina of the choroid into the subretinal area. The resulting macular edema causes central vision loss where 30 to 40% of cases have shown disease recurrence while most other cases are self-limiting.

**Color Vision Deficiency**– abnormal color perception and reduced color contrast sensitivity as a result of photopigment defects within the cone cells of the retina. The most common variation is red-green color blindness, which results from a deficit or abnormality in either the red (protans) or the green (deutrans) cone cells. All color vision disorders that contribute to red-green colorblindness are passed between generations in an X-linked recessive mode of inheritance, affecting males more than females.

# Other Issues

**Drug Delivery Routes**

With age-related macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy becoming highly prevalent, there is increasing interest in improving drug delivery methods to the retina. The current standard is the use of intravitreal injections, which offers efficient bioavailability but is highly invasive and often leads to ocular complications with repeated use. Nanomedicine is a relatively new method of drug delivery to the retina, which involves the use of bioengineered nanoparticles such as hydrogels, liposomes, and synthetic polymers to carry and deliver drugs to target tissues.