**Paramalignant pleural effusion**- needs to be distinguished from malignant pleural effusion due to different prognostic implications. Pathophysiological processes underlying the development of para-malignant pleural effusions may include tumor-associated obstruction, chylous effusion associated with obstruction of the thoracic duct, pulmonary embolism-related effusion, effusion secondary to hypoalbuminemia (driven by a low colloidal osmotic pressure). Superior vena caval obstruction may be seen, both as a late adverse effect of radiotherapy to the mediastinum and increased systemic venous pressures due to local effects of the tumor.

**Treatment-related effusions**- Radiotherapy, conventional chemotherapy (bleomycin, procarbazine, cyclophosphamide, and methotrexate), targeted therapy (dasatinib), and immunotherapy.

**Other causes of pleural fluid accumulation**- Congestive heart failure, hepatic decompensation, and renal failure.

Tumor clonal evolution owing to pharmacological pressure to anticancer treatment has been shown to underlie the differences in mutations in the primary tumor and the pleural metastases. Personalized MPE therapy based upon the actionable mutation discovered in the malignant pleural cells might represent the future of definitive treatment

The utility of intrapleural immune stimulants is also being explored as both a potential anti-tumor and sclerosant treatment. Ren et al. have demonstrated increased survival in patients undergoing pleurodesis with Staphylococcus aureus bioproduct mixture due to its immune-stimulating effect on T cells, which might predispose to tumor cell apoptosis in malignant mesothelioma.