As the discovery of many enchondroma lesions occurs incidentally, care providers and radiologists must be diligent in evaluating ordered radiographic studies. Open communication between the radiology, medical, and surgical teams are required to manage this condition. A holistic, interprofessional, team-based approach should be employed to provide the best outcomes for patients. Although benign, nonaggressive tumors, enchondromas still require expert care and unwavering vigilance. As there is no current guideline-recommended treatment for this condition, future investigation needs to focus on definitive management strategies.

The crux of enchondroma diagnosis comes from differentiating enchondroma from atypical cartilaginous tumor/chondrosarcoma grade 1 (ACT/CS1). Pathologists recommend against biopsy, which is the diagnostic modality of choice for many other oncologic processes. Coordination between radiologists, oncologists, pathologists, surgeons, and the primary medical team is needed to arrive at the diagnosis of an enchondroma. To date, no singular serologic or radiologic test may differentiate ACT/CS1 from enchondroma. This differentiation has limited clinical and therapeutic value, however. The treatment for enchondroma and ACT/CS1 is identical: extended curettage using adjuvants with or without void filling using bone grafts/ bone cement.

Realistically, most enchondromas require nothing more than supportive care and close monitoring. As this may pose a shock to the patient and the family, the presentation with an interprofessional approach and a unified front and plan of action is the best policy.

Prompt intervention is recommended if the patient sustains a pathologic fracture requiring surgical intervention despite increased hospital costs. The benefit of early, primary intervention is a faster return to work.