Thankfully, there is no known mortality attributed to trichodysplasia spinulosa, and the morbidity may be primarily cosmetic. Still, it has the potential to cause pruritus, psychological stress associated with its prominently visible symptoms, and psychological stress associated with prognostic uncertainty while patients await a definitive diagnosis and treatment plan. The two known contributing factors for trichodysplasia spinulosa (TSPyV infection and immunosuppression) are not reasonable targets for prevention due to the ubiquitous nature of TSPyV and the implied medical necessity of immunosuppressive therapy in the relevant patient population.

However, other contributing factors yet to be known could theoretically provide an appropriate avenue for prevention. Collaboration between an interprofessional team of dermatologists, immunologists, virologists, and other healthcare specialists in both clinical and academic settings is required to enhance patient-centered care. Clinical recognition and publication of cases of trichodysplasia spinulosa are needed to better understand risk factors and build the repertoire of treatment options. Investigation of the pathophysiology of this condition and mechanisms of proposed treatments is necessary to clarify and validate their efficacy. Ultimately, expanding upon the paucity of knowledge about trichodysplasia spinulosa will increase diagnostic fidelity, improve patient counseling and reassurance, and firmly establish effective treatment options. [Level 5]