There are over 600 identified medications and medicinal products with anticholinergic activity.

**Elderly Patients:**The elderly population is most sensitive to the effects of anticholinergic medications. Age is the most significant patient predictor associated with the severity of an anticholinergic reaction. As age increases, there are changes in metabolism, leading to different drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Additionally, many elderly patients may have comorbidities such as pre-existing psychiatric disease that increase their sensitivities to anticholinergic medications and increased risk of drug-drug interaction with other medications.

**Treatment:**Management of anticholinergic toxicity starts with stabilization of any emergent conditions related to airway, breathing, and circulation. Specific treatment available for poisoning includes sodium bicarbonate for prolonged QRS intervals on ECG. Delirium is treatable with benzodiazepines. Cooling methods can treat hyperthermia. If the patient is awake and cooperative, activated charcoal can be a consideration. Supportive treatment is typically sufficient for anticholinergic toxicity. Physostigmine is an available antidote, a drug that inhibits the enzyme acetylcholinesterase in the synaptic cleft; this increases ACh in the synapse and allows for competition for inhibited muscarinic receptors.

**Effects of Treatment**: Clinicians should also monitor patients for effects related to treatment. Physostigmine use is controversial given excessive inhibition of acetylcholinesterase which can lead to additional toxicity. Potential symptoms of toxicity categorize into effects on the CNS (coma and seizures), effects on peripheral muscarinic receptors (bradycardia, bronchospasm, gland overactivity, nausea, and vomiting), and effects on peripheral nicotinic receptors (neuromuscular symptoms). The adverse effects of cholinesterase inhibitors should be considered before administration and require close monitoring after administration.