For routine vaccination, two different schedules are FDA recommended, neither of which is more efficacious than the other. If using monovalent, monovalent tetanus toxoid conjugate, or polyvalent DTap, inactivated poliovirus, and Hib conjugate - vaccinate at 2, 4, 6 months and then a booster between 12 to 15 months. If using monovalent; meningococcal protein conjugate - vaccinate at 2 and 4 months with a booster between 12 to 15 months.

The catch-up schedule for the Hib vaccine depends on the child's age when initiating catch-up and how many doses, if any, they received in the past.

Children between the ages of 1 and 5 years old who are receiving chemotherapy or radiation, have anatomic or functional asplenia, have an HIV infection, or are immunoglobulin/complement deficient, are also recommended to be revaccinated with the Hib vaccine. If they received one or fewer doses of the Hib vaccine by one year of age, they should receive two more doses eight weeks apart. If they received at least two doses of the Hib vaccine by one year of age, they should receive one additional dose, at least eight weeks after the most recent dose. Any dose given less than 14 days after the initiation of chemotherapy or radiation should be readministered greater than three months after chemotherapy is finished. Those with an elective splenectomy and at least 15 months old with no previous Hib vaccinations should receive one dose at least two weeks before the procedure. If an individual between 5 and 18 years old with HIV has never received the Hib vaccine, they should receive one dose. All individuals receiving hematopoietic stem cell transplants should receive three doses of the Hib vaccine within six to twelve months after a successful transplant; each dose should be four weeks apart.