Patients are typically asymptomatic, and the condition is often an incidental finding while evaluating for other cardiac illnesses or at postmortem. The vegetations could affect both the ventricular and atrial sides of the valves. The most affected valves are left side chamber valves (mitral followed by aortic), but other valves can also have involvement. The most common clinical manifestations are secondary to embolism. A cerebrovascular embolism can present with signs and symptoms of a stroke or a transient ischemic attack. Systemic thromboembolism can manifest as peripheral arterial embolism, presenting as cold limbs or mesenteric ischemia presenting as severe abdominal pain.

SLE patients show manifestations of the underlying disease such as constitutional symptoms (fever), malar rash, discoid rash, arthritis, oral ulcers, serositis (pleuritis, pericarditis), renal disorder (diffuse glomerulonephritis, focal segmental glomerulonephritis), neuropsychiatric, hematological issues (pancytopenia), or abnormal lab. values (ANA, Anti-dsDNA, Anti-SM). To establish a diagnosis, the clinician can use echocardiography, SLICC criteria (histological findings plus immunological tests), or EULAR/ACR criteria (10 points and above with one clinical feature).

Antiphospholipid syndrome presents with recurrent miscarriages, abortions, and venous/arterial thrombosis.with the presence of lupus anticoagulant and IgG or IgM for anti-cardiolipin.

Libman–Sacks lesions only rarely lead to significant valve dysfunction, and the lesions seldom embolize. However, data suggests a correlation between Libman–Sacks endocarditis and an increased risk for embolic cerebrovascular disease in SLE patients.

A 6-year, fully integrated, controlled, cross-sectional and longitudinal study revealed five significant findings: 1) NPSLE patients have more Libman-Sacks vegetations compared to SLE patients, the presence of cerebromicroembolism, neurocognitive dysfunction, and focal brain lesions; 2) patients with vegetations have three times more cerebromicroembolism per hour, lower cerebral perfusion, more strokes/TIAs, and overall NPSLE events, increased neurocognitive dysfunction, and more significant brain injury; 3) valve vegetations are a strong independent risk factor for stroke/TIA and NPSLE, neurocognitive dysfunction, brain lesions, and all three outcomes combined; 4) vegetations, cerebromicroembolism, NPSLE, neurocognitive dysfunction, and brain perfusion and lesion load improve with anti-inflammatory and/or antithrombotic therapy; and 5) patients with vegetations have poor outcomes with reduced event-free time to cerebrovascular events including stroke/TIA, cognitive impairment, or mortality. These findings support the idea that Libman-Sacks vegetations may generate platelet or fibrin macro-or-microemboli that occlude cerebral vessels, resulting in reduced cerebral perfusion, ischemic brain injury, stroke/TIA, non-focal NPSLE syndromes, neurocognitive issues, and contribute to death. Therefore, Libman-Sacks endocarditis may be a common but under-recognized pathogenetic factor for embolic CVD in SLE.

In a study of 76 patients with SLE, the presence of LS endocarditis correlated with a higher risk for embolic cerebral vascular disease.