**Laboratory Investigations: Biochemistry & Microbiology**

Lactate should be routinely measured as high lactate levels are usually seen in sepsis. A lactate level of > 2 mmol/liter is a component of the 2016 third international consensus definition of septic shock.

The thyroid profile requires evaluation in patients where thyroid storm is suspected. Free cortisol measurement or ACTH test must be done to evaluate adrenal insufficiency. Fresh cultures should be obtained before the initiation or changing of antibiotics. Blood cultures should be obtained in all patients with fever. Additional cultures should be obtained based on the suspected foci of infection, e.g., tracheal secretions, BAL in case of pneumonia, urine cultures in suspected UTI, and CSF culture in suspected meningitis.

**Role of CRP and Procalcitonin**

The****CRP is an acute-phase reactant used as a biomarker for sepsis. CRP is found to increase inflammatory pathology; hence, its role in sepsis is limited due to low specificity. Procalcitonin is another biomarker of sepsis that is a better indicator of the severity of the illness than CRP. It mainly correlates with bacterial infections. Procalcitonin can be used in antibiotic stewardship to reduce the unnecessary use of antibiotics in the ICU.

**Imaging Studies**

Chest radiograph helps to look for the respiratory cause of fever and differentiates pneumonia from tracheobronchitis. The sensitivity of chest x-rays is significantly decreased in neutropenic patients. For example, about 50% of neutropenic patients with bone marrow suppression and blood stem cell transplant recipients had a normal x-ray chest when the HRCT thorax was abnormal.

Ultrasound lung and abdomen/pelvis also help to rule out sources of infection. Ultrasound chest has a high sensitivity in detecting consolidations in the lung, though with a lesser specificity. Ultrasound abdomen will not be able to detect retroperitoneal collections accurately. Air, if present, will obscure the ultrasonic vision significantly. Compression ultrasound & Doppler study of deep veins are performed whenever deep vein thrombosis is suspected. An arterial doppler may be required to diagnose early/subtle limb ischemia as a cause for fever.

CT thorax may help diagnose empyema thoraces unclear or invisible on routine X-ray chest, aiding its prompt drainage. A Contrast-Enhanced Abdominal CT  is sometimes needed to evaluate an undetected intra-abdominal source of fever. Acalculous cholecystitis, liver abscess, and post-operative abdominal collection can be identified with CT abdomen. Suspected mesenteric ischemia will require a CT angiogram. Evaluation for sinusitis is important, especially in neutropenic patients and non-neutropenic patients without any other known infection source. This involves a high degree of clinical suspicion and a CT scan of the paranasal sinuses. Whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) scan is rarely required to diagnose the source of fever in an ICU patient.

**Endoscopic Interventions**

Fibreoptic bronchoscopy and BAL help diagnose certain uncommon pulmonary etiologies (infectious and non-infectious) causing fever in an ICU patient. Fibreoptic gastrointestinal endoscopies are sometimes utilized to rule out a  gastrointestinal cause (infectious or non-infectious) cause for fever. Colonoscopy may be rarely required to confirm the pseudomembrane formation in strongly suspected Clostridioides difficile colitis if conventional tests are negative.

**Blood cultures**

Blood cultures from two different sites (aerobic and anaerobic bottles) should be drawn before starting treatment with antimicrobials. In the presence of central intravascular catheters, blood cultures from the catheter should also be drawn. Moreover, blood should be used to additionally inoculate fungal culture bottles if infection with fungus is suspected.

**Respiratory tract sampling**

When appropriate, endotracheal aspirate/sputum Gram stain and culture are also indicated for febrile patients.