COPD is a complex disease and a cause of significant morbidity and mortality. It requires interprofessional care and the involvement of more than one subspecialty to create a healthcare team. This patient-centered approach involving a physician with a team of other health professionals, physiotherapists, respiratory therapists, dieticians, social workers, clinical psychologists, nurses, and support groups working together for the patient plays a vital role in improving the quality of care in COPD patients. It not only decreases the hospital admission rates but also positively affects the disease outcome.

Based on the symptoms and smoking history, the family physician orders spirometry to determine the diagnosis and assess the disease's severity. The comorbidities and infections are common causes of worsening COPD and COPD exacerbation. Therefore, properly monitoring and managing COPD and its comorbidities are equally crucial in improving the survival of COPD patients. The patients with severe diseases who experience exacerbations are managed in the respiratory unit ICU. COPD exacerbation in patients with kidney disease needs to be treated in the ICU, where they can be taken care of by the different subspecialty physicians. On discharge, the collaboration between the hospital and the family physician ensures the continuous maintenance of the patient.

The complex management of COPD involves patient education, self-management, and pulmonary rehabilitation in addition to the above. Physicians and respiratory therapists assist with patient education, which primarily includes behavior/lifestyle modification, for example, smoking cessation, education about symptoms of COPD exacerbation, the importance of regular medications, and the proper use of prescribed medications. Self-management plan includes taking medications regularly, awareness of severe symptoms, and learning to live with the disease.

Pulmonary rehabilitation is also necessary to improve dyspnea and exercise tolerance and substantially reduce hospital admission rates. A physiotherapist can assist in pulmonary rehabilitation programs to help with exercise and overall conditioning. The nurse can assist with patient monitoring, education, and follow-up care coordination. The pharmacist can help avoid drug-drug interactions and make recommendations regarding appropriate therapy and dosing. Dieticians can assist patients who are overweight or underweight. Family physicians play an important role in discussing end-of-life and palliative care with the patients.

The communication between the interprofessional team members caring for the patient, accurate documentation of the patient's status, and regular assessment of the patient's condition helps maximize the respiratory potential of the patient and, hence cost-effectively decreases the disease burden.