The initial resuscitation of a pediatric TBI patient should proceed in a step-wise fashion to identify all injuries, as well as optimize cerebral perfusion by maintaining hemodynamic stabilization and oxygenation. The initial survey should include a brief, focused neurological examination with attention to the GCS.

The pediatric GCS is similar to the adult GCS, with the main difference in the verbal component of the scoring system. In the 0 to 23 month age group, a 5 is designated for babbling, cooing, or smiling appropriately, 4 points if crying but consolable, 3 points for inconsolable crying, 2 points for moaning or grunting, and 1 point for no verbal response. In the 2 to 5 age group, a 5 is designated if the child is verbalizing appropriate words and phrases, a 4 is designated if the child is verbalizing inappropriate words, a 3 if the child is crying or screaming, a 2 for moaning or grunting and a 1 for no verbal response. GCS in the >5 age group is similar to that in an adult patient.

After stabilization of any airway, breathing, or circulatory deficits, a thorough head-to-toe physical examination must be performed with vigilance for occult injuries and careful attention to detect any of the following warning signs:

- Inspection for cranial nerve deficits, periorbital or postauricular ecchymoses, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea or otorrhea, hemotympanum (signs of the base of skull fracture)

- Fundoscopic examination for retinal hemorrhage (a potential sign of abuse in children) and papilledema (a sign of elevated ICP)

- Palpation of the scalp for hematoma, crepitus, laceration, and bony deformity (markers of skull fractures). In infants, prior to fontanelle closure, a full and/or tense anterior fontanelle can serve as a marker for elevated ICP

- Auscultation for carotid bruits, painful Horner syndrome, or facial/neck hyperesthesia (markers of carotid or vertebral dissection)

- Evaluation for spine tenderness, paresthesias, incontinence, extremity weakness, priapism (signs of spinal cord injury)

- Extremities: Motor and sensory examination (for signs of spinal cord injury)

- Reflexes: Check deep tendon reflexes. Evaluate plantar reflexes for upgoing toes (Babinski sign). Check for clonus, Hoffman reflex, and bulbocavernosus reflex is a concern for associated spinal cord injury

Non-accidental trauma (NAT) should be suspected if the patients present with classical features such as:

- Multiple injuries in multiple locations with different stages of healing

- Retinal hemorrhage

- Bilateral chronic subdural hematomas in a young child

- Significant neurologic injury with minimal signs of external trauma

Symptoms/signs of pediatric patients who have sustained a TBI and are awake enough to express themselves may include headache, nausea/emesis, irritability, and diplopia, among others. Depending on the severity of the TBI, as children age, they may face challenges in information processing, reasoning, impulsivity, mood lability, and sleep disturbance.