Evaluation of pancreatic panniculitis should begin with a thorough physical exam, but investigation of underlying causes can become difficult if this is not suspected initially. The tender, firm and erythematous nodules can be seen before signs of pancreatic disease, so an investigation of etiologies must be performed considering the patient's history and risk factors for malignancy.

Necessary labs include complete blood and cell counts, lipase, amylase, transaminases, bilirubin, and inflammatory markers. Lipase is significantly more elevated in patients with pancreatic malignancy than in those with pancreatitis. Lipase values greater than 4414 U/I were found to have a higher sensitivity and specificity for a malignant etiology for pancreatic panniculitis.

CT abdomen/pelvis with contrast is best to evaluate for pancreatic inflammation, mass, or metastatic disease. This may be a necessary initial step in assessing an abdominal source for panniculitis.

Previous case reports investigating pancreatic malignancies have obtained tumor markers such as CA 19–9. However, it is important to note that in pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma, mixed acinar-ductal, and mixed acinar-neuroendocrine subtypes, elevations in CA 19-9 are not usually seen. Younger patients may have elevated alpha-feto protein.

A biopsy is required for the diagnosis and has pathognomonic findings of anucleated adipocytes, lobular fat necrosis, and leukocyte infiltration to surrounding necrotic adipocytes. The biopsy provides a definitive diagnosis of pancreatic panniculitis.

While not part of a routine investigation, there have been unique features of pancreatic panniculitis of the lower extremities on MRI.