As of now, there are no approved treatments for the Marburg virus. During outbreaks, supportive care has been the mainstay of treatment: the CDC and the WHO have developed a manual for infection control. Key infection control precautions include placing patients in an individual room with a closed door, using proper personal protective equipment (PPE), using disposable patient care equipment when possible, limiting the use of needles and sharps, avoiding aerosol-generating procedures, performing hand hygiene frequently, monitoring and managing potentially exposed personnel and preventing the entry of visitors into the patients' rooms. Although there are no currently approved treatments, there are several pharmaceutical agents in development.

Galidesivir (BCX4430) is an antiviral, synthetic nucleoside analog that inhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.

Other antivirals that have been investigated include favipiravir, a synthetic guanidine nucleoside, and remdesivir, a prodrug of an adenosine analog. A significant survival benefit has not yet been demonstrated. Interferon-beta administration was also studied and found to prolong survival in monkeys.

Treatment with antibodies has been studied in animal models and is planned in humans. A human monoclonal, MR 191-N, was tested in rhesus macaques. After infection, they were treated with 50 mg/kg given IV on days 4 and 7. In the first study, 3/3 animals survived, and in the second study, 4/5.

Antibodies have been used in humans with Ebola virus disease and led to improved outcomes. Specifically, a three-antibody cocktail called ZMapp was tested during the West Africa outbreak and the recent Ebola outbreak in the DRC. It is possible to consider monoclonal antibodies in Marburg virus disease as well, given the similarities between the two diseases.

Multiple trials and efforts are underway to develop an effective filovirus vaccine.

Clinical trials were accelerated following the 2013 Ebola virus epidemic as the need for effective vaccination grew. However, challenges and hindrances associated with vaccine design remain as more data is needed to determine the utility and efficacy of these vaccines.