The defibrillator paddles are placed on the chest, with one paddle placed along the upper right sternal border and the other place at the cardiac apex. Alternatively, "hands-free" defibrillator pads may be used. The hands-free pads are placed in the same location as the paddles; alternatively, they may be placed in an anteroposterior configuration.

The cardiac monitor/defibrillator is then placed in the defibrillation mode, and the defibrillator’s capacitor is charged. The manufacturer pre-sets the initial energy level for biphasic manual defibrillators. The 2015 American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines for defibrillation state that it is reasonable to use the manufacturer’s recommended dose of the first defibrillation shock. On a biphasic defibrillator, this is usually between 120 joules to 200 joules. On a monophasic defibrillator, this is usually 360 joules. If the manufacturers recommended dose is unavailable the AHA recommends giving the maximum available dose.

Once fully charged, the scene is checked to make sure that no one is touching the patient or in contact with anything that is touching the patient. The "shock" button is then pressed, allowing the stored charge to be delivered across the chest from paddle to paddle or hands-free pad to pad.

After the shock is delivered, CPR is immediately resumed for 2 minutes. After 2 minutes of high-quality CPR following the initial defibrillation, the patient's pulse is palpated and the electrical rhythm is checked on the monitor to determine if VF or pulseless VT has been terminated and if a pulse has been restored.

If VF or pulseless VT persists CPR is immediately resumed and the patient may be shocked again. It is important to remember that every successive electrical defibrillation dose should be of equal or greater value until the maximum available dose is reached. A step-wise increase in the defibrillation dose according to the manufacturer's guidelines is recommended.

According to the ACLS VF/pulseless VT algorithm outlined by AHA 1 mg of epinephrine should be administered intravenously every 3 to 5 minutes during the resuscitation after the first unsuccessful defibrillation. High-quality CPR is immediately resumed after the second shock for 2 minutes. If VF or pulseless VT persists at the next pulse and rhythm check, the ACLS algorithm allows for 300 mg of amiodarone to be administered as a bolus intravenously during the resuscitation. If additional doses of antiarrhythmic drugs are needed, 150 mg of amiodarone may be given or 1 mg/kg to 1.5 mg/kg of lidocaine may be administered. According to the current AHA guidelines, epinephrine and amiodarone are preferred over lidocaine.

For pediatric patients, the initial energy dose delivered for defibrillation is recommended to be 2 joules/kg. Subsequent defibrillations in pediatric patients can be dosed at 4 joules/kg or higher with a maximum dose of 10 joules/kg. Infant pads are needed if the patient is under 10 kg or less than 1 year of age. If the patient is over 10 kg or 1 year of age, then adult pads are used. If small pads are not available, adult pads can be used in the anterior-posterior position. It is important to ensure that the pads do not touch. The pads cannot be cut to fit the patient either. A delay in defibrillation for lack of infant pads or low voltage defibrillator is not recommended. A shock with adult pads/defibrillator at adult dose is better than not delivering a shock at all. Ideally, patients less than 1 year of age should be defibrillated using a manual defibrillator. If this is not available, a pediatric attenuator can be used. In children, less than 8 years of age or less than 25 kg, an AED with a pediatric dose attenuator is used. In children 8 years of age and older or 25 kg and greater, standard adult AED pads and cable systems are used.

In the case of VF or pulseless VT during thoracotomy procedures such as emergency department thoracotomy or cardiac surgery, internal defibrillation is performed. This follows the same algorithm as external defibrillation except for a change in the defibrillation energy dose. In internal defibrillation, an initial dose of 20 joules is recommended to avoid burn-like injury to the myocardium. Care should be taken to avoid coronary vessels to prevent vessel damage. Subsequent doses can be increased to a maximum of 40 joules. Sterile internal pads must be used for internal defibrillation and should be readily available during any thoracotomy procedures.