In patients with deficiencies of complement proteins, the greater susceptibility to infer key component of the complement cascade – protein C3 – plays a primary role in the resistance of the host organism to bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic infestations. The results of numerous research studies confirm the correlation between C3 deficiency and recurrent infections caused by both Gram-negative (e.g., Neisseria spp., Haemophilus influenza) and Gram-positive (e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae) bacteria. The particular susceptibility to infections in patients with C3 deficiencies is strictly related to the major role of this component in both the lytic serum properties and opsonophagocytosis. Deficiencies of the late complement proteins involved in the creation of the MAC are related to the occurrence of meningococcal infections. In patients displaying a deficiency of even one of the proteins belonging to the group of C5-C8, recurrent systemic infections, meningitis, purulent otitis media, and bacteremia, usually of severe intensity, may occur.Neisseria spp., Proteus spp., and Pseudomonas spp.

Researchers have studied the roles of complement in killing invading microorganisms for many decades. Since the system can opsonize and lyse foreign particles and cells and generate inflammatory peptides (C3a, C4a, C5a), it has the capacity, if inappropriately activated, to damage host tissues. From the 1970s onwards, its unwanted activities in damaging host tissue were explored in association with diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, glomerulonephritis, ischemic stroke, myasthenia gravis, multiple sclerosis, and drug-induced lupus. More recently, genetic, genomic, and gene-targeting studies have led to new findings on complement heterozygous deficiencies or common polymorphisms, which lead to subtle alterations in activation and regulation, and are associated with diseases such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD), hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) and pre-eclampsia. Knockout studies in mice also highlighted the contributions of complement and related proteins to homeostasis (apoptotic and necrotic cell clearance). Deficiencies in apoptotic cell clearance, which can arise from diminished complement activity, are associated with autoimmune responses, as occur in systemic lupus erythematosus.

AMD affects more than 50 million individuals worldwide and is the leading cause of blindness in the elderly in developed countries.****response, converting C3b to an inactive iC3b form and also weakens the binding of C3b with factor B. The point mutation in the CFH gene decreases the affinity of its product – factor H to CRP (C-reactive protein), which probably reduces the complement activity regulation in the eye fundus and leads to pathological inflammation in the macula.

Research has also confirmed the participation of complement components in the atypical form of hemolytic-uremic syndrome (aHUS).

Studies have also observed that the genetically determined deficiency of the C1 inhibitor (C1-INH,   C1-esterase inhibitor) occurs in hereditary angioedema (HAE). This is a rare, life-threatening disease of the skin and mucous membranes, manifesting as intermittent, recurrent swelling of the face, genitalia, digestive tract, and larynx. C1-INH is one of the critical regulators of the complement system, coagulation, and kallikrein-kinin cascade.

In patients with Alzheimer syndrome, deposition of beta-amyloid plaques in the brain stimulates microglia not only to cytokines secretion, free radicals, and nitric oxide production but also activates the complement system proteins, including the C1 component, Cr3 and Cr4 receptors; this leads to dysfunction of neurons, their degeneration, and, eventually, the patient’s death.