According to the DSM-5, the most common differential diagnoses for agoraphobia include specific phobia, separation anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder, acute stress disorder or posttraumatic stress disorder, and major depressive disorder. Specific phobia should be diagnosed, rather than agoraphobia, if the fear, anxiety, avoidance, or behavioral modification is limited to one of the five, rather than two, of the situations in which agoraphobia can occur. Separation anxiety disorder can be differentiated from agoraphobia if the fear or anxiety arises when considering detachment from loved ones or the home environment, rather than the panic associated with being in the feared situations themselves.

Social anxiety involves fear about being negatively judged in public situations rather than, like separation anxiety disorder, being in the situations themselves. Panic disorder is the appropriate diagnosis if the panic symptoms occur in less than two of the five diagnostic agoraphobic conditions or if they occur in other non-public situations or circumstances. Acute stress disorder or posttraumatic stress disorder is the diagnosis if the fear, anxiety, or avoidance functions to avoid reminding the individual of a past traumatic event. Major depressive disorder should be the diagnosis if the patient also reports associated anhedonia, apathy, loss of energy, insomnia, or low self-esteem. Agoraphobia also cannot be diagnosed if the behavioral modifications are to avoid consequences of medical conditions, such as fears of losing consciousness in public for someone with cardiovascular pathology or developing diarrhea in someone with inflammatory bowel disease.