Scarring and keloid formation are common complications after laceration repair. Excessive tension, insufficient eversion, and suboptimal wound edge level matching can cause poor cosmetic outcomes. If patients are susceptible to keloids or hypertrophic scarring, as evidenced by keloid or hypertrophic scar formation after prior surgery or trauma, it is important to manage expectations and discuss the likelihood of suboptimal scarring despite optimal tissue handling and repair. Fortunately, keloid formation on the face itself is uncommon, although keloids of the scalp, posterior neck, and ears occur commonly in predisposed patients.

Scar revision options include intralesional corticosteroid injections, dermabrasion, laser resurfacing, and surgical revision. Intralesional steroid injections can help reduce inflammation and soften the scars or reduce fibrosis by inhibiting fibroblast activity; however, they may also cause dermal thinning, fat atrophy, and telangiectasia development. Dermabrasion is a skin resurfacing technique that smooths contour irregularities by ablating the epidermis and superficial dermis to promote re-epithelization and collagenesis.

While unsightly or uncomfortable scarring may occur in the long term, the most common short-term complications are hematoma and wound infection with or without dehiscence. Other complications unique to each anatomical site are outlined above.

Failure to achieve adequate hemostasis before laceration repair predisposes to hematoma formation. The wound must be systematically examined for persistent bleeding before closure and include the removal of any retained foreign bodies, as their persistence significantly raises the risk of wound infection and dehiscence. If a wound infection occurs, appropriate antibiotics should be administered; the laceration will need to be opened and irrigated aggressively, debrided if necessary, then potentially reclosed over a drain, with or without a pressure dressing to prevent accumulation of purulent exudate. In some cases, however, the wound will need to be closed in a delayed fashion to permit the infection to clear completely. Expanding hematomas will also require reopening and wound exploration with meticulous hemostasis. After hematoma evacuation, the wound may need to be reclosed over a suction drain with a pressure dressing. Non-expanding hematomas may be managed conservatively with pressure dressings and warm compresses, with or without needle aspiration.