Bilomas typically present with upper abdominal fullness and right upper quadrant discomfort following iatrogenic or traumatic disruption to the biliary tree. Nausea, vomiting, and fever are recognized symptoms, especially in cases of infected biloma. Jaundice may be present in cases of extrinsic compression of the bile duct. Key aspects required from the history include previous surgical or endoscopic interventions or abdominal trauma that may have caused biliary tree disruption. A history of hepatobiliary surgery or diseases of the biliary tree also increases the risk of bile leak and biloma formation.

While patients may present acutely unwell with septic shock from bilomas, and many may be asymptomatic. The large variation in presenting symptoms makes the diagnosis of biloma difficult. Bile peritonitis is a recognized presentation of bile leak and large biloma. However, Lee et al. showed that this presentation is unusual, and most patients present with more subtle symptoms. They describe delayed diagnosis in 77% of 179 patients with abdominal bile collections and bile leaks following laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Significant abdominal pain and tenderness were only seen in 21% of patients. Initial peritonitis does not predict the severity of the disease, with many subtly symptomatic patients developing serious complications.

Following iatrogenic intervention or traumatic injury, physicians should be alert to persistent abdominal distention, bloating, or anorexia as early signs of bile leak and biloma. Physicians should be aware that any delay in recovery from hepatobiliary surgery, especially laparoscopic cholecystectomy, is a possible early symptom of bile leak and biloma formation. Biloma remains an uncommon diagnosis, and other gastroenterological and hepatobiliary diagnoses should be considered for patients presenting with upper abdominal fullness and discomfort. However, in patients who have recently experienced surgical or endoscopic interventions in the region of the biliary tree, bile leak and biloma are essential differential diagnoses to exclude as they can present subtly and have significant morbidity and mortality.