As mentioned, survivors with a Bochdalek hernia and congenital diaphragmatic hernia often demonstrate pulmonary symptoms with chronic lung disease, but also neurocognitive delay, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), chest wall deformity, poor growth, and hernia recurrence.  High incidence of chronic lung disease is demonstrated in CDH survivors, which include PPH and pulmonary hypoplasia, the latter of which can cause a restrictive lung defect. Also, in these patients with pulmonary hypoplasia, there is a high oxygen concentration requirement and subsequent ventilator-induced injury and even bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Other pulmonary morbidities include reactive airway disease, reduced airway disease, and recurrent lung infections. Many of these patients demonstrate improved pulmonary function to near normal in adulthood, though some adult survivors show persistent impairment on pulmonary function testing.

Neurodevelopmental deficits may also occur in CDH survivors, which include but are not limited to, neuropathological lesions (such as periventricular leukomalacia), cognitive and motor dysfunction, and emotional or behavioral problems. GERD and failure to thrive are the most common gastrointestinal impairment at approximately 50 to 100% and 50 to 60%, respectively. Musculoskeletal abnormalities such as pectus deformities and scoliosis have associations with CDH. Hernia recurrence has also been reported, with an increased size of the defect correlating with increased risk for recurrence.  The recurrence rate for patch repairs has been estimated to be 27 to 41% compared to 4 to 13% for primary repairs.