In general, the treatment of radiation injury to the skin, acute, subacute or delayed, should reflect the extent of the injury itself,  keeping  in mind that necrotic tissue should be debrided, infection and inflammation should be managed properly, moisture management should not be ignored and continuous evaluation of the progression of the wound given the therapy employed should be done regularly with a treatment modality change depending on the status of the reepithelialization progress. In other words, standard wound management concepts should still be applied, with strict modifications given the etiology of the of the injury itself, ether just acute erythema at the skin or full thickness chronic wound.

Management of Injury to the irradiated skin should begin with patient education in regards to skin care during the pre-radiation phase, post radiation phase and during the radiation treatment period. Education to the patient should include promotion of personal hygiene and wound hygiene, promotion of comfort, prevention of trauma to the affected skin, and management of radiation dermatitis.

Choices of cleanser and moisturizers and topical creams in radiation-induced skin injuries should reflect the extent of the injury itself. Products such as Natural Care Gel, Eucerin cream, Lubriderm, and corticosteroid cream can be used for erythema and dry desquamation.  If an infection is present topical antibiotic ointment such as Neosporin or silver sulfadiazine 1% can be used, although the need for systemic antibiotic should be assessed as well'

Additional management manifesting irradiation injuries to the skin can be broken down by the presenting clinical pathology:

- Radiation-induced fibrosis: Delanian showed that the use of pentoxifylline, a methylxanthine derivative, and alpha-tocopherol may cause partial reversibility of the fibrosis. In severe cases of fibrosis, surgical resection of the affected tissue may be indicated, with the reconstruction of the defect by a free flap or split thickness skin graft, with hyperbaric oxygen treatment as a possible adjuvant therapeutic agent as well.

- Nonhealing call service/soft tissue necrosis: initial treatment includes hyperbaric oxygen treatment and Pentoxyfilline and later surgical resection of the tissue followed by surgical reconstruction of the defect (

- Osteoradionecrosis/chondronecrosis: it usually affects irradiated facial bone (the mandible). Dental extraction and infection predispose osteoradionecrosis; management varies, from dental extraction before radiation therapy to pentoxifylline and vitamin E before dental extraction in post-irradiated tissue. Hyperbaric oxygen treatment has been used successfully for this type of chronic manifestation of radiation-induced injury

Hyperbaric oxygen treatment has one of the most frequent applications and delays radiation injuries, with up to one-third of patients treated with HBO2 for radiation injury in the United States. Even the mechanism of injury of ionizing radiation to be mainly hypoxia and increased district fibrosis, better oxygen treatment has been shown to increase angiogenesis and therefore improving oxygenation as well as reduce fibrosis, although this effect has not been fully investigated and explain.

Another mechanism of action of delayed radiation injury has been the negative impact of ionizing radiation on stem cells (Feldmeier J, Hyperbaric oxygen therapy and delayed radiation injury (soft tissue and bone necrosis. All serious investigations are now being pursued based upon luminary evidence that hyperbaric oxygen treatment increases the number of stem cells radiation injury site.