Treatment of abnormal uterine bleeding depends on multiple factors, such as the etiology of the AUB, fertility desire, the clinical stability of the patient, and other medical comorbidities. Treatment should be individualized based on these factors. In general, medical options are preferred as initial treatment for AUB.

For acute abnormal uterine bleeding, hormonal methods are the first line in medical management. Intravenous (IV) conjugated equine estrogen, combined oral contraceptive pills (OCPs), and oral progestins are all options for treating acute AUB. Tranexamic acid prevents fibrin degradation and can be used to treat acute AUB. Tamponade of uterine bleeding with a Foley bulb is a mechanical option for the treatment of acute AUB. It is important to assess the patient's clinical stability and replace volume with intravenous fluids and blood products while attempting to stop the acute abnormal uterine bleeding. Desmopressin, administered intranasally, subcutaneously, or intravenously, can be given for acute AUB secondary to the coagulopathy von Willebrand disease. Some patients may require dilation and curettage.

Based on the PALM-COEIN acronym for etiologies of chronic AUB, specific treatment options for each category are listed below:

Polyps are treated through surgical resection.

Adenomyosis is treated via hysterectomy. Less often, adenomyomectomy is performed.

Leiomyomas (fibroids) can be treated through medical or surgical management depending on the patient's desire for fertility, medical comorbidities, pressure symptoms, and distortion of the uterine cavity. Surgical options include uterine artery embolization, endometrial ablation, or hysterectomy. Medical management options include a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (IUD), GnRH agonists, systemic progestins, and tranexamic acid with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

Malignancy or hyperplasia can be treated through surgery, +/- adjuvant treatment depending on the stage, progestins in high doses when surgery is not an option, or palliative therapy, such as radiotherapy.

Coagulopathies leading to AUB can be treated with tranexamic acid or desmopressin (DDAVP).

Ovulatory dysfunction can be treated through lifestyle modification in women with obesity, PCOS, or other conditions in which anovulatory cycles are suspected. Endocrine disorders should be corrected using appropriate medications, such as cabergoline for hyperprolactinemia and levothyroxine for hypothyroidism.

Endometrial disorders have no specific treatment, as mechanisms are not clearly understood.

Iatrogenic causes of AUB should be managed based on the offending drug and/or drugs. If a certain contraception method is the suspected culprit for AUB, alternative methods can be considered, such as the levonorgestrel-releasing IUD, combined oral contraceptive pills (in monthly or extended cycles), or systemic progestins. If other medications are suspected and cannot be discontinued, the aforementioned methods can also help control AUB. Individual therapy should be tailored based on a patient's reproductive wishes and medical comorbidities.

Not otherwise classified causes of AUB include entities such as endometritis and AVMs. Endometritis can be treated with antibiotics and AVMs with embolization.