Therapeutic hypothermia is the treatment for neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. Following the immediate primary neuronal injury, during which there is an interruption of oxygen and glucose to the brain, there is a latent period of up to 6 hours before a secondary phase of injury occurs as the injured areas are reperfused, and damaged cells lyse, releasing toxic neurotransmitters. The goal of therapeutic hypothermia is to intervene during the latent period and minimize damage from the secondary neuronal injury. Therapeutic hypothermia, when started within six hours of injury decreases mortality and severe disability from 62% to 48% and increases survival with the normal outcome from 24% to 40% with a number needed to treat of six to seven. Whole body cooling appears to be more effective at decreasing death than selective head cooling, but both modalities are effective at decreasing severe disability and a combined outcome of death and severe disability. Infants with moderate encephalopathy (Sarnat Stage II) benefit most from therapeutic hypothermia. Importantly, cooling does not appear to decrease death at the cost of more severely neurologic impairment in survivors. Side effects associated with therapeutic hypothermia include peripheral vasoconstriction, diuresis, cardiac dysfunction, arrhythmias, coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, stridor, leukocyte dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension and subcutaneous fat necrosis (calcium deposits in the skin). Therapeutic hypothermia can be delivered safely with specialized equipment and monitoring in sophisticated medical centers.

The treatment of respiratory distress, pulmonary hypertension, coagulopathy and myocardial dysfunction is supportive. Infants with respiratory distress and pulmonary hypertension may require intubation, surfactant, oxygen and inhaled nitric oxide. Coagulopathy is treated with the prudent use of blood products to maintain oxygen-carrying capacity and coagulation. Myocardial dysfunction may result in a need for vasopressors. Renal dysfunction may result in oliguria or anuria; therefore, use of crystalloid fluid and blood products should be cautious.