For the lateral QLB, the patient is positioned supine or lateral position)with an ultrasound probe applied to the flank between the costal margin and the iliac crest in the anterior axillary line (triangle of Petit). The 3 abdominal muscle layers (external oblique, internal oblique, transversus abdominis) are identified and traced posteriorly to identify the TLF and the back muscles – QL, PM, ES, and latissimus dorsi). The provider inserts the needle in an in-plane approach and advances it through the anterior abdominal muscles until it reaches the anterolateral edge of QL. Proper placement results in the spread of local anesthetic between QL and the middle layer of the TLF.

For the anterior QLB, the patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position with the ultrasound probe placed above the iliac crest at the mid-axillary line. The provider moves the probe posteriorly to identify the "shamrock sign." They then insert the needle in an in-plane approach through the QL muscle and the middle TLF layer between QL and PM. Correct needle placement and injection results in the spread of local anesthetic between these 2 muscles.

For the posterior QLB, the patient is positioned supine as with the lateral QLB. The provider identifies the posterior border of QL and places the needle tip at that point. Proper placement should result in the spread of local anesthetic through the middle TLF layer and into the interfascial triangle.

For the Intramuscular QLB, the patient should be placed in the supine or lateral decubitus position. Following identification of QL, the practitioner inserts the needle in an in-plane approach and an anterolateral to posteromedial direction with an injection of a local anesthetic directly into the muscle.