**Types of Crossbite**

Anterior crossbite: Anterior crossbite is present when one or more of the upper incisors are in linguo-occlusal

Posterior crossbite: Posterior crossbite is present when buccal cusps of upper molars and premolars, such that the lower teeth surpass buccally the upper teeth during occlusion.

- Unilateral buccal crossbite with displacement

- Unilateral buccal crossbite with no displacement

- Bilateral buccal crossbite

- Unilateral lingual crossbite

- Bilateral lingual crossbite-scissor bite

Anterior crossbite can occur in primary, and mixed dentition due to a disharmony between the skeletal, functional and dental components of the child. This is characterized by one or more anterosuperior teeth occlude behind the lingual aspect of anteroinferior teeth.

In dental anterior crossbite, one or more teeth are involved. The profile is straight in centric occlusion and centric relation. Class I molar and canine relation can be seen. SNA, SNB, and ANB angles are within normal limits. It can be due to abnormal axial dental inclination.

Pseudo Class III or functional anterior crossbite can be caused by mandibular hyper propulsion, which provokes a lower tongue position and a premature canine contact that entraps the upper maxilla. The mandible is advanced mesially occasionally to obtain maximum intercuspation. The patient can reach an edge to edge incisal relation in centric relation. There is a Class III molar relation in centric occlusion and a Class I relation in centric relation. The facial profile is straight in centric relation and concave in maximum intercuspation.

Skeletal anterior crossbite is characterized by molar and canine Class III relation in centric occlusion and centric relation. An edge to edge incisor relation cannot be obtained in centric relation. The etiology of the malocclusion and the inclination of the affected teeth should be evaluated. The upper arch expansion is more likely to be stable if teeth to be moved are initially tilted palatally. The appliances used for expansion are Coffin spring, Quad helix appliance, surgically assisted rapid maxillary expansion, Ni Ti palatal expander.on. The patient has a concave profile and a retrusive upper lip, predominant chin and ANB angle is negative.