As with all acute presentations, a concise but thorough history is crucial to forming a diagnosis. Relevant details in the history of ICH include the chronicity of symptoms and the time of ictus. Most commonly, vascular events are sudden and may be precipitated by high energy activities such as exercise or heavy lifting or using drugs like cocaine and alcohol. A significant smoking history has implications in vascular disease such as hypertension and vasculitis, which both are risk factors for ICH.

The most common feature of ICH is a sudden onset focal neurological deficit, which is determined by the location of the hemorrhage and subsequent edema. This is often associated with a decrease in the patients’ conscious level, measured using the Glasgow coma scale (GCS). Other common symptoms and signs include headache, nausea/vomiting, seizures (both convulsive and non-convulsive), and a raised diastolic blood pressure (>110 mmHg).

Initial evaluation of the patient should include checking for airway patency and appropriate ventilation. Circulation must be assessed next, and one must secure wide bore venous access and aim for systolic blood pressure targets between 120 to 140 mmHg to maintain cerebral perfusion. A very low consciousness level (GCS<8) must be treated as an emergency, and obtaining a secure airway in a patient with a low conscious level is a priority. The patient must then have a complete peripheral inspection and examination- this includes checking the patients' pupils as dilation and inactivity of the pupils is a sign of cerebral herniation and must be treated immediately.

Once medically stable, it is pertinent to confirm a clear history of anticoagulant/ antiplatelet therapy or coagulation disorders and check the patients' clotting function and other routine blood tests. Any coagulation abnormalities should be discussed with hematologists and corrected appropriately.