The pathophysiology of each disease entity is beyond the scope of this review. Causes include infection (appendicitis, diverticulitis) and obstruction (appendicitis, cholecystitis). Anatomic abnormalities include malrotation of the gut. Age is associated with some diseases: older patients are more likely to present with diverticulitis, cholecystitis, and vascular emergencies.

The classic presentations of appendicitis, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, and diverticulitis, are in large part the result of the dual innervation of the abdomen, both visceral and somatic. Visceral nerves are part of the autonomic nervous system and innervate the viscera. These nerves are sensitive to mechanical distention, inflammation, ischemia, and the intense, smooth muscle contraction seen in colic. The pain is often midline, poorly localized, deep, and dull. Pain from embryonic foregut structures such as the stomach, liver, pancreas, and gallbladder radiate to the epigastrium. Midgut structures, small bowel, and appendix, to the periumbilical area and hindgut, large bowel and rectum, to the lower abdomen. Somatic sensory nerves provide sensation to the parietal peritoneum. Somatic pain is sharper and better localized. Somatic pain suggests peritoneal irritation. An example is a pain over McBurney’s point when the inflamed or ruptured appendix is irritating the parietal peritoneum. Because visceral and somatic afferent nerve fibers share spinal cord segments, visceral pain can be felt as referred pain from a somatic distribution.  This explains cholecystitis radiating to the right scapula.