With serum enzyme levels of limited diagnostic utility, identification of a pancreatic pseudocyst is usually made with the combination of high clinical suspicion and imaging studies. Transabdominal ultrasound has a sensitivity of around 70% to 90% and is often used as the initial imaging study due to its portability, ease of use, and cost. The drawback, however, is that the study is user-dependent, and the accuracy of findings may vary considerably based on the user's expertise.

The better option for initial imaging is a contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen. It is the modality of choice with a remarkable sensitivity of 82% to 100% and a specificity of around 98%. There are many advantages of using a CT scan over an ultrasound; it allows for better visualization of surrounding structures, helps identify evidence of biliary stones or calcifications, and helps discern debris from areas of necrosis. All of which aide in distinguishing pseudocysts from areas of walled of necrosis (WON). The major limitation of using a CT scan is its inability to distinguish between a pseudocyst and neoplastic cystic lesions.

Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) proves resourceful in this regard as it is a minimally invasive procedure that allows for close up, detailed images of the pancreas. EUS also allows for the endoscopist to perform diagnostic and therapeutic drainage of the cyst. Findings suggestive of a cystic neoplasm includes a cyst wall thickness greater than 3 mm, multiple septations, the presence of a solid mass or nodule, and cystic dilation of the main pancreatic duct. An MRI-MRCP is the most accurate tool to study the anatomy of the pancreatic ducts. It is superior to CT scan imaging in characterizing debris within the pseudocyst. However, MRI-MRCP is not routinely used because a CT scan typically offers adequate diagnostic information. Predrainage MRI-MRCP can be useful in situations where identifying the type of debris is essential to avoid complications related to infection or bleeding. Less commonly, this imaging study can be used to characterize complex ductal anatomy to facilitate pseudocyst drainage.