**Laboratory Blood Work**

- Serum metabolic panel to assess blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, uric acid, electrolytes, vitamin D levels, and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR).

- Serum albumin and total protein to evaluate hypoalbuminemia and hypoproteinemia.

- Lipid profile to assess for dyslipidemia.

- Serum IgG with subtypes, for decreased serum levels.

- For primary MN, serum anti-PLA2R antibody and anti-thrombospondin by Western blot and indirect immunofluorescence.

- Detailed studies for respective secondary causes based on history and presentation (like heavy metal levels, infectious etiology like HIV, parasitic infections, autoimmune panel).

**Urine Examination**

- Urine analysis to assess proteinuria, hematuria, and microscopy for cellular casts, fatty casts, and oval fat bodies.

- Spot urine protein or urine albumin to creatinine ratio (UPCR). A 24-hour urine collection is rarely indicated and/or is based on clinician preference. It is done serially and aids in monitoring the clinical response.

**Radiological Investigations**

- Ultrasonography study of the kidneys to assess for radiological kidney disease, evidence of obstruction, and renal vein thromboembolism.

- Renal vein doppler and computed tomography (CT)/magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) to rule out renal vein thrombosis.

- CT angiogram of the chest to rule out pulmonary embolism.

- Lower extremity doppler to assess for deep vein thrombosis.

- The benefit from a contrast study outweighs the risk of contrast-induced nephropathy and should be based on the acuity of presentation.

**Biopsy**

- A renal biopsy is done to confirm the diagnosis, based on the patient's presentation, and only if there is no risk of coagulopathy. The pathological specimen should be sent for light microscopy, silver stain, immunofluorescence, electron microscopy, and immunohistochemistry for anti- PLA2R antibody.