The geriatric assessment is multidisciplinary and multidimensional. Older adult's functional ability, cognition, mental, physical health, and social and environmental factors should be a part of complete geriatric assessment. For example, a complete geriatric assessment should be performed when a caregiver mentions changes in cognition and memory or the provider identifies a potential cognitive deficit. The focus of geriatric assessment should include appropriate diagnosis, workup, development of treatment plan, and follow-up.

Along with evaluating functional abilities like bathing, dressing, toileting, feeding, walking, shopping, doing regular household work, taking daily medications, and managing money, focus should also be on screening for age-appropriate diseases, nutrition, vision, hearing, depression, and polypharmacy. Age-appropriate screening for vision and hearing impairment and osteoporosis should be done. The benefits and harms of routine screening for cancers should be discussed with patients and care providers. Nutrition should be evaluated by history, usual food intake pattern, specific examination for signs of inadequate nutrition, and appropriate laboratory testing. Multiple studies have shown that vitamin A, B12, C, D are often deficient in older adults. Mineral elements like iron, calcium, and zinc are also deficient in older adults.

The United states preventive services task force (USPSTF) recommends screening for depression in older adults. The most commonly used screening tests are the geriatric depression scale and the Hamilton depression scale. The positive screening test should be followed by a detailed evaluation of the severity and nature of depression. Polypharmacy is common in older adults, and about 30% of hospital admissions are related to polypharmacy and can be preventable.

Various laboratory tests are available to help diagnose cognitive decline and rule out other causes like vitamin deficiency and hormonal imbalance. The commonly ordered tests are complete blood count, blood glucose, comprehensive metabolic panel, urinalysis, toxicology screen, CSF to rule out specific infections, thyroid function test. In high-risk populations testing for nutritional deficiencies like B12 levels, HIV and syphilis should be performed. Brain imaging like CT of the head, MRI brain, electroencephalography can also be used in specific cases to rule out underlying stroke, brain mass, and seizures (epileptic and nonepileptic).

To advance the dialogue on Wasteful or unnecessary medical tests, treatments, and procedures American Board of internal medicine foundation called for a 'choosing wisely' initiative. In 2013 American Geriatric Society released a choosing wisely list of '10 things clinicians and patients should question,' 7 of 10 choosing wisely recommendations are related to medication use. The challenges in medication management in older adults are multimorbidity, polypharmacy, potentially inappropriate medications(PIMS), multiple specialists, frequent hospitalizations and transitions of care, lack of high-quality evidence to guide prescribing for older adults as evidence-based guidelines rely on clinical trials that typically exclude frail and older adults.

A core principle of management of polypharmacy in older adults is avoidance of potentially inappropriate medication use. Unfortunately, the determination of whether a medication is inappropriate is highly individualized and circumstantial. Inappropriate medicines, in general, can be found in two resources that serve as guidance on PIMS in adults. They are the BEERS criteria and the START and STOP criteria. A comprehensive medical reconciliation and medication management should be a part of office visits, hospital admission, and discharge planning at every transition point.[8]

Medication appropriateness index can be used to consider the indication for the drug, effectiveness for a specific condition, appropriate dose, and directions, clinically significant drug-drug interactions, and acceptable therapy duration. It serves as a valuable tool for measuring potentially inappropriate prescribing in older adults.

The beers criteria(initially developed by Mark H. Beers in 1991) for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults from the American Geriatric Society list problematic medications for elderly patients. It also gives recommendations regarding drug interactions to avoid. The list of medicines keeps changing. The most recent 2019 update uses the five criteria from 2015. They are

- The medications should typically be avoided by the elderly.

- Medications should be avoided in the elderly with certain conditions.

- Medications with caution because of benefits that may offset risks.

- Medication interactions.

- Changes in dosing based on kidney function.

Beers criteria can be used in all out-patient, acute care, and hospital settings, and it is not used in palliative care and hospice services. In addition, the Beers criteria in the geriatrics app of the American Geriatric Society can be integrated into electronic health records to identify when an inappropriate medication is ordered.

Screening tools for older people's prescriptions( STOPP) and a screening tool to alert them to proper treatment (START) criteria were first published in 2008. Both of these two tools outline criteria for stopping and starting medications in patients older than 65. There are many categories of drugs-cardiovascular, anticoagulation, CNS and psychiatric, Etc. It has similar recommendations to the beer's criteria list, but they are more specific and explicit. The most recent update was in 2015.