**Electrical Axis**

In electrocardiology, a vector represents both the magnitude and direction of the action potential generated by an individual myocyte. The sum of all the individual vectors generated by the depolarization waves makes up the electrical axis. Because each myocyte can produce an action potential, an axis for each wave and interval of the cardiac cycle can be determined. Knowing the axis of each and how they interact can reflect certain pathology.

When the electrical axis is discussed and taught, the ventricular axis is typically used in common clinical practice, although the atrial axis can be quite useful in clinical situations. Since the left ventricle makes up most of the heart muscle under normal circumstances; thus, it generates the most electrical force visible on the EKG. The normal ventricular axis is thus directed downward and slightly towards the left.

The ventricular axis can be determined by looking at the QRS complex, which represents ventricular depolarization. Because the QRS complex is used to determine the ventricular axis, it is also referred to as the QRS axis. The ventricular (QRS) axis signifies the sum of all individual vectors generated by the depolarization waves of ventricular myocytes.

**Ventricular (QRS) Axis**

The ventricular (QRS) axis is determined indirectly by evaluating the vectors produced under the electrodes. This is done by interpreting the electrical signal (QRS complex) recorded at each electrode as positive, negative, or isoelectric and then considering their relationship with each other.

In general, a positive QRS complex in a lead has a ventricular axis that is approximately in the same direction going to that lead. Whereas a negative QRS complex in a lead has a ventricular axis that is approximately in the opposite direction to that lead. If the QRS complex is isoelectric in a lead, then the ventricular axis is perpendicular (90 degrees) to that lead.