Subconjunctival hemorrhage is a frequently encountered complaint in medical practice. Many patients do not experience any symptoms at all except for the physical appearance of the hemorrhage itself. The cause of a subconjunctival hemorrhage can be usually from no identifiable etiology. For the most part, they are of benign origin including increased strain, Valsalva, contact lens usage. But in some instances, there can be a systemic predisposing risk factor and further work-up is needed to prevent further morbidity and mortality.

There are many different types of medical professionals that can encounter subconjunctival hemorrhages. The primary care provider, emergency physicians, and ocular specialists can all be involved in the care of patients with subconjunctival hemorrhage. It can be important to consult with your interprofessional team to discuss the patient's diagnosis and collaborate further care. Nurses and pharmacists are vital members of the interprofessional team as they will monitor the patient's vital signs as well as potentially adjust medications respectively. The ophthalmologist is an important component of the interprofessional team since patients are hopefully able to follow up with these specialists and further coordinate care. In addition, some patients may have subconjunctival hemorrhages caused by anticoagulation. Therefore, it is important to consult with one's cardiologist/vascular surgeon or whoever is monitoring a patient's anticoagulation. Subconjunctival hemorrhages can also be present in newborns and children, therefore, neonatalogists, pediatricians, pediatric emergency physicians could be involved. It is important to note that subconjunctival hemorrhages can be present in the context of non-accidental trauma so the clinician must be vigilant for signs of child abuse.