Before discussing the mechanism for breast milk jaundice, it is crucial to understand neonatal bilirubin metabolism and why neonates, in general, are affected by hyperbilirubinemia. Newborns have markedly increased bilirubin production compared to their adult counterparts, secondary to a higher blood volume and hemoglobin concentration, a shorter red blood cell lifespan, and liver enzymes' physiological immaturity. These factors combined result in relatively high production of unconjugated form, which is not water-soluble. To excrete bilirubin from the body, there is the conversion of the unconjugated form to the conjugated (water-soluble) form is required. The conjugation process occurs within the hepatocyte by bilirubin uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (bilirubin-UGT) enzyme. UGT1A1 gene codes this enzyme production. Therefore those with genetic mutations in this gene are unable to conjugate bilirubin adequately. This enzyme is also significantly less active in neonates than in adults, leading to less efficient conjugation. After conjugation and excretion from hepatocytes, the bilirubin passes to the small intestine, where it gets converted to stercobilin by gut flora and subsequently excreted via the stool.

Infants have a decreased concentration of gut flora needed for this process than adults, leading to a higher concentration of bilirubin remaining within the intestinal tract. The enzyme ß-glucuronidase will deconjugate bilirubin remaining within the intestine. After this process, it is returned to the liver for re-conjugation via portal circulation. This process is known as "enterohepatic circulation." Neonates have significantly higher activity of the enzyme ß-glucuronidase and a more permeable gut wall, leading to overall higher concentrations of unconjugated bilirubin and increased enterohepatic circulation.

Basic and clinical studies were conducted and are still ongoing to investigate breast milk jaundice's pathophysiology by studying breast milk's effect on the processes discussed above.