Imaging of the vertebral and basilar arteries via arteriography is important for the diagnosis and management. Noninvasive CTA or MRA is commonly used to visualize the vertebral-basilar system to define stenosis or occlusions. CTA will produce good images both intracranial and extracranial vessels

Other pathology such as brainstem cavernoma or cerebellopontine angle lesions including acoustic schwannoma and dermoid/epidermoid cysts, which may be identified by MRI convincingly.  Duplex ultrasound may also be used for abnormalities within the vertebral artery, albeit its limitations. Although difficult to visualize V1 and V2, duplex ultrasound may detect changes in flow velocity from proximal vertebral stenosis or subclavian steal. For patients who are older than the age of 45, workup should include identifying risk factors that may cause VBI such as cholesterol levels, lipids, blood sugar, blood pressure, and smoking cessation. If a patient is younger than 45 years old, further workup is indicated to rule out the cardioembolic cause, hypercoagulable states, vertebral dissection, and fibromuscular dysplasia.

Blood work should involve a complete CBC, electrolytes, renal function, coagulation profile, lipid profile, and liver function. In younger patients, one should also investigate for lupus anticoagulant, Protein C, S and factor V Leiden mutation.

ECG may reveal ischemic changes, arrhythmias (atrial fibrillation) or an MI.

Young patients should also undergo an echocardiogram to rule of vegetations, valvular defects, right to left shunts or thrombi.