Investigations necessary to diagnose different chromosomal instability disorders include:

- Diagnostic evaluation for AT includes a combination of ataxia with one or more of the following:  telangiectasia, sinopulmonary disease, and imaging studies (especially with brain MRI) showing diffuse cerebellar atrophy. Investigations for AT should include CBC with lymphopenia; serological testing will show increased alpha-fetoprotein (the most consistent test in AT)ATM gene or lack of ATM protein kinase. Of note, antenatal diagnosis possible through the identification of ATM gene mutation.

- Investigation for Bloom syndrome focusses on the assessment of immunodeficiency. Tests include serology testing and CBC. Serological testing will show decreased immunoglobulin levels (IgA, IgG, and IgE). CBC will show lymphopenia.

- Investigation for FA includes chromosomal stress testing and next-generation sequencing (NGS) panels. Chromosomal stress testing involves the assessment of chromosomal breakage in T lymphocytes from peripheral blood upon exposure of cells to diepoxybutane (DEB) or mitomycin C (MMC). The test is sensitive but not specific because other rare genetic diseases can also show breakage. Flow cytometry to assess cell cycle analysis upon exposure to DNA cross-linking agents is another useful test in evaluating FA. In FA, cells cannot repair DNA damage and undergo cell cycle arrest in G2, leading to a higher percentage of cells in G2. Fanconi anemia gene sequencing generally is useful as a confirmatory tool for patients with positive breakage studies.

- Investigation for Nijmegen breakage syndrome focusses on the assessment of immunodeficiency. Tests include assessment of immunoglobulin levels, CD4, CD8, CD19, CD57, and class switching of memory B cells. Karyotyping sometimes shows structural chromosomal aberrations in T lymphocytes at chromosomes 7 and 14. There is also sensitivity to ionizing radiation. There are also mutations in the NBN gene and the absence of nibrin protein.