APPs are non-specific markers of inflammation, and the tests used should be interpreted in conjunction with history, physical examination, and other laboratory tests and imaging. Their levels will be elevated during both acute and chronic inflammation. However, the highest levels are attained in acute inflammation during an acute infection or after trauma resulting in CRP of 50 to 100 mg/L and ESR exceeding 50 mm/hour.

The best recent evidence relates to procalcitonin (PCT). PCT levels can be used to guide treatment in patients with pneumonia. PCT levels greater than 0.25 mcg/L correlate with bacterial infections of the lower respiratory tract. After 2 or 3 days of treatment, lower PCT levels can facilitate the decision to discontinue pneumonia antibiotic treatment. PCT levels greater than 0.5 ng/mL can confirm sepsis. PCT should not be used for the diagnosis of pneumonia or for deciding if the antibiotics are necessary to treat pneumonia. It should only be as a guide antibiotic treatment.

The normal ESR value for men is 0 to 15 mm/hour and for women 0 to 20 mm/hour. Factors that increase ESR include infection, inflammation, malignancy, pregnancy, autoimmune diseases (SLE, RA, GCA, polymyalgia rheumatic, thyroiditis), multiple myeloma, Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, anemia, macrocytosis, and old age. Factors that decrease ESR include hypogammaglobulinemia, hypofibrinogenemia, microcytosis, spherocytosis, sickle cell disease, polycythemia, and extreme leukocytosis (e.g., chronic lymphocytic leukemia).

Some of the APRs, like CRP, are unique because they can be used in cardiovascular risk assessment for patients. It has also been shown in patients with acute coronary syndromes that elevated CRP levels assayed by the high sensitivity (hsCRP) assay are indicative of poor cardiovascular prognosis. Poor prognosis includes increased mortality, post-myocardial infarction, and unstable angina, among others. In patients without ASCVD, a  hsCRP between 3 to 20 mg/L, on two occasions at least six weeks apart, confers an increased risk for ASCVD provided a nidus for inflammation has been excluded.

CRP is a highly sensitive marker for detecting inflammation. It is not specific to any disease or organ and has a half-life of 24 hours. In patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), CRP is often within normal limits, and ESR is generally elevated. In SLE patients with elevated high-sensitivity CRP (hsCRP), an infection should be ruled out because elevated hsCRP is a predictor for active infection with high specificity in patients with SLE.

The cell-mediated response to endothelial injury causes giant-cell arteritis (GCA). It involves monocytes differentiating into giant cells and macrophages within the vessel walls producing IL-6. As mentioned above, IL-6 is an AP protein that mediates the systemic response to inflammation like fever, weight loss and causes the liver to produce other acute-phase proteins. It is also responsible for elevated ESR in patients with GCA. Tocilizumab is an IL-6 receptor inhibitor used in patients with GCA, and it can reduce relapses and lower glucocorticoid requirements to maintain disease remission.