# Continuing Education Activity

Electroencephalography (EEG) is a neurophysiological test that measures changes in neuronal activity associated with current flows in the extracellular space produced by local field potentials. Such field potentials can be either excitatory, also known as excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP,) or inhibitory, also known as inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSP) in nature. EEG tracing records not only the physiologic cortical activity, but inevitably also captures fields of electrical activity generated by other sources such as cardiac, myogenic, and electromagnetic, among others. It is substantial for the electroencephalographer to be able to distinguish normal physiologic brain activity from those recorded from non-physiologic sources. Such knowledge is critical to avoid EEG misinterpretation. Basal cortical rhythms are physiologic alpha-range rhythms that present in normal healthy brains. They encompass 3 rhythms: (1) Alpha rhythm, (2) Mu rhythm, and (3) Third rhythm. Not a lot is known about the Third rhythm. Wickets rhythm is considered a fragmented Third rhythm and will be discussed in depth. This activity reviews the role of the interprofessional team in EEG basal cortical rhythm evaluation.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the EEG neurophysiological test.
- Identify potential EEG sources of error.
- Review the three basal cortical rhythms and benign EEG variants
- Outline the role of the interprofessional team in EEG basal cortical rhythm and benign EEG variants evaluation.

# Introduction

Electroencephalography (EEG) is a neurophysiological test that measures changes in neuronal activity associated with current flows in the extracellular space produced by local field potentials. Such field potentials can be either excitatory, also known as excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP,) or inhibitory, also known as inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSP) in nature. EEG tracing records not only the physiologic cortical activity, but inevitably also captures fields of electrical activity generated by other sources such as cardiac, myogenic, and electromagnetic, among others. It is substantial for the electroencephalographer to be able to distinguish normal physiologic brain activity from those recorded from non-physiologic sources. Such knowledge is critical to avoid EEG misinterpretation.

Basal cortical rhythms are physiologic rhythms that present in normal healthy brains. The alpha rhythms encompass 3 rhythms: (1) Alpha rhythm, (2) Mu rhythm, and (3) Third rhythm (may also occur in theta range).

In addition, cortical rhythms also encompass theta range rhythms [(1) Ciganek or Third rhythm and  (2) Rhythmic mid-temporal theta of drowsiness (RMTD)] and beta range rhythms.

# Issues of Concern

**Basal Cortical Rhythms**

**Terminology and Definitions of Basal Cortical Rhythms**

Rhythm is a term used in electrophysiology to describe continuous, repetitive, EEG activity that occurs without interruption. Alpha rhythm is a descriptive term where alpha refers to the mature normal frequency that falls in alpha range 8 to 13 per second.

Mu is the 12th letter of the Greek letters, transliterated as "m," and it stands for “rolandic” rhythm. It was called “precentral alpha rhythm,” “rolandic alpha,”, “central alpha,” and “somatosensory alpha rhythm” referring to its cortical origin. Other names include “alphoid activity” and “arcade rhythm” and “comb rhythm” derived from its morphology.

Wickets spikes were first described by Reiher and Lebel.

**Morphology**

Alpha rhythm usually archiform (sinusoidal) or rounded with a negative-sharp component and a positive-round component.

Mu rhythm (rhythm en arceau) – pertains to an archiform waveforms with sharp positive and rounded positive components. The amplitude is comparable to PBR; <50 microV. Frequency 7-12 Hz. It is bilateral, usually asymmetric and asynchronous with shifting side.

Wickets rhythm has a monomorphic archiform waves with surface negative polarity reaching 60-210 microV in amplitude. It usually occurs in runs of 6-11 Hz.

**Reactivity**

The Alpha rhythm can be temporarily blocked, or attenuated by sustained eye-opening and/or mental activity (also called Berger’s effect)

Mu rhythm is present in waking and disappears in drowsiness similar to PBR. It has been described during REM sleep as well; this is in contrast to the Alpha rhythm.

Wickets rhythm can be seen during wakefulness and sleep. It is best seen during drowsiness and light sleep.

**Cortical Generator**

Alpha rhythm (PBR) is a cortical rhythm with genetically determined morphology. The exact generator remains uncertain but multiple brain regions seem to be involved including occipital lobes and thalamic pacemakers.

Mu rhythm is perceived as a cortical idling rhythm of the somatosensory cortex via thalamocortical projections. It was recorded from the ventroposterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus. It has two components: an alpha component that represents the post-rolandic sensory cortex, and a supraharmonic beta originates from the pre-rolandic motor region.

Wickets rhythm is seen over the temporal region; however, the exact generator is uncertain. Wickets are suspected to represent normal fragmented Third rhythm.

**Theta range rhythms**

1. Ciganek or Third rhythm

This theta rhythm (usually between 4-7 Hz) is mostly seen in the vertex and midline regions during drowsiness.   It can be differentiated from the mu rhythm by inconsistent reactivity to thinking about moving or actually moving the contralateral limb.

2. Rhythmic mid-temporal theta of drowsiness (RMTD)

Also known as "psychomotor variant", this rhythm has a notched or flat-topped appearance

**Beta rhythm**

Ranging between 13-30 Hz, beta activity is frequently seen in the awake state in adults in children. It is most prominent in the frontal and central leads and is usually symmetric, and of low amplitude (10-20 microvolts). Beta activity resolves in deeper stages of sleep.

# Clinical Significance

EEG, similar to other tests, has its technical limitations. It relies heavily on skilled lab technicians for acquiring high-quality study with prompt artifact resolution. It also requires a well trained and experienced interpreter to minimize any chance of overcalling a normal phenomenon. The following are some abnormalities that pertain to those cortical rhythms. It is never acceptable for the PBR to drop below the normal range (i.e., less than 8 Hz),

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

An interprofessional team approach involving nurses, technicians, pharmacists, and clinicians will provide the best care for patients with abnormal EEGs that require long-term treatment. [Level V]