There are two primary approaches to leukotriene inhibition. One approach is to antagonistically block cys-LT1 receptors from cysteinyl leukotrienes on bronchial smooth muscle cells, which is the mechanism of action for montelukast and zafirlukast.

The second approach is that of zileuton. The enzyme 5-lipoxygenase is necessary for the biosynthesis of leukotrienes. Zileuton is a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor that inhibits the formation of leukotrienes B4, C4, D4, and E4. In turn, limiting these leukotrienes helps reduce inflammation, edema, mucus secretion, and bronchoconstriction in the airways. This action reduces leukocyte adhesion, smooth muscle contraction, capillary permeability, and the migration and aggregation of neutrophils and eosinophils. As a result, patients benefit from a reduction in asthma exacerbations and an improvement in asthma symptoms.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: According to the manufacturer's labeling, zileuton is rapidly absorbed upon oral administration, and peak plasma concentration is attained in approximately 1.7 hours.

Distribution: Zileuton has an apparent volume of distribution of approximately 1.2 L/kg. Zileuton has high plasma protein binding (93%). It is primarily bound to albumin, and a small proportion is bound to alpha-1 acid glycoprotein.

Metabolism: Zileuton is primarily metabolized in the liver by the cytochrome P450 system, including CYP1A2, CYP2C9, and CYP3A4. Metabolites of zileuton include two  O-glucuronide conjugates (major metabolites) and an N-dehydroxylated metabolite. Pharmacodynamic activity is primarily due to the parent drug.

Excretion: Zileuton and its metabolites are primarily excreted in the urine (94.5%). The mean terminal half-life of zileuton is  2.5 hours.