Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors act on the SGLT proteins expressed in the proximal renal convoluted tubules. Four agents (canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin, ertugliflozin) are FDA-approved for managing adult patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) to improve blood sugar control adjunct to diet and exercise. The incidence of adverse events associated with decreased intravascular volume and SGLT-2 inhibitor use is higher in the geriatric population. Therefore, routinely monitoring blood glucose and blood pressure in elderly patients is vital to prevent harm.

Childbearing females should be advised about the potential risks to the fetus, especially during the second and third trimesters with SGLT-2 inhibitor use. Managing glycemic control in patients with type 2 DM and associated renal and cardiovascular adverse effects requires care coordination from a team of healthcare professionals. The team should comprise a primary care physician (PCP), an endocrinologist, a cardiologist, a nephrologist, nurses, and a pharmacist.

A thorough clinical evaluation and assessment should be performed to determine if treatment with an SGLT-2 is suitable for the patient. Before initiating treatment, the team should assess the patient's baseline blood glucose, HbA1c, renal function, and volume status. The PCP and the rest of the healthcare team should be updated with the latest guidelines on managing type 2 DM patients and utilizing SGLT-2 inhibitors. The patient's kidney function should be assessed routinely, and the PCP and nephrologist should discuss treatment benefits in patients with CKD and choose the appropriate agent with demonstrated benefit.

Type 2 DM patients with underlying heart failure (NYHA classification II-IV) and decreased EF should be assessed thoroughly by the PCP and cardiologist to determine treatment with SGLT2 inhibitors.

Endocrinologists play a crucial role in achieving glycemic goals, managing complications such as euglycemic DKA, and preventing macrovascular and microvascular complications of diabetes. Pharmacists should educate the patients on the potential adverse effects of SGLT-2 inhibitors. The interprofessional healthcare team should advise patients about not taking insulin and insulin secretagogues while taking SGLT-2 inhibitors. Nursing should monitor compliance and educate patients on the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia, alerting the prescriber of any concerns they note that may require alternative interventions. Depending on comorbidities, dieticians can counsel patients regarding adherence to the ADA or AHA-recommended diet. Infectious disease physicians can be critical in managing patients with UTI or recurrent mycotic infections.

Early surgical consultation is crucial in the case of Fournier gangrene. In an overdose, emergency medicine physicians should rapidly stabilize the patient. Consultation with a medical toxicologist is necessary for the latest information. A psychiatrist and clinical psychologist should be consulted if an overdose is intentional.

An interprofessional team of prescribing clinicians (MD, DO, NP, PA), including specialists (endocrinologist, cardiologist, nephrologist), pharmacists, specialty-trained nurses, and dieticians collaborating across disciplines, can achieve optimal patient outcomes related to SGLT2 inhibitor therapy. [Level 5]