Falling onto an outstretched arm with an anterior force on the proximal ulna leads to an anterior elbow dislocation.

This injury and its complications are best understood after reviewing pertinent anatomy. The elbow is a joint made up of the articulation between three bony structures, the humerus, ulna, and radius. The distal humerus is the most proximal aspect of the elbow. The distal humerus flares out medially and laterally making the medial and lateral epicondyles. The trochlea and capitellum make up the distal joint surface of the humerus, articulating with the greater sigmoid notch of the proximal ulna and the radial head respectively.

The olecranon is the posterior portion of the proximal ulna and forms the posterosuperior part of the greater sigmoid notch.

The soft tissue surrounding the elbow joint contributes to the stability of this three-part joint. The annular ligament is a ligament that surrounds the radial head and is an insertion site of the joint capsule. The joint capsule also inserts onto the anterior aspect of the coronoid. Posteriorly, the joint capsule attaches to the olecranon. The capsule contributes to the varus-valgus stability of the elbow when in extension.

The medial ulnar collateral ligament contributes to the valgus stability of the elbow and consists of the anterior, posterior, and transverse bands. The medial collateral ligament originates from the medial epicondyle and inserts at the base of the coronoid.

The lateral collateral ligament contributes to the varus stability of the elbow and also consists of three components: the lateral ulnar collateral ligament, the annular ligament, and the radial collateral ligament.

There are multiple neurovascular structures that cross the elbow joint that are at risk for injury during an elbow dislocation. The brachial artery crosses the elbow joint anteriorly before branching into the radial and ulnar artery distally in the forearm. The median nerve runs alongside the brachial artery crossing the elbow joint anteriorly. The radial nerve crosses the elbow joint laterally along the lateral epicondyle, where the ulnar nerve crosses the elbow medially along the medial epicondyle.

A strong anterior force to the posterior aspect of the flexed elbow is the most common mechanism of injury in an anterior elbow dislocation.

With anterior elbow dislocations, the olecranon is commonly fractured. The anterior force on the flexed elbow causes the olecranon to be levered within the olecranon fossa and fractured. The continuation of the anterior force displaces the more distal aspect of the ulna anteriorly, leaving the fractured olecranon fragment behind.