**Snellen’s Test Types Versus Contrast Sensitivity**

The visual acuity tested by Snellen’s test types is of very high contrast, but in a real-world scenario, the patient may be visually handicapped due to loss of CS. In conditions with low contrast, the visual acuity becomes reduced, and the quality of vision is also reduced. The CS is considered a better predictor of visual acuity as it provides information not provided by the visual acuity alone.

**Contrast Sensitivity Curve**

The contrast sensitivity can also be plotted as a curve, with the x-axis having a spatial frequency and the y-axis having contrast sensitivity.

**Contrast Sensitivity Function**

Manos and Sakrison first proposed this. The graph of CS over spatial frequency range gives CS function. CS is a function of spatial frequency, denoted in cycles per degree; this is a subjective measurement of a subject’s ability to detect a low contrast stimulus, usually vertical stripes of reducing shades of black to grey. This measurement should give a more accurate representation of the eye’s visual function. The peak value range from 1 to 8 cycles/ degree, and the high frequencies are not distinguished due to a limited number of photoreceptors. Neural and optical mechanisms limit the higher spatial CS.

**Modulation Transfer Function**

This indicates the ability of the optical system to transform minute details (spatial frequencies) from object to image. The units are denoted by the ratio of image contrast over object contrast, a function of spatial frequency. MTF is the optical component of the CS function.

**Gratings**

There are a series of pairs of light and dark bars in this. One adjacent pair make up one cycle. The thickness is denoted by spatial frequency in cycle per degree of the visual angle of the eye. Many gratings can be accommodated within a degree of visual angle. They are broader with low spatial frequencies. The spatial phase describes the position. A change in spatial phase by 180 degrees denotes that the grating is displaced by a half cycle.

**Sine Wave Gratings**

These lack a sharp outline, and sinusoidal grating is preferred because they are free from defocus, light scatter, aberration and diffraction. It affects only the contrast and spatial positions.

**Square Wave Gratings**

These grating have sharp edges.