**Methods and Techniques Known to Improve Wound Healing**

**Negative Pressure Therapy**

Numerous wound management devices have been introduced over the years to improve wound healing. However, none have been as influential and successful as negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) therapy. NPWT involves the application of subatmospheric pressure on wound via a sponge-based system with an airtight seal directly over the wound, connected under sealed conditions to a suction device. Benefits of NPWT are realized via several different mechanisms. First, the subatmospheric pressure applied to the wound helps to remove wound exudate and other materials that are known to impair the WHP. Secondly, the presence of subatmospheric pressure promotes angiogenesis and tissue perfusion by increasing cellular proliferation and migration into the wound. The suction also assists in bringing wound edges together. When combined, all of the above elements and mechanisms work synergistically to help speed up wound healing. NPWT devices can be used on a wide variety of wounds, such as pressure ulcers, large abdominal wounds, traumatic wounds, as well as complex, difficult-to-cover tissue defects following debridement operations (e.g., in the setting of necrotizing soft tissue infections)

**Vitamins, Trace Elements, and Growth Factors
**

Although a detailed discussion of the role of vitamins and trace elements in the WHP is well beyond the scope of the current review/synopsis of this topic, the authors feel strongly that a brief overview of this topic is fully warranted. It has long been known that Vitamin A may have beneficial effects on wound healing in the setting of previous systemic exposure to corticosteroids. More specifically, Vitamin A has been shown to overcome the inhibitory effects of cortisone (and related corticosteroids) on the rate of gain in tensile strength of the wound

Vitamin C and zinc have both been found to improve wound healing characteristics, although clinical adoption and implementation of this therapeutic combination is less than universal. Mechanistically, vitamin C has several favorable effects on the WHP. First, it is a powerful antioxidant and free radical scavenger. Second, it is important to systemic immunity, and along with Zinc helps boost the immune system when taken in the postoperative period. Together with Arginine and Zinc, Vitamin C is important for collagen synthesis. The evidence is strongest for supplementing vitamin C and zinc during the immediate postoperative period

Among other interesting (and important) developments in wound care, there is evidence that vitamin-D supplementation may help positively modulate impaired wound healing, although further research toward mechanistic understanding is required in this area. More specifically, the role of vitamin D in the WHP may be indirect, through beneficial effects on closely related physiological processes, such as glucose homeostasis

Finally, another vast topic area that is worth mentioning (but too extensive to fully discuss in this review) is the use of growth factors in the modulation of the WHP.  It has been demonstrated that delivery of various specific growth factors (e.g., basic fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, keratinocyte growth factor) may produce beneficial effects on chronic wounds, with many experimental and clinical applications highlighting promise in the area of diabetic wound care

**Maggot Debridement**

While considered by many as archaic, maggot debridement therapy (MDT) has been shown unequivocally to be of benefit in wound healing

**Hyperbaric Oxygen**

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) is another treatment modality that has been around for quite some time, but only recently saw a resurgence in interest due to promising effects on the WHP, especially in the setting of chronic and complicated wounds

It has been demonstrated that HBOT is effective in improving the course of chronic diabetes-related extremity wounds, potentially reducing the need for major (but not necessarily minor) amputations. Available evidence suggests beneficial effects of HBOT on wounds are usually apparent within approximately 6 weeks of therapy, but long-term beneficial effects continue to be questionable. Another area where HBOT can be beneficial is the management of necrotizing soft tissue infections (e.g., necrotizing fasciitis), with evidence showing potential mortality benefit, lower amputation rates, and an overall reduction in surgical debridements

Despite its potential benefits, there are significant potential dangers of HBOT, including the risk of oxygen fire/explosion, the risk of pneumothorax, as well as the possibility of damage to eardrums during repeated "dives." Consequently, appropriate provider is credentialing and patient/staff safety procedures must be strictly followed to reduce any undue risks of harm