**Medical management:**Oxygen saturation is critical and should be monitored continuously. Similarly, fluid balance and acidosis if present are needed to be addressed urgently. Since the neonate is usually unable to feed well, nutritional rehabilitation might be needed as well. In severe cases where the pulmonary valve is completely atretic and is the pulmonary circulation is entirely dependent on ductus arteriosus, prostaglandin E2 should be considered to keep it open until surgical correction can take place. Symptomatic treatment with diuretics or digoxin is indicated if the patient is going into congestive heart failure.

**Surgical management:**Mainly, the size of the pulmonary arteries, presence/absence of MAPCAs, and PDA drive the surgical plan. Although the ideal surgical approach lacks consensus due to the extreme variation in anatomy, staged palliation is favored by most surgeons over early total correction.

**Staged Palliation**

The surgical treatment of PAVSD is a staged approach that involves several admissions and many operations without any fixed number. The steps of correction are as follows.

1) Blood flow is established first in the pulmonary arteries by connecting it directly to the aorta through a modified Blalock-Taussig shunt.

2) The right ventricle is also connected to the aorta temporarily if the overriding is insufficient.

3) As the pulmonary arteries grow in size due to sustained blood supply from the aorta, the pulmonary circulation is then connected to the pulmonary artery.

4) The right ventricle is connected back to the pulmonary artery.

5) The MAPCAs are closed in the next step usually at six months of age if the respective lung segments are receiving enough supply through the now developed pulmonary arteries.

6) VSD is repaired at the end usually at age 1 to 3 years. The major benefit of this approach is the whole procedure becomes more tolerable by the already feeble neonate and breaks are available to it for healing. In contrast to staged repair, the other approach is complete repair in one surgery. This procedure is only suitable for limited candidates who are on the low end of the severity spectrum.

**Early Total Correction**

In this less popular approach preferred mostly in mild cases, surgeons usually correct the anatomy within the same admission if not the same operation. The patients are carefully picked and risks versus benefits are analyzed critically before picking this option.

**Cardiac Transplant**

In patients with the completely atretic pulmonary system, or who have failed the surgical corrective measures, a cardiac transplant can be the viable option.