The balanced interaction of brain-gut and adipocyte plays an essential role in maintaining appropriate energy balance, body fat, and weight. Miscommunication between these organs can lead to an imbalance between energy intake and expenditure, which leads to obesity. These are the following mechanisms through which the brain, gut, and adipocyte miscommunication lead to obesity:

1) Weakened or defective signals from the brain in response to nutrients and satiety cause disinhibition of liver glucose production and unbalanced or over-feeding.

2) Lack of inhibition of neuropeptide Y neurons in the hypothalamus, dysregulation of melanocortin receptors in the forebrain and hindbrain, and overactivation of orexin receptors due to sleep deprivation leads to abnormal activation of sympathetic neurons and decrease the sensitivity of insulin which leads to obesity.

3) Leptin resistance in the hindbrain and hypothalamus can also lead to obesity. The brain perceives leptin resistance as lower long term energy stores, and as a result, it increases extra energy intake, i.e., overfeeding (hyperphagia) and obesity. Leptin resistance can be central or peripheral.

**Causes of central leptin resistance include**

- The mutation on the leptin receptor located in the brain and various other tissues - mutations in receptors lead to impaired signaling in response to leptin

- Decreased leptin transport across blood-brain barriers due to high triglyceride levels

- Decreased leptin transport across the blood-brain barrier due to ObR receptor saturation or downregulation

- Reduced sensitivity of ObR due to excessively high levels of leptin

- Increased expression of SOCS3 and PTP1B - inhibitors of leptin signaling- cause leptin resistance

- Increased leptin binding protein levels

**Causes of peripheral leptin resistance include:**

Leptin resistance in peripheral organs, e.g., in the liver, heart, and skeletal muscles, are not well studied. According to some studies, leptin resistance in peripheral organs might be due to reduced activation of signaling protein or increased production of leptin signaling inhibitors.

4) Brain trauma

5) Brain surgery of craniopharyngioma

6) Inflammatory lesions of the hypothalamus

7) Psychological disorders, such as depression and anxiety

8) Sleep deprivation causes abnormal elevation of sympathetic outflow and overactivation of orexin neurons

9) Genetic mutations in receptors or hormones and neurochemicals. (Pro-opiomelanocortin gene mutation)

10) Microbial dysbiosis due to a high-fat diet

11) Decreased intestinal barrier functions

12) Inflammation of gut due to a high-fat diet

13) Metabolic endotoxemia

14) Chronic low-grade systemic inflammation

15) Desensitization of vagal afferent nerves