Platelets are anucleated discoid cells with sizes averaging between 2.0 to 5.0 micrometers in diameter and 0.5 micrometers in thickness with a mean cell volume of 6 to 10 femtoliters. Platelets are produced in the bone marrow through megakaryopoiesis from a hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) under the influence of thrombopoietin and appropriate growth factors, and an estimated 10^11 platelets are pumped into the circulation every single day.

Platelets are primarily involved in the hemostasis by adhesion to the disrupted endothelium, secretion of mediators from its granules which promote aggregation, coagulation (by providing a surface to a host of proteins), and finally, clot retraction by the action of contractile proteins in the platelet together with its secretions and entrapped mesh of fibrin. Other roles played by platelet in the body include participation in inflammation, mitogenesis, wound healing, and antimicrobial host deficiencies.

Structurally a platelet is divided into three zones:

- **Peripheral zone**- this zone is primarily involved in adhesion and aggregation function
- Glycocalyx - This is the thick carbohydrate-rich structure found on the exterior surface of platelets and serves as the site of the first contact during the hemostatic response by platelets, and it is made up of major and minor glycoproteins. GP-Ib-IX-V complex involved in adhesion at the site of vascular injury. GPIIb-IIIa is involved in aggregation by attachment through fibrinogen to other platelets.
- Unit membrane - It is made of a lipid bilayer and open canalicular system, which serves a vital role in the acceleration of coagulation through the anionic phospholipid, phosphatidylserine, provided by the surface of activated platelets when clotting is initiated, which converts prothrombin to thrombin.
- The submembrane area - It plays a vital role in transmitting signals from the surface to organelles in the cytoplasm regulating signal processes of platelet activation.

- **Sol-gel zone**- This is the matrix that is made of microtubules and microfilament, which plays a vital role in platelet structure and its support. This zone is responsible for various shape changes on activation during hemostasis and during ex vivo storage. Organelles are embedded within this matrix.

- **Organelle zone**
- Alpha-granules, which store fibrinogen fibronectin FV vWF, PDGF cytokines, chemokines, TG-beta-1, and VEGF
- Dense- granules stores calcium ATP, ADP, serotonin, and pyrophosphate
- Mitochondria- Are the powerhouse of platelets
- Glycogen
- Lysosome and peroxisome

When a platelet is activated, secretions from the α and dense granules are involved in further platelet activation and aggregation. Secretions also have immune-mediated effects.