**Testicular Developmental Disorders**

**Testicular Dysgenesis**

Testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS) is a constellation of poor-quality semen, testicular germ cell cancer, cryptorchidism, and hypospadias. It is a consequence of disruption to embryonal programming and gonad development.

Reduced production of androgen receptors, disrupted hormone levels along with exposure to endocrine disrupters are associated with the development of TDS.

As mentioned before, researchers believe that EDCs contribute to the development of TDS through the interference with the production, transport, metabolism, binding, release, action, and elimination of hormones associated with developmental processes.

There are historical examples of maternal exposure to chemicals contributing the testicular developmental disorders; the synthetic estrogenic drug known as diethylstilboestrol (DES) was historically used for the prevention of the complications of pregnancy but was shown to increase the risk of testicular malformations.

**Cryptorchidism**

It is a state wherein there is an absence of the testes in the scrotum may be unilaterally or bilaterally. The etiology of cryptorchidism can divide into anatomical, genetic, or hormonal causes.

As the main functional significance of the descent of the testes according to the ‘temperature-dependent hypothesis’ is the maintenance of a low-temperature environment to produce viable sperm, failure of testicular descent will lead to an increase in the testicular temperature. An increase in testicular temperature causes a reduction in effective spermatogenesis. Furthermore, damage to Sertoli cells may occur due to the production of reactive oxygen species.

Cryptorchidism appears to demonstrate associations with an increased risk of testicular intraepithelial neoplasm (TIN), which may lead to testicular carcinoma in situ (CIS).

**Anorchia**

By definition, anorchia is the absence of testes in a person who has a 46 XY karyotype and an external male phenotype. It is also known as vanishing testis syndrome or embryonic testicular regression.

Because patients with anorchia have a normal male phenotype, scientists suspect that the testes were functionally normal during some point of embryological development.

**Monorchism**

Monorchism is, by definition, the state of only having one testis in the scrotum. Monorchism may result from trauma, testicular torsion, or surgical removal because of testicular malignancy.

**Polyorchidism**

Polyorchidism refers to a congenital anomaly in which more than two testes are present in the scrotum.

Leung described a way of classifying polyorchidism based on embryological differentiation.

- Type I: An extra testis without an epididymis or vas which attaches to the ipsilateral testis.

- Type II: The extra testis drains through the epididymis of the ipsilateral testis, and they share a common vas deferens.

- Type III: The extra testis has its own epididymis separate from the ipsilateral testis, both of those structures draining into a common vas deferens.

- Type IV: The extra testis has a separate epididymis and vas deferens from the ipsilateral testis.

**Testicular Torsion**

Testicular torsion is a state in which the spermatic cord twisted upon itself, leading to a restriction of blood supply and venous drainage of the ipsilateral testis. If emergency treatment is not delivered quickly, it may lead to necrosis of the testis.

Researchers believe that the majority of postnatal testicular torsion is associated with the "bell clapper anomaly."

Testicular torsion is extravaginal or intravaginal.

**Swyer Syndrome**

Swyer syndrome, also known as pure gonadal dysgenesis, occurs when there is abnormal sexual differentiation during embryological development, leading to insufficient intrauterine virilization with undifferentiated gonads with associated female phenotype.

Swyer syndrome occurs due to reduced production of testosterone and AMH leading to a failure of gonadal differentiation.

**Klinefelters Syndrome**

Klinefelters syndrome is a common congenital chromosomal disorder with an incidence of 0.1% to 0.2% of newborns.

**Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome**

A child can have a disorder of sexual development (DSD) without a chromosomal abnormality such as Klinefelters syndrome. The most commonly seen 46 XY DSD is androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS).

AIS occurs due to molecular defects in the gene that codes for the androgen receptor (AR).

As patients with AIS have a Y chromosome, they will produce male gonads. However, as the fetal cells do not respond to androgens, there will be abnormal development of the reproductive system. This situation may manifest as undescended testes. Furthermore, as androgens play a part in the inhibition of female characteristics through SOX9 and SF1, a loss of response to androgens may lead to a female phenotype.

**5-ARD Deficiency**

The enzyme 5-alpha reductase 2 (5alpha-RD2) converts testosterone into DHT.

5-alpha reductase deficiency is a 46 XY DSD. It presents with a female phenotype or improperly virilized external genitalia along with testes. The gene for 5 alpha-RD2, also known as SRD5A2, is found on the second chromosome on position 2p23, it is an autosomal recessive condition.

**Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia**

The most common inborn error of adrenal function is congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) secondary to a deficiency of the steroid 21-hydroxylase enzyme.

In infant females, the most common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (21-hydroxylase deficiency) may present with a salt-wasting disease or virilization of the external genitalia. In both males and females, it can present with precocious puberty.

Other less common forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia include the 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3b-HSD) deficiency which occurs due to mutations in the HSD3B2 gene, the 17a-hydroxylase (P450 17a) deficiency which occurs due to mutations in the CYP17A1 gene, and the P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc) deficiency which occurs due to mutations in the CYP11A1 gene.

A deficiency in the 3b-HSD enzyme causes a failure of the conversion of 17-a hydroxypregnenolone to 17a hydroxyprogesterone, pregnenolone to progesterone, and DHEA to androstenedione, resulting in the accumulation of pregnenolone, DHEA, and 17-a hydroxypregnenolone and a reduction in the production of sex steroids. It may also cause salt-wasting disease.****Reduced production of androgenic steroid hormones may present as pseudohermaphroditism associated with cryptorchidism.

A deficiency in the P450 17a enzyme leads to a failure of the conversion of pregnenolone to 17a-hydroxypregnenolone, progesterone to 17a- hydroxyprogesterone, and reduced conversion of 17-hydroxypregnenolone into DHEA. This process leads to the accumulation of pregnenolone, progesterone, and reduced production of glucocorticoids and sex steroids, leading to incomplete virilization in males associated with ambiguous external genitalia and cryptorchidism.

A deficiency in the P450scc enzyme leads to a failure of the conversion of cholesterol into pregnenolone; this is the first step in the synthesis of all steroid hormones. As a result, there is a severe deficiency in steroid hormones.

**Other Related Conditions**

**Congenital Inguinal Hernia**

The lifetime risk of inguinal hernias is significantly higher in men (27%) than in women (3%).