The primary adverse effects of levofloxacin include photosensitivity, nausea, diarrhea, headache, tendinitis, tendon rupture, hyper-hypoglycemia, seizures, prolonged QT interval, and peripheral neuropathy. Clinicians should carefully prescribe levofloxacin to patients with a history of prolonged QT intervals.

It is advisable to minimize or avoid exposure to natural or artificial sunlight while taking levofloxacin to reduce the occurrence of phototoxicity.

Research has determined prolonged levofloxacin is associated with an increased risk of fungal or bacterial superinfection (e.g., pseudomembranous colitis).

Levofloxacin can cause hepatotoxicity. The pattern of enzyme elevation is hepatocellular, cholestatic, or mixed. The case of jaundice and vanishing bile duct syndrome have been described. Hepatotoxicity can be associated with immunoallergic presentations such as fever, rash, and eosinophilia. The latency to onset is usually short (1 to 3 weeks), and the onset is often abrupt with enzyme elevation, jaundice, and sometimes hepatic failure. Hence the likelihood score for hepatotoxicity is A (well-established cause of clinically apparent liver injury).

FDA has warned that fluoroquinolones, including levofloxacin, can increase the risk of aortic aneurysm and aortic dissection. Avoid prescribing levofloxacin in elderly patients and patients with a history of Marfan syndrome or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

**Drug-Drug Interactions**

Concomitant administration of oral hypoglycemic agents such as glimepiride increases the risk of hypoglycemia. Careful monitoring of blood glucose is recommended for patients taking concurrent antidiabetic agents due to the risk of glucose dysregulation.