The CT scanner machine rotates the X-ray tube around the patient's body through a circular structure known as the gantry. Each time the machine rotates, computerized information is acquired. The patient is slowly moved up or down in the table, and different cross-section images are produced. In each rotation, a 2D image slice is constructed. Each subsequent image slice's thickness is decided on the operator and the physician/radiologist's request but usually ranges from 1 to 10 millimeters. The gantry can be moved at the desired angle to accommodate the best cross-sectional image. When the desired number of slices are obtained, a scan is reproduced into the computer image and can easily be reproduced and stored.

The image is created using pixels according to its radiosensitivity and is displayed using the Hounsfield scale units, which are compared to known tissue density. Water is 0, while air is negative 1000, and bone is positive 400 to 2000. Intravenous iodine can be injected into the bloodstream to demarcate blood vessels, tumors and identify infectious processes.

Intravenous iodine-based or oral barium-based contrast is used to visualize the digestive system. The images can be computer-tacked together to produce a 3D image of the area of interest. The CT scans are obtained in the cranial direction, meaning from feet to head. It is important to note that current CT machines display the image opposite the patient's side as the image is produced as viewed from the patient's foot. Thus the right side of the image is the patient's left side.