First and Second Degree Nerve Injuries

- Most patients respond and recover after several months -- recommended management consists of serial exams and serial EMG/NCS testing

- Most patients respond well to conservative therapy. Consider removing any restrictive or compressive devices that are routinely worn. Consider relative rest from offending activity such as limiting repetitive pronation, supination, wrist flexion, and ulnar deviation. Often nerve glide exercises as part of occupation/physical therapy are performed in conjunction with rest and activity modification. If symptoms do not resolve with cessation of activity and rest, then consider splinting.

- If an area of pathology indicates possible compression and can be visualized on ultrasound, providers can consider ultrasound-guided hydro-dissection to free the compressed portion of the nerve.

- Oral or topical NSAIDs can be used for pain. Corticosteroid and an anesthetic combination can be injected into the point of maximal tenderness for symptomatic relief. The steroid may help decrease any inflammation contributing to the process.

- In the setting of suspected mild degrees of nerve injury, but either prolonged, absent, or delayed evidence of recovery of nerve function both clinically and by serial EMG/NCS testing, surgery should be the last option if this process has become chronic and conservative treatment has failed after six to 12 months.

Third Degree Nerve Injuries (Neurotmesis)

- Acutely, direct surgical repair of the partial versus complete nerve laceration.

- Nerve grafting techniques are employed in the setting of lacerations with retractions; often, this can present in the subacute setting after injury.

- Residual defects or "injury gaps" measuring >2.5 cm are recommended for nerve grafting techniques.

- Autograft options include the sural or saphenous nerves

- There is no documented improved functional recovery or outcome when comparing autograft versus allograft or nerve conduits