Clinically, most patients have unremarkable physical examinations or have subtle clinical findings. Patients have normal or low blood pressure. There could be a bunch of lab findings. The serum potassium is low (hypokalemia). Serum magnesium may be low (hypomagnesemia) or normal. The serum bicarbonate is usually high in keeping with (metabolic alkalosis). Plasma renin and aldosterone are high (hyper-reninemic hyperaldosteronism). The urinary calcium excretion is low (hypocalciuria).

The lab findings may mimic thiazide diuretic use, and a urinary diuretic screen may be helpful in difficult cases in the absence of family history. Increased urinary sodium and chloride excretion in response to thiazide diuretics help distinguish Gitelman syndrome patients with a blunted chloride fractional excretion.

Laxative abuse is another differential diagnosis to consider in patients with hypokalemia. However, there can be metabolic acidosis with a urine potassium/creatinine ratio of less than 1.5.

The proposed biochemical criteria for suspecting Gitelman syndrome in a patient include the following:

- Documented chronic hypokalemia (2.0 mmol/mmol [>18 mmol/g]) in the absence of potassium-lowering drugs

- Metabolic alkalosis

- Hypomagnesemia (4%)

- Hypocalciuria (spot urine, calcium-creatinine ratio 0.5%

- Normal or low blood pressure

- Normal renal ultrasound with the absence of nephrocalcinosis or renal abnormalities

If plasma electrolytes are within normal ranges or near normal in a patient taking magnesium or potassium supplements or both, these should be stopped at least 48 hours before to unmask the abnormalities. Concomitantly, plasma and urine samples should be obtained. No evidence suggests the need for 24-hour urine collection. Usually, spot urine samples are sufficient to establish the diagnosis.

Arguments that go against the diagnosis of GS include the following:

- Family history of renal malformations or any kidney disease dominantly transmitted

- A history of polyhydramnios or hyperechogenic fetal kidneys

- The presence of a renal malformation, such as unilateral kidneys or polycystic kidneys

- A long history of hypertension

- Chronic use of diuretics or laxatives

- Lack of hypokalemia or inconsistent hypokalemia in the absence of substitutive therapy

- Presentation before age three years

- Manifestations of increased extracellular fluid volume

Of note, arterial hypertension does not rule out the diagnosis of GS in adults.