Peters anomaly commonly occurs as a sporadic disorder, but few inheritances patterns (autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive) have been noticed. Alteration in genes like the PAX6, PITX2, PITX3, COL4A1, FOXC1, and COL6A3 is responsible for the Peters anomaly.

**PAX6**

It is situated on chromosome 11p13. It has 14 exons, and it encodes a 422-amino acid protein.

**FOXC1**

It is a transcription factor situated at chromosome 6p25.

**PITX2**

It is situated on chromosome 4q25.****PITX2 mutations and deletions lead to ocular, cardiac, and hearing defects.

**CYP1B1**

The location of the gene is chromosome 2p22.2. Around 20% of cases of Peters anomaly are caused by the mutation of CYP1B1.

**TFAP2A**

It is a transcription factor situated at chromosome 6p24.3. Its response to retinoic acid is required for the normal development of the lens, optic cup, and craniofacial region. Mutation of this gene leads to branchiooculofacial syndrome.

**COL6A3**

It is situated at the 2q37.3 chromosome and has 44 exons. This gene encodes the longest alpha three chains, which is needed for the firmness of collagen IV molecules. Collagen IV is amply expressed in the cornea.

**CHD2 (chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 2)**

It is situated at chromosome 15q26.1. This gene encodes transmembrane protein N-cadherin. It is responsible for cell to cell adhesion. N cadherin protein is present in developing lens stalk and future corneal endothelium.

**DOP1B (DOP1 leucine zipper-like protein B)**

It is situated at the 21q22 chromosome. This gene helps in protein-protein interaction. This gene may be responsible for autosomal recessive Peters anomaly in a consanguineous family.

**B3GLCT (****β1,3-glucosyltransferase)**

B3GLCT gene located on 13q12.3. This gene prompts the transfer of glucose to O-linked fucose on thrombospondin type-1 repeats (TSRs). Mutation of this gene leads to Peters plus syndrome (autosomal recessive).

Other genes implicated in the Peters anomaly include PITX3, FOXE3, FLNA, HCCS, NDP, SLC4A11, and COL4A1.