The tibialis posterior tendon is a solitary tendon that provides tendinous insertion in the navicular bone, which lays between the flexor digitorum longus and flexor hallucis longus muscles within the deep compartment of the leg. It converses from its broad surface on the superior aspect into a long tendon and crosses the flexor digitorum longus muscle medially at the inferior third of the leg. The posterior tibialis tendon (PTT) is located behind the medial malleolus, over the deltoid ligaments, within an osseous-fibrous groove. PTT is divided into three components at the navicular tuberosity, which are the anterior, middle, and posterior divisions. The anterior component is considered the continuation of the primary tendon because it has the largest segment. It attaches to the navicular tuberosity, the inferior capsule of the medial cuneonavicular joint, and also the inferior aspect of the medial cuneiform bone. The middle component mainly inserts into the inferior aspect of cuboid, middle cuneiform, and lateral cuneiform bones, but it also extended into the bases of the second to fifth metatarsal bones as metatarsal extensions. The posterior component gives attachment to the sustentaculum tali of the calcaneus. It performs as the main dynamic stabilizer of the rearfoot, the tibialis posterior tendon maintains the structure of the longitudinal arch of the foot. Dysfunctions of this tendon alter the biomechanics of the foot in a static and dynamic state. This problem often results in the lengthening or rupture of the spring ligament and eventually leads to the loss of the medial longitudinal arch of the foot, a condition called adult-acquired flat-foot deformity (AAFD).