The systemic polyene antifungal **amphotericin B**(formulated as AMB-d, L-AMB, ABLC, and ABCD) has potentially severe adverse reactions.**AMB-d**therapy carries the risk of hypotension, chills, headache, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, anemia, renal insufficiency, renal function abnormalities, injection site pain, nausea, vomiting, rigors, and fever.**L-AMB**therapy has decreased the incidence of renal function abnormalities when compared to AMB-d, yet it still carries a risk of nephrotoxicity. The most common adverse events caused by L-AMB therapy include hypertension, hypotension, tachycardia, localized phlebitis, chills, headache, skin rash, electrolyte abnormalities (hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hyponatremia, hyponatremia), hyperglycemia, abnormal liver function tests.**ABLC**also carries a risk of nephrotoxicity, leading to increased serum creatinine, fever related to infusion, rigors, and chills, but these risks are less than treatment regimens, including AMB-d.

**Nystatin**is approved only for topical and oral "swish-and-swallow" applications because of severe systemic side effects. Adverse events related to topical nystatin include mild contact dermatitis, with the most severe side effect being Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Oral "swish-and-swallow" nystatin carries a lower risk of hypersensitivity reactions than topical formulations; there are also reports of diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain.

**Azoles,**while typically well-tolerated, frequently cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Hepatotoxicity (elevated liver function tests, hepatitis, cholestasis, and or fulminant liver failure) is a common adverse reaction associated with all azoles. Each of the azole drugs has unique adverse events as well:

- **Ketoconazole**has associations with orthostatic hypotension, thrombocytopenia, pruritis, rash, myalgias, and a rare suppression of glucocorticoid production in the adrenal glands. Of note, ketoconazole also correlates with a significant amount more gastrointestinal distress than other azoles.

- **Fluconazole**has been shown to cause mild headaches, dizziness, and alopecia in high doses.

- **Itraconazole**has a triad of heart failure-like symptoms, hypertension, peripheral edema, and hypokalemia. There are reports of an increased risk of herpes zoster activation or reactivation, headache, dizziness, and fatigue.

- **Voriconazole**has the most numerous and unique of all the side effects in the azole class. These include vision changes, auditory and/or visual hallucinations, neurotoxicity, photosensitivity rash, photophobia, periostitis, cardiotoxicity, and alopecia.

- **Posaconazole**most commonly causes thrombophlebitis secondary to peripheral intravenous catheters, hypertension, hypotension, headache, rash, hypokalemia, and thrombocytopenia. Another reported adverse event is a rare prolongation of the QTc interval.

- **Isavuconazole**has more severe gastrointestinal side effects than most of the other azoles. Other reported adverse events include a headache, hypokalemia, dyspnea, cough, and peripheral edema.

- **Miconazole**has no reported serious adverse events but commonly causes contact dermatitis, burning/stinging, and pruritis at the application site.

- **Clotrimazole**has no severe adverse reactions but commonly causes irritation, burning/stinging, pruritis, urticaria, and possible blistering at the application site.

**Terbinafine,**an allylamine, most commonly results in central nervous system side effects, with a headache being the most frequently reported symptom. Other manifestations of adverse events include but are not limited to rashes, diarrhea, dyspepsia, and upper respiratory inflammation or infection.

**Echinocandins,**like many other antifungal drugs, can result in hepatotoxicity.

- **Anidulafungin is associated**with hypotension, peripheral edema, insomnia, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, increased risk of urinary tract infections, dyspnea, and fever.

- **Caspofungin**can cause hypotension, peripheral edema, tachycardia, chills, headache, rash, anemia, localized phlebitis, respiratory failure, and infusion-related reactions.

- **Micafungin**can cause phlebitis, anemia, transaminitis, hyperbilirubinemia, renal failure, and fever.

**Griseofulvin**has numerous potential adverse events, with the most commonly reported adverse events being rash and urticaria. More severe complications can occur and include an erythema multiforme-like drug reaction, skin photosensitivity, leukopenia (rare), granulocytopenia, and hepatotoxicity.

**Flucytosine**can cause adverse reactions to all body systems but is most commonly associated with the following: cardiovascular (cardiotoxicity, chest pain), central and peripheral nervous systems (confusion, headache hallucination, parkinsonian-like syndrome, peripheral neuropathy), dermatologic (pruritis, urticaria, rash), gastrointestinal (abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, GI hemorrhage), hematologic (agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, pancytopenia, eosinophilia), hepatic (acute hepatic injury/insufficiency /necrosis), and renal (acute kidney injury, renal failure).

**Ciclopirox**has no significant reported serious adverse reactions, but common benign reactions include skin irritation/burning, contact dermatitis, and pruritis.

**Quinolines**(clioquinol and iodoquinol) most commonly have associations with dry skin, contact dermatitis, allergic reaction, rapid hair growth in areas the agent is applied, and folliculitis.

**Potassium Iodide**(as a saturated solution of potassium iodide) has several reported severe adverse reactions, including arrhythmias, GI bleeding, angioedema, parotitis, thyroid adenoma, and goiter. More frequent and less serious reactions include a possible metallic taste, urticaria, acne, cutaneous hemorrhage, numbness, and paresthesias.

**Zinc Pyrithione**has no reported serious adverse reactions and most commonly can cause mild skin irritation.