Management of hypoxia falls under 3 categories: maintaining patent airways, increasing the oxygen content of the inspired air, and improving the diffusion capacity.

**Maintaining Patent Airways**

Ensure patency of the upper airways with good suctioning, maneuvers that prevent occlusion of the throat (head tilt and jaw thrust if necessary), sometimes the placement of an endotracheal tube or tracheostomy is necessary.

In chronic conditions like obesity hyperventilation syndrome, maintaining patent airways can be achieved with positive pressure ventilation like CPAP or BiPAP.

Bronchodilators and aggressive pulmonary hygiene, such as chest physiotherapy, the flutter valve, and incentive spirometry can be used to maintain the patency of the lower airways.

**Increase Fraction of the Inspired O2 (FiO2)**

This is indicated for low PaO2 less than 60 or SaO2 less than 90, and this can be achieved by increasing the percentage of oxygen in the inspired air that reaches the alveoli.

**Low-Flow Devices**

- Nasal Cannula

- Use: mild hypoxia (with FiO2 approximately 92%)

- Flow rate: up to 6 L per minute

- FiO2 delivered: up to 45% (0.45)

- Advantage: Easy to use and more convenient to the patient (can be used during eating, drinking, talking)

- Disadvantage: Dry nasal mucosa (humidify if the flow is greater than or equal to 4 L per minute), FiO2 being delivered varies greatly. Mouth breathers derive less benefit from using a nasal cannula.

- The following formula can be used to approximate the percentage of FiO2; FiO2 = 20% + (4 times oxygen flow liters) For example, oxygen flow 2L/min would deliver approximately FiO2 of 0.3, 6 L per minute would deliver approximately FiO2 of 0.45 (more commonly known as 45%).

- Simple Face Mask

- Use: Moderate to severe hypoxia, initial treatment

- Flow rate: up to 10 L per minute

- FiO2 delivered: 35% to 50%

- Advantage: provides higher FiO2, no pressures involved, well tolerated by patients

- Disadvantage: Dry oral mucosa (needs humidification), the flow must be at least 5 L per minute to flush CO2, not high flow. Also, the mask itself can interfere with activities of daily living.

-  Reservoir Cannulas (Oxymizer)

- The device uses a reservoir space, which stores O2 during expiration, making it available as a bolus during the next inspiration. This way the patient gets a higher oxygen delivery without increasing flow.

- Flow rate: up to 16 L per minute.

- FiO2 = up to 90% (0.9)

- Reservoir cannulas are available as mustache configuration (Oxymizer), where the  reservoir is located directly beneath the nose, pendant configuration (Oxymizer Pendant) which is connected to a plastic reservoir on the anterior chest

- Partial-rebreather Mask

- Has a 300 to 500 mL reservoir bag and 2 one-way valves to prevent exhaling into the reservoir

- Use: Moderate to severe hypoxia, initial treatment

- Flow rate: 6 to 10 L per minute (flow must be sufficient to keep reservoir bag from collapse during inspiration)

- FiO2 delivered: 50% to 70%

- Advantage: Higher FiO2 can be delivered

- Disadvantage: Interferes with activities of daily living

- Non-rebreather Mask

- Has a 300 to 500 mL reservoir bag and 2 one-way valves

- Use: Moderate to severe acute hypoxia, initial treatment

- Flow rate: 10 to 15 (at least 10 L per minute to avoid bag collapse during inspiration)

- FiO2 delivered: 85% to 90%

- Advantage: even higher FiO2 can be achieved

- Disadvantage: Interferes with activities of daily living

**High-Flow Devices******

Usually, this requires an oxygen blender, humidifier, and heated tubing.

- Venturi Mask

- Mask attached an air entrainment valve

- Use: Moderate to severe hypoxia, initial treatment

- The flow rate and FiO2: (depends on the color). (Blue = 2 to 4 L per minute = 24% O2, White = 4 to 6 L per minute = 28% O2, Yellow = 8 to 10 L per minute = 35% O2, Red = 10 to 12 L per minute = 40% O2, Green = 12 to 15 L per minute = 60% O2)

- Advantage: provides the most accurate O2 delivery, high flow

- Disadvantage: need to be removed for eating. Less accurate at high flow rates

- Does not guarantee the total flow with O2 percentages above 35% in patients with high inspiratory flow demands; the problem with air entrainment systems is that as this is increased, the air to oxygen ratio decreases

- High-flow Nasal Cannula

- High-flow oxygen (HFO) consists of a heated, humidified O2

- Flow rate: 10 to 60 L per minute

- FiO2 delivered: Up to 100%

- Advantages: More convenient, Can deliver up to 100% heated and humidified oxygen at a maximum flow of 60 L

- Disadvantages: Fairly large cannula, can be a source of (although usually rather minimal) discomfort

- Air/oxygen Blender

- Provides accurate oxygen delivery independent of the patient’s inspiratory flow demands

- Positive end-expiratory pressure may be generated

- For approximately every 10 liters of flow delivered, about 1 cm/HO of positive pressure is obtained

**Positive Pressure Ventilation**

It allows for accurate delivery of any necessary FiO2 and includes the following:

**Non-Invasive Ventilation**

It is usually used as the last resort to avoid the intubation

- Continuous Positive Airways Pressure Mask (CPAP)

- Mainly used in patients with obstructive sleep apnea or in acute pulmonary edema.

- Delivers oxygen (or air) under pre-determined high pressure via a tightly fitting face mask.

- Positive pressure is continuous, to ensure that the airways are open (split them).

- Bilevel Positive Airways Pressure (BiPAP)

- Mainly used in patients with acute Hypercarbia as in patients with COPD exacerbation and ARDS patients.

- High positive pressure on inspiration and lower positive pressure on expiration.

- Pressure delivery is variable throughout the respiratory cycle, with high positive pressure on inspiration and lower positive pressure on expiration.

**Invasive Ventilation**

- Positive pressure ventilator attached to (usually) endotracheal tube.

- Allows for accurate delivery of predetermined minute ventilation as well as accurate FiO2 and positive end-expiratory pressure.

- Can be used electively during surgery.

**Improve the Diffusion of Oxygen through the Alveolar Interstitial Tissue**

The overall idea s to treat the underlying cause of respiratory failure:

- Diuretics can be used in cases of pulmonary edema.

- Steroids in certain cases of interstitial lung disease.

- Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) can be used as an ultimate method of increasing oxygenation.