PUD is treatable with medications. However, PUD may perforate and lead to high mortality risk. The classic triad for PPU is the sudden onset of abdominal pain, abdominal rigidity, and tachycardia. Physicians should be aware that a normal upright chest X-ray does not rule out duodenal perforation. Early diagnosis, quick resuscitation, and urgent surgical intervention are crucial to improving outcomes. Experienced teams should direct conservative management. The gold standard treatment is still exploratory laparotomy and omental patch repair. During the hospital stay, nurses have a vital role in the monitoring of the patients' vital signs and educate the patients and families.

Once the patients have been discharged, they should receive education from the medical care team regarding lifestyle modification, including quitting smoking and avoiding NSAIDs as much as possible. Patients with positive H. pylori should take medication to eradicate the infection; data shows doing this can decrease the mortality rate. Gastroenterology nurses should follow with patients, educate them, and update the team regarding the patient's condition. The pharmacist should discuss with patients the importance of medication compliance (such as PPI, H2 blocker, or H. pylori treatment) to decrease the mortality rate and to limit NSAID use. Only through an interprofessional team approach can clinicians reduce the mortality and morbidity of duodenal perforation. [Level 5]

Older age, shock, delayed surgery, definitive surgery, and ASA risk can lead to poor patient outcomes with PPU undergoing emergency surgery. Hence, improving overall outcomes requires proper resuscitation from shock, decreasing delay surgery grade, reserving definitive surgery for selected patients, and improving ASA score.