Patients may report acute or chronic medial knee pain. In acute cases, the patient will usually be able to describe a specific recent incident that resulted in the onset of pain or swelling, such as a sporting event. The patient may hear or feel a pop at the time of injury. They may or may not have difficulty walking and complain of knee instability.

Examination of the knee in MCL injury is most revealing at the time of injury and is often diagnosed on the sidelines by physical exam. However, diagnosis can still be made when the patient later presents in the emergency room or office setting.

Inspection may reveal a joint effusion and ecchymosis either at the lateral knee from direct trauma or at the medial knee from the ligament injury. Effusion should be localized around the MCL and will rarely be a generalized knee effusion, as this would be more likely due to intraarticular injuries. Gait is frequently normal, though patients can sometimes present with an antalgic or vaulting gait.

Palpation should be performed along the full length of the MCL. Tenderness specifically at one attachment site indicates the injury likely occurred there. Mid-substance tears can cause tenderness at the medial joint line, which can be confused with a medial meniscus injury. Distal MCL tears can cause tenderness at its attachment to the medial tibial condyle, which can be confused with pes anserine bursitis.

Valgus stress testing is the best way to test the integrity of the MCL directly. The patient should be positioned supine with the hip abducted on the affected side so that the leg is unsupported off the table. The knee should be brought into 30 degrees of flexion. The examiner should grasp the ankle with one hand and push the ankle laterally while applying a valgus force to the knee with the other hand. Laxity should be noted and then graded per the following classification:

- Grade 1 – pain along the MCL with valgus stress but little to no joint opening

- Grade 2 – some opening of the joint but with a firm endpoint

- Grade 3 – significant joint opening, no endpoint

The exam should be repeated with the knee in full extension. The posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) and posterior joint capsule contribute to knee stability in full extension, so if the test is positive at full extension, then it is likely that there is more than just an isolated MCL injury.