The anterior tibial artery supplies the extensor hallucis longus muscle. The anterior tibial artery arises from the popliteal artery, which originates from the superficial femoral artery, a branch of the common femoral artery off the external iliac artery. As the superficial femoral artery passes through the adductor hiatus into the popliteal fossa, it becomes the popliteal artery. The popliteal artery then divides toward the distal end of the popliteal fossa to give rise to the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. The anterior tibial artery passes from the posterior popliteal fossa to the anterior leg through the interosseous membrane between the tibia and fibula. It continues down the anterior portion of the leg to supply all of the anterior compartment muscles, including the extensor hallucis longus, before terminating as the dorsalis pedis artery as it passes into the foot.

The lymphatic vessels of the lower limb divide into two major groups—superficial and deep vessels. The lower limb's superficial lymph vessels further subdivide into two groups: a medial group, which follows the greater saphenous vein, and a lateral group, which follows the small saphenous vein. There are also deep lymph vessels, including the anterior tibial, posterior tibial, and peroneal vessels, that follow the course of the corresponding arteries and veins. The lymph vessels of the lower limb drain into the popliteal, superficial inguinal, deep inguinal, external iliac, and lumbar or aortic lymph nodes.