**Methods of Delivery**

Using lasers at a slit lamp is the most commonly used method to deliver treatment since changing and controlling parameters such as power, spot size, and exposure time is easy. Another commonly used method is using an indirect ophthalmoscope via a fiber optic cable. It is commonly used to treat peripheral retinal break and retinopathy of prematurity. Finally, there is the endolaser, a small fiber-optic probe inserted into the eye for vitreoretinal surgical procedures.

For focal laser of the macular lesions or leaks, the lenses used usually have a laser spot magnification factor of around 1 (including the Volk Area Centralis lens). Thus, the laser spot size at the retina is approximately 50 microns when a spot size of 50 microns is set on the laser machine. The lenses used for PRP usually have a laser spot magnification factor of 2 (including Volk Super Quad 160 and Ocular Mainster PRP 165). Thus, a laser spot set at the machine at 250 microns would yield a retinal spot of around 500 microns. Other common lenses used in Ophthalmic lasers include:

- Abraham lens: Different lenses are available for laser (YAG) capsulotomy and laser peripheral iridotomy.

- Singh Mid-Vitreous for treatment of symptomatic vitreous floaters, and

- Blumenthal lens: Different lenses are available for suture lysis (usually after trabeculectomy) and laser peripheral iridotomy).

**Personnel**

The administration and usage of lasers require an advanced understanding of their use and safety risks. Only trained and qualified physicians should use the laser device. Additional help to improve patient comfort may require trained assistants who can help facilitate safe and effective treatment.

**Preparation**

Before any laser procedure, informed consent is an essential part. This includes discussing benefits, risks, and alternatives before the procedure starts. The laser device should be turned on and set to the appropriate settings for the procedure. If there are any issues with the laser, maintenance and calibrations should only be performed by a trained technician before the laser device can be operated again.

**Safety**

Instructions and safety precautions should be reviewed when using a laser as outlined in the manual, and equipment should be inspected. A warning sign should be placed on the door to the treatment team to inform people outside that laser therapy is ongoing and should not be entered. Inside the room, any mirror or reflective hazards should be removed or moved as they could reflect the laser and cause accidental laser exposure previously discussed.

Physicians performing laser therapy should have safety filters in their devices to protect them from back-scattered light. These filters should be implemented in all slit lamps and indirect ophthalmoscopes for lasers. Operating microscopes should have a separate eye filter implemented in each viewing path of the microscope. To enable long-term viewing of the laser, these filters need to have an optical density specific to the laser wavelength used. Any personnel or bystanders must wear laser safety glasses designed to filter the specific power and wavelength of the laser.