The lysosomal alpha-galactosidase A (alpha-Gal A) deficiency is the main metabolic defect. It is required for the breakdown of the terminal galactose from globotriaosylceramide (Gb3). It leads to the accumulation of Gb3 in various cells and tissues, including skin, eye, kidney, heart, brain, and peripheral nervous system.

Vascular accumulation secondary to increased endothelial proliferation may manifest as vascular occlusion, ischemia, and infarction. The most common site for vascular dilatation is the vertebrobasilar arteries, followed by smaller cerebral vessels. Young patients presenting with stroke in the setting of Fabry disease have low levels of thrombomodulin (TM) and elevated levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI) suggestive of the prothrombotic nature of the disease. Postulated mechanisms for stroke in young patients with Fabry disease have been linked to nitric oxide and non-nitric oxide-dependent endothelial proliferation and dilation and abnormal endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) activity. Other common sites of Gb3 accumulation include autonomic ganglia, dorsal root ganglia, renal glomerular, tubular, interstitial cells, cardiac muscle cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, valvular fibrocytes, cardiac conduction fibers, and the cornea.

Globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) accumulation in the kidney frequently occurs in the glomerulus, followed by deposits in the distal tubule. The preference for Gb3 deposits in these locations is associated with the development of early proteinuria and polyuria. The mechanism of renal sinus cysts formation associated with Fabry disease is not well understood.