The majority of patients with intertrochanteric fractures present to the emergency room. Besides the triage nurse, the nurses on the orthopedic floor should be aware of this fracture and its management. Because many of these patients are initially at bed rest, prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis is vital.

The main concern of intertrochanteric fractures is the 20% to 30% mortality risk in the first year following fracture, with males having a higher mortality rate compared to females. If the fracture is not operatively treated within two days of injury, mortality risk increases. Other factors increasing mortality include age greater than 85 years, two or more pre-existing medical conditions, ASA classification (ASA III and IV increases mortality).  Early medical optimization and co-management with medical hospitalists or geriatricians can improve outcomes. The most predictive factor of functional outcomes following operative treatment is a pre-injury function, age, and dementia. With stable fracture patterns, more than half of patients will regain pre-injury walking function and pre-fracture level of activity of daily living function. Unstable fracture patterns tend to have worse outcomes when compared to the stable fracture patterns, with most patients experiencing a decline in mobility. Immediate postoperative management is imperative as older adults with these fractures have a five- to eight-time increase in risk for all causes of mortality during the 90-day postoperative period.