Numerous studies have shown refractive errors to be the largest cause of visual impairment worldwide.

The Jackson cross cylinder (JCC) is a combination of cylindrical lenses (sphero-cylindrical lenses) with a handle (See Jackson cross cylinder image).

**Astigmatism**

To understand the JCC and its principle, it is important to take a brief look at the concept of astigmatism.astigmatism" comes from a combination of the English article "a," which in this case means "without," and the greek word "stigma," which means "point." In combining the words, the definition indicates the concept of "without a point."

Astigmatism results from a difference in curvature of the key components of the eye's refractive system, which include the cornea and the lens. In astigmatism, the rays of light do not have a point focus on the retina, thus creating a blurry image. There are two foci that, in principle, do not fall at the same location, which gives rise to different forms of astigmatism.

Before the JCC can be effectively used, the circle of least confusion must be positioned on the retina, which is the smallest point that can be formed by a lens system, and the closest an astigmatic eye can come to achieving a clear image.

Astigmatism can be divided into the following five types, which are based on the location of the foci:

- Simple myopic astigmatism (See image): is where one of the foci is in front of the retina while the other focus is on the retina.

- Simple hyperopic astigmatism (See image): in this case, one of the foci is behind the retina at a virtual location while the other focus is on the retina.

- Compound myopic astigmatism: this type of astigmatism is present when both foci are in front of the retina and are at different locations.

- Compound hyperopic astigmatism: this condition is present when both foci are at different locations behind the eye.

- Mixed astigmatism (See image): this astigmatism results when the refractive media creates two foci. One focus is positioned in front of the retina, and the other is behind the retina.

Astigmatism can also be categorized based on the following causes (i.e., the refractive media):

- Corneal astigmatism: this is when the cornea is not evenly shaped, thus resulting in a difference in the refraction of light from the meridians.

- Lenticular astigmatism: the refractive surface of the lens is not equal in this type of astigmatism.