The muscles acting on the foot can classify as extrinsic and intrinsic muscles (29 total; 10 extrinsic and 19 intrinsic).

The extrinsic muscles can be organized by compartment. Anterior leg foot dorsiflexors include tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum longus, and extensor hallucis longus. Within the posterior lateral compartment of the ankle are the peroneus longus and peroneus brevis muscles which are involved in plantar flexion of the foot. In the posterior medial compartment of the ankle, deep to the flexor retinaculum lie the tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum longus, and flexor hallucis longus muscles which are also involved in plantar flexion. Finally, within the posterior ankle and hindfoot superficial to the flexor retinaculum lies the soleus muscle with the conjoined tendon of the gastrocnemius muscles forming the Achilles tendon. Adjacent to the Achilles tendon is the plantar tendon, both attached to the posterior calcaneus and are involved in foot plantar flexion.

The intrinsic muscles can be organized by which digits they power: the first digit, the central three digits, and the fifth digit.

The muscles of the great toe include the abductor hallucis, the flexor hallucis brevis, and the adductor hallucis. The abductor hallucis originates on the calcaneal tuberosity and inserts on the proximal phalanx of the first digit. It abducts the great toe to help maintain the foot arch. The flexor hallucis brevis which is involved in flexion of the first digit originates at the lateral cuneiform and cuboid and also inserts on the proximal phalanx of the first digit. The adductor hallucis has two heads. One head originates obliquely across the central midfoot at the proximal two through four metatarsals, and the other originates via the metatarsophalangeal ligaments three through five. They insert into the first proximal phalanx. This muscle adducts to the great toe.

The muscles of the central toes include the four lumbricals, quadratus plantae, flexor digitorum brevis, and the dorsal and plantar interossei. The lumbricals originate on the flexor digitorum longus tendon and insert on the extensor digitorum longus tendon. This muscle acts to extend the interphalangeal joints and to flex the metatarsophalangeal joints. The quadratus plantae originates on the plantar calcaneus and inserts into the flexor digitorum longus tendon, thereby flexing the distal phalanges. The flexor digitorum brevis originates at the calcaneal tuberosity and inserts at the middle three phalanges aiding in the flexion of the second through fifth digits. The interosseous muscles which adduct the digits, originate at metatarsals three through five and also insert at the middle three phalanges.

The muscles of the little toe include the abductor digiti minimi, flexor digiti minimi, and the opponens digiti minimi. The abductor digiti minimi originates from the calcaneal tuberosity and inserts on the fifth metatarsal base.  The flexor digit minimi originates at the fifth metatarsal base and inserts on the proximal phalanx of the little toe.