The treatment of xanthelasma involves changes in lifestyle and taking medications to lower serum lipids. Even though a low-fat diet and statins are often recommended, they have a limited effect on xanthelasmas once they have developed. If the lesions are a cosmetic concern, they can be excised by simple surgical procedures, cauterized, or removed with liquid nitrogen sessions. Surgery around the eyelids is fraught with complications and can result in ectropion, eyelid retraction, and injury to the eye itself. The use of cryotherapy and chemical cauterization can lead to severe scarring and skin discoloration.

Other methods include chemical peels utilizing trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in a high percentage of 50% or above to reach the optimum depth for the cholesterol deposits in the reticular dermis; similar substances like salicylic acid might be used as well. Deep peels may be complicated by hyperpigmentation, especially in dark-skin individuals, so the treating physician should pay attention to this point very well.

Lasers can be used to treat selected cases of xanthelasma palpebrarum using carbon dioxide, erbium, pulsed dye, argon, and Nd:YAG lasers. Most of the patients might accept laser treatments since they are not associated with tissue destructions or loss, and its a better alternative for surgery. Complications of laser therapy include pain, erythema, pigmentations, scars, and eye injuries. Fractionated Er:YAG and/or fractionated CO2 lasers are the most commonly used machines to treat xanthelasmas.

Radiofrequency machines can be used to treat some cases of xanthelasma because it is a very safe method compared to other modalities, but it is less effective, and it might be expensive.

Even after removal, the recurrence of xanthelasma is common, especially due to genetics and high cholesterol levels. Lipid-lowering medications can be used in patients with high cholesterol and triglyceride levels to prevent ischemic attacks and further deposits.