The development of the pectoral girdle and upper limb bud muscles have separate sources of origin. The scapula and muscles that attach to the medial border of the scapula are derived from para-axially located somites, whereas most of the limb bud structures of the upper limb are derived from lateral plate mesoderm, which develops opposite somites 8 to 10. Additionally, the connective tissue, which encompasses the entire pectoral girdle and maintains the integrity of the structure with the axial skeleton, is continuous with the connective tissue of the limb and superficial tissues of the thoracic region.

Upper limb development generally precedes lower limb bud development by several days. Precursor myoblasts of the upper limb migrate from multiple sources to form dorsal and ventral pre-muscle masses of the limb bud in stage 12, approximately week 5 of development. Supraspinatus will arise from the cells in the dorsal pre-muscle mass. The muscles of the upper limb form as a combination of somatic cells (muscle cells and myosatellite cells) and somatopleuric cells (tendons and other connective tissue structures). As the embryo reaches approximately 11 mm in length, the spine of the scapula and acromion are forming, and at the same time, the cellular mass of the deltoid starts to develop. Between the 11 mm and 15 mm embryonic stage, the deltoid mass transects horizontally, forming a myoblast mass that will become supraspinatus and infraspinatus. This embryologic association is important to the dynamic control of the glenohumeral joint.