Patients with TA require regular and lifelong follow up with a cardiologist trained in congenital heart disease such as a pediatric cardiologist or adult congenital heart disease (ACHD) specialist. The frequency of follow up varies between stages of single ventricle palliation. Patients with the Fontan require at least yearly follow up.

History and physical examination are beneficial in predicting many of the complications described above. Mild jugular venous distension is common after cavo-pulmonary anastomosis, but marked jugular venous distension and or hepatomegaly should prompt further evaluation for Glenn or Fontan obstruction or systolic ventricular dysfunction of the heart. Edema and diarrhea may be present in the context of PLE. A history of palpitations should prompt further evaluation for arrhythmias. Respiratory distress may occur in the context of heart failure, and a history of thick airway secretions may suggest the presence of plastic bronchitis. We emphasize the need for a thorough history and physical examination on follow up visits in these patients.

In addition to clinical assessment on yearly follow up, ECG and transthoracic echocardiogram is necessary. A more extensive cardiovascular and extracardiac organ system surveillance should be performed every 3 to 4 years to monitor for the complications outlined above. The extensive cardiovascular system surveillance may include Holter 24-hour monitor, exercise stress test, pro-brain natriuretic peptide, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography angiography, and cardiac catheterization. Organ system surveillance includes monitoring organ function through blood tests and extra-cardiac imaging.

Patients with surgically corrected TA can survive into childbearing age. There is growing experience with pregnancy in patients with the Fontan circulation. Nonetheless, these would be deemed high-risk pregnancies with increased risks for arrhythmias, heart failure, and thromboembolic complications. Counseling of these patients should take into account overall cardiovascular health and the status of noncardiac organ systems. These patients require joint management by an ACHD specialist and obstetrician specializing in high-risk pregnancies or maternal-fetal medicine specialist.