The novel coronavirus that emerged in Wuhan, China, in December 2019 and subsequently spread worldwide as a pandemic has uniquely challenged healthcare systems globally. Epicenters of the COVID-19 pandemic, including Wuhan, northern Italy, and the New York City area, have already seen their ICU resources stretched to the near breaking point. While only a few of those infected will require ICU care, due to near-universal susceptibility, this total number of COVID-19 patients who will need such resources before a vaccine or definitive therapy are developed vastly.  It can be predicted that COVID-19 ICU patients will be particularly susceptible to the impairments of Post Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS). Adherence to the ABCDEF bundle of care is challenging, if not impossible when ICUs become overwhelmed. Further, COVID-19 ICU patients have unusually high incidences of delirium due to the presence of encephalopathy, sepsis, and the need for prolonged mechanical intubation inherent to the disease.

To minimize the transmissibility of the novel coronavirus in hospital systems, many institutions have employed extremely restrictive patient visitation policies such that most COVID-19 patients spend the majority of their hospitalization in near-complete isolation. While these measures are understandable and necessary, the mental health consequences for both patients and their families are likely to be substantial. Primary care providers and others working in the outpatient setting should be prepared to screen COVID-19 ICU survivors and their family members for the mental health impairments of PICS, including PTSD. Hospital systems should develop plans to minimize the isolation of COVID-19 infection through the use of telemedicine mental health services and technologies to facilitate virtual visitation with family and friends.