The abdominal wall encloses the abdominal cavity and protects the abdominal viscera. The layers of the anterior abdominal wall which may be encountered in a laparotomy include the following from superficial to deep: skin, subcutaneous fat, fascia of Camper, fascia of Scarpa, external oblique muscle, internal oblique muscle, rectus abdominis muscle, transverse abdominis muscle, pyramidalis muscle, transversalis fascia, and peritoneum.

The rectus abdominis muscles are two long vertical muscles on either side of the midline in the abdominal wall. The two recti are joined in the midline by the linea alba, a fibrous avascular plane that runs from the xiphoid process of the sternum superiorly to the pubic symphysis inferiorly. The lateral border of the two sides of this muscle creates a surface marking known as the linea semilunaris. This muscle is divided by fibrous intersections that join the linea alba to give the impression of the well-known six-pack. The rectus abdominis attaches to the pubic crest and inserts into the xiphoid process and costal cartilages of ribs 5, 6 and 7. It is considered a flat muscle which compresses the abdominal viscera and stabilizes the pelvis during movements such as walking. It is innervated by the thoracoabdominal nerve supplied by nerve roots T7-T11.

The pyramidalis, as the name suggests, is a small triangular muscle. It is found superficially and inferior to the rectus abdominis attached to the linea alba and has its base on the pubis bone.

The rectus abdominis and pyramidalis muscles are enclosed in the rectus sheath which is formed by the aponeuroses of the external oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominis. The rectus sheath consists of an anterior and posterior component.

- Anterior rectus sheath – made from the aponeuroses of the external oblique and half of the internal oblique.

- Posterior rectus sheath – made from the aponeuroses of the external oblique and of half of the internal oblique.

However, there is no posterior rectus sheath below the arcuate line. This point is approximately midway between the umbilicus and pubic symphysis and therefore puts the transversalis fascia in direct contact with the rectus abdominis.

The blood supply to the abdominal wall can be considered a dual supply. The first supply consists of the inferior and superior epigastric arteries form the deep epigastric arcade, which is found between the rectus abdominis muscle and the posterior rectus sheath (also known as the retrorectus plane). The rectus muscle is supplied by perforating vessels which also branch off to supply the linea alba. The other main supply is the segmental arteries which arise from the aorta to supply the oblique and transverse muscles. These run between the internal oblique and transverse muscles.

The thoracoabdominal nerve, the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves, and the ventral branches from the 5 to 12 thoracic nerves all contribute to the innervation of the abdominal wall.