**1. Neurological Injury**

- 11.3% incidence of traumatic neuropraxia.

- Anterior Interosseous Nerve Palsy: This is the most commonly injured nerve in extension-type supracondylar fractures.

- Median Nerve Palsy: This can be traumatic or iatrogenic in origin.

- Radial Nerve Palsy: This has been found to be more common in fractures with posteromedial displacement.

- Ulnar Nerve Palsy: This is the most commonly injured nerve in flexion-type fractures.

**2. Vascular Injury**

- Brachial artery injury is more common in completely displaced Gartland III (and IV) injuries.

**3. Compartment Syndrome**

- This can result in the forearm from impaired perfusion in the setting of brachial artery injury and inadequate collateral circulation.

**3. Volkmann Ischaemic Contracture**

- This is relatively rare.

- It can occur as a complication of forearm compartment syndrome and delayed treatment of arterial injury with resultant forearm ischemia.

**4. Malunion and Deformity**

- Malunion can occur with resultant deformity in the sagittal, coronal and axial planes.

- Recurvatum Deformity:

- The sagittal plane deformity is more likely to remodel in younger children because this is in the plane of movement of the elbow (flexion/extension).
- This is the most common sagittal plane deformity.

- Cubitus Varus:

- Coronal and axial plane deformity have minimal remodeling potential.
- Comminution of the medial column can cause collapse, malunion, and varus deformity.
- It may also occur because of a residual internal rotation deformity.

- Cubitus Valgus:

- This can occur due to inadequate reduction and malunion.
- It can lead to tardy ulnar nerve palsy.

**5. Stiffness**

- The range of movement rapidly improves within the first six weeks following surgery.

- The range can improve to 98% of normal within the first 12 months.

- Stiffness is more commonly associated with open reduction procedures.

- Long-term reduction in the range of movement is also associated with malunion.

**6. Pin-site Infection**

**7. Pin-site Migration**