**United States**

Invasive infections caused by N. meningitidis are reported through the National Notifiable surveillance system in the United States. The number of cases reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in 2013 and 2014 was 556 and 564, respectively. These are the lowest numbers reported in the United States.

In 2014, the overall incidence of invasive meningococcal disease for the United States was 0.14/100,000 population. Of the cases reported, 25% of cases were bacteremia with a fatality of 20%. The serogroup distribution was 26% serogroup B, 36% serogroup C, 9% serogroup Y, and 28% other serogroups. In the United States, serogroup B is responsible for 65% of infant disease, and serogroups C and Y are responsible for the adolescent disease. Among the unvaccinated, outbreaks are due to serogroup C.

Meningococcal disease in the United States peaks during the months of November through March. A progressive increase in the protective antibodies against meningococci is seen between 2 and 12 years. Passive in utero IgG antibodies transfer occurs in neonates if the mother has the anti-meningococcal antibody.

**International**

In developing countries, the incidence rate of invasive meningococcal disease is 10 to 25 per 100,000 inhabitants per year. The highest rate of 10 to 1000 per 100,000 per year is seen in a belt across sub-Saharan Africa, termed the meningitis belt, with recurrent epidemics of group A. Death occurs in 6% to 10% of cases and complications in 4.3 to 11.2% of cases.

International outbreaks of N. meningitidis infections occurred in 1987 and 2000 associated with the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca. 1987 outbreak was due to serogroup A and the 2000 outbreak due to serogroup W-135. Serogroup W has emerged in other regions, including South America and England. In European countries, invasive serogroup C disease has declined, and serogroup B is causing 60% to 72% of cases of invasive disease. In Asia, large epidemics caused by serogroup A occurred historically in China, India, Nepal, and Russia. More recently, serogroup B and C emerged as the cause in this area.

An increase in the serogroup Y has been reported in the Nordic European countries.