In "Budgeting for Results," Ross writes that instead of viewing budgeting merely as a tool to estimate revenues and expenses, organizations should utilize budgeting as a process to translate organizational values into operational roadmaps.

Further, this process can be completed through joint efforts among senior leadership, mid-level management, and corporate finance departments. Ross discusses the five fundamental budgeting systems as listed below:

- **Incremental budget**: This budgeting system estimates the total cost of production based on current and historical expenditures. This system adjusts the budget based on the estimated changes in the price of inputs and outputs and the estimated changes in the quantity of the results. The primary focus of the incremental budget is to control the total cost to be within budget. Also known as the fixed or static budget, the incremental budget commonly induces the "use it or lose it" mentality among sub-division managers. For example, the nursing staff of an inpatient unit is allocated an annual budget of $10,000 for all social events; if the team doesn't use all of the $10,00 that year, the remainder will not carry over to the following year. The staff either uses it or loses it.

- **Flexible budget**: In contrast to the incremental budget, the flexible budget acknowledges that future output could fluctuate; therefore, the budgeted amount could also change. Managers of this budgeting system need to know their operations' fixed and variable costs so the budgeted output can be updated as circumstances evolve. The primary focus of the flexible budget is to control the average cost per unit of output to be within budget. For example, an ophthalmology surgical center newly offers an advanced cataract surgery procedure and thus adjusts its budget based on fluctuating levels of output (i.e., surgical cases).

- **Zero-based budget**: This budgeting system rejects the assumption that historical expenditures should dictate future budgets. The primary focus of the zero-based budget is to minimize the marginal cost of production, which is measured by changes in total cost over changes in total output. In zero-based budgeting, managers are required to answer three questions: (1) whether a product needs to be produced, (2) how it should be produced, and (3) at what scale it should be produced. In other words, the zero-based budget aims for the optimal product mix, production method, and quantity. For example, an in-house wellness clinic at a large manufacturing company adjusts its product offerings (e.g., physical therapy, weight management, smoking cessation) based on its employees' utilization.

- **Program budget**: This budgeting system is distinguished by its long-term, multi-department, and top-down approach to budgeting. This budgeting system starts at the executive level of an organization based on overarching objectives, then is passed down to mid-level management to produce department-level budgets. The primary focus of the program budget is to use the budget process to achieve organizational goals. For example, the National Health Service (NHS) in Great Britain allocates funding for its functions of direct medical care, public health endeavors, and medical research based on the organization's priorities in a given budget year.

- **Activity-based budget**: This budgeting system is the most operationally focused budget. Budget planners examine the step-by-step activities required to produce a specific output and estimate the costs generated from such activities. Activity-based budgeting is the composite summation of the cost associated with each production activity multiplied by the quantity of each production activity. The primary focus of the activity-based budget is to maximize effectiveness, efficiency, and throughput. For example, an outpatient surgical center conducts value stream mapping by illustrating a patient's care experience from initial referral to surgery to post-operative care; the center then estimates the cost associated with each step.

A subset of the activity-based budget is time-driven activity-based costing (TDABC), which is important in the era of value-based care.

In value-based care, healthcare organizations are judged by the outcome of care divided by the cost of delivering the care. Medicare designed prospective payment rates based on diagnostic-related groups (DRGs) in the 1980s for hospital reimbursements. The DRG-based payment system is a version of value-based care in which the cost of care is directly tied to the diagnosis and the severity of the illness.

As a result, TDABC has emerged as an all-encompassing yet relatively efficient cost-accounting method that examines the entire care delivery process. Kaplan and Porter developed the 7-step method of TDABC that examines the care delivery roadmap, incorporates direct and indirect costs, estimates time spent per activity, evaluates capacity cost rate, and ultimately generates the cost of the entire care process.