In 1940 Allen and Hives proposed edema in lipedema probably results from the poor resistance of the fat against the hydrostatic passage of fluid from the capillaries into the interstitium. Presumably, hormonal influence may contribute to its pubertal onset or post-pregnancy lipedema development in females when estrogen levels are high. Lipedema in men is uncommon, but few cases have been reported in liver disease or low testosterone, both of which have high estrogen states. Lipedema is also found in cases with polycystic ovarian disease where testosterone levels are high. The role of estrogen as a causative factor in lipedema is not well established.

Several theories have been postulated to describe lipedema. One theory mentions the loss of elastic tissue and abnormal vasculature. Structures in loose connective tissue include blood vessels, lymph nodes, and connective tissue fascia, containing elastin that helps to hold its shape. Lymphatic vessels do not have any elastic fibers, but it supports the closure and opening of lymph vessels in response to the pressure in tissue. Similarly, capillaries do not have any elastic tissue, but loose connective tissue surrounding capillaries contains elastic tissue. Therefore, with the growth of adipose tissue in lipedema, loss of elasticity results in a lack of ability of lymph vessels to open with increased pressure in the extracellular matrix and capillary leakage in the tissue. Subsequently, the development of hypoxia followed by stimulation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) proliferates stem cells in adipose tissue.

Eventually, lymph vessels lose their function results in microaneurysm formation in the lymph vessels responsible for lymphedema development. Another theory of abnormal lymphatic vasculature depicted primary defect in lymphatic vessels results in increased fluid accumulation in an extracellular matrix that enhances permeability in surrounding microvessels. Lipedema is associated with altered left ventricular rotational mechanics and increased aortic stiffness.