Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a progressive disease that, if left untreated, has very high morbidity and mortality due to right-sided heart failure. Pulmonary hypertension falls into five separate World Health Organization (WHO) groups based on the etiology, which has important ramifications for subsequent management. Group 1 is pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). PAH can be due to genetic causes, connective tissue diseases, HIV, schistosomiasis, portal hypertension, or drugs and toxins. Group 2 is PH due to left heart disease. Group 3 is PH due to chronic lung disease and/or hypoxemia. Group 4 is PH due to pulmonary artery obstruction, most commonly from venous thromboembolism (VTE). Group 5 is PH due to multifactorial mechanisms. The clinician can diagnose PH via a right heart catheterization (RHC) showing a mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) of over 25 mm Hg or a pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) greater than 3 Woods units. A normal pulmonary artery wedge pressure of under 15 mmHg is required to exclude group 2 PH. Currently, there are several pulmonary vasodilator agents with approval for the medical management of PAH, including endothelin receptor antagonists (ERA), phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5) inhibitors, and prostanoids.

Treprostinil is a synthetic analog of prostacyclin approved for the treatment of Group 1 or PAH. It is a direct vasodilator of both pulmonary and systemic vascular beds, thereby reducing pulmonary artery pressure and improving systemic oxygenation.

The infusion form is for patients with PAH (WHO Group I) with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II-IV. The inhaled form is used to treat PAH in patients with NYHA class III. The oral form is used to treat PAH in patients with NYHA class II-III.

Studies have also shown that in patients with severe chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) or WHO Group 4 PH, exercise capacity can improve with subcutaneous treprostinil.

The TRIUMPH-I trial (Treprostinil Sodium Inhalation Used in the Management of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension) demonstrated that patients who were symptomatic despite dual treatment with bosentan (ERA) and sildenafil (PDE-5 inhibitor) improved clinically after the addition of treprostinil with improved quality of life and exercise capacity measured by an increased 6-minute walk distance (6MWD).

This drug is available in multiple forms, inhaled, oral, and intravenous (IV). Treprostinil received approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2009 for the inhaled form, 2013 for the oral form, and 2017 for the infusion form.