Chronic fatigue syndrome can potentially affect the instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), such as cleaning, laundry, driving, and managing finances.

**Chronic Fatigue**

Even though chronic fatigue syndrome has fatigue as one of the three mandatory symptoms, it is a complex multisystem neurological disease with evidence of inflammation in the brain, hence the term myalgic encephalomyelitis.

**Rheumatological Disorders**

Fibromyalgia, polymyalgia rheumatica, polymyositis, and autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and Sjogren syndrome present a significant diagnostic dilemma for the provider.

**Psychiatric Disorders**

Roughly 20% of the patients presenting to primary care clinics have an underlying undiagnosed depressive illness, and targeted mental health history is critical.

**Endocrine Disorders**

There could be adrenal abnormalities (Addison disease, adrenal insufficiency, Cushing disease), thyroid abnormalities (both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism), and diabetes mellitus, which can mimic symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome.

**Hematological and Oncologic Disorders**

Undiagnosed malignancies can present with symptoms of fatigue and warrant a search for underlying cancer with age-appropriate screening. However, age alone should not be the only determining criterion for ordering these screenings.

**Infectious Diseases**

Infectious diseases like the human immunodeficiency virus, tuberculosis, and chronic hepatitis can have ongoing fatigue as their initial presentation.

**Gastrointestinal Disorders**

Inflammatory bowel disease can present with chronic fatigue symptoms.

**Neurological Disorders**

Fatigue is the main presenting feature of multiple sclerosis.

**Age-related Orthostatic Hypotension**

It is again imperative to recognize that there are age-related changes in blood vessels, causing decreased autonomic responsiveness, which worsens with inadequate fluid intake and polypharmacy.

**Respiratory Disorders**

Chronic respiratory conditions like chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and sarcoidosis can present with chronic fatigue.

**Sleep Apnea**

Undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnea can present with fatigue and unrefreshing sleep, two of the main diagnostic criteria for chronic fatigue syndrome. This is diagnosed by polysomnography.