The patient usually describes a specific eliciting event causing a combination of hyperextension and radial deviation to the thumb. Almost any type of valgus stress to the thumb can result in stress on the UCL.

In acute injuries, swelling, bruise, and local tenderness may be presented on examination. It is vital to examine the other normal thumb first and assess the range of motion and valgus stability; only then should the injured thumb be examined.

A mass lesion palpated proximal to the MCP joint may suggest a Stener lesion. The UCL integrity is evaluated by a stress test that applies radial stress on the proximal phalanx with the MCP joint in full extension and 30 degrees of flexion, to evaluate the ACL and the PCL respectively. Sometimes the lesion is too painful to perform the stress test in acute injuries, and local anesthetic injection can improve patient cooperation. The examiner assesses both the endpoint and the metacarpal-phalangeal deviation. The absence of a firm endpoint in the stress test indicates a UCL complete tear. A resultant metacarpal-phalangeal deviation more than 35 degrees on the affected side or a difference more than 15 degrees between the affected side and the normal side is also indicative of a complete UCL tear. The physical examination can differentiate a partial or a complete tear, but the determination of a Stener lesion requires further imaging evaluation because the physical finding of a palpable mass at the tender site is not pathognomonic.