The skull bones (frontal, nasal, and maxillae) take part in forming the temple of the nose, and most of its external appearance is made up by the soft tissue structures underlying rather than the bones.

Two paired nasal bones with the ascending process of the maxilla make up the bony vault (upper third) of the nose. The bony vault is smaller in females. At the nasofrontal suture, the nasal bones fuse with the frontal bone; this is called the nasion. The thickness of the bones differs, but it's the thickest at the nasofrontal suture. The average length of the nasal bones is 2.5 cm.

The nose is composed of the root, dorsum tip, and columella (the part between nostrils) externally, while the other parts of the nose are composed of the ala, alar sulcus and nostrils. These are all supported by the underlying structures, which are the bones, cartilage, muscles and subcutaneous fat.

The cartilage supports only the nasal bones, ethmoid bones, maxillae, and vomer. The cartilage is composed of the septal cartilage, the bilateral (greater) alar cartilage, the lateral cartilages, the lesser alar cartilage, and the sesamoid cartilage. The nasal septum supports the cartilage itself.

The nasal septum forms the central part of the nose, and it is composed of the vomer posteriorly, and inferiorly it's composed of the ethmoid and the septal cartilage. It supports the soft tissue of the nose and reinforces the nasal structure by splitting it in two.

The septal cartilage is connected superiorly to the lateral cartilages and inferiorly to the anterior nasal spine. The lateral cartilages have the shape of a triangle, and they are connected to the septal cartilage, to the inferior part of the nasal bones and sometimes to the frontal process of the maxilla. Both the lateral and septal cartilages disconnect anteriorly to allow movement at the time of respiration.

The lower third of the nose is carried by the lower lateral cartilages that reside on the upper lateral cartilages, thus forming the tip of the nose and contributing to its round shape.

The nasal vestibule represents the entrance of the nose and is padded with squamous epithelium, sebaceous glands, and hair. The squamous epithelium becomes mucosa after nearly 0.5 cm.