As stated above, ritonavir is a potent CYP3A inhibitor with significant drug-drug interactions that can potentially cause life-threatening adverse events.

Clinicians and pharmacists (authorized under the FDA EUA to prescribe nirmatrelvir/ritonavir to eligible patients) should obtain a comprehensive history to determine whether patients are candidates for the medication.

If potential drug-drug interactions exist, all healthcare team members should be informed to not only help prevent adverse events but also implement any corrective measures if necessary. In addition, dose adjustments of concomitant medications might be necessary for patients at risk of drug-drug interactions or those with moderate renal impairment.

Patients taking nirmatrelvir/ritonavir should be monitored by the interprofessional team. In addition, patients need to be provided with a fact sheet for patient education. Nurses are ideally situated to observe for adverse reactions, assess patient compliance with their regimen, and inform the healthcare team of their findings. However, as stated above, all healthcare team members are mandated to report serious medication errors and adverse events to FDA MedWatch and the drug's manufacturer.

As nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is an investigational medicine, the healthcare team must be aware of the indications, contraindications, mechanism of action, adverse effects, toxicity, and monitoring when managing the care of patients with COVID-19. In addition to the duties mentioned above, all healthcare team members are responsible for educating and counseling patients. Given that nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is the only oral highly-effective antiviral against COVID-19 at this time, judicious use can help curb COVID-19-related morbidity and mortality while minimizing the risk of drug-related adverse events.

The FDA announced that pharmacists could also prescribe nirmatrelvir/ritonavir; however, patients are required to bring health records(<1 year old), with reports of liver and kidney function along with a comprehensive(including OTC) list of all medications, so the pharmacist can screen for potentially serious drug interactions and check for prescribing eligibility. The FDA has recommended that the pharmacist refer the patient to a physician, advanced practice nurse, or physician assistant if the above criteria are not met.

Consequently, the interprofessional approach with excellent communication between physicians, advanced practice nurses, physician assistants, pharmacists, and specialists are required to accomplish optimal outcomes for nirmatrelvir/ritonavir therapy in patients with COVID-19. This includes meticulous documentation of all interactions and interventions with the patient so that all team members have the same patient data from which to make decisions regarding care.

Finally, genetic sequencing of patients treated with nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is crucial due to the potential for antiviral resistance to SARS-CoV-2.