There are concerns associated with neurosurgery that must merit careful consideration to determine whether the risks of performing invasive surgery is beneficial to a patient's prognosis. In the worst cases, a neurological decline can follow the postoperative period of neurosurgery. Common complications associated with surgery include:

- Intracranial bleeds

- Brain edema

- CSF leakage

- Infection

- Ischemia

- Hyperperfusion syndrome

- Embolism and stroke

- Cranial nerve palsy, particularly after the endarterectomy of the carotid

The sensory cortex can be affected by many of the aspects contributing to potential neurological decline after surgery. Any obstruction of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) or middle cerebral artery (MCA) will cause associated sensory deficits along with other neurological deficits, as this arterial system supplies more than simply the sensory cortex. The surgery on the vasculature itself, including the circle of Willis, can cause embolization. Thromboemboli and atheroemboli (can arise after carotid endarterectomy) from surgical procedures can reach the ACA or MCA and result in the associated neurological symptoms. The obstruction of the ACA typically can cause sensory and motor deficits in the legs, while common manifestations of the MCA obstruction include sensory and motor deficits in the face and arms. Both of these obstructions typically present unilaterally. Essentially, surgically manipulating the vasculature supplying the sensory cortex and the vessels that upstream can result in embolic infarcts. Further surgical considerations include hypotension from blood loss and internal carotid obstruction, resulting in global cerebral ischemia and watershed infarcts in the area between the ACA and MCA.