Awareness in the treatment of venous disorders through the use of stents has increased over the past decade. Venous stenting is recognized as a possible treatment to help assist patients with symptomatic iliocaval venous obstruction (ICVO) as an alternative to conventional surgery. ICVO contributes to chronic venous insufficiency and chronic venous hypertension.  Symptoms of ICVO include venous claudication, chronic edema and/or venous ulceration, and other manifestations of post-thrombotic syndrome.

Women and patients with a history of deep venous reflux diagnosed on duplex scans have a higher incidence of ICVO.

Hemodynamically significant ICVO may compromise the effectiveness and even causes worsening of symptoms with routine compression therapy and exercise for limb swelling. The use of stenting procedures to treat ICVO, including involvement into the inferior vena cava, has acceptable patency rates and reduction in symptoms in most patients.

The initial use of self-expanding stents for the treatment of ICVO employs an endoprosthesis stent consisting of a braided, self-expanding stent composed of cobalt, chromium, and nickel alloy. Early venous stents comprise large diameters, radial force, compression, and fracture resistance. However, its deployment accuracy could be imprecise due to stent foreshortening. The radial force is only present in the body, and thus the stent could collapse at the ends due to the Poisson effect of biomechanical forces.

Most initial venous stents were not designed for use in the venous system.  Initial stent development focused on addressing these challenges by increasing the crush resistance needed in venous stents.

Based on prior consensus clinical practice guidelines, iliac stenting assists in significantly increased ulcer healing.