The associated injuries with pelvic fractures make prognostic measurements difficult. One study showed that over 60% of patients with traumatic pelvic fractures experience chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pain is associated with depression and anxiety. External fixation is associated with pin site infections that can be treated with PO or IV antibiotics +/- debridement of site. Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve injury can also occur from external fixation.

Urogenital injuries can be associated with sexual dysfunction, such as dyspareunia, erectile dysfunction, and restricted motion. Urinary and fecal incontinence are also possible. Urethral strictures have been reported in 31% to 69% of complete urethral transections.

Urinary incontinence is initially treated conservatively. Pelvic floor strengthening and biofeedback are used initially. Duloxetine, a selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor is used in combination with physiotherapy successfully in many patients.

Similarly, fecal incontinence starts with nonoperative management. Dietary changes and fiber supplements can optimize stool consistency and limit urgency. Medications can be used to slow the bowels. Examples include the antidiarrheals Imodium and Lomotil, the bile acid binder cholestyramine, and medications the reduce the reflexive relaxation of the sphincter, such as amitriptyline. Physical therapy and biofeedback have been used successfully to strengthen the pelvic floor. If conservative treatments fail, a sphincteroplasty can be performed. Other options include implanting artificial anal sphincters or magnetic anal sphincters. Sacral nerve stimulators can also be successful.

It is important to note a pelvic binder itself can cause complications. A pelvic binder should not be placed for more than 24 hours. The binder can cause skin necrosis and pressure ulcers as soon as 2 to 3 hours after placement.

Complications from angioembolization occur in up to 5% of cases. Complications can occur at the access site and include hematoma, pseudoaneurysm, dissection, or thrombus. Pelvic tissue necrosis can be a life-threatening complication and requires exploration and repair. Patients can have a reaction to the contrast itself or develop contrast nephropathy and an acute kidney injury.

Potential REBOA complications are numerous and mainly involve vessel injuries. The balloon can cause an arterial rupture, perforation, or dissection. The catheter itself can create lower extremity ischemia and subsequent reperfusion injury and compartment syndrome. Balloon occlusion also leads to distal ischemia. Prolonged occlusion leads to organ ischemia, which can be irreversible. Organ reperfusion can lead to multiorgan dysfunction or failure, including acute kidney injury, liver failure, intestinal ischemia, spinal cord infarction, and death. Access site complications can be treated with patch repairs, arterial reconstructions with native or artificial tissue, or bypasses. If these measures fail, then the limb would require amputation. Aortic injuries from REBOA are generally life or limb-threatening. Multiorgan dysfunction is generally treated medically.