**Islamic Principles**

- Muslims are required to pray five times a day.

- Pilgrimage to Mecca is required at least once in their life for those who can afford it.

- Once a year, a Muslim gives 2.5% of one's wealth to a charitable cause.

- Ramadan is a month-long fast of drink, food, and sex during daylight.

- The Quran is the final revelation of Humanity.

- There is only one God, Allah.

- Muhammad is God's messenger.

- Complete submission to God

- Judgment day

- Oneness of God, his angels, scriptures, and messengers

- Life after death

- Reward and punishment

**Food**

- Children, women who are pregnant, and those who are ill may be exempt from fasting.

- Eat food that is clean, good, pure, nourishing, pleasant, tasteful, and wholesome.

- Eat with the right hand, considered to be the clean hand.

- Food not invoked in Allah's name may be prohibited.

- Use only vegetable oil.

- Pork and alcohol are prohibited

**Daily Practices**

- Prayer 5 times a day facing Mecca (dawn, midday, mid-afternoon, sunset, night)

- Days of observance occur throughout the Muslim lunar calendar.

- Wash face, hands, and feet before prayer

**Health**

- Abortion is prohibited except in cases of incest, rape, and if the life of the mother is threatened.

- A fetus is considered a human being after 25 weeks gestation.

- Health providers are seen as helpers of God’s will.

- Most surgical procedures are permitted.

- No restrictions on amputations, biopsies, blood or blood products, medications, amputations

**Death and Dying**

- Autopsy only for legal or medical reasons

- Confession of sins and begging forgiveness may occur before death.

- Death is in God’s plan.

- Euthanasia is prohibited

- Organ donation is permissible.

- Prayer for the deceased is led by a male within 72 hours after death; as a result, a death certificate should be signed quickly to facilitate the process.

**Special Practices**

- Customs prohibit handshakes or any contact between genders.

- Female patients may require a female physician but always ask the patient.

**Holy Days**

- Congregational prayer - Fridays, the Holiest Day for Muslims, takes place at noon prayer.

- Eid-ul-Adha (Celebration of the Sacrifice of Abraham) - a three-day celebration beginning on the 10th day of the 12th month called Dhul Hijjah.

- Eid-ul-Fitr (Celebration of the Fast-Breaking) - held on the first day of the 9th of the lunar calendar.

- Ramadan one month long

**Shia Muslims**

Shia means Party of Ali.

Shia Muslims believe that when Muhammad died, it was his wish that Ali, his cousin, would be the new caliph. They believe that the leaders of Islam should be direct descendants of the Prophet Muhammad. Shia Muslims ignore the elected Sunni leaders and instead follow their leaders, which are direct descendants of Muhammad called Imams. Approximately 15% of Muslims are Shia. Iran and Iraq have a majority of Shia Muslims. Shia Muslims are a minority in the rest of the world. Shia Muslims pray up to 5 times a day. some Shia's will combine the noon and afternoon together, the same for Maghrib and Isha. Sunni Muslims pray five times a day.

**Sunni Muslims**

Sunni means the words and actions of the Prophet Muhammad. Sunni Muslims believe that when Muhammad died, it was his wish that the next leader would be elected. Sunni Muslims believe the leaders of Islam should continue to be elected. Most Muslims are Sunni.