Latanoprost is available as a colorless, isotonic ophthalmic solution at a strength of 0.005%. According to the manufacturer, unopened bottles should be stored 'under refrigeration at 2 to 8 degrees C (36 to 46 degrees F). During shipping, the container may remain at temperatures up to 40 degrees C (104 degrees F) for a period not to exceed eight days. Upon opening the bottle, it may be stored at room temperature up to 25 degrees C (77°F) for six weeks.

The dosage is one drop once daily at night, and curiously the IOP lowering effect reduces (or paradoxical IOP rise may occur) when used more than once daily. The reduction in the IOP lowering effect may be due to subsensitivity at the FP receptors.

Latanoprost may be administered with other antiglaucoma agents to reduce intraocular pressure. If using more than one topical ophthalmic drug, there should be a minimum gap of 5 minutes between two drops. Contact lenses require removal before administering the medication, and the patient should not reinsert them within 15 minutes of the topical application of the drop. Latanoprost administration is topical, with one drop once daily in the evening in the affected eye/s.

The average IOP drop with latanoprost is in the range of 30% to 35%. At six months, latanoprost was noted to reduce IOP by 35% when applied in the evening and 31% when instilled in the morning compared to timolol, which caused a 27% reduction of IOP.

Once-daily latanoprost has been shown to achieve a uniform round-the-clock reduction of IOP either alone or combined with a twice-daily dose of timolol.

**Use in Specific Population**

- **Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**There is no information about dosage adjustments in patients with hepatic impairment in the manufacturer's labeling.

- **Patients with Renal Impairment:**There is no information about dosage adjustments in patients with renal impairment in the manufacturer's labeling.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**Prostaglandins stimulate uterine smooth muscle, inducing uterine contractions, and animal studies have indicated an augmented risk of abortion or preterm delivery. In animal reproduction studies, intravenous (IV) administration of latanoprost to pregnant rabbits and rats throughout organogenesis resulted in embryofetal lethality, malformations, and spontaneous abortion at clinically relevant doses. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies of latanoprost ophthalmic solution administration in pregnant women to advise regarding drug-associated risks. However, theoretically, prostaglandins increase uterine tone and can lead to premature labor. Hence, other classes of medications than latanoprost should be selected to treat glaucoma during pregnancy. (FDA Category C)

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**No information is available on the use of latanoprost during breastfeeding. Because of its short half-life, it is not likely to reach the bloodstream of the infant or cause any adverse effects in breastfed infants. Professional guidelines consider prostaglandin eye drops acceptable during breastfeeding. To diminish the amount of drug that reaches the breastmilk after using eye drops, the clinician should advise the patient to place pressure over the tear duct by the corner of the eye for 1 minute or more, then remove the excess solution with an absorbent tissue.