A dysfunctional protein can lead to a variety of medical conditions and, often, death. Dysfunctional proteins can lead to****childhood obesity, breakdown of the retina leading to blindness, hearing loss, and type 2 diabetes.

Take, for example, the protein cilia and how its dysfunction manifests.

- Inadequate cilia in flagella lead to sperm dysmotility.

- Defective cilia in the respiratory tract lead to chronic lung infections.

- Eustachian tube cilia dysfunction causes chronic ear infections and hearing loss.

- Dysfunctional cilia in Fallopian tubes cause infertility.

**Infectious**

Many infective agents work by mimicking human accessory proteins and binding to elongation factors. Although the bacteria inhibit proteins, viruses actually "hijack" and use the host's protein synthesis machinery for reproduction and further infection. Infectious, misfolded proteins called "prions," short for "proteinaceous and infectious virions," infect as a normally folded protein then replicate and misfold into β-sheets called an "amyloid fold." These aggregate into amyloid plaques and create "holes" in tissue creating a "spongiform" appearance. Prions affect nervous tissue leading to harmful and deadly neurological symptoms.

**Cartilaginous**

Mutations that alter collagen's structure promote frequent fractures, easy bruising, weak joints, and hearing loss due to abnormal inner ear bones.

**Enzymatic**

A genetic disease can cause a deficiency of the enzyme required to convert amino acids into neurotransmitters and skin pigment. The disease does not result from the decrease in amino acid levels, rather from the high concentration of amino acids. This promotes activity in a minor enzymatic pathway producing toxic products. The presence of these products is screened for in the blood as part of standard neonatal testing.  Patients usually express traits of albinism, white-blond hair, pale blue eyes, and an odor from the toxic products in their sweat, urine, skin, and hair. Treatment of this disease is with a diet low in specific amino acids.

**Muscular**

Diseases in skeletal muscle proteins may cause a rapid breakdown, therefore resulting in the inability to walk.

**Osmotic**

Misfolded proteins can cause numerous, clinically significant diseases. Most notably is cystic fibrosis, an autosomal recessive disorder due to a defect in the chloride channel CFTR protein, which regulates water, chloride movement, and mucus production. Normally this protein is a channel for chloride to move out of cells to balance the tonicity of salt and water. Sodium is an ion that moves in a counter-current fashion to balance the osmolality between compartments. This is important in glandular tissues that secrete large concentrations of sodium chloride. Mucus plugs, recurrent infections, infertility, and gastrointestinal dysfunction are common manifestations.

**Multifactorial**

Acute phase reactants caused mostly by IL-6 made by macrophages and also T-helper cells. Too many acute-phase proteins can be deposited anywhere in the body. The non-specific deposition is called amyloidosis. Deposition into the vasculature alters their integrity. Compliance with blood vessel walls will decrease, leading to less distensibility; this makes the blood vessel more likely to rupture if the pressure goes up—a massive intracerebral hemorrhage in a young person with no prior history of hypertension or trauma. Diagnostic confirmation is via congo red stain, which shows a characteristic apple-green birefringence.

Beta-amyloid or tau protein is present in both age-related and Down syndrome-related Alzheimer disease (beta-lipoprotein E4 is more specific for Alzheimer's disease). In the general population, this protein gets oxidized, causing Alzheimer disease. Neurofibrillary tangles are the manifestation of the tau protein undergoing oxidation and aggregating. In Down syndrome, the body is not able to cleave the beta-lipoprotein from the amyloid precursor protein. The result is the build-up of beta lipoprotein, which causes early-onset Alzheimer disease.