Diagnosis begins with the evaluation of risk factors and a physical examination. Dermoscopy can be used to aid in the diagnosis, confirming follicular purpura and corkscrew hairs with a 4 mm punch biopsy of affected areas showing similar findings by histopathology. Serum testing for low plasma vitamin C (less than 0.2 mg/dL) is usually consistent with scurvy; however, as stated above, recent intake or supplementation may elevate plasma levels and not be reflective of a prior prolonged deficit. The level of vitamin C in leukocytes is more accurate when assessing the sparse vitamin C stores as they are less affected by acute dietary changes. A leukocyte vitamin C level of 0 mg/dL is indicative of latent scurvy. Zero to 7 mg/dL is consistent with deficiency, and greater than 15 mg/dl is adequate.

In addition to assessing vitamin C levels, screening for concomitant other vitamin deficiencies should be undertaken. As deficiency is primarily related to poor intake, those affected also may have a poor intake of other essential vitamins and minerals. Vitamin B12, folate, calcium, zinc, and iron have been notably low in this patient population. Additionally, vitamin C’s role in iron absorption causes those with scurvy to be more prone to bleeding, and iron deficiency, in particular, should be assessed.

Imaging studies will reveal the following:

- Fractures, dislocations

- Subperiosteal elevation

- Alveolar bone resorption

- Early imaging features of scurvy are observed at the distal ends of the radius, which has fuzziness over the lateral aspect of the cortex. Progression to osteoporosis is common.