A diagnosis of SPS is usually made clinically by thorough neurological examination with the support of electrodiagnostic and laboratory findings.

The current diagnostic criteria for classic SPS  include:

- Stiffness in the limb and axial muscles, prominent in the abdomen and thoracolumbar region

- Painful spasms precipitated by unexpected tactile and auditory stimuli

- Evidence of the continuous motor unit activity in agonist and antagonist muscles demonstrated by EMG

- Absence of other neurological impairments that could support an alternative diagnosis

- Positive serology for anti-GAD65 or anti-amphiphysin autoantibodies

- Clinical response to therapy with benzodiazepines

The level of anti-GAD antibodies in serum higher than 10,000IU/mL supports a clinical impression of SPS.****CSF analysis is usually unremarkable. In patients with PERM, a mild increase in CSF cell count with elevated protein and positive oligoclonal bands has been demonstrated as well as positive autoantibodies against glycine receptors.

Electrodiagnostic testing is useful to rule out other nerve and muscle pathologies and to confirm the clinical diagnosis. Routine nerve conduction studies in SPS are usually normal. Needle electromyography (EMG) in SPS shows continuous involuntary motor unit activity even at rest, despite volitional effort to relax. Continuous motor unit activity and co-activation of agonists-antagonists muscles are key diagnostic features and are mostly detected in trunk muscles, especially paraspinal and abdominal muscles and proximal limb muscles.

MRI brain and spinal cord are usually non-diagnostic in classic SPS, but they are often performed to rule out other causes of rigidity and stiffness.

Magnetic resonance spectroscopy can show a focal change in GABA levels in the motor area of the brain in SPS.****In patients with PERM, MRI might show hyperintense signals in the spinal cord and the brainstem.

To diagnose a paraneoplastic variant, it is important to check for antibodies against amphiphysin and gephyrin and initiate a prompt neoplastic workup.

Since around 35 % of patients diagnosed with SPS have DM-1 and about 5 % have associated autoimmune thyroid disease, a search for coexisting autoimmune conditions is commonly performed.