**Primary Thrombosis Etiology (Paget–von Schrötter syndrome)**

Primary thrombosis is usually seen in healthy, young individuals. It is also referred to as spontaneous axillary subclavian vein thrombosis (ASVT) due to its unexpected presentation. Recent studies have shown that the syndrome can affect all ages. In the past, the syndrome was known as effort-induced thrombosis. Effort-induced thrombosis was used to describe the disease as unexpected thrombosis occurring after strenuous or repetitive use of the upper extremity on the affected side.

The pathophysiology of the disease is attributed to many factors. First, it is important to understand the anatomy of the structures of the thoracic outlet and the venous system. The clavicle is superior to the thoracic border of the subclavian vein, and the first rib is inferior to the subclavian vein. The anterior scalene muscle is located laterally to the vein and the medial costoclavicular ligament. The subclavian vein passes through the thoracic outlet before reaching the internal jugular vein. Changes in slight anatomy can cause compression of the vein. When the arm abducts, the subclavian vein is compressed between the clavicle and the first rib. This results in the perfect setup for Virchow’s triad- endothelial cell damage, inflammation, scarring, hypercoagulability, and blood stasis.

The costoclavicular ligament is more commonly seen inserted laterally in patients with thrombosis resulting in subclavian vein compression. Repetitive movements in the area that includes the subclavius and anterior scalene muscles also contribute to venous compression and injury. Other anatomical changes that can increase the risk of thrombosis are the abnormal insertion of the first rib, congenital fiber-muscular bands, or narrowing of the costoclavicular space. In addition, any hematologic pathologies that coexist can contribute to thromboses, such as factor V Leiden mutation, protein C deficiency, or anti-thrombin III. Idiopathic primary thrombosis is frequently linked to an occult malignancy or coagulation abnormality.

**Catheter-induced Subclavian Vein Thrombosis**

Placing pacemakers and central catheters will alter the venous blood flow and create turbulence in the vein. This will start the cascade of platelet aggregation, the release of procoagulants, and, ultimately, fibrin deposition. A thrombus forms that will reduce the size of the vein, ultimately leading to total vessel occlusion. In patients with risk factors for thrombus, such as cancer, immobility, and hemophilic disorders, this will be an additional contributing factor.