Differential diagnosis: According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) following are the differential diagnosis of mood disorders.

- Generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), or other anxiety disorders: A comprehensive history taking is required to distinguish generalized anxiety disorder from a mood disorder, as anxious ruminations can be misunderstood as racing thoughts. Actions to decrease anxiety may be comprehended as aggressive behavior seen in the manic episode. Likewise, signs and symptoms of PTSD, including anger and aggression, should be differentiated from bipolar disorder.

- Substance/medication-induced mood disorder: Substance use disorders may present with symptoms suggestive of mania/ depression that needs to be differentiated. A primary diagnosis of a mood disorder must be ascertained based on symptoms that continue once the patient stops consuming the substance. Certain medications (steroids and alpha-interferon) can induce manic or depressive symptoms. Clinical judgment and a thorough history are required to distinguish these symptoms from mood disorders.

- Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Commonly seen in adolescents and children, this disorder can be mistaken for bipolar disorder. Symptoms such as increased psychomotor activity, difficulty to interrupt speech, distractibility, and decreased need for sleep overlap with symptoms in a manic episode. The episodic nature of bipolar disorder can be valuable in differentiating mania from ADHD.

- Personality disorder: Symptoms of certain personality disorders like borderline personality disorder may have a significant overlap with bipolar disorders. Labile mood, impulsivity, delusions, and hallucinations are commonly seen in both disorders. These symptoms must appear in episodes with a marked increase over baseline, to be categorized as bipolar disorder.

- Schizophrenia spectrum and other related psychotic disorders: Bipolar disorder and severe depression with psychotic symptoms must be differentiated from psychotic disorders. Schizophrenia and other related psychotic disorders are all defined by intervals of psychotic symptoms. Important criteria to distinguish these two are delusions, and hallucinations in psychotic disorders are seen in the absence of any mood symptoms. Other valuable considerations constitute the concurrent symptoms, the chronology of symptoms, and the longitudinal course.

- Delirium, catatonia, and acute anxiety: It is crucial to distinguish symptoms of mania from hyperactive delirious symptoms, excited catatonia, and impulsivity/aggression associated with acute anxiety.