A loss of function of sensory neurons may prevent the withdrawal reflex from being initiated. Different pathologies can affect peripheral sensation, such as multiple sclerosis and stroke. Congenital insensitivity to pain is a rare disease that impairs an individual's ability to perceive pain

The withdrawal reflex may also be impacted if motor neurons or their synapses with musculature are damaged, as can be seen in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).Mycoplasma pneumoniae), and viruses (CMV, HSV, and enterovirus). Patients with transverse myelitis will experience motor weakness, autonomic nervous system (ANS) and sensory dysfunction, and diminished reflexes.

Specific modulators of the withdrawal reflex have long been topics of research, which has revealed that the reflex pattern may undergo modulation by running, different phases of walking, stimulus intensity, and even the load on the leg. In fact, the particular phase of walking has been found to reverse the reflex. Classical conditioning involving the cerebellum as a structure for procedural learning has also been found to affect the withdrawal reflex.

Premature infants may display a flexion withdrawal reflex as early as 22 weeks and three days gestational age. Compared to full-term newborns, the flexion withdrawal reflex of premature infants has a very low threshold throughout the first three days of life and continuously increases up to a corrected age of 37–40 gestational weeks, which reflects the changing spinal cord excitability in human development.