The cause of substance use is multifactorial. It includes psychological, biological, socio-cultural, and environmental factors. Some mental health disorders predispose individuals to abuse illicit substances; for example, those with ADHD have a high chance of abusing illicit substances in their adulthood.

Cannabis is the most common abused drug in the United States.

The Services Administration for Mental Health and Substance Abuse (SAHMSA), the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), and the National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA) have accumulated data on substance use and its consequences over the years. Studies show individuals who abuse one substance are more like to abuse other substances as well. In 2012, studies showed that the lifetime prevalence of alcohol use disorder was 8%, and illicit substance use was 2-3%.

A cross-sectional study was conducted in the US with 36,309 adults, and the data was obtained from April 2012 to June 2013. The study showed a 12-month prevalence of substance use disorder was 3.9% and lifetime substance use disorder was 9.9%. Substance use disorder was more prominent among certain population groups. They were men, Caucasian, Native Americans, young single or previously married adults, lower educated individuals, lower-income individuals, and those residing on the Western side of the country. There was a significant association with individuals with disabilities, with a 12-month prevalence of 13.5% and a lifetime prevalence of 24.6%.