The disease has an enigmatic tale, with both the time lapse between the onset of symptoms and hospital admission and progression to a higher stage being highly variable and unpredictable.

A delay in the diagnosis of SEA (defined as multiple visits before the definite diagnosis and treatment) can result in increased residual weakness or permanent neurologic deficit.

Irreversible paralysis still affects 4 to 22% of patients owing largely to delay in diagnosis and suboptimal management. 11 to 75% of them are initially misdiagnosed.

Around 5% of the patients die from sepsis or other related causes.

There is limited data available in the literature about neurological recovery after surgery. However, the recovery is variable and generally depends on multiple factors, including age, health status, comorbidities, and time to diagnosis. Timely treatment initiation is crucial.

**Importance of timely surgical interventions among patients with SEA:**

- Surgery during stage 1 or stage 2 reduces pain and shows improvement in above 90% of cases.

- Surgery during stage 3 may reverse or minimize neurological deficits.

- Surgery during stage 4 within 36 hours may help regain some neurological functioning.

Esophageal tears and intestinal–spinal fistula need to be ruled out among patients with refractory or recurrent infections.

There is a high risk of recurrence among patients with:

- History of intravenous drug use

- Bowel dysfunction at presentation

- Concurrent local wound infection

- Concurrent immunocompromised status or immunosuppressive agents.

The motor deficit has been observed to be a risk factor for 90-day mortality.