A thorough history and physical examination are important tools in the evaluation of inclusion body myositis. Laboratory testing includes serum creatinine kinase level which is usually elevated suggesting muscle injury. Other markers of muscle injury like Aldolase, LDH, ALT, and AST can also be elevated. Inflammatory markers like ESR and CRP can be normal. Mup44 antibody against the cytosolic 5'nucleotidase 1A antigen is most commonly present in a patient with IBM. However, these antibodies are also detected in about 20% of patients with SLE and Sjogren syndrome in the absence of muscle disease.

EMG can be helpful in distinguishing myopathy from neuropathic causes of weakness. Typical EMG findings of myositis include irritability of the muscle fibers (fibrillation, complex repetitive discharges, and positive sharp waves) at rest and during needle insertion and myopathic motor unit potentials (short duration, low amplitude and polyphasic) during contraction.

Both EMG and MRI are helpful in identifying the muscle appropriate for doing a biopsy. A muscle that does not have clinical signs of advanced or end-stage disease and is at the same time not minimally affected is ideal for doing a biopsy. Biopsy should be done on the contralateral to the one used for EMG testing to avoid inflammation artifact caused during needle insertion. In 90% of cases, degeneration and regeneration of the myofibrils are seen. Typical biopsy finding is perivascular and endomysial inflammatory infiltrates that predominantly consists of CD8+T Cells and invades the non-necrotic muscle fibers that express MHC Class I antigen.

Inclusion body myositis can be associated with autoimmune diseases like Sjogren syndrome and sarcoidosis, lymphoproliferative diseases like CLL and infections like HIV and hepatitis B. Hence, screening tests with antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-Ro(SSA), anti-La(SSB), serum immunofixation, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and hepatitis C should be considered.