**Blood supply**

The three major branches of the celiac trunk include the left gastric, splenic, and common hepatic arteries. These arteries constitute the main blood supply to the foregut and the spleen. The left gastric artery gives off esophageal branches that supply the lower part of the esophagus. It then travels along the lesser curvature of the stomach to form an anastomosis with the right gastric artery. The splenic artery travels posterior to the stomach and gives rise to the left gastroepiploic artery, which supplies the greater curvature of the stomach. It also gives rise to pancreatic branches that supply the tail and body of the pancreas. The short gastric artery is another branch of the splenic artery, and it supplies blood to the fundus of the stomach. It is important to note that the short gastric artery does not anastomose with any other arteries. As a result, the fundus of the stomach does not have a dual blood supply, and any obstruction to the splenic artery will lead to ischemia of the fundus.

The common hepatic artery, which is the only arterial source to the liver, gives off the proper hepatic and gastroduodenal arteries. The proper hepatic artery gives rise to the right gastric and right and left hepatic arteries. The cystic artery is usually a branch of the right hepatic artery. 1.2% of the time, it can originate from the left gastric artery.

**Lymphatics**

Celiac lymph nodes are located around the celiac trunk and drain lymph from the liver, gallbladder, stomach, spleen, and pancreas into the cisterna chyli, which eventually drains into the thoracic duct.