To access and remove the buccal fat pad for facial aesthetics, the safest method is via intraoral access. The key structure to identify before creating an incision is the Stenson duct, the opening of the parotid gland into the oral cavity. The incision may be created superior to the duct in the maxillary vestibule or inferior to the parotid duct at approximately the level of occlusion. This approach provides access to the buccal extension of the posterior lobe.

The buccal fat pad may be accessed either inferior to or superior to Stenson’s duct for aesthetic purposes. The preferred method at the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Program at Madigan Army Medical Center is to access the buccal fat pad inferior to Stenson’s duct. A Minnesota Retractor is utilized to retract the cheek, and local anesthesia is first injected into the buccal mucosa; Stenson’s duct is positively identified, and a shallow 1.5 cm horizontal incision is placed with a 15-blade in the buccal mucosa midway between the occlusal plane and Stenson’s duct. At the time of incision, the opposite hand is utilized extra-orally to apply pressure on the contents of the buccal fat pad to facilitate exposure into the oral cavity. Hemostats are then utilized to bluntly dissect through the buccinator muscle and access the buccal fat pad.

The narrow buccal space is accessed, and the yellow fat pad is exposed. 3 to 5 cc of the fat pad is then gently teased out of the buccal space. Hemostats are then used to clamp the fat pad and the level of the mucosa, while a 15 blade or surgical scissors are utilized to excise the fat pad. The mucosa is then reapproximated with two single 4.0 interrupted absorbable sutures.

It is crucial to not apply excessive traction on the buccal fat pad during removal with excessive pulling and only to resect the portion of fat the protrudes passively into the oral cavity.