Most patients with subclavian artery stenosis due to atherosclerotic occlusive plaques are asymptomatic.

**Endovascular Approach**

An endovascular approach is recommended in the primary management of the lesions at the proximal site of the subclavian artery. The endovascular approach has the advantage of a minimally-invasive procedure and should be attempted before open subclavian artery revascularizations.

Several **open surgical revascularization**techniques, including the carotid-subclavian bypass, might be utilized to manage subclavian artery stenosis, including; 1. transposition of subclavian to the carotid artery, 2. carotid–subclavian or subclavian–axillary.

Indications for the treatment are as follows;

- Morbid upper arm ischemia (57%)

- Upper limb claudication

- Upper extremity pain at rest

- Fingers embolization

- Vertebrobasilar insufficiency from steal syndrome (37%)

- Anginal symptoms from coronary steal via Intermammary artery graft (21%)

- Leg claudication in the presence of axillofemoral graft

Medical therapy includes aspirin or clopidogrel, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers. The patient was counseled against smoking, and if diabetes is present, strict glycemic control is advisable, with the target HbA1c of less than 7.

Surgical treatment is sometimes necessary. In 1951, Shimizu and Sano first reported surgical repair of subclavian artery thrombosis.

- Axillary–axillary bypass

- Carotid-subclavian bypass

- Transposition of the subclavian artery

The axillary–axillary bypass surgery has a good prognosis regarding morbidity and mortality.

Endovascular intervention is the best modality for relieving subclavian artery thrombosis, including percutaneous transluminal angioplasty with stenting or ballooning.

Rheolytic pharmacomechanical thrombectomy (PMT) with the Angiojet device is well-established for managing acute arterial thrombosis. This technique implies the adjunctive application of thrombolytic therapy via either a thrombectomy catheter or a prolonged infusion. The latter might be delivered through an indwelling catheter and is considered a (catheter-directed thrombolysis, or CDT).

Pharmacomechanical thrombectomy alone in managing subclavian artery thrombosis was used in almost half of the patients, and the remaining half received catheter-directed thrombolysis along with PMT. Interestingly, patients with PMT alone had improved outcomes. The following criteria characterized improved outcomes; a. higher rates of procedural success and b. 12-month amputation-free survival.

Precious risk factor control and best medical therapy (BMT) for cardiovascular risk reduction are recommended in all patients with symptomatic upper extremity artery disease.**symptomatic patients**; 1. patients with signs and symptoms indicative of transient ischemic attack/stroke, 2. patients with signs and symptoms suggestive of coronary subclavian steal syndrome, 3. ipsilateral hemodialysis access dysfunction or 4. impaired quality of life (QOL).**asymptomatic patients**in the following circumstances; 1. planned coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) with the internal mammary artery, 2. patients with ipsilateral hemodialysis vascular access, and 3. significant bilateral subclavian stenosis/occlusion to provide adequate blood pressure surveillance.

For revascularization plans, both endovascular and surgical procedures are recommended. According to recent reviews, the results of the endovascular and open repair and significant complications, including vertebrobasilar and post-procedural stroke, were comparable. Still, no RCTs have evaluated endovascular vs. open repair in managing subclavian artery pathologies. The risk of severe complications, including vertebrobasilar stroke, is low with both approaches.

The following step-wise management to address severe thrombotic stenosis of the proximal section of the left subclavian artery has been recommended in a case report. Reversed blood flow in the left vertebral artery on Doppler ultrasound and angiographic confirmation of severe left subclavian artery thrombotic lesion are the primary steps to be undertaken in signs and symptoms suggestive of left subclavian artery thrombotic stenosis:

- Placement of a long guiding sheath

- Placement of an anti-embolic filter into the left brachial artery; this step was recommended for distal protection

- Blood pressure cuff inflation over the left brachial artery, the blood pressure cuff should be inflated for pressures above the maximum systolic arterial blood pressure for 10 minutes

- A coronary balloon catheter is inflated specifically at the first segment of the vertebral artery, at the origin of the left subclavian artery

- A peripheral stent was placed and dilated distal to the subclavian stenosis

- The consecutive deflation was undertaken as follows

- Jailed balloon
- Blood pressure cuff
- Post-dilation balloon

- Control angiography after Jailed balloon catheter retrieval was undertaken

The three distinct measures were applied for the potential complications:

- Plaque shift to the vertebral artery

- Cerebral

- Distal limb embolism.

The protective measures include invasive protection via the filter and jailed balloon and non-invasive measures through reactive hyperemia.