The standard sonographic examination of the female pelvis includes the transabdominal approach and transvaginal approach with additional color or doppler ultrasonography if indicated. A high-frequency transducer (curvilinear probe) is used for transabdominal examination due to its ability to provide high spatial resolution. The vaginal transducer is also using higher frequencies and is used for transvaginal examination. However, its penetration is limited to approximately 12 cm, so a transabdominal examination is usually necessary to provide a complete evaluation of the pelvic organs. Adequate images can be obtained with or without a distended bladder, although it may be beneficial in pediatric patients.

Evaluation of the uterus includes sagittal and transverse views. Typically, the transvaginal examination is performed first. The typical orientation of the uterus is anteverted and anteflexed so that other orientations can be noted. The length and height of the uterus are measured in the midsagittal plane. The uterine length has to be measured in the sagittal approach. The average uterine length is 7.3 to 9.2 cm in premenopausal women and 5.6-6.7 cm in postmenopausal women as myometrium atrophies with menopause.

Myometrium is homogeneous and echogenic, but sometimes arcuate vessels can be identified in the outer myometrium (which can have calcifications in older patients). The following abnormalities can be found within the myometrium: fibroids and adenomyosis (presence of abnormal endometrial tissue). Fibroids are common and are classified as intramural, submucosal, or subserosal. The endometrium should be measured at its widest point, from the outer border of the anterior endometrium to the outer border of the posterior endometrium, in sagittal view, not including any intrauterine fluid, if present. The endometrial appearance and thickness vary based on the phase of the menstrual cycle. During the proliferative phase, the endometrium has a "trilaminar" appearance and is typically < 8 mm. In the secretory phase, the endometrium appears more echogenic due to increased mucin production by the endometrial glands and is usually < 16 mm. During menstruation, blood and tissue can be found within the uterine cavity. Endometrial thickness of greater than 5 mm in postmenopausal women always warrants further investigation.

Any cystic structures, irregularities, masses (frequently polyps), changes in echogenicity, or presence of an IUD can be noted. Cervix is measured from the internal oz to the external oz. Nabothian cysts can be appreciated as small cystic anechoic areas, which are benign in nature. Fibroids of the cervix have a similar appearance to the uterine fibroids. Early cervical cancer can not be visualized with sonography.

Evaluation of the adnexa and ovaries is best performed with the transvaginal approach. Ovaries must be imaged and measured in two orthogonal planes. Fallopian tubes (when normal) are not typically seen unless there is fluid in the cul-de-sac or hydrosalpinx. Hydrosalpinx results from distal fallopian tube obstruction, which is most commonly due to pelvic inflammatory disease. An ovary is an oval structure and can be identified in females of reproductive age by the presence of multiple follicles. With menopause, ovaries atrophy and become more challenging to identify by sonography. The mean ovarian volume in menstruating females is 9.8 cc, and in postmenopausal women, it's 5.8 cc.

Ovarian torsion is twisting of the ovary on its pedicle, interrupting its blood supply, and represents a gynecological emergency. A torsed ovary appears enlarged and edematous. Commonly, an associated tumor or cyst may be found, which predisposes the patient to ovarian torsion. Sonographic assessment of the adnexa allows visualization of the uterine and ovarian arteries, which can be highlighted with color Doppler and show decreased flow when ovarian torsion is present. However, Doppler color may still be present even in cases of ovarian torsion due to the dual arterial supply of the ovaries.

Cul-de-sac (or the pouch of Douglas) may contain a small amount of free fluid in the space between the posterior wall of the uterus and the rectum. It is a frequent finding, present in up to 40% of women.