The trachea is a relatively elastic structure made up of about 16 to 20 cartilaginous rings and is positioned and protected, given its vicinity to the sternum, rib cage, and vertebral column. The etiology for tracheobronchial tears includes penetrating and blunt trauma, and also iatrogenic injuries. Motor vehicle collisions represent more than half of the cases of penetrating and blunt traumas, causing tracheobronchial injury.

Penetrating injuries are more likely to cause a tracheobronchial tear than blunt trauma, and gunshot wounds are more common penetrating injuries than stab wounds.

Gunshot wounds generally cause injury to the cervical portion of the trachea, though any point of trachea could be injured. Stab injuries almost always involve the cervical part of the trachea. Blunt trauma to the cervical trachea could result indirectly from hyperextension injuries occurring while weightlifting or sudden deceleration during motor vehicle accidents. Direct cervical tracheal injuries result from wire strangulation while snow biking, seat belt, steering wheel, and dashboard injuries during the vehicular crash. Complex injuries involving both the above mechanisms could also happen in vehicular motor accidents as in "padded dashboard syndrome."

The lower thoracic trachea is often involved in blunt injuries, and the associated multiple severe injuries compound the higher mortality. Blunt trauma during motor vehicle accidents causes damage to the intrathoracic trachea, carina, and the main bronchi. The carina is the most fixed area in the airway system and hence is very likely affected by the shear stress forces during sudden deceleration. Thus blunt injuries are much more common in the lower trachea, which may vary from a partial horizontal tear to a complete separation. The vertical tear could go upwards from the carinal injury. The lower tracheal injury could extend to one or both bronchi resulting in a partial or complete laceration. Intra thoracic trachea usually gets injured with high energy trauma though low energy blows are also known to inflict injury. Most blunt bronchial injuries occur on the right side, likely due to the bulkier right lung and a shorter right main bronchus. Kiser el published a study in 2001, which showed the site of bronchial injury is almost always within 2 cm from the carina in three-fourths of the patients.

Iatrogenic causes for tracheobronchial injury or tear is increasingly reported in airway instrumentations (e.g., endotracheal intubation, rigid bronchoscopy), diagnostic-transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) via endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) and therapeutic airway interventions, e.g., tracheostomy (open as well as percutaneous dilatational), metallic airway stent deployment and removal, balloon bronchoplasty, and head and neck, thyroid, and esophageal surgeries. Most iatrogenic injuries occur in the posterior membranous portion of the trachea.

The risk factors for iatrogenic tracheobronchial tear could be divided into mechanical and anatomical factors. The mechanical factors could be procedural or instrumentation related causes that are most modifiable. The etiologies for the former include inexperienced operator for the given procedure and increased attempts at intubation, and causes for the latter include the use of stylet during intubation, use of large-sized tracheal tubes, double-lumen tube, larger balloon diameters during bronchoplasty and inadequate tube care after intubation. The anatomical risks for tracheobronchial injury include tracheal diverticula, distorted anatomy, tracheal bronchus, congenital tracheobronchomegaly, female gender, age above 65 years, inhaled steroids, and inflamed trachea. A review found female sex, age above 65 years, and emergency intubations as most non-modifiable factors.