Congenital toxoplasmosis results from a protozoan, an obligate ubiquitous intracellular parasite, Toxoplasma gondii.

**Life cycle**

The definitive hosts of T. gondii are cats with a wide range of intermediate hosts. In cats, it can have two cycles-intestinal and extraintestinal. Whereas in other the hosts it has only extra-intestinal phase. It has three infectious stages in its life cycle, namely tachyzoite, bradyzoite, and oocysts or sporozoites. Bradyzoites and tachyzoites are slow and fast multiplying phases, respectively in the tissues of the host, mainly brain and muscle. Oocysts form from the sexual cycle of the organism in the cat’s intestine. Cats typically get infected when they consume infected animals containing bradyzoites or contaminated soil or water containing oocysts. The parasite replicates in the gut of the cat to produce oocysts. In this acute phase of intestinal infection, the cat sheds millions of oocysts in their feces for about 1 to 2 weeks. These oocysts sporulate under ideal humid environmental conditions and contaminate the soil, grass, and garden vegetables. It usually takes 2 to 3 days in temperate climates and longer in colder climates. Thus if the cat litter gets disposed of within 1 to 2 days, the risk of infection is decreased. Intermediate hosts such as humans, sheep, cattle, pigs, birds, and mice acquire the infection in this phase. These oocysts differentiate into tachyzoites, which are characteristic of acute infection. The transformation into oocysts (sexual cycle) occurs only in cats. Over time, they get deposited in the tissues as cysts (bradyzoites) in the intermediate hosts. Bradyzoites are responsible for latent infection and persist in the brain, myocardium, skeletal muscle, and other organs for life.

**Transmission**

Pregnant women develop toxoplasmosis via two routes.

- Primary maternal infection due to the ingestion of undercooked meat or oocyst contaminated food or water

- Reactivation of latent infection in severely immunocompromised states such as co-infection with human immunodeficiency virus

The organisms are transmitted transplacentally to the growing fetus. The incubation period is 4 to 21 days in acquired infections. The exact timing of when the transmission occurs is not well documented. The severity of the clinical manifestations in the fetus and the newborn depend on the gestational age at which the infection occurs, parasitic load, the virulence of the infective strain, and the maternal immune status.