The standard regimen is nirmatrelvir 300 mg (two 150 mg tablets) and ritonavir 100 mg (one 100 mg tablet), which are orally co-administered twice daily for five days and started within five days of symptom onset. Nirmatrelvir and ritonavir are co-packaged in convenience packs of 300 mg/100 mg or 150 mg/100 mg (for patients with moderate renal impairment).

The medication should be taken at the same time each day. If a dose is missed within eight hours of the time it is typically assumed, it should be taken as soon as possible. However, the missed dose should be skipped if more than eight hours have elapsed. The FDA does not authorize nirmatrelvir/ritonavir for treatment for longer than five days. Additionally, use is not approved for pre-exposure or post-exposure prophylaxis to prevent COVID-19.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Renal Impairment**

- Dose adjustment is not needed for mild renal impairment (eGFR >60 mL/min to <90 mL/min).

- Dose adjustment is needed for moderate renal impairment (eGFR >30 to <60 mL/min).

- 
              
- Nirmatrelvir 150 mg (one 150 mg tablet) and ritonavir 100 mg (one 100 mg tablet) are orally co-administered twice daily for five days within five days of symptom onset.

- Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is not recommended in those with severe renal impairment (eGFR <30 mL/min).

**Hepatic Impairment**

- Dose adjustment is not needed for mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A).

- Dose adjustment is not needed for moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B).

- Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is not recommended for those with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C).

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Limited human data is available regarding drug-related risks of congenital disabilities, miscarriage, or other adverse maternal or fetal outcomes using nirmatrelvir in pregnant women. Human data on the use of ritonavir in pregnant women have not shown an increase in the risk of congenital disabilities.

Animal studies of nirmatrelvir/ritonavir suggest that it can be safely used in pregnant women. Because pregnancy is a risk factor for developing severe COVID-19, nirmatrelvir/ritonavir should be offered to eligible pregnant women based on risk-benefit assessments.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Limited human data is available regarding the presence of nirmatrelvir in breast milk or its effects on breastfeeding infants. Human data demonstrate that ritonavir is present at low levels in breast milk and breastfed infants' blood.

Though ritonavir use during pregnancy is unlikely to have significant clinical implications, breastfeeding infants should still be monitored for the development of adverse effects.****Additionally, nirmatrelvir has poor oral bioavailability, and the concentration of ritonavir in milk is small; consequently, the combination of nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is unlikely to cause adverse drug reactions in nursing infants.