**The Historical Aspects of the IRIS**

Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) was first discovered in the 1980s in patients with tuberculosis and Leprosy who were receiving treatment. Physicians at that time noted a paradoxical worsening of fever, weight loss, fatigue, and shortness of breath in patients with pulmonary TB and worsening of skin lesions in patients with Leprosy after initiation of treatment.

The following are non-HIV related conditions where IRIS has been observed:

**1. Solid Organ Transplant Recipients**

Solid organ transplant recipients (e.g., liver, kidney transplants) are placed on immunosuppressive agents such as tacrolimus or cyclosporine. These agents target CD4 positive cells and suppress their functioning. IRIS seen in solid organ transplant recipients is thought to be secondary to the antiinflammatory response seen after withdrawal of these immunosuppressive agents. Cryptococcosis, Cytomegalovirus disease, and tuberculosis are the most common infections associated with IRIS in solid organ transplant recipients.

**2. Postpartum Period**

Pregnancy is a period of the relatively immunocompromised state.  During pregnancy, there is a shift to the activation of Th2 cells and an increased IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10. There is also a suppression of Th1 cells and associated cytokines (IL-12, TNF-a). This results in a state of anti-inflammatory response, needed during pregnancy to prevent any fetal rejections or miscarriages. However, after pregnancy, there is a reversal of this process and results in a relative pro-inflammatory state immediately postpartum. Thus, the immediate postpartum period (3 to 6 weeks) has an increased risk of IRIS, most commonly with cryptococcosis, herpes virus infection, human papillomavirus reactivation, leprosy, tuberculosis, viral hepatitis, and a flare-up of autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.

**3. Neutropenic Patients**

Patients with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) below 500 per microliter are at increased risk of fungal and viral opportunistic infections (Aspergillus infections, CMV). These infections might initially be latent or have subacute presentations but become clinically apparent only after the neutrophil counts improve, thus, presenting as IRIS. Most commonly observed IRIS in neutropenic patients has been associated with invasive pulmonary aspergillosis and chronic disseminated candidiasis.

**4. Patients on Tumor Necrosis Factor Antagonists (TNF antagonists)**

TNF antagonists such as infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab, and etanercept are used to treat chronic inflammatory conditions such as ulcerative colitis, Chrohn disease, or sarcoidosis. Tumor necrosis factors play an integral role in macrophage activation and granuloma formation. Thus, the use of TNF antagonists can significantly impair the host response against infections such as TB. These TB infections can be latent while using TNF antagonists, but once these medications are discontinued, there will be a subsequent macrophage activation, leading to IRIS associated with TB.