The alkaline pH of the duodenum activates the components of pancrelipase, which then helps with digestion.

**Lipase**

- Pancreatic lipase catalyzes the hydrolysis of triglycerides to monoglycerides, fatty acids, and glycerol.

- Colipase anchors the lipase to the lipid-water membrane of the micelle producing a change in the structure of that surface. The hydrophobic active site is thus exposed to the binding of the triglycerides and the subsequent interaction with the catalytic triad. There is hydrolyzation of the esters of the fatty acids.

**Amylase**

- Pancreatic amylase hydrolyzes the alpha 1-4 linkages in the polysaccharides of three or more linked glucose units.

- Starch is only reduced to a lower compound as alpha 1-6 linkages are not hydrolyzed. Therefore, starch breaks down into dextrins and lower sugars.

**Protease**

- Pancreatic protease comprises trypsin and chymotrypsin, which belong to the family of serine proteases.

- Trypsin acts on the arginine and lysine residues which are hydrophilic.

- Chymotrypsin acts on the hydrophobic residues tryptophan, tyrosine, and phenylalanine.

- Both components present a catalytic site formed by the triad of serine, histidine, and aspartate.

It, therefore, acts as the digestive enzymes inherently secreted by the pancreas in the absence of insufficiency.

Various factors affect the efficacy of this supplementation, for example:

- Dose

- Gastrointestinal (GI) pH

- Size of the micro-spherules

**Pharmacokinetics**

- The enzymes are released only if the pH is greater than 5.5.

- Some preparations are enteric-coated, which inhibit gastric inactivation during gastric passage and deliver more to the duodenum where it is active.

- The GI tract does not absorb the contents in any amounts.

- The drug is excreted in the feces.