The patients are taken to the operating room, then prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion. All preoperative imaging should be reviewed, and the decision to perform an aortic valve replacement with aortic enlargement procedure should be discussed after the findings of a small aortic annulus. A median sternotomy can be performed using a sternal saw. Cardiopulmonary bypass can be started with cannulation of the aorta and right atrium. A left heart venting catheter can be placed if needed. After cross-clamping the aorta and giving cold cardioplegia with circulatory arrest, the aorta can be examined. A transverse aortotomy can be performed with full exposure of the aortic valve and aortic root. The aortic valve can be fully excised with further examination of the aortic annulus. The annulus can then be measured intraoperatively with sizers. The measurements of the annulus and the patient's body surface can then be discussed to consider how much valve diameter they will gain by performing the Manougian technique. Usually, patients can have a valve 1 to 2 sizes larger placed after performing the posterior aortic enlargement technique.

After making the decision to proceed with aortic root enlargement, either a modified Manougian or a traditional Manougian can be performed. To perform the modified Manougian technique, an incision is made by extending through the commissure between the noncoronary cusp and the left coronary cusp onto the subaortic curtain. The traditional Manougian involves making a similar incision between the noncoronary and left coronary cusps. The incision is then carried on to the anterior leaflet in the mitral valve and roof of the left atrium. The incision can almost be extended to the free edge of the mitral valve for added enlargement. Careful technique should be used to ensure the incision is made in the middle of the anterior leaflet. The newly created defect can be reconstructed with glutaraldehyde prepared bovine pericardium, autologous pericardium, or a Dacron patch. The patch can be cut into a diamond shape and can then be sewn in place using a running prolene suture starting at the apex of the reconstruction but allowing room for placement of the aortic valve sutures into the annulus. This allows for the widest aortotomy for placement of a larger sized aortic valve. At this point, the aortic annulus can then be remeasured.

The pledgeted valve sutures can be placed around the aortic annulus. The valve can then be sewn in place. The aortotomy can then be closed using the remaining patch for the closure of the aorta in a running continuous fashion. If the left atrial wall is small and able to be closed, it can be closed in continuity with the patch closure. If the left atrium is unable to be closed, a second patch will need to be used to close the left atrial defect.  A transesophageal echo can be performed to evaluate the new aortic enlargement and the valve. The patient can then be weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass with decannulation. The chest can then be closed with completion of the surgery.