Carotid Sinus Massage & Valsalva Maneuver – Vagal maneuvers, including CSM and VM, transiently increase the arterial pressure in the carotid sinuses and aortic arch. This action triggers the baroreceptor reflex, which results in increased parasympathetic output to the heart via the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X).

The location of the carotid sinus is at the bifurcation of the internal and external carotid artery from the common carotid artery. The sinus contains baroceptors that sense changes in blood pressure. Afferent signals are then transmitted via the glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX) to the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) within the medulla.

Within the aortic arch, there are baroreceptors that sense changes in aortic arterial pressure. These receptors send afferent signals to the NTS via the vagus nerve.

The result of the increased frequency of afferent signals due to increased arterial pressure is the stimulation of vagal nuclei in the medulla. These nuclei send efferent parasympathetic signals down the right and left vagus nerves to the heart.

The right and left vagus nerves exit the skull through the jugular foramen, coursing caudally within the carotid sheath and dividing many times, mediating parasympathetic tone in the heart, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract.

Within the heart, the right vagus nerve serves to stimulate the sinoatrial (SA) node, the pacemaker of the healthy heart, in the right atrium; this causes slowed electrical activity within the SA node. The left vagus nerve mostly innervates atrioventricular (AV) node, which slows conduction between the atria and the ventricles.

The end product of vagal stimulation is a decrease in the speed and frequency of electrical impulses in the heart, which could ultimately slow or terminate a tachydysrhythmia.

Diving Reflex – This reflex is an autonomic response observed in marine mammals, and less so in humans, as a physiologic change to decrease oxygen expenditure. It gets triggered by breath-holding and cold water stimulus to the face. The prevailing theory is cold water exposure triggers the reflex by initiating afferent impulses from the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V), the predominant sensory nerve of the face. The impulses then stimulate vagal nuclei in the brain, eventually resulting in the slowing of AV nodal conduction.