Newborns with CF may present with meconium ileus, prolonged neonatal jaundice, or early lung infection. Infants and children with CF may present with failure to thrive and poor weight gain, anemia, undescended testicles in boys, recurrent sinopulmonary infections, and a distal intestinal obstructive syndrome with or without pancreatic insufficiency. The median age of diagnosis is 6 to 8 months; although, individuals may not exhibit clinical signs and symptoms until later.

Adults with CF often present with exacerbations of one or more symptoms. Lung manifestations of CF include chronic bronchitis, abnormal pulmonary function tests, bronchiectasis, atypical asthma, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Sinus manifestations of CF include chronic rhinosinusitis, chronic post-nasal drip, nasal polyposis, and panopacification of the paranasal sinuses. Pancreatic manifestations include pancreatic insufficiency, recurrent pancreatitis, and early-onset diabetes. Hepatobiliary manifestations include focal biliary cirrhosis, cholelithiasis, periportal fibrosis, liver cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and variceal bleeding. Musculoskeletal manifestations include kyphoscoliosis, osteopenia/osteoporosis, and arthropathy. Hematologic manifestations include iron-deficiency anemia or anemia of chronic disease leading to splenomegaly. Nephrogenic manifestations include nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, hyperoxaluria, and hypocitraturia. Dermatologic manifestations include “salty sweat,” digital clubbing, and cyanosis. Additional dermatologic conditions due to malabsorption include acrodermatitis enteropathica due to zinc deficiency and scaly dermatitis associated with fatty acid deficiency. Finally, males may be infertile due to absent vas deferens, while females have reduced fertility due to thickened cervical mucus.