# Continuing Education Activity

The postpartum period begins soon after the delivery of the baby and usually lasts six to eight weeks and ends when the mother’s body has nearly returned to its pre-pregnant state. The postpartum period for a woman and her newborn is very important for both short-term and long-term health and well-being. This activity should help the interprofessional team on how to provide comprehensive postpartum care for the new mother.

**Objectives:**
- Review the guidelines regarding comprehensive postpartum care.
- Summarize the components of the postpartum care of the new mother.
- Outline the common medical conditions that women encounter during the postpartum period.
- Describe how interprofessional team coordination and communication can enhance patient outcomes when rendering a new mother's postpartum care.

# Introduction

The postpartum period begins soon after the baby's delivery and usually lasts six to eight weeks and ends when the mother’s body has nearly returned to its pre-pregnant state.

# Function

**Timing of Postnatal Visits**

In April 2018, The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) recommends12 weeks of support, rather than a single six-week postpartum visit. ACOG also recommends postpartum evaluation within the first 3 weeks after delivery in-person or by phone, which later is followed up with ongoing care as needed, concluding with a comprehensive postpartum visit no later than 12 weeks.

**Components of Postpartum Care**

- **Vaginal pain:**Genital tract trauma is obvious with spontaneous vaginal delivery.

- **Vaginal bleeding/discharge:**Bloody vaginal discharge (lochia rubra) is heavy for the first 3-4 days, and slowly it becomes watery in consistency and color changes to pinkish-brown (lochia serosa). After the next 10-12 days, it changes to yellowish-white (lochia alba).  Advise women to seek medical attention if heavy vaginal bleeding persists (soaking a pad or more in less than an hour). Women with heavy, persistent postpartum bleeding should be evaluated for complications such as retained placenta, uterine atony, rarely invasive placenta, or coagulation disorders.

- **Breastfeeding:**Breastfeeding is beneficial for the mother and the newborn.

- **Nutrition and exercise:**Women at higher risk for postpartum weight retention are those with higher gestational weight gain, black race, and lower socioeconomic status, which at the same time increase their risk of future obesity and type 2 diabetes.

- **Breast engorgement:**Women may experience full, firm, and tender breasts after the delivery. Frequent breastfeeding on both breasts is recommended to avoid engorgement.

- **Bladder and bowel function:**Voiding must be encouraged and monitored to prevent asymptomatic bladder overfilling. Women are encouraged to use mild laxatives such as docusate, psyllium, bisacodyl if defecation has not occurred within 3 days of delivery. Another consideration is Osmotic laxatives as polyethylene glycol and lactulose.

- **Sexual relations:**Libido may decrease after the delivery because of decreased estrogen levels. This may not return for as long as 1 year postpartum, particularly in women who are breastfeeding. Reassurance is usually appropriate.  Advice women to wait for their perineal area to heal before resuming sexual activity, and it may take 4-6 weeks for the perineal tears to heal completely. Health care providers should be more comfortable discussing women about sexuality during the early postpartum period.

- **Contraception:**The prenatal period is the best time to discuss postpartum contraception. In adolescents begin motivational interviewing, discussion of long-acting reversible contraception during pregnancy.

- **Education:**Health care providers should provide essential education regarding newborn care, such as umbilical cord care, bathing, breastfeeding, and the importance of immunizations.

- **Miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death:**For mothers who experience any pregnancy loss, it is essential to ensure follow-up. Key elements are to provide emotional support and bereavement counseling; referral, if appropriate, to counselor and support groups. Also review of any laboratory or pathology studies related to the loss and counseling regarding recurrent risk and future pregnancy planning.

# Issues of Concern

**Common Postpartum Concerns**

- **Postpartum blues:**Transient depression (baby blues) is very common during the first week after delivery.

- **Intimate partner violence:**Use HARK (humiliation, afraid, rape, kick) or HITS (hurt, insult, threaten, scream) tools to evaluate for intimate partner violence.

- **Incontinence:**Stress incontinence occurs due to extensive stretch or injury to pelvic floor muscles during labor. Risk factors for urinary incontinence three months postpartum include obesity, parity, smoking, longer duration of breastfeeding, and use of forceps during vaginal delivery. Advise women to do Kegel’s exercises regularly to strengthen pelvic floor muscles.

- **Hemorrhoids:**Caused by constipation and/or by pushing during the second stage of labor.

# Clinical Significance

According to ACOG, at least 40% of women do not seek postpartum care. Several factors contribute towards this trend, such as cultural differences, lack of insurance, lack of adequate family support, low socioeconomic status, poor anticipatory guidance, race, lack of good transitional care management, and poor access to home visits. According to the Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System (PMSS), Nonhispanic blacks have the highest maternal mortality.

During the first week of the postnatal period, severe hypertension, severe bleeding, and infection are the most common contributors to maternal deaths, while the cardiovascular cause is the leading cause of late deaths.

# Other Issues

**Health Issues that Arise During Pregnancy**

1. Pregnancy-induced hypertension: Hypertensive disorder risk is higher < 48hrs after delivery. An office visit is recommended within the first 7 days after delivery. Blood Pressure (BP) ≥150/100 mmHg can be treated with oral medication such as nifedipine or labetalol. Hospitalize if signs of end-organ (liver injury or pulmonary edema) or BP ≥ 160/110. Recommend lifestyle modification and annual BP and bodyweight monitoring follow-ups.

2. Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM): Women with GDM are at a very high risk of developing diabetes. ACOG recommends women with GDM should have a 75-g, 2-hour fasting oral glucose tolerance test 4 to 12 weeks postpartum to screen for type 2 DM.

3. Thyroid disorders: Mother can experience symptoms of hypo- or hyperthyroidism. The diagnosis of postpartum thyroiditis depends on clinical presentation and elevated free T4 and low TSH. Hyperthyroidism is transient and usually not treated. Beta-blocker can be used if needed for symptoms. Hypothyroidism is treated with levothyroxine. The American Thyroid Association recommends annual testing in women with hypothyroidism with a history of postpartum thyroiditis.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

**In 2013, WHO released the following  recommendations regarding the postpartum care:**

1. Provide postnatal care in the first 24 hours to all mothers and babies-regardless of where the birth occurs.2. Ensure healthy women and their newborns stay at a health care facility for at least one day after the delivery. 3. All mothers and newborns need at least four postpartum visits in the first 6 weeks.4. If birth is at home, the first postnatal contact should be as early as possible, within 24 hours of birth.5. Ensure at least 3 postnatal visits for all mothers and babies, on day 3 (48 to 72 hours), between days 7 to 14, and 6 weeks after birth.6. All women should be educated about the physiological process of recovery after birth and mention that some health problems are common, with advice to report any health concerns to a health care provider, in particular, signs and symptoms of infection, postpartum hemorrhage, pre-eclampsia/eclampsia, and thromboembolism.7. The use of prophylactic antibiotics among women with a vaginal delivery and a third or fourth-degree perineal tear is recommended to prevent wound complications.8. Advise women to apply topical chlorhexidine application to the umbilical cord stump daily during the first week of life is recommended for newborns born at home in settings with high neonatal mortality (30 or more neonatal deaths per 1,000 live births).

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Ultimately, providing the optimum level of healthcare and support for postpartum families will require local, state-wide, and national-level policy changes. Even though the affordable care act improved maternal care access, the US still needs a major change in policies to provide appropriate, evidence-based, and culturally competent universal access to maternity care.

Expanding eligibility for Medicaid, which pays for almost half of U.S. deliveries, can improve postpartum coverage.