Pulmonary artery banding is performed with predominantly two objectives:

1) Reduce pulmonary blood flow in patients with significant pulmonary over circulation secondary to significant left-to-right shunting in as palliation prior to later definitive surgical repair.

2) Increase afterload to the morphological left ventricle (which functions as a low-pressure pulmonary ventricle) in order to prepare or "train" the ventricle to become a systemic ventricle prior to an arterial switch procedure in patients with transposition of the great arteries (TGA).

Clinical scenarios in which pulmonary blood flow requires limitation via PAB include:

1) Muscular "Swiss cheese" ventricular defects (VSD) which may be technically challenging to repair and/or require ventriculotomy in infants.

2) Multiple or single VSD with confounding surgical comorbidities (i.e., very low birth weight, sepsis, pneumonia, intracranial hemorrhage, multiorgan failure, etc.).

3) Unbalanced AVC defects with borderline left ventricular hypoplasia as palliation prior to committing to potential biventricular repair after further development and growth.

4) High-risk infants with hypoplastic left heart syndrome with bilateral PAB and patent ductus arteriosus stenting for short term surgical palliation.

Clinical scenarios for the patient requiring LV training include:

1) Preparation of left ventricle in patients with D-TGA presenting late (>1month) for a subsequent staged arterial switch operation, where the LV has become "deconditioned" by functioning as the pulmonary ventricle.

2) Preparation of left ventricle in patients with L-TGA for a subsequent staged double switch procedure.

3) Reduction of tricuspid regurgitation in patients with L-TGA without VSD. In this scenario, the pressure load to the pulmonary LV induces a shift of interventricular septum that improve coaptation of tricuspid valve leaflets in the systemic right ventricle.

4) As an adjunct procedure in patients with single ventricle anatomy and antegrade pulmonary blood flow at the time of bidirectional Glenn shunt placement to maintain some antegrade flow but maintain low superior vena cava pressure.