Imatinib is FDA-approved to be administered orally and is typically supplied in 100 mg and 400 mg tablet formulations. Imatinib was initially available under a branded name; however, after the expiration of several patents, generic versions are available. The recommended dosing for imatinib varies by indication:

- Adult Ph+ CML CP 400 mg/day

- Adult Ph+ CML AP 600 mg/day

- Adult Ph+ CML BC 600 mg/day

- Pediatric Ph+ CML 340 mg/m2/day

- Adult Ph+ ALL 600 mg/day

- Adult MDS 400 mg/day

- Adult MPD 400 mg/day

- Adult ASM 100 mg/day or 400mg/day

- Adult HES 100 mg/day or 400mg/day

- Adult CEL 100 mg/day or 400mg/day

- Adult DFSP 800 mg/day

- Adult metastatic/unresectable GIST 400 mg/day

- Adult adjuvant GIST 400 mg/day

- Mild to moderate hepatic impairment 400 mg/day

- Severe hepatic impairment 300 mg/day

800 mg doses should be administered as a 400 mg dose twice daily; all other doses should be given once daily. Patients should take imatinib with meals and a large glass of water to minimize gastrointestinal upset, and food does not impact bioavailability.

**Adults of Reproductive Potential**

Human post-marketing surveillance and animal studies have shown imatinib to harm the developing fetus. Therefore, clinicians should test pregnancy status in females with reproductive potential before the initiation of treatment.

**Contraception**

Advise females of reproductive potential to administer effective contraception (methods resulting in less than 1% pregnancy rates) while using imatinib during treatment and for two weeks days after stopping treatment with imatinib.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

Based on human and animal data, imatinib can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. There are no clinical studies on the use of imatinib in pregnant women. However, there have been postmarket reports of spontaneous abortions and congenital anomalies from women who have been exposed to imatinib during pregnancy. Therefore, advise females to avoid pregnancy when taking imatinib. If imatinib is administered during pregnancy, or if the female gets pregnant while taking it, counsel the patient about the potential hazard for the fetus.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

Imatinib and its metabolite are excreted into breast milk. Since there is potential for serious adverse reactions in breastfed infants from imatinib, advise a lactating woman not to breastfeed during treatment and for one month after the last dose.

**Hepatic Impairment**

Mild and moderate hepatic impairment do not affect exposure to imatinib and metabolite CGP74588. However, in patients with severe hepatic impairment, the imatinib AUC increased by 45%, and the CGP74588 AUC increased by 55%, compared to patients with normal hepatic function. Therefore, reduce the dose of imatinib by 25% for patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Renal Impairment**

There is insufficient data on patients with severe renal impairment, and as per the manufacturer’s labeling, dose reductions are required for patients with moderate and/or severe renal impairment.