Primary management of bupropion overdose is supportive care, as no direct antidote exists. Consultation with a regional poison center or toxicologist may be helpful, especially in critical cases with serious organ-system dysfunction. Decontamination with activated charcoal may be appropriate for patients presenting soon after a large overdose and who do not need airway protection. Unintentional overdose rarely causes significant clinical effects; however, major adverse reactions (seizures) have been reported even in double-dose ingestions.

Seizures should be treated with benzodiazepines as first-line agents and barbiturates, such as phenobarbital, as second-line agents. Avoidance of other anti-epileptics, including phenytoin, is recommended, given possible drug-drug interactions. Life-threatening arrhythmias should be treated following ACLS guidelines, possibly including other adjuncts depending on the clinical situation. Widened QRS complex on the electrocardiogram often suggests fast sodium channel blockade. In the setting of wide QRS with hemodynamic instability or dysrhythmias, boluses of sodium bicarbonate are typically indicated. Unfortunately, bupropion-induced QRS prolongation may not respond to sodium bicarbonate since the cardiotoxicity does not appear to be due to fast sodium channelopathy and results from impaired gap junction communication.

Cardiogenic shock should be treated with vasopressors as first-line therapy. A clinical toxicology task force in 2016 supported intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) in severe life-threatening toxicity, such as refractory status epilepticus or hemodynamic instability. The task force favored traditional treatments of seizures, such as benzodiazepines and phenobarbital, as first-line modalities. Interestingly, ILE was not recommended in pulseless electrical activity due to the possibility of interference with epinephrine and extracorporeal treatments.

ILE has been shown in case reports to cause rapid improvement in hemodynamic status and left ventricular ejection fraction in overdose. Classically, ILE is used as rescue therapy, but these cases may suggest value in earlier initiation.

Patients with seizures, hemodynamic instability or life-threatening arrhythmias, and severely altered mental status be monitored in an ICU setting. All bupropion XL overdoses, including therapeutic errors, should be observed for 24 hours for delayed-onset seizures.