The history should explore the eight features of pain. They are Site, Onset, Characteristics, Radiation, Associated factors, Timing, Exacerbating Factors, and Severity. These eight features are easily remembered by the acronym SOCRATES

Besides this, the presence of red flags (signs and symptoms suggestive of serious pathology) should be excluded by eliciting a history of trauma, cancer, weight loss, night pain, age >50, fever, IV drug use, recent infection, previous surgery, urinary retention, saddle anesthesia, osteoporosis, corticosteroids, morning stiffness, improvement with exercise, pain down the leg, pseudo claudication and pain relieved by sitting

The Start Back Tool

The physical examination should include assessment of symmetry in both the sagittal and coronal plane, gait, muscle atrophy, flexibility (flexion, extension, lateral flexion and rotation), touch and pinprick sensation in all relevant dermatomes, muscle power, deep tendon reflexes, Babinski, clonus, tenderness, straight leg raising, femoral stretch test and FABER's test

The majority of low back pain do not have an identifiable diagnosis.  Also, the standard battery of tests during physical examination may not identify the strength and endurance of the paraspinal muscles, which plays a significant role in low back pain.  The following tests could identify the weakness in these muscles

**The prone instability test******The patient starts by standing on one end of the examination couch. While continuing to stand on the foot end of the couch, the patient lowers his / her torso on to the couch.  The patient can hold onto the couch's sides for support. The examiner then palpates the lower lumbar spine to elicit tenderness. The patient then holds onto the couch and lifts his / her feet off the ground tensing the paraspinal muscles. Less pain and tenderness on repeat palpation of the lower lumbar spine while the feet are off the floor is considered positive.

**Prone Plank/Bridge**

**Supine Bridge**