The classic and most well-known function of mast cells involves the inflammatory cascade. The mast cell functions as part of the body’s innate immune system. When membrane-bound IgE binds a foreign substance and two Fc receptors crosslink, the mast cell immediately releases a large number of mediators into the nearby extracellular space via degranulation. Granules are contained within a lipid membrane which fuses with the plasma membrane. The most important cytokines released is histamine. Histamine induces white blood cell chemotaxis, airway smooth muscle constriction, and increased vascular permeability. Other mediators released from the granules include tryptase, chymase, and TNF-alpha.

Next, the mast cell synthesizes and releases lipid-based prostaglandins and leukotrienes, which have pro-inflammatory effects. Finally, cytokine production is increased due to an increase in gene transcription.

The inflammatory effect of the mast cell is used by the innate immune system as a first line of defense. MC(T) cells are the predominant cell type in the immune response. When a foreign protein is encountered, the pro-inflammatory effects exerted by the mast cell result in recruitment of circulating immune cells. Cytokines released also have direct effects on local tissue, such as increased mucus production or increased gut peristalsis to reduce pathogen invasion.

Mast cells also play a role in tissue repair and angiogenesis. Upon injury, MC(TC) release procoagulant cytokines, leukotrienes, and platelet-activating factor independent of IgE mechanisms. Later, heparin, tryptase, and t-PA from the cell modulate blood flow to increase nutrient and immune cell delivery. Inflammatory mediators promote the differentiation and growth of fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Mast cells also possess many angiogenic cytokines, such as VEGF and FGF 2. Finally, mast cells have been implicated in the wound contraction and the regeneration of nerve fibers.

No deficiency in mast cells has ever been noted, implying that the functions of the cell are vital for life.