There is a profuse blood supply to the reticular formation due to the diffuse and expansive location of the network of brainstem nuclei and neurons. Blood supply to the brainstem, and thus, to the reticular formation, originates from the vertebrobasilar system or posterior circulation of the brain. The beginning of the posterior brain circulation system arises from the vertebral arteries, branches of the subclavian arteries. The vertebral arteries take a superior course towards the brain through the transverse foramen of the cervical vertebra. As the vertebral arteries then travel into the dural space, in an anteromedial direction through the foramen magnum of the skull, they unite to form a single basilar artery. Before the union of the vertebral arteries, the posterior inferior cerebellar artery, as well as the anterior spinal artery, arise, supplying blood flow to the inferior cerebellar hemispheres bilaterally, the cerebellar vermis and tonsils, the lateral medulla oblongata, and the upper cervical spinal cord.

After the union of the vertebral arteries, the basilar artery continues a superior course in front of the medulla and pons. It will later bifurcate at the junction of the pons and mesencephalon to give rise to the posterior cerebral arteries, supplying the occipital cortex as part of the posterior brain circulatory system. Prior to the division into the posterior cerebral arteries, the basilar artery gives off the anterior inferior cerebellar arteries, the pontine perforating branches, and the superior cerebellar arteries. The basilar artery and its subsequent branches supply the rest of the brainstem, including the medulla and pons, the midbrain, and superior structures such as the thalamus, posterior internal capsule, the middle and upper cerebellum as well as the cerebellar vermis.