Amniocentesis procedure is relatively safe, with fewer complications among experienced hands. The location of the placenta is an important factor in amniocentesis. While performing the procedure, one should try to avoid penetration of the placenta. The anterior and fundal placenta is associated with more complications, including multiple pricks and blood-stained liquor; however, it is not associated with increased fetal loss rates.

After the amniocentesis procedure, the sample of amniotic fluid is taken to a laboratory for testing. Results usually take ten days to three weeks depending upon the laboratory. In the laboratory, genetic and chemical tests are done. For genetic tests, specific chromosomes and genes undergo analysis.

A. For chromosomal and genetic testing, the amniotic fluid is sent for a conventional cell culture report, which is obtained in 14 days. Rapid chromosomal preparations are available that give results in 1 to 2 days, including fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH) and quantitative fluorescence polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR).

**Commonly Performed Tests**

1. Rapid test: A rapid test looks for abnormalities on specific chromosomes. This test is almost 100% accurate. A rapid test can identify some chromosomal conditions that cause physical and mental abnormalities. These are:

- Down's syndrome: caused by extra chromosome 21

- Edward's syndrome: caused by extra chromosome 18

- Patau's syndrome: caused by an extra chromosome 13

2. Full karyotype:

The cells in the sample of amniotic fluid are grown for up to 10 days in a laboratory before being examined under a microscope to check for:

- Number of chromosomes

- Appearance of chromosomes

Results from a full karyotype will usually be available in two or three weeks. Amniocentesis in the third trimester has higher cell culture failure rates.

**Uncommon Tests**

- Chromosomal microarray: Chromosomal microarray analysis detects a pathogenic copy number variant in approximately 1.7% of patients with a normal karyotype and normal ultrasound examination findings. It can detect chromosomal abnormalities in approximately 6% of the fetuses with normal karyotype and structural abnormalities on ultrasound. Hence, all women opting for invasive prenatal diagnostic testing should be offered chromosomal microarray testing.

- Molecular amniotic fluid testing helps diagnose single-gene conditions, including X-linked, recessive, and dominant conditions. Parental mutation should be known preferably before offering prenatal molecular testing for a fetal diagnosis. Ultrasound diagnosis usually indicates molecular testing of a particular condition.

- Various laboratory tests with special testing requirements, such as peroxisomal, biochemical, or methylation conditions, are useful for diagnosing specific genetic conditions. Methylation study in amniotic fluid helps diagnose fragile X syndrome.

B. Amniotic fluid is analyzed for the presence of proteins, minerals, and other compounds. Amniocentesis results will either be positive or negative. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), in conjunction with elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in amniotic fluid, is considered diagnostic for open neural tube defects.

C. Turbid amniotic fluid should be sent for microbiological culture to detect the presence of any organism. Antibiotic coverage should be given to the patient. Occasionally, brown or green amniotic fluid is aspirated during amniocentesis due to intra- amniotic hemorrhage before the amniocentesis procedure due to the breakdown of blood products.

For most chromosomal conditions, there is no cure, so the couple needs to be appropriately counseled regarding the continuation of pregnancy.