Currently, the criteria to diagnose placental insufficiency lacks as there are also no standardized methods for diagnosis. Part of the problem is due to the wide variety of terminology used to describe what is known as ‘placental insufficiency.’

Prior to the onset of pregnancy, uterine arteries show low diastolic flow, high resistance, and elastic recoil noted in the form of early diastolic notches. Successful placentation involves removal of the intimal muscle from the vasculature such that the blood vessels will have a vigorous diastolic flow, minimal resistance, and no elastic properties. When placentation is successful, Doppler ultrasound demonstrates that the remodeling occurs rapidly, such that by 12 weeks gestation, there is a loss of notching, and resistance is low by 20 weeks gestation or earlier. When there is a failure of placentation, notching persists, and resistance remains high, which has shown to be correlated with maternal-hypertensive related fetal complications, including IUGR, pre-eclampsia, and fetal demise.

As resistance in the placenta increases, doppler studies of the umbilical artery can demonstrate either normal, reduced, absent, or reversed end-diastolic velocities.

While umbilical artery Doppler studies provide important information pertaining to possible placental compromise, a valuable adjunct is to also use the middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler. The MCA provides information regarding systemic circulatory responses in the developing fetus, as it represents downstream resistance in the cerebral microcirculation.  The normal MCA Doppler displays high resistance throughout pregnancy; however, the placental disease can be identified when there is increased diastolic flow along with declining pulsatility index. Therefore, MCA Doppler studies can provide important additional information when there is a concern for severe IUGR, indicating that there may be fetal compromise and intervention may be required.

Another form of Doppler that provides insight into placental and fetal health is the venous Doppler, which relays information pertaining to cardiac data when the fetal circulation is experiencing stress. The venous waveform that has been shown to provide the best clinical data is the ductus venosus. There are many benefits of using the ductus venosus over other venous waveforms, which include its responsiveness to oxygenation changes, it is one of the primary regulators of venous return in abnormal and normal fetal circulations, it is independent of cardiac function, it serves as a direct conduit to view right atrial retrograde pulse waves, and lastly, because it has elevated and focal velocity color Doppler signal from as early as 12 weeks gestation up to 40 weeks gestation, it is very easily imaged.

MRI imaging has been found to provide additional information in order to detect and diagnose placental insufficiency. Flow voids occur when there is a loss of MRI signal observed in a blood vessel where blood flows vigorously. When using T2-weighted Rapid Acquisition with Relaxation Enhancement (RARE) imaging, placental insufficiency can be detected when decreased flow voids are observed between the placenta and the uterus, as this can be considered to reflect a reduction in uteroplacental perfusion.