# Continuing Education Activity

Drug-induced hepatotoxicity is an acute or chronic liver injury secondary to drugs or herbal compounds. It is difficult to diagnose because the presentation is similar to many hepatobiliary disorders. The principle treatment is the removal of the offending agent and close observation for resolution. This activity explains the pathophysiology, evaluation, and treatment of drug-induced hepatotoxicity. Additionally, it reviews the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for patients.

**Objectives:**
- Review the evaluation of suspected drug-induced hepatotoxicity.
- Outline the classification of drug induced hepatotoxicity based on clinical presentation, mechanism of toxicity, and histological appearance. 
- Identify the etiologies of drug-induced hepatotoxicity.
- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination among the interdisciplinary team to enhance the delivery of care for patients with drug-induced hepatotoxicity.

# Introduction

Drug-induced hepatotoxicity or drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is an acute or chronic response to a natural or manufactured compound.

# Etiology

There are patient risk factors associated with the development of DILI, which include female sex, older age, and increased body mass index (BMI).

Intrinsic DILI is most commonly caused by acetaminophen, while it is less often seen in aspirin, tetracycline, and vitamin A

Idiosyncratic DILI cases are caused by:

- Antibiotics (45.4%): amoxicillin-clavulanate (most common), sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, ciprofloxacin, isoniazid (INH)

- Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)

- Herbal and dietary supplements (HDS) (16.1%): green tea extract, anabolic steroids, multi-ingredient nutritional supplements

- Cardiovascular drugs (10%): statins, amiodarone

- Central nervous system (CNS) agents: valproate, phenytoin

- Antineoplastic drugs: tyrosine kinase inhibitors, tumor necrosis factor inhibitors, alpha inhibitors, methotrexate

# Epidemiology

The true incidence of DILI is difficult to determine as it is often underreported, and there are several different diagnostic criteria used.

# Pathophysiology

The pathogenesis of DILI can be divided into two mechanisms: intrinsic and idiosyncratic. The intrinsic mechanism is both predictable and reproducible from drugs that are known to cause liver injury in a dose-dependent manner with a short latency period.

# Histopathology

Although liver biopsy is not required for diagnosis, drug-induced hepatotoxicity can be classified based on histologic findings. The histological appearance can also assist in identifying an etiology, excluding other diagnoses, and thus drive management. It is also a tool that can assist in prognostication.

- Acute hepatocellular injury: severe inflammation with necrosis and apoptosis seen in isoniazid (INH), aspirin, and phenytoin

- Chronic hepatocellular injury: findings as above with fibrosis resembling other chronic liver disease seen in amoxicillin-clavulanate, valproic acid, amiodarone

- Acute cholestasis: bile plugging with hepatocellular cholestasis, commonly seen in anabolic steroid use

- Chronic cholestasis: bile stasis, portal inflammation, bile jury, bile plugs, and duct paucity seen in amoxicillin-clavulanate

- Steatosis: microvesicular often related to mitochondrial injury seen in tetracycline and valproic acid

- Zonal necrosis: usually in intrinsic DILI and associated with poor outcomes, seen in acetaminophen toxicity

- Granulomas: are associated with milder injury and can result from many drugs, or even talc exposure through the bloodstream

# History and Physical

Clinical presentations in drug-induced hepatotoxicity are varied and, most times can be asymptomatic.

# Evaluation

Diagnosis begins with a compatible history, known drugs, and excluding underlying liver disease. Subsequently, a high index of suspicion is required, as there are no specific tests available to diagnose DILI.

Several clinical prediction scores have also been developed to develop an objective diagnostic tool for DILI. Among them is the Roussel Uclaf Causality Assessment (RUCAM), which includes risk factors, course of liver enzymes, suspected offending agents, and alternative causes into the scoring system. Using the calculated “R” score, the type of liver injury can be classified, and subsequently, the likelihood of DILI can be determined.

# Treatment / Management

The principal treatment for drug-induced hepatotoxicity is the removal of the offending agent.

# Differential Diagnosis

DILI is clinically challenging to diagnose as it can mimic any acute or chronic hepatobiliary condition.

- Liver diseases: viral hepatitis (A, B, C, E), cytomegalovirus(CMV), Epstein-Barr virus, ischemic hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, Hemochromatosis, Wilson disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), alcoholic hepatitis, Gilbert syndrome

- Biliary disease: cholangitis, choledocholithiasis, primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis

- Malignancy: hepatocellular cancer, lymphoma, pancreatobiliary malignancy

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

The Drug-Induced Liver Injury Network (DILIN) was developed to advance research in DILI through a prospective clinical trial of patients. It created the DILIN Causality Scoring System to understand better the etiology, pathogenesis, risk factors, and outcomes of drug-induced hepatotoxicity.

# Prognosis

Generally, patients have a favorable prognosis after discontinuation of the offending drug, as 90% recover. Mortality risk can be predicted through “Hy’s law,” which includes the following criteria that are associated with a poorer prognosis: ALT/AST more than 3 times ULN, total bilirubin up to 2 times ULN in the absence of obstruction, and no other explanation of the mentioned laboratory values.

# Complications

There is a 17% risk of progression to chronic liver disease, mostly seen in patients with prolonged cholestatic injury such as vanishing duct syndrome.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Prevention of DILI can begin with patient education on their medications, which include over-the-counter drugs, prescription medications, and HDS. If patients should experience signs and symptoms of liver toxicity or ALF, further evaluation is required.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

More than 1000 medications and herbal compounds can cause drug-induced hepatotoxicity.