There are many indications for liver biopsy.

- Diagnosis: Liver biopsy is crucial for diagnostic dilemmas: e.g., differentiating autoimmune hepatitis from nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in obese patients with abnormal liver function tests and positive autoimmune serology. Wilson disease is traditionally called the "great masquerader" due to its varied presentations. Quantifying copper on the liver biopsy specimen helps clinch the diagnosis.  It is very useful in overlap syndromes, e.g., autoimmune hepatitis with primary biliary cholangitis.  Its role in post-liver transplant setting cannot be overemphasized. It is very helpful in the evaluation of abnormal liver function tests in the immediate post-transplant setting. Vascular pathologies or infections helps guide management, differentiating rejection from a recurrence of underlying diseases such as hepatitis C infection.  Diagnostic challenges like differentiating cholangiocarcinoma from hepatocellular cancer can be made with liver biopsy in atypical cases.

- Prognosis: Liver biopsy can be used as a prognostic tool for several diseases. In NASH, the presence of advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis has important prognostic considerations. Similarly, in diseases such as hemochromatosis, the presence of cirrhosis predicts increased risk for developing hepatocellular cancer. Although now largely replaced by noninvasive markers, the presence of fibrosis has very important prognostic implications for patients with chronic liver diseases such as hepatitis C infection.

- Treatment: Liver biopsy plays a sentinel role in patients with autoimmune hepatitis being treated with steroids and immunomodulators. The presence of histologically active disease is associated with high risk of relapse if treatment is stopped. There is a marked improvement in liver histology if patients are taking treatment, and therefore, can be helpful in monitoring compliance.