The underlying cause of macroglossia should be diagnosed and treated. Various modalities of treatment, including medications, surgery, radiation, and orthodontic treatment, may be used to treat macroglossia.

Referral for surgery may be appropriate for residual macroglossia that may be causing complications such as airway obstruction despite the completion of successful treatment. The conservative method is usually desired, whenever possible. In severe macroglossia or macroglossia due to neoplasia or when functional impairment such as speech and swallowing difficulties, facial skeleton abnormalities, and its psychological consequences are present reduction glossectomy is indicated. Reduction glossectomy is usually required in about 10% of cases of macroglossia. More than 20 surgical techniques have been proposed. Whenever possible, partial glossectomy should be conservative as much as possible, more so in benign disease, to retain functions of the tongue. Thyroxine may be used in cases of hypothyroidism, and bromocriptine may be used in cases of acromegaly for beneficial effects. Corticosteroids can be used postoperatively to treat edema of the tongue and maybe life-saving in acute obstructions.

Patients with acromegaly and macroglossia who do not respond to medical therapy may benefit from partial glossectomy.

Improvement of macroglossia occurs after discontinuation of the lopinavir/ritonavir.

Macroglossia may regress spontaneously. About 40% of children with BWS undergo a surgical tongue reduction.