Disulfiram has an acceptable risk profile. However, it is associated with many adverse events and drug-drug interactions, including death. The most common and less serious adverse effects include headache, sleepiness, tiredness, and halitosis (or metallic taste).

Reports exist of dermatological, neurological, psychiatric, and cardiac events. Serious side effects include hepatitis, hepatotoxicity, psychosis, seizures, peripheral neuropathy, and optic neuritis. Dermatological adverse effects are rare and include exfoliative dermatitis, rash, and pruritis. Hepatic failure may develop after many months of therapy. There have been cases of fatal fulminant hepatic failure that have been reported despite discontinuation of medication (1 case in 30000 patients treated per year). Psychiatric adverse effects are rare. Psychosis, confusional states, mutism, headbanging, memory impairment, and rarely stupor have been reported, and effects are dose-dependent. Symptoms usually resolve after discontinuation of disulfiram and a short course of antipsychotic medication. Psychosis may occur as a result of an interaction between disulfiram and cannabis. Neurological adverse effects may occur as early as 10 days after initiation. Axonal polyneuropathy is a rare adverse effect. Some cases of severe sensory-motor polyneuropathy with the involvement of cranial nerves have been reported within weeks of initiation of disulfiram 500 mg. Neuropathy occurs in 1 case per 1000 patients treated with disulfiram per year.

Drug interactions occur with compounds utilizing the cytochrome P450 enzyme system for oxidative metabolism. This interaction can occur with the following medications: amitriptyline, imipramine, phenytoin, chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, omeprazole, and acetaminophen. Drug-drug interactions may occur with other medications not listed. Slow elimination of disulfiram may give rise to the disulfiram-alcohol reaction up to fourteen days after the discontinuation. Disulfiram-alcohol reactions have been reported in patients exposed to environmental chemical compounds containing alcohol.