A myocardial abscess is a life-threatening disorder of the endocardium, and early recognition and initiation of treatment are necessary for patient survival. In the majority of cases, a myocardial abscess is a complication of endocarditis that either involves native or prosthetic valves. However, a myocardial abscess can also occur in many other settings including infective endocarditis, trauma, suppurative pericarditis, infected transplanted heart, HIV, and parasitic infections. The condition carries very high mortality ranging from 30% to 75% without treatment. To reduce the morbidity and mortality of this disorder, it is imperative that a structured approach is developed to make an early diagnosis and begin treatment.

- Cardiologist to monitor for complications like heart block, septal perforation

- Cardiovascular surgeon for debridement, replacement of the valve

- Infectious disease specialist to ensure that the patient is on the right antibiotics

- Intensive care medicine and pulmonary medicine specialists to monitor the patients

- Nephrologist to dialyze the patients when the patient has renal failure

- Laboratory technology/pathologist to determine the type of organisms and cause; it is important to note that many patients have negative blood cultures due to prior administration of antibiotics

- Nurses to educate the patient and family on handwashing and endocarditis prophylaxis

- Physical therapist to improve muscular activity and lessen the risk of deep vein thrombosis

- Dietitian to ensure that failure to thrive does not develop; patients are extremely ill and often require food supplementation, either entirely or parenterally

- Pharmacists to monitor the antibiotic therapy which may extend for several months; many patients with prosthetic valves may be on oral anticoagulants and need monitoring of their coagulation parameters; these patients may also be on diuretics to treat heart failure and antiarrhythmic drugs

**Evidence-Based Medicine**

A myocardial abscess is an uncommon, life-threatening disorder. Most patients require immediate treatment, and it is difficult to perform randomized controlled studies; hence, evidence-based guidelines are not yet available. Most of the recommendations have been made indirectly from the care of patients with infective endocarditis.