Managing pediatric cataracts requires a team effort consisting of ophthalmologists, pediatricians, anesthesiologists, counselors, and parents/family members. Before surgery, the family members are counseled regarding the visual prognosis, the different available treatment options, and the need for regular follow-up, post-operative visual rehabilitation, and compliance to the amblyopia therapy, if required.

**Treatment Options**

Mydriasis: Use 2.5% phenylephrine as we need only mydriatic action. This method is used when the partial or nonamblyogenic cataract is present to permit vision through the non opacified area.

Optical iridectomy: no longer used. The same purpose as mydriatics; that is, it permits vision through the non-opacified area.

**Surgery**

- Indications:

- Presence of any visually significant opacity
- Cataract with vision ≤ 20/60 or disc not visible with an indirect ophthalmoscope
- Central cataract ≥ 3 mm
- Posterior subcapsular cataract
- Nuclear cataract
- Bilateral cataract
- Cataract associated with strabismus, nystagmus

- Anesthesia: general anesthesia, along with constant monitoring of vital parameters, is preferred for cataract surgery. A trained anesthesiologist team and interdepartmental support are required in dealing with children.

- When to operate: surgery should be performed as soon as possible for visually significant cataracts, ideally within a few weeks after birth to prevent amblyopia. For nonamblyogenic cataract, surgery is better planned after 4years of age as ocular development will be complete and post-operative complications are less, but close follow-up and visual monitoring is required to prevent amblyopia and treat as indicated. The consensus is to operate a unilateral cataract as early as 4-6 weeks after birth. Bilateral cataracts should be operated on by 6-8 weeks, and the second eye should be operated on within 2 weeks of the first surgery.

- Type of surgery and the surgical challenges: there has been a paradigm shift and advancement in cataract surgeries. Discission has been replaced by modern-day phacoaspiration and IOL implantation. Choyce and Binkhorst first performed the implantation of a monocular intraocular lens in a child's eye in 1959. Pediatric cataract surgery is different from adult cataract surgery and poses various intraoperative challenges: low scleral rigidity causes difficulty in incision construction and wound closure, the smaller size of the eyeball, shallow anterior chamber depth and small pupil size causing decreased maneuverability, elastic capsule, high positive intravitreal pressure and risk of vitreous loss and expulsion of intraocular contents. Advantages of primary IOL implantation are immediate post-operative refractive correction, minimal or no optical aberration, full visual field, less chance of development and progression of amblyopia, strabismus, nystagmus, and minimal dependence on patients' compliance. IOL implantation in below 2 years of age is still a controversial topic. Lack of long-term data to predict the success rate, associated other ocular abnormalities along with cataract, frequent occurrence of deprivational amblyopia, and increased postoperative complications are the main reason for limited uses of IOL implantation in children below 2 years of age. Infant Aphakia Treatment Study (IATS) showed higher intra-op and post-op complications and the need for additional surgeries in children with IOL implantation in less than 1 yr of age.
- Less than 18 months to 2 years of age - Lens aspiration without IOL with posterior curvilinear capsulorhexis (PCCC) with limited anterior vitrectomy (LAV), leaving the child aphakic and giving post-op aphakic correction followed by secondary IOL implantation at a later age.
- 2 years to 5 years- Lens aspiration with IOL implantation with PCCC with LAV.
- More than 8 years - Lens aspiration with IOL implantation with PCCC without LAV.
- More than 8 years - Phacoaspiration with IOL implantation like an adult cataract surgery.
- PCCC (in < 8 years) and LAV (in < 5 years)  are important in younger children because of the higher risk of VAO post-surgery.

- IOL POWER CALCULATION IN CHILDREN: Accurate IOL power calculation is essential for post-surgical refractive outcomes in children. It is challenging both in terms of calculating it and adjusting it for the age of the child and/or axial length of the eye. Biometry and keratometry measurements differ according to the type of instruments and method used to measure them. Studies have shown that SRK/T and Holladay 2 formulae had the least predictive error (PE) among the various IOL formulas available. Newer IOL formulas are being investigated to optimize the variability of IOL power in children. Emmetropisation is the change of three major variables, namely axial length, corneal curvature, and lenticular power from its birth values to its adult values as the child grows. As the size of the eyeball grows, axial length increases, and there is a myopic shift. Thus, the initial desired refractive outcome after IOL implantation is hypermetropia. Various studies have shown that under correction of the required IOL power depending upon the child's age improves the refractive outcome in these children post-surgery. Dahan and Drusedau suggested an under correction of 20% in <2 years; 10% between 2 and 8 years. A consensus is to have residual refraction of +6D (1 to 2 years), +5 (2 to 4 years), +4 (4 to 5 years), +3 (5 to 6 years), +2 (6 to 7 years), and plano for >14 years.