Fusiform incision is commonly used to remove lesions that are roughly round or oval. The technique begins by determining the necessary margins around a given lesion, and those margins are drawn with a marker, forming a circle or an oval. The fusiform incision will include the tissue within the marked boundaries as well as additional tissue at either end to allow for the desired tapering. Fusiform incision may be performed in several variations, but two forms are most typical. The most common form portrayed in textbooks has two sides that are rounded from end to end of the incision. A more efficient method employs straight sides on the ends of the incision, resembling a rhomboid shape.

In some instances, the fusiform incision may be used to obtain a cross-section of a larger area of tissue, particularly when one wants to see histologically the transition from normal to abnormal skin or to see the architecture of a large skin neoplasm. For example, it can be used at the periphery of a keratoacanthoma to provide a large cross-section for pathologists to examine the architecture that helps to differentiate this from a more aggressive squamous cell carcinoma. In these circumstances, a longer and more narrow specimen may be harvested, allowing maximal cross-sectional tissue for examination with little tension in defect closure. Likewise, a full cross-section may be obtained in a large pigmented lesion, providing the pathologist substantial tissue for examination without creating a large defect.