The precise pathophysiology behind clonus is not known, but there are 2 leading theories.

Hyperexcitability in muscle stretch circuits is produced when there is less tonic inhibition of motor neurons involved in the monosynaptic stretch reflex. This can occur when there is a lesion to descending motor nerves, predominantly the dorsal reticulospinal pathway, which can occur anywhere from the cortex to the spinal cord. The inhibitory dampening effect of these descending nerves on alpha and gamma motor neurons is removed, leading to a hyper excitatory state in the muscle stretch reflex circuit. Therefore, clonus is considered a manifestation of upper motor neuron pathology and this explains why other signs of hyperreflexia generally accompany it.

The rhythm of a given joint's clonus is defined by the nervous anatomy involved in that joint's stretch reflex. The longer the nerves involved, the longer it takes for a signal to be conducted to the spine and back out to the periphery, and therefore the longer the time between beats. For example, the wrist or fingers will oscillate at a higher frequency (shorter interval between beats) than the ankle which is significantly further from the spine.

The most common site to test for clonus is in the ankle/Achilles reflex (S1/S2 nerve routes). Some other commonly tested clonus reflexes include the

- Jaw jerk/masseter: Trigeminal nerve, tested at the chin/mental protuberance

- Patellar/quadriceps/knee: L2 to L4 (mostly L4), tested just inferior to the patella (or by pushing patella distally)

- Biceps: C5 to C6, just anterior to the elbow

- Triceps: C7 to C8 (mostly C7), just posterior to the elbow