The common complications of lung decortication include:

- **Hemorrhage**: Blood loss from the raw lung surfaces can result in a significant hemorrhage. A postoperative blood profile should be done to ascertain the need for blood transfusion.

- **Persistent air-leak and bronchopleural fistula**: Minor air-leaks can occur during decortication. However, these leaks resolve spontaneously after a few days. Large leaks must be closed with formal suturing to avoid the development of a bronchopleural fistula.

- **Persistent lung collapse**: Collapse, and non-expansion of the lung parenchyma is frequently noticed in the postoperative period after decortication. Incentive spirometry and chest physiotherapy play a crucial role in the re-expansion of underlying parenchyma. However, a subset of patients may not show adequate lung expansion due to diseased/destroyed lung.

- **Injury to vital structures**: Decortication must be performed carefully by experienced surgeons. Injury to vital structures, including subclavian vessels, diaphragm, esophagus, and pericardium, is common if the limits of peel removal are not followed.

- ****Retained infective focus and sepsis**:**Removal of the pus and pleural toileting must be thoroughly performed during decortication. Retained pus is a nidus of infection and may lead to sepsis in the postoperative period.

- **Severe postoperative pain**: Any thoracotomy, especially those with rib resection, may lead to significant pain in the postoperative period. Adequate postoperative analgesia is a must and may require a combination of intravenous and epidural analgesia.

- 
**Chest wall deformity and scoliosis**