Veno-venous (VV) ECMO and Veno-arterial (VA) ECMO comparison

**VV ECMO**

**VA ECMO**

Requires venous cannulation

Arterial and venous cannulation

Maintains pulmonary blood flow and increases mixed venous pO2

Decrease pulmonary arterial pressure as bypasses pulmonary circulation

Does not assist systemic circulation; no cardiac support is provided

Cardiac support assist in the systemic circulation

Not useful in right ventricular (RV) failure

Could be useful in RV failure

Perfusion rate requirement is high

Perfusion rate requirement is low

Compared to VA ECMO, lower PaO2

Higher PaO2 achievement

ECMO circuit connection in series to the heart and lungs

ECMO circuit connection is parallel to the heart and lungs

Fewer complications

More complications

ECMO circuit basically consists of drainage and return cannula, pump, heat/gas exchanger.

**Pump:**Roller and centrifugal are two types of the driving force (pump) of ECMO. Centrifugal pumps contain plastic cones or impellers that rotate around 3000 revolutions per minute. This generates up to 900 mmHg of forwarding pressure that propels the blood in a centrifugal pump. The negative pressure of around 400 to500 mmHg is responsible for fewer microemboli and fewer cavitations. Blood flow in the pump is preload and afterload dependent, but in the case of hypovolemia, the inlet pressure becomes more negative to maintain the speed of the pump; however, the rate of the blood flow decreases. Systemic vascular resistance changes the circuit flow and the speed of the pump in VA ECMO.

The roller pump consists of tubing compressed by rollers. The rotating arm has rollers that compress the tube and propel the blood. In the case of hypovolemia, pump speed, and flow rate decrease. Roller pumps are not controlled by the afterload, therefore in VA ECMO, changes in the systemic vascular resistance do not influence blood pumping. Roller pumps are less expensive, safer, and more reliable, but microembolization shedding can occur due to the production of high negative pressure.



Centrifugal Pump

Roller Pump

Description

Non-occlusive

Occlusive



Affected by afterload

No effect of afterload

Advantages

Portable

Cheap



Positive and negative pressure adjustment is safe

Small prime volume



No large air embolism

A shallow sine wave pulse



Adapt to venous return

No backflow

Disadvantages

Large prime volume

Excessive positive and negative pressure



Expensive

Large air embolism possible



Flowmeter is necessary

Occlusion adjustments may be required.



Passive backward flow is possible.

Risk of tubing rupture





Risk of spallation





Vulnerable to careless operation

**Oxygenators:**Membrane oxygenators are similar to the lungs, having the characteristic of either microporous polypropylene hollow fiber or non-microporous silicone rubber. Less particulate and gas embolization by membrane oxygenators compared to bubbles also allows superior control of blood gases.

**Cannulae and Tubing:**The drainage cannula is suggested to be 23 F to 25 F, and the return cannula should be 17 F to 21 F. 25 F multi-stage femoral venous cannula was suggested by Sidebotham et al., which has numerous side holes that provide drainage for both VV and VA ECMO, which is useful in many patients who require a flow of more than 6 L/min.

In ECMO circuits, heparin can be coated through ionic or covalent bonds, but effectiveness is not very well established. Heparin/platelet factor 4 antibodies are considered for the development of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia type II.

Anticoagulation for ECMO: Monitoring anticoagulation is essential for ECMO management. The balance between reducing the platelet and thrombin activation to prevent thrombosis and providing sufficient clotting to prevent bleeding is the goal of anticoagulation.

Thromboelastography (TEG) has been used by several medical centers that help to check the coagulation profile, including the measurement of strength and dissolution of clots in case of fibrinolysis. To monitor anticoagulation through heparin, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) is most widely used except in the case of cardiopulmonary bypass when high heparin dose is required. But in ECMO high heparin dose is not required; therefore, APTT is considered a valuable tool for anticoagulation assessment. In comparison to APTT, ACT has been found to poorly correlate with APTT as ACT could not delineate between low and moderate levels of anticoagulation.

The first choice for anticoagulation for ECMO, heparin, is most widely used because it is easily available, has a rapid onset of action, is easily reversible, and is well tolerated by pediatric and adult patients. For ECMO, 20 to 70 U/kg/h of heparin dosage is recommended. Dosage varies in adult and pediatric patients based on metabolic rates and thrombin generation. With prolonged use of ECMO, consumption of antithrombin can reduce heparin responsiveness. Argatroban is an alternative anticoagulant in those with heparin allergies or a history of HIT.  The starting dose of Argatroban ranges between 0.2 to 0.5 mcg/kg/min. Koster et al. mentioned of successful use of bivalirudin, a direct thrombin inhibitor like Argatroban, for a patient of myocardial failure who developed heparin-induced thrombocytopenia during ECMO.