Multiple pathophysiologic mechanisms have been described in the literature so far to explain CRPS. Scientific evidence does not point to a single principal mechanism. Therefore, the underlying mechanism seems to be multifactorial. Inflammatory, immunological, central, and peripheral sensitization, as well as autonomic changes, have been studied in CRPS.

**Inflammatory Changes**

Both the clinical presentation and elevated inflammatory laboratory markers suggest that inflammation is a key mechanism underlying the development of CRPS. The basic signs of inflammation, such as increased temperature, swelling, redness, pain, and functional impairment, are commonly associated with CRPS.

**Immunological Changes**

Autoimmune factors seem to play a role in CRPS pathogenesis. Autoantibodies against beta-2-adrenergic receptor, alpha -1a-adrenergic receptor, and muscarinic-2 receptor have been found in CRPS.

**Peripheral Sensitization**

Sensitization of the peripheral nervous system is triggered by the release of pro-inflammatory markers after the initial injury. Markers such as TNF-α released in this process reduce the stimulation threshold, leading to local sensitization and hyperalgesia in CRPS. Catecholamine sensitivity of peripheral nerve fibers has also been noted in CRPS.

**Central Sensitization and Neuroplasticity**

Increased excitability of secondary dorsal horn neurons occurs in CRPS. Hyperalgesia and allodynia develop as a result of sensitization. The release of substance-P, bradykinin, and glutamate play an important role in this process. Persistent noxious primary afferent traffic into the dorsal horn leads to “wind up” and central sensitization.

Evidence of cortical reorganization has been noted in CRPS with a reduction in the somatosensory-cortex area corresponding to the affected extremity.

**Autonomic Changes**

Sympathetic-afferent coupling occurs in CRPS due to the upregulation of sympathetic receptors on nociceptive nerve fibers. As a result, sympathetic hyperactivity leads to increased pain and sympathetic sensitivity of nociceptive nerves. Local swelling, color, and temperature variations associated with this disorder suggest an involvement of the autonomic nervous system.