The effects of hypophosphatemia are broad and impact nearly every system. Symptoms of this deficiency become apparent below 0.32 mmol/L. Effects primarily are due to intracellular depletion; however, chronic effects can be seen in the bone structures. Prolonged hypophosphatemia leads to osteopenia, osteoporosis, rickets, or osteomalacia due to decreased bone mineralization. The central nervous system may manifest with metabolic encephalopathy as a result of ATP depletion and may include altered mental state, irritability, paresthesias, numbness, seizures, or coma. Cardiac function is impacted by ATP depletion. In addition to possible systolic heart failure, the myocytes become less stable, and arrhythmias are possible. The decreased diaphragmatic function impacts pulmonary function with subsequent hypoventilation. Ventilator-dependent patients have been shown to have longer hospital courses and worse outcomes when hypophosphatemia is present. Gastrointestinal dysfunction occurs as a result of ATP deficiency, also with dysphagia or ileus possible. Generalized muscular weakness can occur. Rhabdomyolysis may occur, resulting in renal injury and increased creatinine phosphokinases; however, this is typically only seen in acute or chronic hypophosphatemia, such as in acutely ill persons with alcohol use disorder. The hematology systems are rarely impacted, but depletion of ATP may result in increased erythrocyte rigidity, predisposing to hemolysis, reduced phagocytosis, and granulocyte chemotaxis by white blood cells, and thrombocytopenia.

While symptoms are not clinically present in mild cases, it is important to address and replace phosphate whenever abnormalities are noted. The appropriate regimen for replacement is determined depending on clinical symptoms. Mild, asymptomatic cases with a serum phosphate less than 0.64 mmol/L should receive oral phosphate therapy of 30 to 80 mmol of phosphate per day, depending on the severity of deficiency. Severe, symptomatic cases are appropriate for intravenous phosphate if the serum phosphate is less than 0.32 mmol/L and should be changed to oral replacement when the serum phosphate exceeds 0.48 mmol/L. There are no contraindicating reasons for oral replacement.