The majority of clonidine overdoses in adults and children have not been shown to cause significant symptoms requiring major intervention. Death or the need for invasive intervention such as intubation or use of vasopressors are rare and are reported only in extreme cases, for example, with a very young age or extremely large dose/patch ingestion. In a study done on adults, bradycardia was the most consistent finding, lasting about 24 to 48 hours post-ingestion.

As severe toxicity requiring advanced resuscitation is rare, supportive care is the basis of managing clonidine overdoses. Hypotension should be addressed first with fluid resuscitation. In refractory cases, pressors are recommended. Dopamine and NE have both been cited as the agent of choice. However, there have been no studies to support the use of one over the other. Dopamine may also improve associated bradycardia. One case report demonstrated worsening hypotension with the prehospital administration of epinephrine. Rarely, intubation is needed for patients with severe respiratory depression. No specific recommendations for RSI medications are found.

The use of naloxone as an antidote to clonidine has been debated for many years. Its efficacy in this situation is thought to stem from the reversal of endogenous opioids released in the body secondary to clonidine toxicity. However, this depends on several factors, including the patient’s baseline blood pressure and sympathetic tone before ingestion. Several published studies and case reports show differing outcomes, highlighting the likely role of unknown cofactors. Despite its questionable utility, sources recommend judicious use of naloxone in cases where the patient is not protecting their airway, as the incidence of adverse effects is rare. Escalating doses of 0.1 mg to 10 mg is suggested.

Atropine for bradycardia has also been suggested, although it too has inconsistent results when studied. One study reported eight adults treated with atropine to have had transient improvement of heart rate of about an hour duration. In a bradycardic patient who becomes hemodynamically unstable, transcutaneous or transvenous pacing is suggested but unsubstantiated.

The consensus from multiple sources is that a patient who does not show any clinical signs of toxicity within several hours of ingestion may be discharged home following an observation period. Four to 8 hours has been suggested as the appropriate time frame. In adults without co-ingestion, intensive care unit (ICU) stay is not indicated as significant delayed effects are rare. Adults with isolated bradycardia may even be discharged in some situations. Pediatric ICU admission is recommended for pediatric patients with any cardiovascular or central nervous system symptoms.