Immunocompromised vaccination recipients may not have a prominent immune response and should be routinely monitored. Recipients of the vaccines should periodically monitor any new and unusual adverse effects and report them to their vaccination provider.

Pregnant women planning to be vaccinated by the mRNA-1273 vaccine are encouraged to register in the pregnancy exposure registry. The registry monitors outcomes in pregnant women exposed to the mRNA-1273 vaccine.

**Warnings and Precautions**

- The BNT162b2 vaccine postmarketing data showed elevated cardiac inflammatory risk (myocarditis and pericarditis) within seven days of completing the 2-dose series. Males aged 18-24 are most at risk, and males below 40 are at higher risk than females.

- The mRNA-1273 vaccine postmarketing data showed elevated cardiac inflammatory risk (myocarditis and pericarditis) within seven days of completing the 2-dose series. Males aged 12-17 are most at risk, and males below 40 are at higher risk than females.

- Thrombosis with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome (TTS), Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP), and Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) with the Ad26.COV2.S vaccine has been reported.

- Syncope, altered immunocompetence, and limitations of vaccine effectiveness have also been reported in both mRNA vaccines (BNT162b2,mRNA-1273) and the Ad26.COV2.S vaccine.

- Monitoring for allergic reactions and syncope has been advised by the FDA fact sheet following the administration of NVX-CoV2373 vaccines.

- Given the reports of myocarditis, pericarditis, hypersensitivity reactions, and lymphadenopathy-related reactions following NVX-CoV2373 vaccines, appropriate workup and reporting to the CDC are advised when patients present with signs and symptoms consistent with these complications.