Fibroblasts can regenerate functional tissue. They have involvement in all three stages of wound healing: inflammation, cell proliferation, ECM deposition, and remodeling. The process starts with an injury triggering an inflammatory response. Clot formation begins at the wound site formed from a fibrin-fibronectin matrix. Fibroblasts work off this scaffold to initiate the deposition and remodeling process.

Fibroblasts proliferate at the site of injury mediated by a slew of cytokines and growth factors. It is during this proliferative stage that granulation tissue forms and fibroblast activation takes place. The TGF-B above is one of the most well-researched cytokine mediators of fibroblast function. It functions as a chemotactic agent, a trigger for both proliferation and apoptosis, an enzyme activator, and a regulator of collagen deposition.

High tension within the wound produced by both migration and mechanical stress triggers adaptive changes in the ECM and the differentiation from fibroblast to myofibroblast, a step necessary for contraction and wound closure. The mechanical stress itself is enough to partially induce “stress fibers” within the fibroblast; however, additional factors are necessary for a full phenotype transition.  Fibroblasts containing the ectodysplasin A gene (a splice variant of fibronectin RNA) allow for TGF-B to stimulate the production of alpha-SMA. Increased alpha-SMA allows for the transition to myofibroblasts.

The migrational process of fibroblasts initiates tension production.  Myofibroblasts produce further contraction through the “fibronexus” adhesion complex allowing the myofibroblast to connect to intracellular microfilaments and the ECM mediated by alpha-SMA and non-muscle myosin. This activity permits the complex to contract in sync and perform wound closure. The fibronexus is not present in fibroblasts.