Approximately two to five million spermatozoa are deposited into the vagina during sexual intercourse and travel through the fallopian tube for potential fertilization. The lifespan of an individual sperm within the female reproductive tract ranges from three to seven days. Sperms can not repair themselves upon damage in harsh environments as they are terminally differentiated cells that lack transcription and translation machinery. They are subjected to physical stresses due to ejaculation, contractions of the female tract, alteration in the pH environment, mucous secretions, defenses of the female immune system, and must navigate a double tract fallopian tube system. Thus, of the millions of sperms inseminated at coitus, only a few thousand reach the fallopian tubes to fertilize the secondary oocyte. In contrast, the female ovary typically releases only a single matured oocyte that has halted in metaphase of meiosis II into the fallopian fimbriae.

**Gamete Approximation:**Fertilization requires that the sex cells are close enough in proximity to bind to one another**;**thus, both a sperm and an oocyte must travel from their original deposition location to approach each other within the fallopian tube.****After spermatozoan deposition, uterine contraction is stimulated by prostaglandins in the semen and oxytocin released during the coital reflex. The mixture of sperms with the secretion of uterine glands is passively aspirated into the uterine cavity. It should be noted that the active motility of sperms does not aid this process, but their motility is of utmost importance in transport from the uterine cavity to the oocyte. Most sperms die within 24 hours of their release, as they are gradually reduced in number by barriers provided by abrupt constrictions at the cervix and uterine ostium. Of the hundreds of millions of sperms emitted at a single ejaculation, only 1% enter the uterus, and a trip from the cervix to the oviduct takes between 30 minutes to 6 days. In contrast, the oocyte travels via ciliary beats and rhythmical contractions of the musculature of uterine tubes. Eventually, and typically, the sperms and ova both reach the ampulla of the fallopian tube.

**Contact and Fusion of Gametes:**Out of the thousand or fewer sperms reaching the ovum, only one fully penetrates the oocyte to produce an embryo. The remaining sperms are engaged in the disintegration of the three barriers around the secondary oocyte by an enzyme,hyaluronidase, which is present in the acrosomal cap of sperms. The three barriers around the secondary oocyte are the corona radiata, zona pellucida, and vitelline membrane. Nevertheless, before the actual fertilization (penetration) occurs, the spermatozoa must undergo a process called capacitation, followed by an acrosomal reaction (discussed in the Cellular Section). These two processes help a sperm acquire the capability to penetrate the ovum.

Once the sperm penetrates the ovum, the cytoplasm of the mature ovum contains two pronuclei: a male pronucleus composed of a sperm head with its nuclear envelope and a female pronucleus composed of the nucleus of a mature ovum. Both pronuclei contain 1N haploid chromosomes (23 chromosomes). The pronuclear envelopes disappear, and the chromosomes of each arrange themselves in the equatorial plane in order to prepare for fusion.

**Fertilization:**Fertilization is the process of fusing a mature male gamete and a mature female gamete to form a single cell, the zygote. The male gamete, a sperm, and the female gamete, an ovum, are both haploid and contain 23 chromosomes.

**Mitotic Cleavage of the Blastomere:**After fertilization, the resulting one-celled zygote will rapidly undergo multiple mitotic cleaves as it travels around four days to reach the uterine cavity. The zygote is much larger than most cells of the body and is actually visible to the naked eye. The process of cleavage or segmentation results in the production of blastomeres, which restores the standard size of cells by a progressive reduction of the cytoplasmic volume of the zygote. Once cleavage begins, the concepts will go through a two-cell stage (approximately day one of cleavage), four-cell stage (approximately day two of cleavage), twelve-cell stage (approximately day three of cleavage), and sixteen-cell stage (approximately day four of cleavage). Despite rapid increases in the number of cells during cleavage, the conceptus remains a similar size and form due to the compaction of its cells.

**Morula Formation:**The morula appears approximately four days after fertilization and first appears as a 16- to 32-celled mass still surrounded by the zona pellucida. Medically, this is often known as the final stage before the formation of a fluid-filled cavity within the conceptus called the blastocoel cavity, which precedes blastula formation. Recent time-lapse microscopy observations suggest that compaction may represent an important checkpoint for human embryo viability, through which chromosomally abnormal blastomeres are sensed and eliminated by the embryo. Compaction is critical because it sets anatomical differences between cells (inner versus outer), ultimately determining their fate. The group of cells present in the center of the morula will eventually give rise to the inner cell mass and the embryo proper.outer cell mass cells, are critical in the cavitation of the morula that occurs as it transitions into a blastocyst.****

**Blastocyst Formation:**By the blastocyst stage (approximately day five after fertilization), the embryo has reached 50 to 150 cells and starts to strain at the confines of the zona pellucida. This is due to cell division but also active pumping of fluid by outer cell mass cells into the inner space of the blastocyst, which forms a cavity or blastocoel. The filling of this space with fluid expands the blastocyst; thus, the termexpanded blastocyst. Before the creation of this fluid space, the embryo is referred to as non-expanded. Expansion functions to thin and eventually rupture the zona pellucida to permit the blastocyst to hatch from the zona pellucida. Blastocyst expansion also functions to allow a large amount of fluid entering the space to shift a grouping of cells off to one side of the hollowed interior. This cellular mass is a grouping of embryonic stem cells with unrestricted developmental potential termed the inner cell mass (ICM) within the blastocyst.  The ICM has the cells that will give rise to actual fetal cells. The other cells that surround and protect the ICM and that line the inner side of the zona pellucida are the trophectoderm cells, which give rise to the fetal part of the placenta. Thus, hallmarks of successful blastocyst formation are the fluid-filled blastocoele, the ICM, and the fully differentiated trophectoderm-derived trophoblast.****

**Apposition of the Blastocyst:**Implantation is the process of the blastocyst embedding into the endometrial lining of the uterus, which typically occurs in Week 2 of development. For implantation to occur, the blastocyst must completely hatch from the zona pellucida once the conceptus enters the uterine cavity. Early zona pellucida disappearance can lead to tubal pregnancies. Usually, the human blastocyst implants in the endometrium near the fundus along the anterior or posterior wall of the uterus between the openings of the glands.decidualization. The uterus is in the secretory phase, which is defined by high levels of estrogen and progesterone that function to coil glands and arteries, allowing the tissue to become succulent.