Gram-positive cocci:

Staphylococcus aureus is a gram-positive, catalase-positive, coagulase-positive cocci in clusters. S. aureus can cause inflammatory diseases, including skin infections, pneumonia, endocarditis, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, and abscesses. S. aureus can also cause toxic shock syndrome (TSST-1), scalded skin syndrome (exfoliative toxin, and food poisoning (enterotoxin).

Staphylococcus epidermidis is a gram-positive, catalase-positive, coagulase-negative cocci in clusters and is novobiocin sensitive. S. epidermidis commonly infects prosthetic devices and IV catheters producing biofilms. Staphylococcus saprophyticus is novobiocin resistant and is a normal flora of the genital tract and perineum. S. saprophyticus accounts for the second most common cause of uncomplicated urinary tract infection (UTI).

Streptococcus pneumoniae is a gram-positive, encapsulated, lancet-shaped diplococci, most commonly causing otitis media, pneumonia, sinusitis, and meningitis. Streptococcus viridans consist of Strep. mutans and Strep mitis found in the normal flora of the oropharynx commonly cause dental carries and subacute bacterial endocarditis (Strep. sanguinis).

Streptococcus pyogenes is a gram-positive group A cocci that can cause pyogenic infections (pharyngitis, cellulitis, impetigo, erysipelas), toxigenic infections (scarlet fever, necrotizing fasciitis), and immunologic infections (glomerulonephritis and rheumatic fever). ASO titer detects S. pyogenes infections.

Streptococcus agalactiae is a gram-positive group B cocci that colonize the vagina and is found mainly in babies. Pregnant women need screening for Group-B Strep (GBS) at 35 to 37 weeks of gestation.

Enterococci is a gram-positive group D cocci found mainly in the colonic flora and can cause biliary tract infections and UTIs. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) are an important cause of nosocomial infections.

Gram-positive rods:

Clostridia is a gram-positive spore-forming rod consisting of C. tetani, C. botulinum, C. perfringens, and C. difficile. C. difficile is often secondary to antibiotic use (clindamycin/ampicillin), PPI use, and recent hospitalization. Treatment involves primarily with oral vancomycin.

Bacillus anthracis is a gram-positive spore-forming rod that produces anthrax toxin resulting in an ulcer with a black eschar. Bacillus cereus is a gram-positive rod that can be acquired from spores surviving under-cooked or reheated rice. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, and watery non-bloody diarrhea.

Corynebacterium diphtheria is a gram-positive club-shaped rod that can cause pseudomembranous pharyngitis, myocarditis, and arrhythmias. Toxoid vaccines prevent diphtheria.

Listeria monocytogenes is a gram-positive rod acquired by the ingestion of cold deli meats and unpasteurized dairy products or by vaginal transmission during birth. Listeria can cause neonatal meningitis, meningitis in immunocompromised patients, gastroenteritis, and septicemia. Treatment includes ampicillin.