Xenon is an element with the symbol Xe and an atomic number of 54 (group 18 of the periodic table). It is an inert mono-atomic gas firstly identified in 1898 by the British chemists William Ramsay (1852-1916) and Morris Travers (1872-1961) in the residue obtained by partial evaporation of liquid air (krypton impurity).

Among the physical and chemical properties of xenon, the boiling point is 166.6 K, the melting point 161.7 K, density is 5.851 g/dm2 whereas the colour spectrum is blue-green. Because the oil-gas partition coefficient of xenon is 1.9, it is among the noble gases the most soluble gas in oil (lipids).

Even if xenon does not react with any chemical element, it is always able to form quite particular compounds with water, hydroquinone, and phenol. This noble gas can be oxidized by groups that are extremely electronegative, forming salts. For instance, the compound, called xenon hexafluoplatinate, was first synthesized in 1962 by the chemist Neil Bartlett (1932-2008) and it was the first example of a noble gas chemical compound reported in the chemical literature. Other Xenon fluorides are the Xenon difluoride (XeF2), Xenon tetrafluoride (XeF4), and Xenon hexafluoride (XeF6).

Xenon can be manufactured by the fractional distillation of liquefied air. The use of xenon in the industry is limited by high costs. Among these applications, there is the xenon lamp, a particular arc lamp that uses xenon gas to produce very intense and white light similar to sunlight. There are several types of xenon lamps, all consisting of a glass or quartz tube with two tungsten electrodes at the ends and filled with xenon gas after vacuuming them. These lamps are used for street lighting, photo flashes and projectors, car headlights, and marine lighting. It is also used for lasers, and x-ray tubes as well as in the food industry for killing microorganism, and in aerospace.

**Xenon in Medicine**

The main role of the element concerns its use as a radioactive diagnostic agent in clinical imaging, and inhaled anesthetic in general anesthesia. Other applications regard the organ protection, ophthalmology, and in dermatology.

Clinical Imaging

Xenon is indicated for cerebral flow assessment (xenon-enhanced computed tomography), pulmonary function evaluation, and lung imaging. Xenon has also found use in nuclear medicine with computed tomography as well as single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In summary, the gas can be useful for the measurement of cerebral blood flow, whole-brain scans, and ventilation studies of the lungs through MRI (131 Xe), SPECT (133 Xe), and CT (129 Xe).

General Anesthesia

The anesthetic proprieties of xenon were discovered in 1939 and applied in mice in 1940 (JH Lawrence) and subsequently in two humans volunteers (Cullen and Gross), in 1951.

Organ Protection

An important field of study concerns the xenon-induced organ protection. For example, xenon use has been proposed for preventing ischemia/reperfusion damage after Stanford Type-A acute aortic dissection surgery.

Other Clinical Uses

Apart from this research, there have been studies with the gas for pathologies including dementia, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, and obsessive-compulsive disorders.