# Definition/Introduction

MacConkey agar (MAC) is a bacterial culture medium named after bacteriologist Alfred T. MacConkey (1861-1931). MacConkey agar is a selective and differentiating agar that only grows gram-negative bacterial species; it can further differentiate the gram-negative organisms based on their lactose metabolism.

# Issues of Concern

Key components of the MacConkey medium include crystal violet dye, bile salts, lactose, and neutral red (pH indicator). Crystal violet dye and bile salts halt the growth of gram-positive bacteria. This allows only gram-negative species to form colonies on MAC agar.

Based on the ability to ferment lactose, different species will yield colonies in varying appearance on a MacConkey medium. This gives McConkey agar its differentiating property.

- Lactose (Lac) positive (pink colonies):

- 
              
- Lactose fermenting species will grow pink colonies. Lactose fermentation will produce acidic byproducts that lower the pH, and this turns the pH indicator to pink.
              
              
- Example of Lac positive species: Escherichia coli, Enterobacteria, Klebsiella

- Lac negative (white colonies)

- 
              
- Gram-negative bacterial species will still form colonies, but colonies will have a white appearance as there will be no change in pH in the absence of lactose fermentation.
              
              
- Example of Lac negative species: Salmonella, Proteus, Yersinia, Pseudomonas

- No colonies:

- 
              
- Gram-positive bacteria will not form any colonies on MacConkey medium.

- Slow:

- 
              
- Weak lactose fermenters will form colonies slower than the rest.  
              
              
- Example of slow lac fermenters: Serratia, Citrobacter

- Mucoid: (sticky, wet colonies)

- 
              
- Encapsulated bacteria produce capsules using lactose. This gives sticky, wet-appearing colonies.
              
              
- Example of mucoid colony-forming species: Klebsiella, enterobacter

# Clinical Significance

A pure bacterial culture remains crucial to assess its virulence, its susceptibility to antibiotic therapy, and its genome sequence in order to facilitate the understanding and treatment of caused diseases. MAC's selective and differentiating properties as a culture medium allow isolating colonies of pure bacterial culture from a source sample. Typically in a clinical setting, the collected sample is placed on a panel of many growth media for identification and isolation of bacterial cultures.Escherichia coli and Campylobacter jejuni are some of the common causes of bacterial gastroenteritis. When bacterial gastroenteritis is suspected, the patient's specimen can be sampled and cultured on a panel of bacterial cultures, which includes MacConkey medium. MAC contributes to the identification of the causal agent by providing lactose-fermentation profiles in gram-negative species.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

A pure bacterial culture remains essential for the study of its virulence, its antibiotic susceptibility, and its genome sequence in order to facilitate the understanding and treatment of caused diseases. Bacterial cultures are still widely used laboratory techniques that many physicians rely on to make their final diagnoses. Many health care professionals are involved in this process, and proper communication and coordination will enhance patient-centered care, improve outcomes, patient safety, and enhance team performance. Bacterial culture from a patient's specimen is a commonly ordered test that many physicians use to aid their medical decision-making process. Nurses are frequently involved in obtaining and transporting samples from the patient to the laboratory. Clinical microbiologists must be trained with a thorough understanding of the principles to run the tests, interpret the results, and report the findings. Sterile sampling techniques and proper handling of the specimen during handling and transport of samples are required to avoid contamination. Any healthcare professionals handling these patient samples must be adequately trained in order to avoid contamination of the samples or accidental exposure and spread of potential pathogens.