Symptoms of irritant contact dermatitis may include burning, itching, stinging, soreness, and pain, particularly at the beginning of the clinical course, while pruritus is more common in allergic contact dermatitis. Patients with a history are at increased risk for developing nonspecific hand dermatitis and irritant contact dermatitis.

Both irritant contact dermatitis and allergic contact dermatitis can present with three morphological patterns.

- Acute phase: erythema, edema, oozing,  crusting, tenderness, vesicles or pustules

- Subacute phase: crusts, scales, and hyperpigmentation

- Chronic phase: Lichenification.

Hands are the common site of contact allergic dermatitis.

No pathognomonic clinical signs and symptoms can differentiate between allergic contact dermatitis and irritant contact dermatitis.

The acute irritant reaction usually reaches its peak quickly, within minutes to few hours after exposure, and then starts to heal, while in allergic contact dermatitis, the elicitation time depends on the characteristics of the sensitizer, the intensity of exposure, and degree of sensitivity. Lesions usually appear 24 to 72 hours after the exposure to the causative agent and reach their peak at approximately 72 to 96  hours. Allergic contact dermatitis improves more slowly than irritant contact dermatitis and then recurs faster (in a few days) when exposure is re-established.

Common allergens causing allergic contact dermatitis include the following -

- Paraphenylenediamine (PPD) present in hair dye; a common cause of allergic contact dermatitis on the scalp, face, ears

- Neomycin and bacitracin applied to the areas of stasis dermatitis and leg ulcers may be the cause of allergic contact dermatitis on the legs and feet

- Topical neomycin and corticosteroids can lead to allergic contact dermatitis in patients with otitis externa

- In women with lichen sclerosus et atrophicus, benzocaine applied in pruritus ani and pruritus vulvae may develop allergic contact dermatitis

- Nickel is the most common metal present in artificial jewelry which is the cause of allergic contact dermatitis.

Different clinical patterns of allergic contact dermatitis include erythema multiforme, urticarial papular plaques, lichen-planus, lichenoid eruptions, purpuric petechial reactions, dermal reactions, lymphomatoid contact dermatitis, granulomatous and pustular reactions, pigmentation disturbances, or pemphigoid.