# Continuing Education Activity

HDL cholesterol levels have been believed to be cardioprotective for many years. Recent studies examining pharmacologic elevation of HDL through various methods have not demonstrated a reduction in coronary vascular disease progression. This resulted in further study of the relationship of HDL particle number with HDL level as well as the many functions of HDL and the role they play in antiatherogenic properties. This has been identified as a potential secondary target for those with cardiovascular disease who have reached maximum LDL lowering benefit on lipid-lowering medications. We will also look at the various hereditary disorders and genetic mutations that result in low HDL states and the various effects these have on cardiovascular risk. This activity will examine the drugs that affect HDL cholesterol level, particle number, and function while also examining the clinical benefit. Lastly, it will highlight the importance of the interprofessional team in supporting the nutrition and exercise changes that improve HDL levels as well as cardiovascular health.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiologies of low high-density lipoprotein medical conditions and the effect they have on cardiovascular disease risk.
- Review the evaluation of low high-density lipoprotein states including very low levels due to inherited causes and the syndromes associated with them.
- Summarize the management options available for low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
- Discuss interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication in the treatment of low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

High-density lipoproteins are a group of particles that have a wide array of functional and physicochemical properties.

# Etiology

Low HDL has been described in various forms of familial lipid disorders and as a part of metabolic syndrome.

Tangier disease, discovered 40 years ago in siblings on Tangier Island, is an autosomal co-dominant condition in which the homozygous state has an absence of plasma HDL-C with premature coronary artery disease, peripheral neuropathy, cholesteryl ester deposition in the reticuloendothelial system leading to hepatosplenomegaly, xanthomata, xanthelasma, arcus corneae along with enlarged tonsils and lymph nodes. HDL is about 50% of normal levels in heterozygotes.

Another rare inherited lipid disorder is familial combined hypolipidemia. This disorder is defined by low LDL, triglycerides, and HDL.

Lipoprotein lipase facilitates the transfer of cholesterol to HDL from lipoproteins and triglyceride-enriched lipoprotein hydrolysis, lowering triglyceride levels. The premature coronary disease was present in 15% of those with heterozygotes of the lipoprotein lipase gene mutations in one study.

Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) is an enzyme that esterifies free cholesterol to cholesterol esters and HDL cholesterol. Very low serum HDL has been observed in those with homozygous mutations of the LCAT gene. Fish-eye syndrome is characterized by LCAT deficiency due to mutations of the LCAT gene with associated classic symptoms of severe corneal opacities, nephropathy, and proteinuria. Typically premature cardiovascular disease is not seen with LCAT deficiency but can occur in some mutations even in heterozygotes.

Low HDL cholesterol is a component of metabolic syndrome atherogenic lipid phenotype. Other features of the syndrome include insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus, obesity, hypertension, borderline high LDL, and elevations of triglyceride enriched remnants.

# Epidemiology

For most hereditary causes of low HDL, the case prevalence is not well established, and most are considered rare. The frequency of apo A-I gene mutation was estimated to be 6% and 0.3% in the general population.

# Pathophysiology

Several mutations were found in a population study to determine the frequency of familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia. In the children with the identified mutations, apo A-I levels were reduced by roughly 50% in the heterozygotes, and homozygotes were deficient in plasma HDL and apo A-I. The deleterious mutation is believed to be autosomal dominant. ATP binding cassette transporter (ABC1) mutations were detected in both familial HDL deficiency, and Tangier disease resulting in impaired cholesterol efflux from macrophages via the cholesterol efflux regulatory protein.

Tangier disease has also shown marked hypercatabolism of apoA-I in atypical lysosomes inside mononuclear phagocytes.

Polymorphism of the CETP gene affects the concentration and activity of CETP in the plasma. The B1 gene variant has been associated with lower HDL cholesterol and higher CETP concentration. Various genotypes were evaluated in an angiographic study of men with previously documented coronary atherosclerosis. The study compared the progression of coronary artery disease in these patients based on their CETP genotype. The B2B2 genotype had the least progression noted, the B1B1 genotype had the greatest progression, and B1B2 genotype had an intermediate progression of coronary disease. A different report evaluated two common mutations in CETP, resulting in a decreased CTP activity, comparing healthy subjects to those with coronary heart disease.

Lower HDL cholesterol concentrations were found in those who are heterozygous or homozygous for these mutations compared to the non-carriers. Despite the low HDL level associated with the mutations, women and men had a lower CHD risk.

# History and Physical

Most causes of low HDL do not have clear associated history or physical findings; however, some of the above-mentioned syndromes have classic findings that are important to look for as it will help narrow the differential quickly. Syndromes that have elevated LDL and triglycerides are prone to have xanthomas and xanthelasmas. Fish-eye disease characterized by severe corneal opacities that resulted in the name of the fish-eye disease. Tangier disease patients will complain of peripheral neuropathy. Physical exam of a patient with Tangier disease may have hepatosplenomegaly, enlarged tonsils or lymph nodes, arcus corneae due to lipid deposits in the eye, xanthomata, and xanthelasma. The insulin resistance seen in metabolic syndrome can sometimes be associated with acanthosis nigricans.

# Evaluation

Fasting lipid panel will give you the HDL cholesterol level in the blood. NMR can be used to measure particle numbers; however, there is not a standardized way of quantifying this lab.

# Treatment / Management

Overall, any beneficial clinical impact resulting from the elevation of HDL cholesterol content is not supported by research. A meta-analysis, in 2009, evaluating 108 randomized trials with patients at risk for coronary heart events failed to find an association, after adjustment for LDL cholesterol changes, between creases and HDL cholesterol from treatment with risk ratios for cardiovascular events, deaths from coronary disease or total deaths.

The VA HIT trial examined patients with coronary heart disease, HDL less than 40, LDL less than 140, and triglycerides less than 300. Subjects were divided randomly into two groups, gemfibrozil treatment, and placebo. After randomization, the beneficial effect first became apparent. After five years, nonfatal myocardial infarctions and cardiac death, the combined primary endpoint, was observed less often in the gemfibrozil group.

Infusion of apolipoprotein A-I has been tested in multiple studies for the potential benefit. Reduced risk for cardiovascular disease events has been strongly associated with ApoA1 levels in patients on statin therapy for LDL cholesterol.

Infusion of reconstituted HDL is examined in the erase trial were patients were randomized between placebo or dose of reconstituted human HDL. There was early study discontinuation in the higher dose HDL infusions due to increased incidence of liver function test abnormalities.  However, despite this, the vascular ultrasound taken a few weeks after the last infusion did not demonstrate a statistically significant difference in the coronary atheroma volume change from baseline.

The ILLUMINATE trial, which investigated torcetrapib, was terminated early due to the increased risk of cardiovascular events. Both major studies for evacetrapib were terminated early due to futility. Lastly, anacetrapib is currently under investigation.

In patients with increased cardiovascular risk with low HDL cholesterol, the evidence does support a healthy diet, regular exercise, reaching target body weight, and smoking cessation to improve HDL cholesterol and decrease cardiovascular disease risk.

# Differential Diagnosis

Of medications, many anti-hypertensive medications alter serum HDL levels. Diuretics cause an increase in all cholesterol and triglycerides proportionate to the dose. This effect is more pronounced in African Americans. The one exception is the reduction of HDL in diabetics on diuretics. Beta-blockers cause a decrease in HDL secondary to increased triglycerides. Cardioselective beta-blockers, especially in diabetics, have a smaller increasing effect on triglycerides. Alpha-blockers have an opposite effect compared to beta-blockers resulting in decreased triglycerides and increased HDL. HDL and other cholesterol are decreased with central sympathomimetics. Vasodilators increase HDL while reducing LDL and total cholesterol.

# Prognosis

Myocardial infarction, according to data from Framingham heart study, increases by about 25% for every 5 mg/dL decrease in HDL cholesterol serum levels below median values.

# Complications

Elevation of HDL cholesterol without a substantial increase in HDL particle can result in cholesterol overloaded HDL particles, which in one community-based cohort study showed an increased progression towards carotid atherosclerosis as measured by carotid intimal medial thickening in asymptomatic patients with no underlying atherosclerotic disease. CETP inhibitors and niacin both raise HDLC levels without having any effect on HDL function or number of particles and therefore tend to increase cholesterol overloaded particles.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

As discussed previously, a healthy diet is recommended in the treatment of low HDL. The Mediterranean diet in observational studies has shown a decrease in cardiovascular and overall mortality.

Further counseling on weight loss and exercise is warranted as well. Amongst the saturated fatty acids, the carbon chain length affects the change in serum cholesterol. For instance, those with carbon chain lengths of 14 (myristic) and 16 (palmitic) increase LDL and HDL cholesterol while decreasing triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. These smaller saturated fats can be found mostly in dairy products and red meats. On the other hand, stearic acid (18 carbons) has less of an effect on LDL and HDL cholesterol and can be found in beef and cocoa butter.

While there is no consensus on monounsaturated fats effect on HDL replacing polyunsaturated fats with monounsaturated fats in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus reduces insulin resistance. Insulin resistance and diabetes are important causes of low HDL and should be addressed during patient education.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In an analysis, evaluating obese individuals with pre-diabetes and diabetes, many reported a lack of lifestyle counseling from their primary care provider on exercise, diet, and weight-loss strategies. Referrals to weight loss programs were also reported at low levels.

A survey found the average primary care provider median visit length was 10 minutes.

Licensed therapists have been shown to help with behavior modification strategies, including smoking cessation as well as overeating or binge eating. Personal trainers with guidance from the clinician or for patients with cardiovascular disease cardiac rehab specialists can help with exercise programs tailored to each individual. Dieticians can help not only with one on one consultation but also classes on healthier cooking mechanisms.