# Introduction

Since ancient times, it has been a challenge to come up with the best way to replace missing teeth. Previously, dentures were the standard way of replacing lost teeth. Science, technology, and researchers have provided choices for better care of teeth and understanding of oral health, leading to solutions for most oral problems. Rehabilitation of the stomatognathic system includes the restoration of normal contour, function, esthetics, comfort, speech, and health.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Mini dental implants can be compared to conventional implant systems. They are made of one piece; however, conventional implants usually consist of two parts, the implant, and the abutment. Mini implants have a one-piece titanium screw with a ball-shaped head for denture stabilization or a square prosthetic head for fixed applications, instead of the classic abutment. A bracket like head design can aid in orthodontic treatment and serve as indirect anchorage. Mini implants are protruded over the gum surface when they are placed into the bone; conventional implants are placed under the gums. Transmucosal portion of the neck of mini-implant should be smooth and varies in length depending upon the mucosal thickness of the implant site.

# Indications

Mini implants should be considered for retaining overdenture prosthesis as an alternative treatment when standard implant placement is not possible. Mini implants may be considered for the rehabilitation of patients who express dissatisfaction with conventional dentures and have limitations regarding the placement of standard implants. They are indicated for bridge repair and fixed replacement of the single or multiple teeth in a narrow ridge.

# Contraindications

Mini implants should be avoided for patients who are medically unfit for the treatment. Prospective patients must be thoroughly evaluated for all known risk factors and conditions related to oral surgical procedures and subsequent healing before any clinical treatment. Contraindications include but are not limited to the following:

- Vascular conditions

- Uncontrolled diabetes

- Clotting disorders

- Anticoagulant therapy

- Heavy smoking

- Metabolic bone disease

- Chemotherapy or radiation therapy

- Chronic periodontal inflammation

- Insufficient soft tissue coverage

- Metabolic or systemic disorders associated with wound and/or bone healing

- Use of pharmaceuticals that inhibit or alter natural bone remodeling

- Disorders inhibiting patient ability to maintain adequate daily oral hygiene

- Uncontrolled parafunctional habits

- Insufficient bone height and/or width

- Insufficient interarch space (not always placed in the narrow alveolar ridge)

In edentulous arches, more than two implants are usually needed due to narrow the diameter, the unpredictability of survival, and the lack of scientific understanding. Treatment of children is not recommended until growth is finished and epiphyseal closure has been completed.

# Technique or Treatment

Preoperative planning includes a maximum of diagnostic information. A panoramic x-ray is a minimum requirement, a Cone Beam CT scan is recommended for 3D planning especially in cases with very narrow ridges. Raising a flap or flapless; If there is sufficient width of the ridge a flapless transgingival technique for the pilot drill is possible. When however a narrow ridge of extensive soft tissue is present a minimal flap (crestal incision) is recommended to reveal the bone. This would allow the exact placement of the implants at the correct angulation in the bone. The mini dental implant system utilizes a self-tapping threaded screw design and employs minimally invasive surgical intervention. For successful osteointegration and high success rate, initial stability of the mini implant is important and is dependent upon the bone quality, implant design, and surgical technique used.

# Complications

The primary disadvantages of mini implants for definitive prosthodontic treatment are as follows:

- The need for multiple implants because of the unpredictability and lack of current scientific guidelines and understanding

- The limited scientific evidence about long-term survival

- The potential for fracture of the implant during placement, screw loosening and prosthetic issues

- Lack of parallelism between implants is less forgiving because of the one-piece design

- The reduction in resistance to occlusal loading need an evaluation of the distribution of forces and movement of the prosthesis, similar to narrow-diameter implants

- Other disadvantages attributable to flapless surgery (when used) such as lack of bone visibility, inability to irrigate the bone, and contraindications in situations requiring alveoloplasty to gain prosthetic space

- Biological complications include peri-implantitis/ progressive bone loss, peri mucositis, periapical implantitis or sensory disturbance.

- Primary stability is poor where the cortex is thinner than 0.5 mm and density of trabecular bone is low

- Infection can occur if the transmucosal portion around the screw is not entirely smooth

- Excessive pressure during insertion of the self-drilling screw can lead to fracture of screw tip

- Overtightening can lead to screw loosening. Stop turning the screw when the smooth part of neck reach the periosteum.

- While obtaining orthodontic anchorage with the bracket like screw head, turning the ligature around the screw will make it impossible to keep the area free of inflammation. The ligature should be placed in the slot perpendicular to the wire on top of the screw

# Clinical Significance

Despite these disadvantages, the need for mini implants will continue to grow, especially among edentulous patients because of the following:

- An increase in the need for complete dentures

- The increased cost of standard implants

- Access-to-care issues, especially among economically disadvantaged patients and patients indicated for maxillofacial prostheses

- Medically compromised patients who may not be candidates for traditional surgical procedures or ridge augmentation procedures

- Use of mini implants as transitional implants to support prosthesis during the healing phase of implant denture restoration.

- As an alternative to the standard implants, when inadequate space and limited bone is available, a mini implant-supported permanent single crown can be placed

- Increased interest in implant dentistry among general dentists

Therefore, the current evidence must be reviewed and synthesized with the available clinical data on the survival of mini implants for definitive prosthodontic treatment.

Following factors influence the clinical success of mini implants:

1. Mini implant design: Improvement of implant shape, thread patterns and surface treatments lead to enhanced primary stability and faster osseointegration

2. Size of mini-implant effects the area of possible retention in bones

3. Favorable occlusion and masticatory forces significantly influence mini-implant success

4. Number and position of mini-implant within the prosthesis affect the forces acting on the bone surrounding the implants

5. The stress distribution is influenced by implant diameter and shape along with the load direction