**Pulse Oximeter Analysis**

This is a quick, inexpensive, portable, lightweight, noninvasive method for measuring a person’s continuous oxygenation status and is sometimes called the fifth vital sign. In 95% of cases, this method is accurate within 4% and usually uses transmissive pulse oximetry. These instruments are 2-wavelength devices that measure only two hemoglobin types. These hemoglobin types are oxyhemoglobin and hemoglobin not bound to oxygen. These are two equations with 2 unknowns. The device uses 2 light-emitting diodes emitting light at 660 nm (red) and 940 nm (infrared).

These 2 wavelengths pass through a finger, earlobe, or foot to a photodetector. The red region or oxyhemoglobin (O2Hb) absorbs less light than hemoglobin (Hb), while the reverse is true with infrared. A ratio of these two absorbances at these wavelengths is calibrated against arterial blood gas saturations from a co-oximeter in normal volunteers and is stored as a calibration algorithm. This algorithm within the device is then called up when needed, and the pulse oximeter estimates the saturation.

One problem is that the normal volunteers tend to be white, and it has been shown that pulse oximeters may tend to be under-read in dark-skinned subjects.

The advantage of pulse oximetry is that despite being quick and noninvasive, no study has yet noted a difference in mortality.

Eleven years later, 100% of patients undergoing bariatric surgery had hypoxemia (hypoxemia defined as a sat <90% for at least 30 s in this study).2 was 37 + 3 mm Hg (no hypercarbia).

The gold standard is still the ABG which gives the best saturations. In addition, ABGs provide more information related to pH, pCO2, and acid-base status and are often needed. Despite its pros and cons, pulse oximetry has taken the nation by storm in the last 25 years and is here to stay. There are more benefits than negatives. When using pulse oximetry and co-oximetry, it is important for healthcare providers to consider the presence of certain dyshemoglobinemias, which are conditions where oxygen-binding moieties are unable to effectively bind oxygen. The 3 notable dyshemoglobinemias that need to be considered in this context are CO poisoning, methemoglobinemia, and, although rare, sulfhemoglobinemia.

Fractional SaO2 = Sometime called FO2Hb; it is the same as SaO2 (functional arterial saturation) when there is no dyshemoglobinemia.

When there is a dyshemoglobinemia, fractional saturation measures all hemoglobin, and the formula is 100% X (02Hb)/(02Hb + Hb + COHb + MetHb + Sulfhemoglobinemia).

The partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2): The pressure of oxygen in mm Hg in the blood can be obtained with an ABG with normal values from 75 to at least 95 mm Hg.

CO-oximetry requires arterial blood gas and is divided into functional and fractional oxygen saturations (SaO2). Functional SaO2 includes hemoglobins that bind to oxygen.

- Functional SaO2 = (O2Hb)/(O2Hb + Hb) X 100%. Normal Value: 95 – 100%.

Fractional SaO2 is important because it includes all hemoglobin, ie, those that don’t bind oxygen (methemoglobin, carboxyhemoglobin, and sulfhemoglobinemia) and those that do (02Hb and Hb) and require one equation for each hemoglobin (wavelength).

- Fractional SaO2 = (02Hb)/(02Hb + Hb + COHb + MetHb) X 100%.

- Normal Value: 94 – 98%.

- Example 2: O2Hb = 10.0 mg/dL, Hb: 0.5 mg/dL. Methemoglobin: 2.0 mg/dL. COHb: 5 mg/dL.

- Answer: 10 mg/dL/17.5 mg/dL = 57%.

- FO2Hb = Fractional SaO2; it is lower than the regular SaO2 in dyshemoglobinemia.

Theoretically, functional and fractional hemoglobins are identical when only O2Hb and Hb are present. When the oxygen saturation level is below or higher than expected by pulse oximetry using a 2-wavelength system, consider co-oximetry to ensure no dyshemoglobinemia is present.

Oxygen Content (CtO2) = SaO2 X CtHb mg/dL X (1-FCOHb-FmetHg) +

Pa02 X 0.003 ml 02 per gm Hg/dL

Normal CtO2 = 18.8 to 22.3 ml/dL -generally 2% dissolved oxygen and 98% on Hb.

Normal SaO2 = ct022Hb/ct (02Hb + HHb) X 100% = 95 – 100%.

One can increase Oxygen Content by transfusions, reducing dyshemoglobinemias, or giving oxygen.

Sa02 = percent of oxygenated hemoglobin relative to the amount of hemoglobin capable of carrying oxygen. Reference value = 95% to 100%.

Using 2 wavelengths, simple co-oximeters will give similar functional and fractional values in healthy young white individuals. Pulse oximetry estimates the saturation of hemoglobin and does not give estimates of actual Pa02 or other bound gazes, such as carbon monoxide (CO), which require different oximeters. The co-oximeter is a special spectrophotometer used to measure different oxygen saturations. This type of spectrophotometer is used to determine whether a dyshemoglobinemia is present.

**Arterial Hypoxemia - 5 Common Causes**

- Diffusion abnormality

Carbon monoxide is the tracer of choice to measure diffusion since it is diffusion limited. Nitrous oxide (NO) and oxygen are perfusion limited. Oxygen can become diffusion limited if the membrane becomes thickened, particularly if the 0.75-second normal capillary time drops with exercise (can drop to as low as 0.20 seconds with exercise). One can demonstrate that the thickening of the alveolar membrane results in a diffusion capacity for oxygen of less than ¾ of a second. The normal diffusion (DLCO) in the 2017 guidelines is no longer specified, but a value of 0.75 predicted or greater per an older guideline would probably be considered normal.

2. Right to Left Shunt (normal shunt <5%, from Thebesian and bronchial veins).

The 5 common mechanisms of hypoxemia: order listed from common to rare.



**Hypoxemia Type**

****

**Feature**

**A-a gradient**

**0xygen  response**

**Diseases**

1. V/Q mismatch

Normal V/Q ratio (0.80)

****

Elevated

Good

Asthma, COPD

2. Decreased      ventilation



Elevated PaCO2

Normal

Good

Obesity, drug overdose.

3. Shunt

<5% is normal.

Elevated

Poor response, especially if the shunt

is 30% or more.

ARDS, pneumonia

4.  Diffusion

Thickened alveolar membrane

Elevated

Good

Interstitial Lung Disease

5. High Altitude

Greater than 2,000 meters

Normal

Good

Acute mountain sickness.

All but a high right-to-left shunt respond well to oxygen. In addition, if there is a shunt with relative hypoxemia, increasing oxygen to the area can increase oxygen carrying capacity of blood that passes it. A shunt will not respond at all to oxygen, only when ventilation is close to zero or zero.

3. V/Q abnormality

The most common abnormality seen overall and in obstructive lung diseases. The most important point is that, in general, high V/Q areas (V/Q as high as 3) cannot make up for low V/Q areas.

4. Hypoventilation

Hypoventilation presents with an elevated arterial PaC02 and a normal A-a gradient that responds well to oxygen. Neurologic disease and drug overdoses are two common causes.

5. Altitude

Both barometric pressure and the A-a gradient decrease with an increase in altitude. Therefore, there will be no negative effect with increasing elevation. Increasing altitude responds well to oxygen. High altitude is the rare 5th leading cause of hypoxemia.

Generally, the alveolar oxygen stays constant at about 100 mm Hg, and the arterial oxygen starts at about 95 mm Hg or less and goes down with age (time). This reduction is partly due to normal shunting and to a slight reduction in the A-a gradient that occurs when standing upright since the normal V/Q ratio is about 0.80 and not one. These are at least two reasons why the A-a gradient can never be zero.

**Carbon Monoxide (CO) Poisoning**

CO poisoning is one of the most common dyshemoglobinemia that can cause errors in conventional pulse oximetry using two-wavelength techniques. In CO intoxication, the pulse oximeter Sp02 is within normal limits, but the actual saturation of oxygenated hemoglobin is much lower.2Hb) at 660 nm. This means that carboxyhemoglobin can falsely elevate the Sp02 measurements.

Therefore, with CO poisoning the pulse oximeter saturation is elevated to normal due to the elevated CO binding to hemoglobin and not due to oxygen binding to hemoglobin. Therefore not measuring the carboxyhemoglobin level makes the diagnosis of CO poisoning challenging and requires a high level of suspicion, especially since the symptoms are vague and the saturation levels on the pulse oximeter seem normal.

**Evaluation with Co-oximetry**

A complete work-up is necessary, including electrolytes, blood count, BUN, creatinine, urine toxicology and urinalysis, troponin, and electrocardiogram (ECG). A prolonged Q-T interval or ischemia is sometimes seen on the ECG. A chest radiograph and brain CT should also be done since sometimes the globus pallidus or other areas of the brain can be affected. An ABG with co-oximetry needs to be done on an arterial or venous blood sample to make the diagnosis. Arterial ABGs give more information about low oxygen in the blood with CO poisoning.

**Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy**

If indicated, co-oximetry can be considered. Overall, mortality with hyperbaric oxygen has been equivocal. Late neurologic findings are common. In one well-done randomized controlled trial, the result shows that three hyperbaric oxygen treatments done within 24 hours reduce cognitive sequelae at 6 and 12 months.