The mainstay of treatment for MDS involves assessment of symptoms and potential morbidity attributed to the disease. Patients do not always require treatment as long as they are asymptomatic and most can be treated with supportive measures such as intermittent blood or platelet transfusions. MDS often portends an indolent or gradual course, though some patients have risk factors that put them at risk for transformation into AML. Oncologists will use the IPSS or R-IPSS scoring system to help guide the course of treatment. Treatment options include supportive measures, low intensity treatment with systemic agents, or high intensity treatment such as allogeneic stem cell transplant. The only curative modality remains an allogeneic stem cell transplant, but this is often difficult as MDS occurs more commonly in the elderly population. Candidates for allogeneic stem cell transplant must be carefully selected, as the transplant process itself can be morbid for patients with potentially significant treatment-related mortality, especially in the elderly population. However, high-risk patients who are able to undergo transplant have around 50% survival at 3 years. Treatment decisions are often individualized to each patient and based upon potential morbidity and mortality from treatment. Patients in intermediate or high-risk categories are generally considered for treatment.

MDS has proven to be refractory to cytotoxic chemotherapy, but there has been some success with the use of hypomethylating agents and lenalidomide. High-risk and some intermediate-risk patients are often considered for allogeneic stem cell transplant or systemic treatment. Low-risk patients may be managed with supportive measures such as transfusions or hematopoietic growth factors, though they may be offered treatment with systemic agents.

Hematopoietic growth factors may be used in low-risk patients with mild pancytopenia and low requirements for transfusion. In these patients, erythropoietin (EPO) levels should be measured. If the level is less than 500 mU/mL, erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) such as agents such as recombinant human erythropoietin or darbepoetin may be given with or without granulocyte colony stimulating factors (G-CSF). G-CSF does not appear to affect survival but may have a synergistic effect with EPO agents to effectively improve anemia with improvement in anemia in 40% to 60% of patients. If serum EPO level is greater than 500 mU/mL, patients may be considered for treatment with either immunosuppressive agents such as anti-thymocyte globulin +/- cyclosporine or one of the hypomethylating agents as ESAs are unlikely to improve anemia in this subset of patients.

Lenalidomide, a thalidomide derivative, is an agent used in patients with symptomatic anemia and deletion 5q (+/- one other cytogenetic abnormality except monosomy 7) in a low or intermediate risk category. This is an oral agent given daily, with responses typically noted after 3 months of treatment and often allows patients to become independent of blood transfusions.

Azacitidine and decitabine are pyrimidine analogues which are classified as hypomethylating agents or epigenetic modifiers. Low doses of these medications have shown to aid in allowing the differentiation of blasts into mature cells. These agents are given monthly and generally require several months before assessing response. Treatment is usually continued for a prolonged period of time though patients will often eventually have progression of their disease and experience worsening of cytopenias.

Data to support the usage of these drugs has been gained from prospective randomized trials and retrospective data. Azacitidine has been shown to improve both cytopenias and survival, especially those with high-risk MDS. A large randomized phase 3 trial, which randomized patients to azacitidine (75 mg/m subcutaneous or intravenously daily for 7 days every 28 days) versus supportive measures or conventional care (low dose cytarabine or intensive chemotherapy) showed 50.8% survival at 2 years in the azacitidine group compared to the conventional care group. It also showed the potential to delay time to progression to AML, compared to supportive care. Another crossover trial assigned patients to either supportive care or azacitidine with complete and partial remission rates of 60% versus 5% in the supportive care group. Patients receiving azacitidine also required fewer transfusions. Of note, azacitidine may achieve a duration of response of around 15 months.

Decitabine is a closely related hypomethylating agent that can be given intravenously (IV) daily over 3 to 10 days every 28 days. It offers response rates of 30% to 50% and is thought to be more potent than azacitidine. One randomized trial compared decitabine to supportive care, which showed improvement in progression-free survival but no difference in overall survival. There have been no cross-comparisons of these 2 hypomethylating agents at the current time.