**Hemosiderosis Bulbi**

It is very similar to siderosis bulbi due to an intraocular foreign body. Fe3+ is released from the catabolism of hemoglobin in RBCs. It takes place intracellularly in macrophages and is stored as ferritin and hemosiderin, which is later lysed and released into vitreous.****

Iron irreversibly binds to various ocular structures especially the ones derived from the outer layer of the optic cup–retinal pigment epithelium, lens epithelium, ciliary body, iris dilator and sphincter muscles, perivascular structures of the retina, optic nerve, and trabecular meshwork.

**Glial and Fibrivascular Proliferation**

In animal experiments, it was found that intravitreal injection of blood, blood products or iron, led to a glial and fibrovascular proliferation in the vitreous and retinal surface. Its partly explained by induction of liquefaction and syneresis of blood in vitreous, leading to traction.

Patients with a posterior penetrating ocular injury with vitreous hemorrhage are more likely to develop a tractional retinal detachment. In experimental rabbit eyes, it was found that penetrating injury leads to a breach in blood-retinal barrier leading to choroidal, scleral fibrocytes with retinal pigment epithelial cells gaining access into the vitreous cavity and leading to fibro cellular proliferation and secondary retinal detachments.

**Glaucoma**

- 
**Ghost Cell Glaucoma**

This occurs only after VH. The RBCs lose their pliability and biconcavity over a period of 1 to 3 weeks to degenerate into ghost cells, which are spherical, smaller, khaki-colored, and rigid. These cells contain denatured hemoglobin attached to its membrane know as Heinz bodies.

These ghost cells reach the anterior chamber whenever there is a breach in the anterior hyaloid face as happens after trauma, vitrectomy, and cataract surgery. These cells obstruct the trabecular meshwork and cause secondary open-angle glaucoma.

On slit-lamp examination, khaki-colored cells can be seen in a deep anterior chamber, which may discolor trabecular meshwork. They may settle inferiorly and give the appearance of pseudohypopyon. If there is fresh bleeding, one can see khaki-colored cells over red, lying inferiorly in AC, the so-called candy stripe sign.

- 
**Hemolytic Glaucoma**

RBC debris, hemoglobin laden macrophages may block the trabecular meshwork and cause hemolytic glaucoma.

- 
**Hemosiderotic Glaucoma**

This entity is very rare. It occurs following recurrent vitreous hemorrhage and is very similar to siderosis following an iron intra-ocular foreign body. The iron released from the RBCs reaches trabecular meshwork and damages the endothelial cells causing sclerosis and obstruction of the meshwork. In addition to raised intraocular pressure (IOP), other signs of ocular siderosis will also be present.

**Amblyopia and Myopic Shift-**This is noted in infants; hence early vitrectomy is needed to avoid amblyopia and myopic shift.