**Background and Presentation**

**Acetaminophen**: Acetaminophen overdose is the most commonly reported overdose in both the UK and in the United States. It is also the most common cause of acute liver failure (ALF) in the United States, accounting for 50% of all ALF cases.

**Organophosphates**: Acute poisoning from organophosphates, usually in the form of insecticides, is possibly responsible for more drug-related deaths worldwide than any other drug class.

**Warfarin**: Warfarin, a vitamin K antagonist, is a widely used anticoagulant that remains popular despite the introduction of new anticoagulants. With more than 30 million prescriptions annually, it is the most commonly prescribed oral anticoagulant in North America.

**Digoxin**: Digoxin is one of the oldest cardiac medications with the use of cardiac glycosides dating back to ancient Egypt.

**Ethylene glycol and methanol**: Poisoning with ethylene glycol or methanol may occur through attempted self-harm, unintentional ingestion, or a misguided attempt at inebriation. In 2007, United States poison centers received a combined 8014 calls related to possible ethylene glycol or methanol exposure.

**Hydrofluoric acid**: Hydrofluoric acid, a commonly used chemical in many industries and an ingredient in many household cleaning products, can cause life-threatening burns as well as systemic toxicity. It can enter the body via the skin, mucosa, gastrointestinal, or respiratory tract. Severity determination is by the concentration of the acid, the type and the duration of contact, and type of tissue involved.

**Isoniazid**: Isoniazid has been used to treat tuberculosis since the 1950s. It leads to a pyridoxine deficiency by inhibiting pyridoxine kinase, the enzyme responsible for the production of the active form of pyridoxine (pyridoxal phosphate), and by increasing excretion of pyridoxine by the kidneys.

**Tricyclic antidepressants**: Tricyclic antidepressants were first introduced in the 1950s and were used extensively in the treatment of depression. Reports of toxicity appeared just a few years after the introduction of TCAs to the market.

**Beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers**: Beta blockers competitively antagonize beta-1 adrenergic receptors in the myocardium, reducing calcium entry into the cardiomyocytes with resulting negative inotropic and chronotropic effects.

**Heavy metals**: Patients may become exposed to heavy metals from contaminated food, industrial processes, commercial products, or natural sources such as groundwater or metal ores.

**Iron**: Acute iron toxicity may be due to unintentional ingestion (most common in children) or intentional overdose with the intent of self-harm. Intentional overdoses carry a higher mortality rate; 10% compared to the 1% for unintentional ingestions.

**Cyanide**: Cyanide reversibly binds to mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase, leading to intracellular hypoxia. Symptoms usually begin within one minute of inhalation and several minutes of ingestion and include dyspnea, headache, dizziness, nausea, gastrointestinal distress, seizures.