**Airway Evaluation**

Time permitting, the first step in preparation is to perform an airway evaluation, which includes a history of intubation and difficult intubations. Evaluation of the external anatomy may be predictive of a difficult airway. Patients with restricted cervical motion, obesity, and facial or neck trauma may present as difficult airways, and providers should anticipate alternative modes of intubation in these situations.

One commonly used mnemonic to evaluate the airway is “LEMON.” “Look” externally for signs of trauma, facial hair, neck masses, large tongue, or dentures. “Evaluate” the 3-3-2 rule. Less than three fingers between the incisors, three fingers between the hyoid bone and the mental protuberance, and two fingers between the hyoid bone and the thyroid cartilage (Adam’s Apple) may be representative of a difficult airway. “Mallampati” class greater than or equal to 3 is predictive of difficult intubation. “Obstruction” or obesity may restrict visualization of the vocal cords. “Neck” mobility and any restriction of it can contribute to difficulty passing the endotracheal tube.

**Positioning**

Once the external evaluation of the patient is complete, the head position should be optimized to get the best possible view of the vocal cords. The “sniffing position” has traditionally been considered the optimal position for direct laryngoscopy as it aligns the oral, pharyngeal, and laryngeal axes. This position is achieved by elevating the patient’s head, extending the head at the neck, and aligning the ears horizontally with the sternal notch. In morbidly obese patients, rolls may be utilized to elevate the head until the external auditory meatus aligns with the sternal notch.

**Endotracheal Tube**

Traditionally, an endotracheal tube size of 7.0 is used for women, while an 8.0 is used for men. Variations in size depend on patients’ height and whether they will require bronchoscopy. Bronchoscopy requires at least a 7.5 or 8.0 tube. For children, endotracheal tube size is selected using the equations: size = [(Age/4) + 4] for uncuffed tubes and size = [(Age/4) +3.5] for cuffed tubes. Cuffed endotracheal tubes have become increasingly preferred for the pediatric population in recent years.

**Medications**

Rapid sequence intubation (RSI) is often the method used by most physicians in emergency settings as it has been shown to improve the likelihood of first-pass success and minimize aspiration. RSI is accomplished by using medications that have a quick onset and short duration of action. Administration of these medications within a short period (e.g., <30 seconds) minimizes apnea time.

A dissociative medication, such as ketamine, is used to allow patient compliance and adequate time for pre-oxygenation. A dissociative agent without respiratory depressant effects allows for the use of positive pressure ventilation in the pre-intubation period to optimize pre-oxygenation.

**Pre-Oxygenation**

Once all instruments are prepared for intubation, the patient requires pre-oxygenation to increase alveolar oxygen and decrease alveolar nitrogen tension. Pre-oxygenation is accomplished by using a high fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) before the administration of sedative and paralytic medications. The goal of pre-oxygenation is to slow the decline of oxyhemoglobin during apnea. The preferred source of pre-oxygenation is a non-rebreather mask with 1-way valves that allow for delivery of close to 90% FiO2 and do not allow exhaled air to be re-inspired.

Other oxygen masks without 1-way valves can provide up to 70% FiO2 with a tight seal around the patient’s face, and bag valve masks can often deliver a higher than ambient air FiO2. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or non-invasive bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) may be used in patients with pulmonary shunt pathologies as methods of pre-oxygenation. Patients with underlying conditions causing alveoli to be perfused but not ventilated may benefit from increased PEEP using these mechanisms. Pre-oxygenation should last 3 minutes and achieve end-tidal oxygenation (EtO2) greater than 90%.

In emergency settings, where an EtO2 monitor is not readily available, a pulse oximeter may serve as a marker of arterial oxygen saturation. These methods of pre-oxygenation are employed in patients with a preserved respiratory drive. In apneic patients or patients with inadequate respiratory drive, bag-valve-mask ventilation with the highest possible level of FiO2 is the most appropriate method of pre-oxygenation.

**Apneic Oxygenation**

Apneic oxygenation works by oxygen diffusion and helps prolong the safe duration of apnea during intubation. Efficient apneic oxygenation depends on airway patency and the patient’s functional residual capacity. This is achieved by providing oxygen via the nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal route. Most commonly, this is done via nasal cannula at an oxygen rate of up to 15 L/min or high flow nasal cannula with 100% FiO2 during oropharyngeal intubation. These methods can provide approximately 10 minutes of adequate oxygenation during intubation attempts in patients without underlying lung pathology.