Meperidine is a potent opioid analgesic that has the potential for habit-forming and misuse, which increases the risk of overdose.

- Having an underlying or unknown condition that increases the sensitivity to meperidine

- Accidentally or intentionally using more than the prescribed dosage

- Concomitant use of meperidine with alcohol, other CNS depressants, or illicit drugs that make changes in the body’s sensitivity to the medication.

The signs of an overdose of meperidine:

Patients can have shallow or no breathing, signs of cyanosis like blue lips or fingernails, fatigue, convulsion, low blood pressure, bradycardia, constipation, stomach cramps, nausea and vomiting, cold and clammy skin, drowsiness, lightheadedness, and twitching muscles. In severe overdose, patients may experience circulatory relapse, cardiac arrest, apnea, and in some cases, death.

Treatment of meperidine overdose:

First, because of potential respiratory failure, the patients’ airway should be reestablished by ventilation. Then the patient can be managed by activated charcoal to reduce the absorption of the medication in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract by almost 60% (time-dependent). IV fluids are useful for flushing the medication from patients’ system while balancing the acid/base equilibrium and minerals of the body. The use of gastric lavage or stomach pumping will wash out the stomach content. Laxatives can be an option to induce defecation to remove the poison from the GI tract. Hemodialysis may help to filter the patient’s blood. Administration of opioids antagonists like naloxone to reverse the drug’s effects is another means of addressing overdose. Intravenous hydrocortisone or prednisone is also a choice to treat severe reactions. Clinicians can add intravenous chlorpromazine in those cases exhibiting hypertension and hyperpyrexia.

After the recovery, these patients should participate in addiction treatment programs for the treatment of underlying causes of addiction and support the patient in the process of rehabilitation.