Treatment for the majority of cases is supportive, the same as for most other causes of gastroenteritis. Appropriate initial steps include intravenous fluid rehydration and correction of electrolyte abnormalities. The typical course of infection is self-limited and in most cases does not require additional treatment. There are no recommendations for using antimotility agents to treat diarrhea. In more severe cases such as wound infections and sepsis, antibiotic treatment is indicated. There have been no large studies involving antibiotic treatment specifically for V. parahaemolyticus infection. The recommendations are based on guidelines from studies examining treatment for other Vibrio species. If the patient has a particularly severe case of gastroenteritis, doxycycline is the antibiotic of choice. For uncomplicated wound infections, treat with minocycline or doxycycline. Consider adding a third-generation cephalosporin if the wound infection is severe or if the patient is at significant risk for sepsis (has underlying liver disease, alcohol use disorder, or has diabetes mellitus). For severe cases, the patient should be admitted to the hospital for further intravenous fluid replacement and infectious disease consultation. Mild cases, with a hemodynamically stable patient, can be treated and observed in the emergency department. If the patient remains stable and does not have any signs of sepsis, they may be discharged.

Prevention of V. parahaemolyticus infection is similar to other food-borne illnesses. Seafood should be stored properly and appropriately cooked before consumption. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention recommends against consuming raw oysters or other shellfish, especially in at-risk populations. Additionally, people with open wounds should avoid exposure to brackish or saltwater.