The primary management of short stature should aim at alleviating the underlying cause. Short stature caused due to underlying hormonal deficiency should be managed with hormonal treatment. Short stature due to bone diseases should aim at treating the disease.

Various hormonal treatments are available today to treat the underlying hormonal condition giving rise to short stature and should be prescribed as soon as possible. This will treat the underlying cause and prevent the development of short stature and prevent its psychosocial effects. These include treating growth hormonal deficiencies and constitutional growth delays with gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs (GnRHa), aromatase inhibitors, recombinant human insulin-like growth factor- 1 (RhIGF-1), low-dose androgen therapy, recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH), etc.

- Gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs (GnRHa) treatment is given in case of the development of early or precocious puberty. The administration of GnRHa suppresses gonadotropin, and gonadal steroid secretion allows for increased time for the development of menarche. It will lead to delayed bone maturation and fusion of the epiphyseal plates.

- Low-dose androgen therapy, using oxandrolone, given to peri-pubertal males, has been shown to increase the growth potential but have no positive effect on stature. Animal models using oxandrolone have also been found to have good efficacy in preventing the development of osteopenia and short stature.

- Maternal metformin treatment has been shown to improve fetal growth in animal-based studies. Metformin increases insulin sensitivity in the fetus, leading to higher glucose uptake by tissue and better development.

- Recombinant human insulin-like growth factor- 1 (RhIGF-1) has been used in children to treat insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) deficiency and pregnancy-associated plasma protein A2 deficiency.

- Aromatase inhibitors hamper the action of aromatase, an enzyme that converts androgens to estrogens, androstenedione to estrone, and testosterone to estradiol, thereby delaying puberty. Aromatase inhibitors have been found to be effective in children also receiving the.

- Recombinant C-natriuretic peptide (CNP) has been found to increase the growth velocity up to 42 months in the treatment of achondroplasia.

In addition to treating the underlying cause, individuals suffering from psychosocial distress due to their short stature should receive psychosocial counseling to acquire coping mechanisms.