Knowledge of the basic structure of the teet is paramount to understand pathological processes and the logic behind current medical treatments. Below are some focal points of connection between histology and clinical significance.

The periodontal ligament is the key part of malocclusion correction because it allows small progressive movements used by orthodontic techniques.

Enamel, because of its mineralization, is highly vulnerable to demineralization by acids, and since it cannot be replaced, it is essential to balance the diet, reduce acidic beverages and keep perfect oral hygiene.

Dentin is a sensitive layer, and any alteration of the enamel allows exposure of the dentin to chemical and microbiological elements. Dentin damage is the main reason for dental pain, which is conducted by the tubules to the odontoblast's processes. Invasion of bacteria causes infection of the tubules and may result in dental caries; if the infection is left untreated, there is a subsequent invasion of the dental pulp, compromising the vitality of the tooth.

Developmental remnants are common sources of pathology. The remnants of the dental lamina or rests of Serres are small nests of squamous epithelium under the gum that can proliferate and form cystic structures: gingival cysts. Remnants of Hertwig’s root sheath (rests of Malassez) located in the periodontal membrane (or rarely in the alveolar ridge) can proliferate during bacterial infections and necrosis of the pulp forming the epithelial lining of apical granulomas. These structures are also potential sources of ameloblastomas and odontogenic cysts.

Lateral canals can be present in different numbers in a certain tooth and cause problems during endodontic or root therapies. Radiopaque materials can be used to indicate the number and position of these canals.