The saphenous vein is of considerable surgical significance because of its ability to serve as a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG), especially when medical therapy or percutaneous intervention is ineffective or not performable. In terms of graft choices for CABG procedures, both arterial and venous grafts have been used, with the saphenous vein being the most commonly used venous graft for the bypass. However, in CABG procedures, arterial grafts are more widely used and preferred due to their prolonged patency. Studies have indicated that 10-year patency rates for saphenous vein grafts are at 61% compared to arterial bypass grafts such as the internal mammary artery at 85%.

The patency of the saphenous graft can be affected by a multitude of factors such as disruption of the vasa vasorum that supports the graft and tissue handling during the anastomoses of the graft. The mismatch between the compliance of the grafted vein at the site of the anastomosis to the coronary artery can cause a hemodynamic imbalance which promotes decreased patency of the venous graft.

When harvesting the saphenous vein for CABG procedures, careful attention is necessary on delineating the saphenous vein from the saphenous nerve. Particularly in the inferior third of the leg, the saphenous nerve and vein are adhered together by a common fascia.

**Iatrogenic saphenous nerve injury**

While saphenous neuropathy following trauma accounts for less than 1% of adult patients presenting with lower extremity pain

Depending on the technique used, the incidence of sensory disturbances in patients undergoing arthroscopic knee surgery has been reported as low as 0.06% up to as high as 77%.

The original belief was that the sartorial branch of saphenous nerve only becomes superficial at the medial joint line of the knee. So that during medical dissection of the knee, retraction of subcutaneous tissues would be protective of the sartorial branch of the saphenous nerve. However, there is anatomical variation where the saphenous nerve can become superficial above or below the joint line which can make it susceptible to injury during medial meniscus repairs.

The saphenous artery also has significant surgical implications since a fasciocutaneous flap containing the saphenous artery can be elevated from the upper medial third of the leg and knee. These flaps can be utilized by reconstructive surgeons to cover defects of the upper extremities and exposed tibia after burns.