Osteosarcoma is grossly divided into various subtypes based on its location within the bone then further subdivided by grade.

- **Central (Intramedullary):**
- **High-Grade Central**
- **Conventional**– “classic” appearance; cells are spindle-like to polyhedral in shape; nuclei are variable in appearance, and cells undergoing mitosis are readily identifiable. Matrix production by the tumor cells may be osseous (“osteoblastic”), cartilaginous (“chondroblastic”), or fibrous (“fibroblastic”) but a combination of the three often presents. Osteoid matrix must be identified somewhere in the lesion, even if only in a minuscule amount. In the case of osteoblastic osteosarcoma, there may be excessive osteoid matrix production such that the tumor is described as “sclerosing” in appearance.
- Osteoblastoma-like – histologically resembles osteoblastoma but features more cellular atypia and local aggressiveness, and osteoid matrix production
- Chondroblastoma-like – histological resembles chondroblastoma but features more cellular atypia, local aggressiveness, and osteoid matrix production
- Chondromyxoid fibroma-like – histological resembles chondromyxoid fibroma but features more cellular atypia, local aggressiveness, and osteoid matrix production
- Malignant fibrous histiocytoma-like – histologically resembles malignant fibrous histiocytoma but features more cellular atypia, local aggressiveness, and osteoid matrix production
- Epithelioid – features cells that are so poorly differentiated that it may be hard to distinguish histologically whether the lesion is a sarcoma (connective tissue origin) or a carcinoma (epithelial origin)
- Giant cell – features benign multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells
- Clear cell – features numerous cells with clear or ground-glass cytoplasm and vacuoles


- **Telangiectatic**– comprised of numerous blood-filled sinusoids such that the tumor mimics the histology of an aneurysmal bone cyst; the presence of pleomorphic/atypical nuclei will distinguish the malignancy.
- **Small Cell**– considered to be a histological combination of Ewing sarcoma and osteosarcoma, features numerous small round cells. A minuscule volume of an osteoid matrix will distinguish this as a variant of osteosarcoma.


- **Low-Grade Central**
- Fibrous dysplasia–like – features a large volume of osseous matrix embedded in a small amount of fibrous stroma.
- Desmoplastic fibroma–like – features a very small volume of osseous matrix embedded in a large amount of fibrous stroma.

- **Surface (Periosteal/Cortical):**
- **Low-Grade Surface**
- **Parosteal**– found on the outer periosteal surface of the bone, features ribbons of osseous trabeculae oriented in parallel, primarily composed of a chondroid matrix with only a minuscule amount of osteoid matrix.


- **Intermediate-Grade Surface**
- **Periosteal**– found between cortex and the inner periosteal surface of the bone, features ribbons of osseous trabeculae oriented in parallel, primarily composed of a chondroid matrix with only a minuscule amount of osteoid matrix, more nuclear atypia than the parosteal variant.


- **High-Grade Surface**
- **High-Grade Surface**– histological identical to high grade/conventional/central variant, varies only in location (being confined to the surface of the bone) which is thought to represent dedifferentiated parosteal osteosarcoma.

- **Extraskeletal:**
- **Low-Grade-**Histologically identical to low-grade surface/parosteal variant and low-grade central variant varies only in geography, potentially appearing at any extraskeletal location in the body, including the soft tissues of the thigh, buttocks, upper extremities, or retroperitoneum.
- **High-Grade-**Histological identical to high grade/conventional/central variant differs only in geography, being found at any extraskeletal location in the body.