**Disadvantages**

CO2 floats on the gravity-nondependent surface of blood; therefore, abnormalities of the dependent portions of vessels may be missed. Air-fluid levels of significance in practice only occur in the aorta, the IVC, and their first order branches.

Imaging of arteries that assume a posterior course, such as lumbar and some renal arteries, may only fill after positioning the patient more decubitus than supine.

Compared with liquid contrast or intravascular ultrasound (IVUS), CO2 can cause an underestimation or overstimulation of vessel caliber

As CO2 passes through vascular bifurcations, the bolus dissipates and can simulate a stenosis. If there is a physiologic shunt, then CO2 injection can mimic an anatomic fistula in the absence of an anatomic fistula needing mechanical interruption.

Given the somewhat inferior appearance of CO2 to liquid contrast, at the time of patient procedural consent the physician should discuss with the patient whether the patient will agree to allow the physician to inject a small volume of iso-osmolar iodinated contrast (such as 10 to 20 mL) in order to detect stenoses or confirming equivocal findings.

**Advantages**

CO2's lower viscosity compared with liquid contrast can allow it to more easily escape a vessel and more rapidly disperse along a slow flow system. This can make CO2 more sensitive than liquid contrast for detecting a/an:

- Arteriovenous fistula

- Slow hemorrhage

- Slow flow in a vessel (e.g., a bypass graft)

- Slow flow endoleak

- Blush of tumor vascularity.

Gastrointestinal tract bleeding