Glucocorticoids (daily or every other day) are the first line of treatment in children and adults with focal segmental glomerular sclerosis (FSGS). Patients resistant or intolerant to steroids are treated with immunosuppressive therapy with calcineurin inhibitors (CNI), mycophenolate mofetil, or rituximab.

**Corticosteroids**

High-dose corticosteroid therapy with prednisolone is started at an initial dose of 1 mg/kg/day daily single dose (maximum 80 mg) or alternate day dose of 2 mg/kg/day (maximum 120 mg) for at least four weeks and until complete remission is achieved or a maximum of 16 weeks treatment, whichever is earlier.

Tapering off steroids should start after at least four weeks of achieving remission with high-dose therapy or after two weeks of the disappearance of proteins, whichever is longer. Prednisolone is reduced by 5 mg every one to two weeks to complete a total duration of six months. If partial remission is achieved within eight to twelve weeks of high-dose steroid therapy, continue until 16 weeks to ensure complete remission. After that, the prednisolone dose is reduced by 5 mg every one to two weeks to complete a total six-month duration of 6 months.

**Calcineurin Inhibitors**

If the patient is steroid-resistant or develops adverse effects from steroids, alternative immunosuppression should be used, such as calcineurin inhibitors. The options include the following:

- Cyclosporine - 3 to 5 mg/kg/day (target trough levels 100 to 175 ng/ml)

- Tacrolimus - 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg/day (target trough levels 5 to 10 ng/ml)

Trough levels should be monitored to prevent drug toxicity. The duration of determining the efficacy of cyclosporin or tacrolimus is at least six months, after which the patient can be labeled CNI-resistant. CNIs should be continued for at least 12 months in patients with partial or complete remission to prevent relapses. The dose of CNIs is to be slowly tapered over 6-12 months as tolerated.

In patients resistant or intolerant to CNIs, there is a lack of evidence regarding any particular agent. Mycophenolate mofetil, high-dose dexamethasone, rituximab, and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) have been studied.

In patients with subnephrotic proteinuria, adaptive FSGS, a trial of renin-angiotensin system (RAS) inhibition, and sodium restriction can be tried. In other secondary forms of FSGS, removing the offending agent or treating the underlying disorder is recommended. In addition, optimization of blood pressure, treatment of edema with diuretics, statin therapy for hypercholesterolemia, and anticoagulation in select patients at risk for thrombosis/embolization are indicated.

Children respond within a few weeks, but adults may take months to respond. Glucocorticoids are associated with a remission rate of approximately 30% compared to about 50% in patients treated with CNI.