The management of the cognitive, motor and gait aspects of progressive supranuclear palsy is challenging, and the treatment for individuals suspected to have progressive supranuclear palsy remains symptomatic and supportive, with ongoing clinical trials striving to identify disease-modifying therapies often targeting the underlying tau pathology. For motor (parkinsonian) symptoms, levodopa combined with a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (e.g., carbidopa) is generally tried, with typically modest to no success in most progressive supranuclear palsy phenotypes but potential benefit in the PSP-P predominance type. Overall, evidence for mild to moderate benefits with levodopa is low

The potential value of physical therapy is increasing interest, particularly given evidence of benefit for individuals with Parkinson's disease. A recent trial showed improvement in the Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Rating Scale (PSPRS).

While case reports and series suggest promising experiences with unilateral or bilateral pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) deep brain stimulation (DBS) in patients with suspected progressive supranuclear palsy, a recently published randomized controlled trial of unilateral PPN DBS in 8 individuals with PSP-RS showed no benefit in gait, postural stability, and fall PSPRS subitems when comparing ON and OFF stimulation conditions at 6- and 12-month follow-up.

There are no accepted treatments for the cognitive symptoms in individuals with suspected progressive supranuclear palsy, with small trials and case series of cholinesterase inhibitors suggesting that these drugs may help cognition but worsen motor function.

To date, studies of potentially disease-modifying therapies have failed to demonstrate efficacy in individuals suspected to have progressive supranuclear palsy. Randomized, placebo-controlled trials of riluzole,

Regardless of investigational and symptomatic treatment approaches used throughout the disease course, palliative care is an important component of progressive supranuclear palsy treatment with hospice as a valuable resource in the late stages.

Current investigations of tau-focused progressive supranuclear palsy therapies include TPI-287, a microtubule stabilizer, C2N-8E12/ABBV-8E12, and BMS-986168/BIIB092, both anti-tau monoclonal antibodies, and salsalate, a tau acetylation inhibitor. Microtubule stabilizers are hoped to compensate for microtubule dysfunction associated with loss of tau function; anti-tau monoclonal antibodies are hoped to impede the spread of pathogenic tau, and tau acetylation inhibitors are hoped to inhibit acetylation of soluble tau and thus limit hyperphosphorylation.