Naproxen blocks arachidonate binding to competitively inhibit both cyclooxygenase (COX) isoenzymes, COX-1 and COX-2, resulting in analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects. COX-1 and COX-2 are catalysts of arachidonic acid conversion to prostaglandin G (PGG), the first step of the synthesis of prostaglandins and thromboxanes involved in rapid physiological responses. COX-1 is constitutively expressed in most tissues, while COX-2 is only expressed in the brain, kidney, bones, reproductive organs, and select tumors such as colon and prostate cancers. COX-1 is responsible for prostaglandin synthesis in response to stimulation by circulating hormones and maintaining healthy renal function, gastric mucosal integrity, and hemostasis. COX-2 is inducible in many cells in response to specific mediators of inflammation (e.g., interleukin-1, tumor necrosis factor, lipopolysaccharide).

The anti-inflammatory mechanism of naproxen is due to decreased prostaglandin synthesis by inhibiting COX-1 and COX-2. The majority of anti-inflammation that Naproxen induces is mostly due to inhibition of the COX-2 isoenzyme; though, it should be noted that COX-1 is also expressed at distinct inflammatory sites. Further, COX-1 is also expressed in the joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis, especially in the synovial lining. Therefore, although Naproxen targets both COX-1 and COX2, it is slightly more selective for the former. Additionally, naproxen is most effective in the setting of pain receptor sensitivity. It appears prostaglandins, specifically prostaglandins E and F, are responsible for sensitizing these pain receptors; therefore, naproxen has an additional, indirect analgesic effect by inhibiting further prostaglandin production.

The liver extensively metabolizes naproxen, and about 95% of the drug is excreted in the urine. Naproxen also has a half-life of 12 to 17 hours.