When the nerve impulse from the peripheral or central nervous system reaches the presynaptic membrane (nerve terminal) of the neuromuscular junction in the form of the action potential, it triggers voltage-gated Ca2+ channels at the active zones of the nerve terminal to open, and Ca2+ ions enter the nerve terminal from the extracellular space. Increased intracellular calcium interact with SNARE proteins; this stimulates synaptic vesicles to fuse with active zones and release their content – ACh into the synaptic cleft. This process is named exocytosis. Increased intracellular calcium in nerve terminals triggers the simultaneous release of a number of ACh quanta. The total number of quanta of ACh released by a stimulated nerve markedly depends on the concentration of Ca2+ ions in the extracellular fluid. If Ca2+ ions are not present, even electrical stimulation of the nerve will not produce the release of transmitter. A 2-fold increase in the extracellular calcium will cause a 16-fold increase in the quantal content of an endplate potential.

Released ACh travels across the synaptic cleft towards the motor endplate and binds with the nicotinic ACh receptors, triggering ACh-gated channels to open. The motor endplate on the muscle membrane becomes more permeable to Na+ ions. This changes the membrane potential at the muscle membrane from -90 mV to -45 mV. This decrease in membrane potential is called endplate potential. In the skeletal NMJ, the endplate potential is strong enough to propagate action potential over the surface of the skeletal muscle membrane. This potential is carried along the muscle fiber through the system of T tubules and triggers to release Ca2+ ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the sarcoplasm of muscle, which results in the contraction of the muscle. The remaining ACh in the synaptic cleft gets hydrolyzed by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE). Interestingly, the presynaptic part of NMJ, the nerve terminal, also has nicotinic ACh receptors. These receptors sense ACh in the synaptic cleft and, via a feedback system, controls the release of ACh. If the concentration of ACh in the synaptic cleft has increased appropriately, the presynaptic ACH receptors will sense, and the nerve terminal will shut down more release.  The difference between pre-and postsynaptic ACh receptors is the response of these receptors to different ACh receptor agonists and antagonists.