**Indications for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Healthy Patients**

Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not routinely indicated in healthy patients undergoing dental or oral surgery procedures. However, there are some exceptions when prophylaxis is recommended, as it reduces the risk of postoperative complications, including implant failure, local infection, or sinusitis.

**Indications for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Healthy patients: Dental Implants**

Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended before dental implants are placed immediately after dental extraction, with or without clinical signs of infection. These recommendations stem from concerns regarding the placement of implants into a potentially infected wound bed, which may affect osseointegration.

In penicillin-allergic patients, alternatives include azithromycin or clarithromycin 500 mg one hour before the procedure followed by 250 mg daily for 5 to 7 days, or metronidazole 1 g one hour before the procedure followed by 500 mg every six hours for five to seven days.

Antimicrobial prophylaxis during the second phase, or prosthetic phase, of dental implants is not justified.

For dental implant placements done concurrently with sinus lift procedures, amoxicillin/clavulanate 875/125 mg every twelve hours started one day before the procedure and continued for seven days is recommended. Antimicrobial prophylaxis in this situation is to prevent sinusitis in case of perforation of Schneider's membrane, resulting in communication between the oral cavity and the maxillary sinus.

Antimicrobial prophylaxis before routine dental implants remains controversial. They have been recommended to reduce the risk of osseointegration failure caused by a microorganism affecting the wound healing process.

On the other hand, a meta-analysis including three studies found that the number needed to treat to prevent one implant failure was thirty-three.

Infected bone grafts are a considerable problem as they often lead to total or partial graft loss.

Clindamycin should not be used to prevent dental implant-related infections as worse outcomes, including infection and osseointegration failure, are noted compared to when amoxicillin is used.

**Indications for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Healthy patients: Facial Fractures**

Infection rates of mandibular fractures range from 3.3% to 43.9%, while infections involving fractures of the upper facial, third, and mid-face occur in 0% to 12.5%.

**Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Special Populations**

Severely immunocompromised patients, such as those on chemotherapy, should avoid invasive dental procedures whenever possible.

There is a lack of evidence regarding patients with severe neutropenia, high doses of immunosuppressants, or patients with immunodeficiencies.

Previous guidelines have recommended antimicrobial prophylaxis be provided to patients with diabetes mellitus.

There is no consensus regarding the need for antimicrobial prophylaxis before dental procedures in patients that have received a splenectomy.

The American Dental Association does not routinely recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis in patients with implanted prosthetic joints before dental procedures.

**Indications for Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Patients With Cardiac Risk Factors**

Due to the increased risk for infective endocarditis in patients with certain cardiac risk factors, The American Heart Association recommends antimicrobial prophylaxis before specific dental procedures if patients meet one of the below criteria.

- A prosthetic valve or implanted prosthetic cardiac material is present. Materials include prosthetic valves in place, prosthetic material from a prior cardiac valve repair, or other prosthetic material in situ, including a transvenous aortic valve replacement. It also includes patients with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) or artificial heart.

- A previous episode of infective endocarditis has occurred.

- Certain patients with congenital heart disease meeting specific conditions: those with unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart defects, repaired congenital defects with prosthetic material within six months of repair, repaired congenital heart disease with a retained prosthetic device and residual defect, and patients with a pulmonary artery valve or conduit in place.

- Cardiac transplant patients with valvulopathy.

In patients not meeting the above conditions, the American Heart Association does not recommend antimicrobial prophylaxis for infective endocarditis before dental procedures.

- Patients using pacemakers or automatic cardioverter-defibrillators

- Patients having undergone prior septal defect closure with success

- Patients with peripheral vascular grafts (such as those used for hemodialysis access) or vascular stents

- Patients with ventriculoatrial shunts

- Patients with vena cava filters

- Patients with pledgets

Procedures that carry sufficient risk to justify antimicrobial prophylaxis in the groups outlined above involve gingival or periapical manipulation and cases that require perforation of the oral mucosa.

**Recommended Regimens for Patients with Cardiac Risk Factors**

Antimicrobials should be administered as a single dose thirty to sixty minutes before the procedure.

Alternative regimens include cephalexin 2 g, azithromycin 500 mg, clarithromycin 500 mg, or doxycycline 100 mg for those with penicillin allergy.

In patients with type I hypersensitivity to penicillins, including reactions of anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria, cephalexin should not be administered.

Clindamycin is not recommended for antibiotic prophylaxis before dental procedures and oral surgery due to the high incidence of adverse events, such as C. difficile colitis.