Management of foot deformities varies and ranges from conservative management with observation and reassurance to foot orthotics and casting to complex surgical procedures.

**Clubfoot:**The gold-standard treatment option for clubfoot is the Ponseti method of serial casting, which should be applied as early as possible after birth.

Plaster of Paris cast appliance should commence ideally within the first two weeks after birth, with weekly serial casting application and exchange. The order of correction is the midfoot cavus, forefoot adductus, hindfoot varus, and equinus; the CAVE mnemonic can help recall the order. Tendoachilles lengthening (TAL) at week 8 after implementation of serial casting is required in 80-90% of the patients.

The French method of daily manipulation and physical therapy has also been reported as an alternative method of clubfoot correction. However, it is not used in the United States as it requires strict adherence to daily manipulation and provides relatively good outcomes only in skilled hands.

In residual clubfoot deformities, various surgical options exist, such as PMR, tendon transfers, osteotomies, and arthrodesis.

**Planovalgus:**Management is conservative in most cases, as it is usually temporary, especially in children. In adults, management is based on the etiology of the deformity. Stretching, shoewear modification, and heel support with orthotics have been tried and are usually applied to asymptomatic or slightly symptomatic patients.

**Cavovarus:**Management varies and ranges from foot orthotics to surgery. Although foot orthotics have been used, there are often reserved for mild cases or as adjuvants before or after surgical procedures.

However, the optimal management of pes cavovarus is surgical, as foot orthosis alone is insufficient for most cases. The surgical approaches vary and depend on whether a fixed forefoot or hindfoot component causes the deformity.

In the case of flexible hindfoot deformity, where the cavus is produced by fixed forefoot deformity, the patient may benefit from dorsiflexion osteotomy of the first metatarsal and plantar fascia release. In the case of fixed hindfoot deformity (hindfoot remains varus during Coleman's block test), the patient may benefit from lateral valgus-producing calcaneal osteotomy and peroneus longus to brevis transfer and with procedures for the forefoot.

Other soft tissue release approaches include posterior tibia tendon transfer, Achilles tenotomy, Broström ligament reconstruction (performed for ankle instability), and Jones tendon transfers (transfer of the extensor hallucis longus and extensor of the digit tendons to the dorsum of the metatarsals).

**Congenital vertical talus:**The goal of the treatment is to avoid complications and render the patients able to walk. Conservative treatment alone is rarely sufficient for CVT. The most commonly used management strategy is an initial application of long-leg serial casts, followed by soft tissue releases and talonavicular joint fixation. The treatment yields better results when performed before the age of 2.

Serial casting and manipulation are initially performed to stretch the soft tissues for the surgery. Once reduction is achieved with casts, open reduction of the talonavicular joint with pin fixation is performed. Achilles tenotomy is also usually required to correct the equinus contracture, along with possible lengthening of the peroneals and toe extensors. The surgical approach can be performed in one or two stages. Triple arthrodesis is reserved for cases that failed prior surgical treatment or when the diagnosis of CVT is made at a later age, and no other surgical option is available.

**Congenital oblique talus:**Treatment ranges from observation to using shoe inserts or casting and surgical approach for more severe cases. Most cases of COT are successfully treated with shoe inserts or even need just observation. However, in cases that failed conservative management, with more fixed equinus, and when talonavicular joint subluxation persists, serial casting with talonavicular fixation and soft tissue release are warranted. Talonavicular fixation is achieved with open reduction and talonavicular pinning to reduce fixed talonavicular subluxation and requires adjuvant Achilles tenotomy to correct fixed equinus deformity.

**Metatarsus adductus:**Most deformities reach a spontaneous complete resolution before age one year. However, 4 to 14% of all metatarsus adductus deformities progress to rigid deformities in adulthood.

Historically, serial casting has been the gold standard treatment for metatarsus adductus. However, they are usually not well tolerated by the pediatric population, with side effects such as skin bruises, circulatory problems, deep wounds, and nerve injury being described. In the past 30 years, many research papers tried to find a solution for these side effects by reporting the use of new orthoses as an alternative to casting. Some of these include Bebax, a below-the-ankle orthosis shown to be as successful as casting, and Universal Neonatal Foot Orthotics (UNFO), a practical foot orthotic that a caregiver instead of the physician can adjust.

If conservative treatment fails in symptomatic severe and rigid cases, surgery is an option. Different procedures have been described without a consensus on the best option. Options include tarsometatarsal capsulotomies for patients aged 2 to 4 years, a combination of dome shape or close wedge osteotomies on all lesser metatarsals, and usually an opening wedge osteotomy on the medial column in patients older than 4 years.

**Skew foot:**There is no clear consensus regarding the treatment approach. It usually depends on the severity of the deformities and the age at diagnosis. Conservative management, such as serial long-leg casting with hindfoot valgus molding, can be used initially. Surgery is usually reserved for more severe cases and deferred after the age of 6 years as all three components of the foot (forefoot, midfoot, and hindfoot) need correction. If surgery is needed, multiple forefoot, midfoot, and hindfoot osteotomies are performed. In the forefoot, shortening of the lateral column and opening of the medial column osteotomies are needed to correct forefoot adduction. This is performed in combination with calcaneal opening wedge osteotomy.