The NMDA receptor is involved in a variety of disease states, including:

- Alzheimer disease: NMDA receptors become severely disordered in this disease, a progressive and debilitating neurodegenerative disorder of unclear etiology. While the precise mechanisms of this remain unclear, it is well known that memantine, an NMDA receptor uncompetitive antagonist, improves Alzheimer symptoms.

- Huntington disease: This is a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder that also involves NMDA receptor-mediated excitotoxicity.

- Epilepsy, stroke, and traumatic brain injury: These events involve calcium-mediated excitotoxicity. For example, in epilepsy, uncontrolled neuronal firing leads to excitotoxicity and permanent brain damage. It appears that similar processes occur in stroke and traumatic brain injury.

- Major depressive disorder: NMDA receptors may be involved in major depressive disorder, as ketamine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, has shown promise in its treatment.

- Tinnitus: NMDA receptors may be involved in the pathophysiology of tinnitus.

- Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis: This is a rare, potentially lethal autoimmune encephalitis where autoantibodies are produced against the NMDA receptor. Patients present with psychiatric changes, epilepsy, motor, speech, or autonomic dysfunction, as well as decreased levels of consciousness. The diagnosis is by collecting anti-NMDA receptor antibodies from the patient's cerebrospinal fluid. This disease provides an excellent example of the ubiquity of NMDA receptors. When attacked by an autoimmune disease, dysfunction in numerous neurologic functions occurs. Treatment commonly involves steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin, and plasma exchange therapy. Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is often associated with ovarian teratomas.

- Heavy metal poisoning: Evidence suggests that in heavy metal poisoning, metals such as lead bind to NMDA receptors and may exert some of their toxic effects there.

- Migraines: Magnesium is a treatment for migraines, and NMDA receptors may be involved in their pathogenesis.