Fungal sinusitis is a rare infection of facial sinuses, and it often affects people who are immunocompromised, though it can also occur in immunocompetent patients. Most researchers attribute the recent increase in the prevalence of fungal sinusitis to immunodeficiency secondary to cancer therapy, diabetes mellitus, post-transplant therapy, as well as the vast use of antibiotics in modern societies.

Although more studies and discoveries have been conducted on the topic recently, the subject remains largely under-studied. One of the significant complications of invasive fungal sinusitis is the ability to spread to the cavernous sinuses and cause systemic manifestations with potentially fatal complications. As such, clinicians must recognize presentations suspicious for invasive fungal sinusitis and treat them as rapidly as possible; this is one of the incentives behind the discovery of diagnostic modalities that allow for quick recognition and treatment of fungal sinusitis.

It is essential to distinguish invasive fungal sinusitis (which must be treated emergently) from allergic fungal sinusitis (which has a benign course and can be managed electively).

Surgical debridement is by far the mainstay of treatment for most forms of fungal sinusitis. It is, at times, followed by systemic antifungal therapy to prevent the recurrence of infection. Most patients require multiple surgical therapies to obtain long-term relief for invasive disease.

Interprofessional work between internists, infectious disease specialists, ENT surgeons, and nurses is essential for accurate diagnosis and timely treatment. Whatever course of treatment the clinician chooses, it would be wise to consult with a  board-certified infectious disease pharmacist - they can recommend antifungals to accompany debridement and verify dosing on steroids. Nursing will participate in patient care before, during, and following any procedure and can administer medication as well as perform monitoring and counsel the patient. Both the pharmacist and nurses need to inform the treating clinician of any concerns they may encounter. These types of interprofessional interventions are necessary to drive optimal outcomes with fungal sinusitis infections. [Level 5]