The vast majority of cases can be treated conservatively with observation. Splinting of the affected digit has been found to be ineffective and is not recommended. Most presentations of isolated clinodactyly are due to aesthetic/cosmetic concerns, and functional concerns rarely arise. Surgery is for cosmetic correction is not advised due to the complications associated with surgical intervention, which include scarring and stiffness of the affected digit. Surgical intervention is reserved for severe clinodactyly with angulation and shortening, predominantly when there is the involvement of the thumb or radial digits, as severe deformities can often interfere with pinch and grasp.

In cases of severe deformity that involve the radial digits or limit pinch, several different operative treatment options exist. Corrective osteotomy is the mainstay surgical treatment for correction of clinodactyly and, if possible, should be reserved until skeletal maturity is reached. Osteotomy can be challenging in the skeletally immature patient due to the risk of physeal injury, or excessive or incomplete correction. Options include opening or closing wedge osteotomy, reverse wedge osteotomy, and epiphyseal bracket resection and fat grafting. Opening wedge osteotomy requires bone grafting and allows for the preservation of length or the option to increase length; however, this requires a donor site that may be limited in a skeletally immature patient. Closing wedge osteotomy is an attractive option due to its simplicity; however, it typically results in some degree of shortening, which may be significant if the initial degree of shortening is substantial. The reverse wedge osteotomy is a technically challenging procedure when performed on a skeletally immature hand and requires access to both sides of the affected digit. In all cases of corrective osteotomy, the soft tissue deficit that is created with either lengthening or shortening of the digit must be addressed. Soft tissue deficits on the concave side can typically be treated with a "Z" -plasty. In more severe soft tissue deficits, rotational or advancement flaps may be necessary to gain adequate soft tissue coverage.

In patients with open growth plates, epiphyseal bracket resection and fat grafting termed "Vicker's physiolysis" can be used as an alternative treatment option. This method of correction involves resecting the cartilaginous or osseous bracket on the short side of the affected digit and interposing in the created "dead space" with fatty tissue. After resection of the epiphyseal bracket and tissue interposition, this allows for the normal portion of the epiphyseal growth plate to generate and longitudinally correct the deformity over 1 to 2 years.