There are many conditions that may present in a somewhat similar fashion to BEB. It is important to differentiate between these conditions and recognize their differences.

**Apraxia of Eyelid Opening (AEO)**

Most cases of AEO present in the context of extrapyramidal disorders. However, there are reports of AEO as an isolated finding in healthy individuals.

AEO shares many demographic aspects with BEB: its incidence is greater in the sixth decade of life, and it also has a female predominance (2:1). It tends to be bilateral, and most patients exhibit sensory tricks. Anxiety and depression are also common before and after diagnosis. In patients with isolated AEO instead of contraction of orbicularis oculi muscle, frontalis muscle contraction is seen in an effort to open the eyes.

In some cases, it is not possible to differentiate between BEB and AEO since many patients with BEB also have AEO, and some that initially present as AEO later develop blepharospasm, usually after 1.5 years. AEO is also treated with botulinum toxin injections, and surgery is reserved for refractory cases.

**Hemifacial Spasm**

Hemifacial spasm has the same female to male distribution (2 to 1), and age at onset is between 40 to 59 years. The estimated prevalence of hemifacial spasm is 11 per 100,000 people, 7.4 per 100,000 in men, and 14.5 per 100,000 in women.

It is characterized by involuntary muscle contractions, but in this case, limited to one side of the face. These muscle contractions are typically intermittent, clonic, or tonic in nature. The muscle is relaxed in between the spasm episodes. It is aggravated by voluntary movement of the face, fatigue, stress, or a change in head position. Patients may complain of hemifacial spasm persisting in their sleep.

The most common underlying cause of hemifacial spasm is compression by an ectatic vessel, typically the vertebral artery or the anterior/posterior cerebellar artery.

Following botulinum toxin injection, 85 to 90% of patients experience improvement in their symptoms. Patients refractory to botulinum toxin injection may benefit from vascular decompression.

**Post Facial Palsy Synkinesis**

Nerve regeneration occurs after an episode of facial nerve palsy. If there is aberrant muscle reinnervation, synkinesis between the lower and upper facial muscles following facial palsy may occur. This generally tends to occur six months after an episode of Bell palsy.

A patient suffering from post-facial palsy synkinesis will present with abnormal involuntary facial movements. There are different patterns of synkinesis such as oral-ocular, which presents with non-intended eye closure on voluntary movement of the muscles of the mouth. Ocular-oral synkinesis occurs when voluntary eye movements lead to non-intended movements of the muscles of the mouth.

**Psychogenic facial spasm:**

Studies have shown that the mean age of psychogenic spasm is 34.6 years of age.

A patient suffering from psychogenic facial spasm will present with a non-patterned, variable facial spasm.

Patients suffering from psychogenic facial spasm may be differentiated from dystonic conditions by the presence of particular clinical signs. Psychogenic facial spasm tends to involve the muscles of the lower face (downward deviation of the angle of the mouth). Furthermore, the 'brow-lift sign' may be seen, which consists of frontalis and orbicularis oculi muscles contracting, leading to a raising of the eyebrow during occlusion of the eye.

**Facial Motor Tics**

Facial motor tics tend to be short-lived, brief, and stereotyped in nature. The motor tic may resemble a normal coordinated voluntary movement.  A patient suffering from facial motor tics may have a sudden urge or premonitory feeling to perform the movement. As such, the patient may be able to suppress the movement with effort.

These motor tics may be associated with motor tics of the limbs, along with other features of Tourettes syndrome.

**Facial Myokymia**

A myokymia is an undulating, rippling movement which affects individual muscle fascicles which may affect the upper or lower eyelid. This is associated with sleep deprivation, excessive caffeine consumption, and excessive fatigue.

**Tardive Dyskinesia**

Tardive dyskinesia presents with repetitive, involuntary movements around the orofacial region. There may be smacking of the lips, protraction of the tongue, or excessive blinking of the eyes. These movements tend to be irregular in nature, asynchronous, and involve muscles that are not innervated by the facial nerve such as the masseter muscle or the external muscles of the tongue. Tardive dyskinesia is a potential complication of long term neuroleptic use.