Toxicology screens have changed markedly over the years. Methods such as gas chromatography and radioimmunoassays have given way in everyday use to enzyme-linked sorbent immunoassay (ELISA) and cloned enzyme donor immunoassay (CEDIA). This migration is largely due to speed and ease of use. However, these new generation immunoassays carry with them limitations in the form of reduced sensitivity and specificity. The calibration of these tests can detect specific substances rather than an entire class of drugs and also suffer from cross-reactivity to structurally similar compounds. Comprehensive drug screens utilizing other methods tend to be prohibitive in terms of expense and typically can take weeks to result, making them impractical for clinical use.

Drug testing is possible using samples from urine, serum, breath, sweat, or saliva. Breath testing is used nearly entirely on estimating alcohol concentrations, and urine and serum tests remain the most commonly used for medical professionals.

**Urine Testing**

Illicit drugs of abuse are a common area of interest in screening and utilize urine testing. Five drugs commonly tested in the United States in a urine screen are:

- Cocaine

- Amphetamines

- Marijuana

- Phencyclidine (PCP)

- Opioids

These drugs were targeted for drug screening by the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

Many assays include benzodiazepines as well. In addition to issues with false positives or negatives of the test, the standard urine assay will not screen for some existing illicit drugs. The epidemiology of drug use has shifted over the past ten years, and there is a higher prevalence of substances such as synthetic cannabinoid, MDMA (ecstasy), and chemical variants of opioids and PCP, which may not be detected by many urine screens. Other drugs of misuse that are generally unscreened include ketamine, chloral hydrate, gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), psilocybin, and bath salts (cathinones).

Most urine drug screens do not provide quantitative testing, so a simple “positive” or “negative” result is given if the assay detects substrate.

**Serum Testing**

Serum tests screen for common over-the-counter drugs which are likely sources for intended overdoses. These tests commonly obtain acetaminophen, aspirin, salicylates, and ethanol. Some extended serum screens include tricyclic antidepressants or barbiturates. Unlike urine screens, these tests are often quantitative and are useful in measuring blood concentrations. Concentrations require interpretation as to the reported times and amounts of ingestion, and often serial concentrations are necessary when the history is lacking or unreliable. While ethanol is detectable in the alcohol screen, other toxic alcohols like methanol, ethylene glycol, and isopropyl alcohol are not detectable.