The brain receives blood supply from the internal carotid arteries and the vertebral arteries. The internal carotid artery branches off into the two main cerebral arteries- the anterior and middle cerebral arteries. The right and left vertebral artery come together at the level of the pons and join to form the basilar artery. The basilar artery connects the blood supply of the internal carotid arteries to form the circle of Willis, which is a circulatory anastomosis that provides collateral circulation to the cerebral circulation. This arrangement is important because if one of the vessels becomes occluded or narrowed, another vessel will preserve cerebral perfusion to avoid ischemia.

The anterior and middle cerebral arteries then form the anterior circulation and give off branches that supply the structures of the forebrain such as the hippocampus, hypothalamus, and the internal capsule. The middle cerebral artery branches, namely the lenticulostriate arteries, specifically supply the basal ganglia and thalamus. The posterior circulation of the brain supplies both the midbrain and hindbrain structures. Branches from the posterior cerebral, basilar and vertebral arteries supply circulation to the posterior cortex, midbrain, and brainstem. The medial structures of the brainstem receive supply from the midline arteries, and the lateral arteries supply the lateral structures of the brainstem. The cerebellum, parts of the medulla, and pons obtain vascular supply via the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) and the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA), which are also known as the dorsal-lateral arteries.

Lymphatic drainage of the neural tube occurs through the meningeal lymphatic vessels, located parallel to the dural venous sinuses located in the central nervous system (CNS). These meningeal lymphatics drain immune cells, metabolic wastes, and excess fluid from the CNS and into the deep cervical lymph nodes, which are near the internal jugular vein.