# Continuing Education Activity

In a world of evolving disease, accidental industrial or commercial contamination, as well as foreign and domestic terrorism, emergency providers must be able to provide safe and efficient resuscitation procedures to victims while wearing personal protective equipment (PPE). Contamination events can take the form of chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear threats (CBRN) that are often compounded by explosions and trauma (ET). This activity describes resuscitation during contamination and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the management of these patients.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for PPE during resuscitation.
- Describe the PPE equipment used during the resuscitation of contaminated patients.
- Review the clinical relevance of PPE during resuscitation.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination of contaminated patients.

# Introduction

In a world of evolving disease, accidental industrial or commercial contamination, as well as foreign and domestic terrorism, emergency providers must be able to provide safe and efficient resuscitation procedures to victims while wearing personal protective equipment (PPE). Contamination events can take the form of chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear threats (CBRN) that are often compounded by explosions and trauma (ET). Resuscitation follows the emergency medicine mantra of managing the airway, breathing, and circulation (ABC) to sustain life, and regarding contamination gives preference to antidotes (AABCs). The most common schema for PPE is the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administrations (OSHA) PPE protection levels A, B, C, and D.

CBRN threats are common; they have been well documented throughout history. The nature of evolving viruses that cause Ebola, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (MERS) has required the use of PPE by emergency providers to avoid natural or nosocomial inoculation from airborne or contact means.Salmonella typhimurium causing 751 casualties.

# Indications

Indication for resuscitation with PPE is the need to resuscitate victims of known CBRN+ET events and unknown attacks with hazardous material arsenals.

# Contraindications

Contraindications for resuscitation would be related to the inability to endure donning PPE and performing resuscitation while in PPE. Individuals contaminated cannot participate in the operation to rescue and resuscitate. Persons with a history of claustrophobia and heat stroke should not be selected for participation if healthy, more able-bodied personnel are available.

# Equipment

Emergency providers require PPE so they can safely enter areas contaminated by hazardous materials (HAZMAT) to treat the injured. A risk-benefit analysis chooses PPE levels. The HAZMAT benefits increase with more restrictive PPE levels, but also proportionally increases the risk from physiological stress. The appropriate PPE needs to be chosen for the right task or hazard.  Equipment is based on United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards.

Level A offers the highest level of protection and is best used for unknown threats. Level A protects operators from liquids, vapors, and gases. Level A equipment encompasses a positive pressure full face mask connected to a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA), a totally encapsulated suit, outer chemical resistant gloves, inner chemical resistant gloves, and chemical-resistant boots.

Level B offers protection from liquids, gases, but not vapors. Level B consists of positive-pressure, full-faced, self-contained, breathing apparatus (SCBA), hooded chemical-resistant clothing, outer chemical-resistant gloves, inner chemical-resistant gloves, chemical-resistant boots, boot covers, and face shield.

Level C is most commonly used in healthcare facilities and consists of a full or half-face mask, air-purifying respirator, chemical hooded resistant clothing, outer and inner chemical-resistant gloves, chemical-resistant boots, boot covers, and face shield.

Level D provides the least amount of protection and entails a work uniform, gloves, boots, safety glasses, and a face shield.

# Personnel

Emergency medical services (EMS) professionals can include but are not limited to emergency medical technicians, paramedics, firefighters, other trained professionals like the military, and physicians. EMS providers must often meet the inclusion criteria of being healthy, willing, and able. Professionals are often excluded if they are claustrophobic, heat-sensitive, or pregnant.

# Preparation

Training for CBRN+ET events can instill confidence in those teams selected to perform resuscitation in contaminated theaters. Current literature suggests that training in the form of consequence management with threat mitigation and mass casualty response drills has both shown to increase success.

# Technique or Treatment

Traditionally EMS providers have traveled into the contamination area to retrieve victims and bring them to appropriate decontamination sites near healthcare facilities in a so-called “scoop and go” type of mission.

The area of greatest risk is titled the hot zone. This is the immediate area of the CBRN+ET threat, often the area of most casualties.  Traditionally victims were retrieved by EMS providers in PPE and brought into an adjacent warm zone. The warm zone is a safe distance from the hot zone and is an area where triage and decontamination may take place. After decontamination, patients can cross the cold line and enter the cold zone where definitive medical management can occur, or safe transport to health care facilities can occur. The cold zone will also house the incident command post where leadership manages the consequences of the specific threats.

If the patient is incapacitated, then their vitals need to be measured. It can be challenging to assess a patient’s vitals while in OSHA PPE levels A, B, and C. The decreased visibility from the hood and decreased dexterity from glove thickness are often cited as main detractors for diagnosing and treating victims in real life or mannequins in training.

Chest compressions for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) have been found to be of great importance. This is a physically demanding process for the operator delivering compressions, that becomes more demanding when utilizing PPE protection levels. The suits increase temperatures with exertion, can cause fogging and visual impairment of the face shield, and decrease sensorium leading to lowered quality and rate of chest compressions, specifically decreased depth and rate. One study has shown a decrease in CPR effectiveness of 30% while in PPE.

The risk of apnea and cardiac arrest have been found to be high in events of CBRN+ET.

Endotracheal intubation is considered the gold standard for definitive airway management. ETI has shown to handle secretions of victims in CBRN+ET events better. It requires the operator to position the patient to view the glottis. The view of the glottis can be seen by the operator when rostral to the patient’s head and viewing the glottis through the pharyngeal, tracheal axis intersection. Medications are used to sedate the patient and relax musculature to allow for the passing of the ET tube through the glottis. The tube is then secured, and the patient is treated with a BVM until a ventilator is available. Studies on mannequins have shown direct laryngoscopy (DL) to be the fastest practice for ETI.

Patients can and will often require venous access for the delivery of fluids or medications for early resuscitation during CBRN+ET events. This has been studied multiple times and placing peripheral IVs has been found to be challenging in PPE due to decreased dexterity and sensorium. Interosseous placement (IO) has been found to take significantly less time than intravenous access (IV) while wearing PPE.

Patients that achieve resuscitation are later decontaminated. This can take up to 12 minutes per person.

# Complications

Those team members selected to don PPE are all at risk of contamination. Contamination can be in the form of a systems error or unforeseeable circumstance. The same complications with resuscitative techniques can also occur. For example, endotracheal intubations can lead to esophageal intubations, tracheal perforations, aspiration, or possibly main stem intubations if done incorrectly. Victim and Responder can endure heat stress or dehydration from the physical demands of egress from a dangerous environment with the taxing strain of PPE equipment as added workload required for protection.

# Clinical Significance

Similar to what is referred to as the "golden hour" in trauma resuscitations, EMS resuscitation while in PPE success is also time-dependent. Team members will be required to diagnose and treat simultaneously while arranging an evacuation. Providers should rely on symptom pattern recognition to enhance successful treatment plans. Examples of this would be toxidrome recognition. In the case of cholinergic toxicity, this includes increased vitals, mydriasis, and dry skin. In the same way, medical triage is done by treating those salvageable and most sick; injuries and contamination must be addressed per patient with a goal of treating what cannot wait before formal decontamination and definitive treatment. The clinical gestalt must be guided with emphasis on timing to intervention, decreasing overall hazard exposure, and putting a large distance between the threat and the victims.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The EMS team requires a chain of command with known protocols in place. Briefing and debriefing allow for improvement from lessons learned from previous operations. Teams should be assessed physically and mentally prior to and after operations. The team is only as strong as the weakest link in the chain. Access to current data in resuscitation through ATLS, ACLS, BCLS, and PALS is necessary. Follow-on training for CBRN+ET is required and necessary. Annual training to keep skillsets sharpened must be addressed. Increased preparatory training will improve success while decreasing complications of operations.