**Posterior fossa arachnoid cyst:**Arachnoid cysts are filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and do not communicate with the ventricular system or subarachnoid spaces. Posterior fossa arachnoid cysts may be difficult to distinguish from a mega cisterna magna and may appear anywhere within the posterior fossa.

Similar to mega cisterna magna, arachnoid cysts match the CSF signal density on computed tomography (CT) and signal intensity on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and typically do not enhance following administration of intravenous contrast. In contrast to mega cisterna magna, arachnoid cysts may be associated with a mass effect on the cerebellum, resulting in obstructive hydrocephalus. Posterior fossa arachnoid cysts may also result in scalloping of the occipital bone.

**Persistent Blake's pouch cyst:**During embryogenesis, Blake's pouch is an inferior protrusion of the fourth ventricle. Blake's pouch results from a finger-like expansion of the posterior membranous area. It initially does not communicate with the subarachnoid space but later becomes a permeable structure and then constitutes the foramen of Magendia.

Persistent Blake's pouch cyst results when there is failed permeabilization. Persistent Blake's pouch cyst radiographically may have a similar radiographic appearance to mega cisterna magna, appearing as a cystic posterior fossa mass that matches CSF density on CT imaging and CSF intensity on MRI imaging. In contrast to mega cisterna magna, persistent Blake's pouch is characteristically associated with hydrocephalus. Similar to mega cisterna magna, persistent Blake's pouch cyst is not associated with cerebellar hypoplasia. Persistent Blake's pouch cysts are not associated with other brain abnormalities.

**Dandy-Walker variant:**Dandy-Walker variant is usually an isolated malformation but can also occur in association with many other conditions, including Aicardi syndrome, Meckel-Gruber syndrome, Walker Warburg syndrome, and chromosomal abnormalities such as trisomy 9, 13, and 18, among others.

The key distinguishing feature of the Dandy-Walker variant radiographically is a hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, which rarely may be completely absent.

**Epidermoid cyst:**Epidermoid cysts are slow-growing congenital tumors that develop from remnants of epidermal elements during the closure of the neural tube and disjunction of the surface ectoderm with neural ectoderm.

Posterior fossa epidermoid cysts usually arise in the lateral subarachnoid cisterns. Epidermoid cysts may be difficult to distinguish from mega cisterna magna on computed tomography (CT) and head ultrasound as they both match CSF signal density and echogenicity, respectively. Similarly, on MRI, mega cisterna magnas and epidermoid cysts will match CSF signal intensity.

In contrast to mega cisterna magna, epidermoid cysts on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequence will appear hyperintense with correlated hypointensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). Mega cisterna magna, in contrast, do not restrict diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging.

**Pilocytic astrocytoma:**Pilocytic astrocytomas account for approximately 15% of central nervous system (CNS) tumors and are the most common pediatric brain tumor.

Pilocytic astrocytomas will have a cystic appearance similar to mega cisterna magna, but in contrast, pilocytic astrocytomas will typically additionally have an associated enhancing mural nodule. The cystic portion of pilocytic astrocytomas may or may not enhance following administration of intravenous contrast. Additionally, pilocytic astrocytomas, if large enough, can have an associated posterior fossa mass effect resulting in obstructive hydrocephalus, which is not seen in mega cisterna magna.

As with mega cisterna magna, unless there is significant mass effect or an additional associated abnormality present, there is no hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis. Pilocytic astrocytomas do not typically restrict diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging. Pilocytic astrocytomas may be associated with neurofibromatosis type 1.