The two main treatments for generalized anxiety disorder are cognitive behavior therapy and medications. Patients may benefit most from a combination of the two. It may take some trial and error to discover which treatments work best.

**Cognitive Behavioral Therapy**

This includes psychoeducation, changing maladaptive thoughts patterns, and gradual exposure to anxiety-provoking situations.

**Pharmacotherapy**

Several types of medications are used to treat generalized anxiety disorder.

**Antidepressants**

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) classes are the first-line agents with a response rate of 30% to 50%. This class of drugs includes escitalopram (Lexapro), duloxetine (Cymbalta), venlafaxine (Effexor XR) and paroxetine (Paxil, Pexeva). In a study, 81% of children with anxiety disorders who received a combined sertraline hydrochloride and CBT were responded to the treatment.

**Benzodiazepines**

Examples diazepam and clonazepam are long-acting agents. These agents are used when an immediate reduction of symptoms is desired, or a short-term treatment is needed. Generally, cooperative and compliant patients who are aware that their symptoms have a psychological basis are more likely to respond to benzodiazepines. Since there is a concern for misuse and dependence, patients with a history of alcoholism or drug abuse are not appropriate candidates for this treatment.

**Buspirone (BuSpar)**

Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine which does not cause dependency. It is also less sedating than benzodiazepines, and tolerance does not occur at therapeutic doses. This agent has a therapeutic lag in the efficacy of two to three weeks which limits its use.