Evaluation again is based on the presenting complaint and a high index of suspicion. The chest X-ray may show hyperinflated lungs with peribronchial thickening and bronchiectasis in the lower bases. However, a CT scan is more sensitive than a chest X-ray to assess the lung and may reveal alveolar damage and cystic bronchiectasis, which are more significant in the lower lung fields. Plain X-rays of maxillary and frontal sinuses may show central opacification.

Pulmonary function tests will reveal mild airflow obstruction in the smaller airways. In a patient with compatible clinical features, confirmation of the diagnosis is possible with genetic testing that shows homozygosity or compound heterozygosity.

Young syndrome requires differentiation from cystic fibrosis (CF), which can present with similar features, and further evaluation with cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) mutation carrier testing is highly recommended. While Young syndrome more often presents in males, CF presents equally in either sex. In Young syndrome, chronic sinusitis is the predominant pulmonary abnormality, while in CF, there is progressive bronchiectasis due to recurrent lung Infections and colonization, especially with Pseudomonas. Spermatogenesis is affected in CF patients with abnormal sperm histology.

The diagnostic basis is on the occurrence of recurrent sinopulmonary infections, persistent azoospermia but normal spermatogenesis, and the exclusion of cystic fibrosis and immotile-cilia syndrome.