Imaging begins with standard PA and lateral wrist radiographs.

SLAC wrist will have a pattern of arthrosis which shows the progression of the injury. Localized arthrosis of the scaphoid fossa begins at the styloid tip (radial styloid beaking) which is indicative of a Stage I SLAC wrist. Progressive joint space narrowing and sclerosis affecting the entire scaphoid fossa of the distal radius is indicative of Stage II SLAC wrist. Stage III SLAC wrist entails sclerosis and joint space narrowing between the lunate and capitate. Eventually, the capitate will migrate proximally into the space created by the scapholunate dissociation.  Stage III SLAC wrist is synonymous with the "Terry Thomas sign." The lunate may fall into dorsiflexion (dorsal intercalated segment instability), and the scaphoid into flexion but the integrity of the radiolunate articulation is preserved until late in the process.

**Advanced Imaging Modalities**

While CT scans are often not indicated, MRI scans may facilitate diagnosis in subtle clinical presentations. However, the latter are also often not necessary as radiographs are often sufficient. When obtained, an MRI may reveal thinning of the articular surfaces of the proximal scaphoid. It may also show synovitis of the scaphoid facet of the distal radius and capitolunate joint as well as the overall radiocarpal and midcarpal joints. Sagittal images can demonstrate abnormal changes in the position of the scaphoid and lunate bones and can also demonstrate radioscaphoid incongruity.