Initially, the cause of the neuropathy should be identified and diagnosed (this is often done prior to the development of ulceration in an ideal world, however, oftentimes, this is not the case). The different types of neuropathy can be distinguished based on the physical exam in conjunction with electrodiagnostic testing and laboratory markers. The electrodiagnostic testing consists of electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies/nerve conduction velocity (NCS/NCV). These tend to be performed at the initial presentation of symptoms and are often only used to evaluate peripheral neuropathy sources, not neuropathic ulcerations. EMG/NCV mainly evaluates the large myelinated fibers, while diabetes tends to affect the smaller unmyelinated fibers. Additionally, an epidermal nerve fiber density test can be performed to measure and document small fiber peripheral neuropathy objectively. Laboratory studies that can help evaluate sources of neuropathy include complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, fasting blood glucose, hemoglobin A1c, thyroid studies, vitamin B12 levels, renal function studies, and any tests that can help evaluate autoimmune disorders, infectious processes, and toxic etiologies can be performed.

All ulcerations should be evaluated with plain radiographs immediately. Plain radiographs help to assess multiple aspects of neuropathic ulcerations. The soft tissues can be evaluated for the possibility of soft tissue emphysema or gas-forming organisms infecting the foot. The structure of the bones can be evaluated as well for any hypertrophy or deformity causing ulceration. Lastly, the quality of the bone can be assessed for signs of osteomyelitis, which will require further workup to confirm a diagnosis. Different signs of osteomyelitis may be seen in the form of a sequestrum as a sclerotic area with a radiolucent rim, an involucrum of the thick bone surrounding a sequestrum, and cortical destruction. Plain radiographs are highly useful for ruling out many differentials.

Vascular studies should also be ordered to help differentiate neuropathic ulcers from ulcers of vascular origin. This helps to evaluate blood flow, arterial efficacy, and perfusion to certain tissues. This can adjunct surgical decisions and predict healing capabilities as well. The society for vascular surgery developed a risk stratification system that considers healing potential in patients with diminished vascular status, including the likelihood of amputation. This shows the direct correlation between vascular insufficiency, the prognosis of ulceration, and the incidence and necessity of surgical intervention in patients with poor blood flow in a limb.

The initial laboratory evaluation of a neuropathic ulcer should include a complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic profile, c-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and hemoglobin A1c (if recent value not known); with adjunct testing that can also be performed in certain situations. These help to evaluate markers of infection and inflammation. The white blood cell count gives further information on the body's attempt to fight infection, and the differential allows us to analyze which cells in the body are activated for this. The complete metabolic profile helps analyze the ability of the patient's body to maintain a proper electrolyte balance. The c-reactive protein, or CRP, is an enzyme released by the liver that quantifies the amount of inflammation occurring in the body. It has been shown that levels of 7.9 mg/dL associated with an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 60 mm/h are associated with an increased probability of osteomyelitis. ESR is a measurement of how fast the erythrocytes, or red blood cells, settle at the bottom of the test tube and is a nonspecific measurement of chronic inflammation. The ESR greater than 60mm/h has a sensitivity of 74% and a specificity of 56%, while the CRP levels of 7.9 mg/dL have a sensitivity of 49% and a specificity of 80%.

At the time of initial evaluation, it is important to perform any debridement of devitalized tissue, a cleansing of the wound with a sterile solution, and obtain a culture of the wound for microbiological analysis. The culture and sensitivities that the laboratory can perform can help guide antibiotic treatment in cases of infection. The Infectious Diseases Society of America came out with clinical practice guidelines in 2012 for diabetic foot infections and have recommended criteria such as inflammation, purulent drainage, positive probe to bone test, chronic ulceration >30 days, previous amputation, a history of ulcerations and multiple other conditions to be of solid evidence for suspicion of infection; thus necessitating the need for cultures. This same paper also recommends that cultures be taken before the initiation of antibiotic therapy if possible and that the specimen should be taken from the deepest tissue after cleansing and debridement.

Secondary evaluation should include advanced imaging if indicated. Indications include any suspicion of deep soft tissue abscess and bone infection, but it should be considered that any deep infection is possible in most instances. This can include computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 3-phase bone scintigraphy, and ultrasound. Each of these has its pitfalls; however, they can each provide insight into certain nuances of ulcerations for workup on soft tissue abscesses and osteomyelitis. If osteomyelitis is indicated, a bone biopsy is the gold standard for evaluation. Although it has been shown that microbiological and pathological evaluation and interpretation are clinician dependent and maybe not be as reliable as it was once thought for diagnosing bone infection.

The preferred advanced imaging modality is MRI, which has a high sensitivity for infection diagnosis and can be used with contrast for further evaluation of bone and soft tissue. Triple phase bone scans are a viable alternative and can be combined with different radionuclides for further sensitivity and specificity. CT scan can also be a viable alternative as it has superior bone resolution than MRI and is much more readily available; however, evaluation of the soft tissue envelope is much poorer when compared to MRI.