The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (sedimentation rate, sed rate, or ESR for short) is a commonly performed hematology test that may indicate and monitor an increase in inflammatory activity within the body caused by one or more conditions such as autoimmune disease, infections, or tumors. The ESR is not specific for any single disease but is used in combination with other tests to determine the presence of increased inflammatory activity. The ESR has long been used as a "sickness indicator" due to its reproducibility and low cost. Over many decades, several methods have evolved to perform the test. However, the reference method for measuring the ESR proposed by the International Committee for Standardization in Haematology (ICSH) is based on the findings described by Westergren a century ago.

The Westergren method measures the distance (in millimeters) at which red blood cells in anticoagulated whole blood fall to the bottom of a standardized, upright, elongated tube over one hour due to the influence of gravity. The tube used for the test is called the Westergren tube. Today, these tubes are made of either glass or plastic, with an internal diameter of 2.5 mm and lengths of 190 to 300 mm.

Perhaps the first to notice a change in blood sedimentation due to illness was a British surgeon John Hunter (1728–93), in his posthumous publication, A Treatise on the Blood, Inflammation, and Gun-Shot Wounds. A Polish physician, Edmund Faustyn Biernacki (1866–1911), later refined the clinical use of the ESR near the end of the 19th century.Gazeta Lekarska in Poland and the Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift in Germany) and developed his test for measurements. These findings were not widely propagated in the English-speaking medical communities. Because of his work, the ESR is occasionally called the Biernacki Reaction worldwide.

The applied use of ESR in clinical diagnostics by Biernacki was refined by Dr. Robert Fahraeus in 1918 and Dr. Alf Vilhelm Albertsson Westergren in 1921.

The Westergren method for measuring the ESR proposed by the International Committee for Standardization in Haematology (ICSH) has allowed reproducibility for almost a century. Over time, this same method has established comparable reference values within the same laboratory and even between different facilities across the globe. The ICSH adopted the Westergren method as the gold standard for ESR measurement in 1973.