For diagnosis of ocular sarcoidosis, three criteria must be met:

- The patient must have clinical findings consistent with sarcoidosis as per the international workshop on ocular sarcoidosis (IWOS) criteria [Figure 4]

- Evidence of non-caseating granuloma on tissue biopsy

- Other causes of granulomatous inflammation (such as tuberculosis syphilis) should be ruled out.

The revised IWOS criteria for diagnosing ocular sarcoidosis [Figure 5] have removed the diagnosis of 'possible ocular sarcoidosis.'

The gold standard investigation in the diagnosis of sarcoidosis is tissue biopsy. In ocular sarcoidosis, tissue biopsy can be done on tissues including the eyelids, lacrimal glands, conjunctival nodules, and orbital tissues. However, at certain sites where tissue biopsy is not possible, imaging techniques such as chest x-ray, chest CT scan, serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels, serum calcium levels, and serum lysozyme levels may aid in the diagnosis of a probable or presumed ocular sarcoidosis.

**Fundus photography**-  Helps document retinal findings and future objective comparisons of the lesions. Yellowish-white choroidal granulomas, periphlebitis, and other features of posterior uveitis can be documented as well as monitored on serial photographs.

**Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA)**– FFA helps in documenting retinal vasculitis and detection of peripheral retinal neovascularization.

**Fundus autofluorescence imaging (FAF) –**FAF helps detect sub-clinical retinal pigment epithelial changes in chorioretinal pathologies and monitors treatment response in uveitis patients with chorioretinal lesions.

**Optical coherence tomography (OCT)**– OCT helps assess and monitor macular edema and helps predict functional outcomes based on the structural integrity of various retinal layers.

**Anterior segment OCT  –**Anterior segment OCT helps identify and document peripheral anterior synechiae and the extent of angle closure.

**OCT of the optic nerve –**OCT of the optic nerve head helps investigate an optic nerve head granuloma. It helps detect adjacent peripapillary retinal edema, monitor response to treatment, and evaluate the severity of optic nerve damage due to glaucoma.

**Ultrasonography of the eye –**In patients with vitreous hemorrhage secondary to sarcoidosis, ultrasonography of the eye helps to understand the status of the retina. It helps as pre-operative aid in assessing the status of posterior vitreous detachment.

**Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) -**UBM helps objectively evaluate the inflammatory process in anterior chamber angle, iris, ciliary body, pars plana, and peripheral vitreous.

**Visual fields**– A wide range of visual field defects can be seen either due to glaucomatous optic neuropathy or ischemic optic neuropathy. Patients with ischemic optic neuropathy can present with central or centrocecal scotomas, hemianopic field defect, or altitudinal field defect.

**Diagnostic vitrectomy**– In limited cases, the vitreous sample obtained by vitrectomy can be used for diagnostic analysis. High mobility group box -1 (HMGB1), a pro-inflammatory cytokine, is detected in high levels in the vitreous of patients with ocular sarcoidosis.

**Systemic Investigations**

**Chest X-ray –**Bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy is the classical radiological feature of sarcoidosis.

**High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest****–**HRCT scans are superior to conventional chest X-rays in delineating hilar lymphadenopathy, understanding lung parenchymal damage, and differentiating inflammation from fibrosis.

**Pulmonary function tests**– Pulmonary function tests typically reveal a restrictive pattern of ventilatory function. The tests show decreased lung volume and decreased carbon monoxide diffusing capacity.

**Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (SACE)****assay**– SACE levels are elevated in about 30 to 80% of patients with sarcoidosis.

**Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) –**BAL fluid analysis shows an increased number of activated T lymphocytes, alveolar macrophages, and inflammatory cytokines. In 85% of patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis, lymphocytosis is seen with normal or low granulocyte count.

**Radionuclide techniques –**Radionuclide techniques include Gallium (Ga) scans fluoro-2deoxy-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scans. Uptake of Gallium helps identify appropriate sites to take the biopsy.

**Lung Biopsy –**Transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) using a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FFB) is the diagnostic procedure of choice in patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis with a sensitivity range of 60 to 90% depending on the stage of the disease.

**Kveim-Siltzbach test –**This test involves intradermal injection of a suspension of granuloma containing spleen or lymph node from a patient with sarcoidosis.

**MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) of the brain –**MRI brain in neurosarcoidosis reveals a wide spectrum of findings such as periventricular and white matter lesions, leptomeningeal enhancement, solitary or multiple supra- and infratentorial brain lesions, and involvement of cranial nerves.