Up to 50% of patients are diagnosed antenatally by fetal echocardiography, anticipating the need for postnatal prostaglandin therapy if there is evidence of severe right ventricular outflow obstruction. Useful studies to help with diagnosis and evaluation include chest radiograph, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram. Chest radiographs usually show a normal-size heart silhouette, with an upturned apex and a concave main pulmonary artery segment, commonly known as “boot-shaped.” On the electrocardiogram, it is common to see signs of right atrial enlargement and right ventricular hypertrophy showing right axis deviation, prominent R waves anteriorly and S waves posteriorly, upright T wave in V1 (abnormal after 7 days of life up to 10 years of age) and a qR pattern in the right precordial leads. Among imaging studies, an echocardiogram is the gold standard, addressing the anatomy and severity of the right ventricular outflow obstruction, the location and number of ventricular septal defects, and assessing associated anomalies or variants with the coronaries arteries and the aortic arch. The major limitation of transesophageal echo in patients with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is in visualizing the distal pulmonary arteries. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can be used and is particularly useful in adults with repaired tetralogy of Fallot. Cardiac catheterization is not commonly used but can help to assess the level of obstruction, pulmonary stenosis or hypoplasia, coronary artery anatomy, and the presence of collaterals and accessory septal defects.

The most frequent causes of mortality in patients with no surgical intervention include hypoxic spells (68%), cerebrovascular accidents (17%), and brain abscesses (13%). Within the first year of life, 25% of infants with severe right ventricular outflow tract obstruction die if left untreated, 40% by three years of age, 70% by 10, and 95% by 40.