The management options for patients with trigeminal neuralgia depend on a variety of factors, including age, general health, disease severity, and the underlying cause. The decision should be taken after a thorough discussion with the patient and other doctors involved in the care of the patient.

**Pharmacologic Therapy**

- The first-line treatment for patients with classic TN and idiopathic TN is pharmacologic therapy. The most commonly used medication is the anticonvulsant drug carbamazepine.

- Oxcarbazepine is a newer drug and is being increasingly used as first-line therapy for TN in patients who do not respond to or who cannot tolerate carbamazepine. Possible side effects include double vision and dizziness. It can also cause hyponatremia. It should also be avoided in patients with HLA-B*15:02 allele.

- Baclofen is a muscle relaxant that can be used to treat TN. Side effects include dizziness, sedation, and dyspepsia.

- Other medications include lamotrigine, phenytoin, gabapentin, clonazepam, and valproic acid.

- Newer drugs like eslicarbazepine, an active metabolite of oxcarbazepine, and the new Nav1.7 blocker, vixotrigine, are being explored for pain relief in TN.

- Patients with secondary TN also can respond well to pharmacotherapy. However, it is recommended to treat the underlying lesion or disease.

**Botulinum Toxin Injections**

This can be beneficial for some patients, particularly the middle-aged and the elderly, who are refractory to medical therapy or who cannot tolerate medical therapy due to its side effects.

**Surgical Therapy**

- Patients who are refractory to medical therapy can be considered for surgery.

- Microvascular decompression

- Ablative procedures include rhizotomy with thermocoagulation, chemical injection, or mechanical balloon compression. These procedures involve damaging the trigeminal nerve root, thereby interrupting the pain transmission signals to the brain. Rhizotomy with thermocoagulation uses an electrode to apply heat to damage the nerve fibers. Chemical rhizotomy involves injecting the chemical glycerol into the trigeminal nerve, thereby damaging it. Balloon compression involves inserting a tiny balloon to the point of location of nerve fibers.

- Radiosurgery: This procedure involves using radiosurgery instrumentation.

- Peripheral neurectomy and nerve block: The neurectomy can be performed on peripheral branches of the trigeminal nerve like the supraorbital, infraorbital, lingual, and the alveolar nerves.