Cardiac development is a highly regulated process, and several molecular factors are involved in the process. Perhaps the most documented of these is the NOTCH signaling pathway. Mutations in the NOTCH signaling pathway result in congenital cardiac abnormalities in both humans and mice. The primary purpose of NOTCH signaling is to regulate tissue patterning via local cell interactions.

The establishment of laterality is an essential aspect of cardiac development, facilitated by cilia configuration within the primitive node. Ciliary structures found in the primitive node have a unique design that allows for overall leftward migration with the failure of such a process, leading to dextrocardia conditions. The motile cilia rotate in a clockwise fashion to generate this movement. The determination of the left-right cardiac axis is via several genes typically induced by NODAL expression. In turn, the NODAL expression induces expression of left-right determination factor (LEFTY) gene expression and paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2).PITX2 gene is considered the primary gene responsible for the determination of left-right orientation. The PITX2 gene has several roles in cardiac development. In addition to establishing left-right orientation, PITX2 gene mutations have associations with isolated cardiac congenital heart disease, including atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, and tetralogy of Fallot.VangI2 on cardiac outflow tract development and Noggin on contractility.