There are multiple steps when treating splanchnic venous thrombosis, all of which will reduce mortality and morbidity. It is imperative to treat the underlying cause, the thrombosis itself, and complications that it causes, such as variceal bleeding.

There is no consensus when treating splanchnic venous thrombosis. Small uncontrolled studies have shown that systemic anticoagulation improved survival and lowered recurrence.

By one estimate, about 25 percent of splanchnic vein thrombosis cases present with gastrointestinal bleeding at the time of diagnosis.

Studies have shown that patients with cirrhosis with portal vein thrombosis will benefit from anticoagulation therapy. They have a lower rate of variceal bleeding when treated. Isolated portal vein thrombosis without cirrhosis is not as clear of a scenario. Studies have not shown an increase in episodes of bleeding after anticoagulation therapy.

Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is the drug of choice for anticoagulation. Splanchnic vein thrombosis cases have increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding, and therefore LMWH (with a shorter half-life than warfarin) is the preferred medication. Additionally, by one estimate, 22 to 27 percent of patients with splanchnic vein thrombosis have underlying solid malignancy. LMWH is traditionally used more frequently and effectively than warfarin in cancer cases.

There are two studies, and several articles on the use of direct oral anticoagulant medications (dabigatran etexilate, rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban) in splanchnic vein thrombosis. Overall, there was an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding using rivaroxaban as compared to LMWH.

In cases of symptomatic splenic vein thrombosis, splenectomy is the best treatment. The role of splenectomy is unclear in asymptomatic patients. Such patients have a low risk of bleeding and can be observed and treated with splenectomy if they become symptomatic.

Patients with cirrhosis and portal vein thrombosis need screening for esophageal varices, even in the absence of bleeding. This is done by upper endoscopy to prevent future variceal bleeding. If esophageal varices were found during screening, the patient should be prophylactically treated with nonselective beta-blocker drugs.