The majority of E. histolytica infections are asymptomatic; however, up to 10% of asymptomatic individuals infected can develop the disease over time.E. histolytica most commonly causes intestinal amoebiasis but can also affect the liver, respiratory tract, heart, and brain.

**Gastrointestinal:**Symptoms typically have a gradual onset, usually over one to three weeks.  Common symptoms include diarrhea, bloody stools, weight loss, and abdominal pain.

**Liver:**Amoebic liver abscess formation is the most common extraintestinal complication. It can be seen in months to years after an individual has had exposure to an endemic area. Symptoms include fever and right upper quadrant pain. Exam findings may include hepatomegaly with hepatic tenderness. Less than 10 percent of patients have jaundice. Common laboratory findings include leukocytosis without eosinophilia, elevated alkaline phosphatase, transaminitis, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate.

**Respiratory tract:**Pleuropulmonary involvement is a rare complication that causes atelectasis and transudative pleural effusions.  In rare cases, an amoebic liver abscess can rupture into the pleural space causing empyema or hepato-bronchial fistula causing fevers, coughing, and respiratory distress.

**Cardiac infection:**Cardiac infection is an even less common complication than pleuropulmonary disease and occurs with a liver abscess ruptures into the pericardium and presents with symptoms of pericarditis or cardiac tamponade.

**Brain infection:**Amoebic brain abscesses are very rare with sudden onset symptoms such as headache, vomiting, and mental status changes with rapid progression to death.