Treatment of hyperprolactinemia depends upon the cause. Once the physiological cause of hyperprolactinemia is excluded, we should look for other possible systemic causes and address them for the symptomatic patient. Here, we are discussing treatment options based on etiology.

**Etiology Type**

**Hypothyroidism**

The patient should be treated with thyroid replacement therapy and confirm the normalization of prolactin level after treatment.

**Drug-Induced Hyperprolactinemia**

Treatment is only necessary if patients develop hypogonadism, osteoporosis, or troublesome galactorrhea.

**Hypothalamic Disease: Stalk Damage**

Removal of the cause should be the first choice; if not, hyperprolactinemia should be treated with the dopamine agonist.

**Idiopathic Hyperprolactinemia**

Idiopathic hyperprolactinemia is treated with the dopamine agonist. However, these patients are relatively resistant to dopamine agonists. Dosage can be adjusted to keep the lowest possible dose with the normal level of prolactin. If the patient attains normal prolactin on the lowest dose of a dopamine agonist for 2 years, the drug can be discontinued as a trial.

**Macroprolactinemia**

It does not require treatment.

**Prolactinoma**

It has medical, surgical, and radiation treatment.

**Medical Treatment**

Endocrine society guideline recommends against treatment with a dopamine agonist for asymptomatic microadenoma but recommends dopamine agonist therapy to decrease prolactin levels, tumor size, and normalize gonadal function for symptomatic patients with microadenomas or macroadenomas. Cabergoline is preferred to other dopamine agonists due to higher efficacy in normalizing prolactin levels and tumor shrinkage

Cabergoline and bromocriptine are commonly used dopamine agonists. Quinagolide is not available in the United States but used in some other countries. Pergolide had been withdrawn from the United States because of concern of valvular heart disease. Cabergoline is the first choice because of its efficacy and fewer side effects.

Dopamine agonist therapy can be tapered and discontinued after 2 years of continuous therapy if serum prolactin level is normal and no adenoma is visible in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

**Surgery/Radiation Treatment**

Most of the prolactinomas are treated with medical therapy only. Surgery and radiotherapy are reserved for those who are resistant to medical therapy with the dopamine agonists. Endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery is the preferred surgical method. Prophylactic surgery is considered in women with large prolactinoma which potentially threatens vision during pregnancy.