# Introduction

Cardiomyopathies are a heterogenic group of diseases of the myocardium, which further classify into primary “confined to the heart, “or secondary “related to systemic disease.” The primary cardiomyopathies are divided into genetic “including hypertrophic, arrhythmogenic right ventricular, left ventricular noncompaction, Danon glycogen storage disease and others”; and acquired “including acute myocarditis, stress-induced (Takotsubo), peripartum, and tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathies." The secondary cardiomyopathies occur due to systemic diseases. These include infiltrative diseases such as amyloidosis, Gaucher disease, Hunter disease, and Hurler disease. Storage diseases, medication toxicity, inflammatory disease, and endocrinology diseases can also lead to secondary cardiomyopathy.

Diagnosis of the etiology of cardiomyopathy starts with a thorough history and physical exam, including obtaining detailed social and family history, a careful review of medication and substance use, and followed by diagnostic tools including electrocardiogram, laboratory testing, imaging studies, and may require a myocardial biopsy to reach the definitive diagnosis. Echocardiogram, cardiac MRI, cardiac CT, and nuclear medicine imaging are the primary imaging modalities used for both work up and follow up on patients with cardiomyopathies.

# Plain Films

**Chest radiograph:**

A chest radiograph is usually the initial imaging study to order, especially in an acute setting, to differentiate between cardiac and pulmonary etiologies of severe respiratory symptoms. The chest radiograph can also be used to distinguish different types of cardiomyopathy although it is not a sensitive test in the workup. In dilated cardiomyopathy, the chest radiograph will show increased left and right ventricular size. The chest radiograph can show evidence of cardiomegaly and increased cephalization, pleural effusion, and Kerley B-lines in the setting of acute congestive heart failure. Cardiomegaly on chest radiograph usually reflects the decreased ejection fraction, and the increased cephalization reflects increased preload. These can be helpful to establish a diagnosis of acute heart failure but are not adequate to confirm the diagnosis.

In peripartum cardiomyopathy, findings are consistent with other dilated cardiomyopathies including enlargement of the heart silhouette and increased pulmonary venous congestion with or without interstitial edema. In contrast, the chest radiograph in Chagas heart disease usually shows an enlarged cardiac silhouette, which is typically due to pericardial effusion.

**Echocardiography**

Echocardiogram remains the main imaging study in the workup for cardiomyopathy and to differentiate between the different types of cardiomyopathy. The ease of use and cost efficiency of echocardiogram comparing to other imaging studies has always made it the first choice in the evaluation of new-onset cardiomyopathy and follow up on the progress of the disease. The echocardiogram helps to evaluate the systolic and diastolic dysfunction, wall motion abnormalities, and valvular abnormalities. The sensitivity of the 2D echocardiogram is 81%, and the specificity is 100% in diagnoses of left ventricular dysfunction.

In dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), the echocardiogram is an essential imaging test to make the diagnosis. The echocardiogram shows dilation with or without dysfunction of the left ventricle.

Abnormal global longitudinal strain (GLS) is a predictor of mortality in patients with systolic heart failure with decreased ejection fraction and is superior to other echocardiogram parameters as a prognostic measure.

In peripartum cardiomyopathy, there is a global decrease in the left ventricular systolic function with or without evidence of dilated ventricles. A left ventricular thrombus may occur when LVEF is less than 35%.

All patients with suspected hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) should be evaluated with an echocardiogram, to check the LV wall thickness, systolic and diastolic function, left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction, and presence of mitral regurgitation. Clinical diagnosis of HCM is possible with the finding of LV hypertrophy on echocardiogram.

Diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathy by echocardiogram is more difficult than the diagnosis of hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies. The left ventricle usually is usually normal in size or small and associated with a normal left ventricular systolic function. These patients usually have an abnormal diastolic function with biatrial enlargement.

Echocardiogram has low sensitivity when used for workup of cardiac sarcoidosis. In systemic sarcoidosis, an echocardiogram can show abnormal findings in up to 46% of patients even if they are asymptomatic for cardiac disease; findings can include: diastolic dysfunction, abnormal wall motion, and wall thickness (increased in acute cardiac sarcoidosis and decreased in chronic).

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a cardiomyopathy that is caused by the fibrous-fatty replacement of myocardium of the right ventricle. Echocardiogram has limited sensitivity in the diagnosis of ARVC, it can show regional RV akinesia, dyskinesia, or aneurysm,

# Computed Tomography

Multidetector computed tomography can be used in the workup of cardiomyopathy to differentiate between ischemic and nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy etiology.

In HCM, the cardiac CT can help to identify the hypertrophy of the myocardium and the LVOT obstruction and can show an enlarged mitral valve, systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve or mitral valve regurgitation. The CCT can demonstrate the asymmetry of the ventricular hypertrophy.

In restrictive cardiomyopathy, the CCT can show the ventricular sizes similar to the echocardiogram findings. In cardiac sarcoidosis, the cardiac CT with contrast can demonstrate the enhancement of the sub-epicardium with global or regional hypokinesia.

In ARVC, cardiac CT can show dilation of the right ventricle with a bulging appearance in the right ventricular wall due to fatty deposition.

# Magnetic Resonance

Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) is used in cardiomyopathy to assess ventricular volumes, ejection fraction, myocardial mass, and wall thickness. The high resolution of CMR helps in assessment of the ventricle systolic function and differentiate between ischemic and non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) can identify the fibrosis of the myocardium which helps to differentiate between types of cardiomyopathy. LGE CMR can be used to check for the arrhythmogenic substrate; this helps for future treatment options including ablation.

In DCM, the dilated ventricles and decreased ejection fraction are the main findings.

In HCM, the CMR can show the septal and left ventricular hypertrophy and helps in the assessment of variant types of HCM. CMR is more sensitive than echocardiogram to identify areas of segmental left ventricular hypertrophy. Myocardial fibrosis can be detected when using IV gadolinium.

CMR is essential in the diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathy and the differential diagnosis of etiology of this type of cardiomyopathies; it helps to differentiate the restrictive cardiomyopathy from the constrictive pericarditis.

In cardiac sarcoidosis, the typical findings on CMR are biventricular dilation and thinning of the septum.

CMR can be used as part of the workup for other unclassified cardiomyopathies. In stress cardiomyopathy, the CMR can show the left ventricular wall motion dyskinesia or akinesia in the mid and apical areas of the left ventricle in up to 75% of patients.

# Nuclear Medicine

The nuclear imaging is used to evaluate the cardiac function and myocardial perfusion to rule out ischemic cardiomyopathy. It is also useful in restrictive heart diseases, especially in cardiac sarcoidosis and amyloidosis and in the diagnosis of the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy HCM. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET) are beneficial in the workup for cardiomyopathies. SPECT can help in the evaluation of wall mobility, thickness, and cardiac ischemia. PET is helpful to evaluate cardiac ischemia and inflammation.

In DCM, SPECT myocardial perfusion scintigraphy (MPS) and PET can help to differentiate the ischemic versus nonischemic etiology of the cardiomyopathy. In nonischemic cardiomyopathy, the SPECT MPS shows a good distribution of the blood flow compared to the ischemic CM where there is a decrease in blood distribution due to the ischemia.

In HCM, the perfusion Imaging can demonstrate thickened asymmetric septum or apex, and shows fixed reversible defects without evidence of coronary artery disease. The Thallium-201 can help to detect reversible exercise-induced defects in the left ventricle.

In cardiac sarcoidosis cardiac, fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scan is considered an important test to establish the diagnosis. FDG PET can show focal areas of increased uptake which represents areas of inflammation. These appear as patchy infiltrates on the scan.

In cardiac amyloidosis, the MIBG SPECT helps for early detection of the myocardium denervation before the incidence of amyloid deposition that leads to heart disease. The use of PET is still limited in the use of work up for cardiac amyloidosis.

In arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), abnormal 123I-MIBG SPECT uptake is related to increased risk of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias.

# Clinical Significance

Diagnosis of cardiomyopathy requires multiple diagnostic tests. Imaging tests play a primary role in the workup. Echocardiogram remains the first test to order; it helps in establishing the diagnosis and provides an easy and cheap tool for routine follow up on disease progression and response to treatment. Cardiac MR provides an excellent evaluation of the myocardial function and is considered to be the definitive imaging test to diagnose hypertrophic and infiltrative diseases of the myocardium. It is useful for predicting prognosis in multiple types of cardiomyopathy. Cardiac CT is essential in the workup of ischemic heart disease and helps in the workup of hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopathies. Nuclear imaging is helpful on the evaluation of metabolism and function of the myocardium, and it is an excellent tool for the diagnosis of ischemic cardiomyopathy and has value in the workup of infiltrative cardiomyopathies especially cardiac sarcoidosis and TTR amyloidosis.