Patient positioning is prone, with bolsters or pillows positioned to increase interlaminar space optimally. The skin is cleansed and prepared in a sterile fashion. Fluoroscopic anterior-posterior (AP) imaging is used to identify the targeted vertebral levels. Cephalad or caudal tilt is used to maximize or "open up" the interlaminar space and a 5 to 15-degree oblique angle is introduced to establish a trajectory view for a paramedian approach. A 25-gauge needle is used for anesthesia of the skin and projected approach. Then, a 17 to 20 gauge Tuohy spinal needle is inserted at the same site parallel to the image trajectory. The spinal needle is advanced with the stylet in place using intermittent imaging. From superficial to deep the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and paraspinal muscles are pierced until encountering resistance at the ligamentum flavum. Lateral imaging may be used to assess depth depending on clinician preference and spinal region. This assistance can be especially useful in cervical or thoracic procedures for safety. Upon feeling the ligamentous resistance, the stylet is removed, and the LOR syringe filled with 2 mL of preservative-free normal saline is connected.

The spinal needle is then advanced in millimeter increments with continuous gentle pressure on the plunger of the LOR syringe. When the ligamentum flavum has penetrated a loss of resistance is felt through the plunger, and the normal saline is injected due to negative pressure upon penetration into epidural space. Firm, careful control of needle depth is vital as syringes are exchanged at this stage to avoid the advancement of the needle. The LOR syringe is exchanged for a syringe containing iodinated contrast, and a small amount is injected to ensure epidural placement.