Following are the conditions which show retinal hemorrhages depending on the stage and severity of the disease:

- Ocular diseases: Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD), polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV), juxta foveal telangiectasia, optic disc hemorrhages.

- Diabetic retinopathy: dot and blot and vitreous hemorrhages. Bilateral and diffusely distributed in the posterior pole.

- Hypertensive retinopathy: diffuse flame-shaped hemorrhages, preretinal hemorrhages seen rarely. Bilateral and diffusely distributed in the posterior pole.

- Retinal vein occlusions: diffuse intraretinal hemorrhages in all quadrants in central retinal vein occlusions and sectoral distribution in branch retinal vein occlusions.

- Trauma: multilayered hemorrhages can be unilateral or bilateral, depending on the type of trauma. Preretinal hemorrhages are typical of Terson syndrome and Valsalva retinopathy. The shaken baby syndrome shows bilateral diffuse multilayered hemorrhages in infants and children. Birth trauma is the leading cause of neonatal retinal hemorrhages.

- Anemia: Roth spots, multilayered hemorrhages, subhyaloid hemorrhages, and vitreous hemorrhages. They are seen bilaterally and diffusely distributed.

- Leukemia: Preretinal hemorrhages, vitreous hemorrhages, flame-shaped hemorrhages, intraretinal hemorrhages, Roth spots, and cotton wool spots, and. Sea-fan neovascularization is a typical finding. Bilaterally seen and diffusely distributed.

- Acute bacterial endocarditis: preretinal/vitreous, intraretinal, or flame-shaped hemorrhages in the parapapillary rim, cotton wool spots, Roth spots. They are bilaterally seen.

- Sickle cell anemia: SC and S-Thal variants lead to retinopathy, intraretinal salmon patch hemorrhages, black sunburst chorioretinal ischemic scars, and sea-fan neovascularization which might lead to vitreous hemorrhage. They are seen bilaterally.

- Ocular ischemic syndrome: Mid-peripheral intraretinal hemorrhages, retinal neovascularization.

- Preeclampsia: Intraretinal hemorrhages, Elschnig spots, with serous retinal detachment. They are seen bilaterally with varying intensity.

- Connective tissue disorders (lupus): intraretinal hemorrhage and vascular occlusions (severe stages) seen bilaterally.

- High altitude retinopathy: Roth spots, multilayered hemorrhages, and vitreous hemorrhages often seen bilaterally.