**Management of AAGA**

When AAGA, or indeed any form of awareness associated with patient distress, is suspected or confirmed, a prompt and multi-disciplinary proactive approach to management is the standard of care.

Postoperatively, patients with a suspected awareness event should be interviewed at several intervals to assess and minimize the downstream psychological impact of AAGA. Immediate assessment in the PACU, either in response to a patient report of awareness or when suspected by a clinician, should focus on an open-ended discussion whereby the patient is permitted to relate their experience in detail. Dismissal of related events or justification for awareness from the practitioner at this point is inadvisable, and it is paramount to validate the concerns raised by the patient early in their recovery. Expressing regret for unpleasant experiences is both ethically sound and important for patients to hear. Expression of regret for untoward outcomes, and in many states, even apologizing for them, cannot be used against a practitioner as evidence of negligence in a malpractice claim.

Immediate post-operative interviews should occur in the presence of both surgical and anesthesiology team members to ensure that all parties are informed of events and so that a common understanding and analysis of causative factors may be undertaken. A patient’s recognition of awareness may be delayed by hours or even days. In many cases, patients may hesitate to initiate conversations about unintended awareness until asked.

The Brice questionnaire, first described by Brice, Hetherington, and Utting in 1970, attempts to solicit experiences consistent with awareness by distinguishing explicit recall from dreaming and is open-ended in both format and syntax.

In contrast, only 3 of those 19 individuals were captured on the basic post-operative quality assurance calls, demonstrating that commonly employed follow-up methods are insufficient tools to screen for AAGA. Directed interviews one month out for all surgical patients pose a logistical challenge for healthcare infrastructure, particularly in the current environment of a depleted and overburdened workforce. Herein lies a considerable and persistent challenge in accurately detecting AAGA events.

**Effect of Accidental Awareness on Patients**

Awareness events are commonly associated with psychological sequela. Nightmares, depression, anxiety, and PTSD are reported at significant but variable rates after AAGA.

As such, it is of critical importance to perform a detailed and comprehensive informed consent for the planned anesthetic, including the possibility of awareness and explicit recall, even in the setting of routine preoperative benzodiazepine administration. Indeed, significant gaps in understanding among patients of commonly performed sedation and anesthetic techniques may be identified during a properly informed consent process, thus offering an opportunity to educate the patient and manage expectations for planned consciousness or the lack thereof. Psychiatric and/or psychologic referral and treatment are highly recommended after suspected or confirmed awareness events.