The evaluation of these patients is similar to the usual progression of a patient with dyspnea and signs of right heart failure.

Chest radiographs will typically be performed and can note enlargement of central pulmonary arteries and signs of vascular congestion.

Computed tomography of the chest (CT chest) will typically be performed with evidence of elevated pulmonary pressures, such as the increased diameter of pulmonary vessels and possible right ventricular enlargement with bowing of the interventricular septum into the left ventricular lumen. Additionally, there will be signs of pulmonary venous congestion such as mosaicism with centrilobular ground glass opacities, scattered pulmonary nodules, mediastinal lymph node enlargement, and smooth thickening of interlobular septa.

Spirometry typically shows normal values, though mild restrictive defects may be seen.

Echocardiography shows signs of pulmonary hypertension, such as elevated pulmonary arterial systolic pressure (PASP), right ventricular strain/dilation, and right ventricular dysfunction. Echocardiography will also be useful to exclude left-sided heart disease as a cause of pulmonary edema.

Ventilation and perfusion scanning (V/Q scanning) is typically performed in the workup of patients with suspected PAH. It is of poor utility in diagnosing PVOD because it is usually normal or leads to a misdiagnosis of CTEPH. It can sometimes show mismatched perfusion defects in PVOD patients.

Right heart catheterization is necessary for the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension. Patients with PVOD will have the typical hemodynamic features of pulmonary arterial hypertension, which are elevated mean pulmonary arterial pressures (mPAP) >20 mmHg, normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) ≤15 mmHg, and elevated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) ≥3 Wood Units.

There are no particular findings in right heart catheterization specific for the pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, although some may point toward the diagnosis. The first would be developing pulmonary edema during vasoreactivity testing. Vasoreactivity testing is generally done to evaluate the viability of calcium channel blockers in treating pulmonary arterial hypertension. This is typically done using short-acting pulmonary vasodilators such as adenosine, epoprostenol, or inhaled nitric oxide.

If a patient develops pulmonary edema during this testing, it can be suggestive of PVOD. Another finding suggesting this diagnosis would be an abnormal rise and fall in PCWP when flushing the distal port. Due to the narrowing of pulmonary veins, there may be a steep rise in the PCWP and a slow fall after flushing saline.

Histology remains the gold standard for making a definite diagnosis. However, lung biopsy is contraindicated as it increases the risk of life-threatening bleeding. It is recommended to use a noninvasive diagnostic approach based on clinical features and noninvasive tests to support the diagnosis.

For patients with a family history of PVOD or IPAH, some centers may test for BMPR2 or EIF2AK4 mutations.