Hyperkalemia is the most common adverse effect of succinylcholine administration, attributed to the drug's stimulatory effect on skeletal muscles. Serum potassium levels may increase as much as 0.5 mEq/L, which is clinically insignificant unless a predisposition to hyperkalemia exists as a result of disease pathophysiology that induces upregulation of postjunctional acetylcholine receptors. If such disease pathology is present, succinylcholine use is contraindicated. If hyperkalemia is sufficient to create electrocardiography changes, clinicians should avoid using succinylcholine in such circumstances. Special consideration is also necessary for those with chronically elevated potassium levels, such as renal failure patients, to not induce acute on chronic hyperkalemia. Succinylcholine should be avoided in patients with significant burns or traumatic injuries that are 24 to 72 hours post-injury due to the high probability of acute hyperkalemia that may become exacerbated as a result. Marked and/or untreated hyperkalemia may result in dysrhythmias or even death.

Masseter muscle spasms, otherwise known as trismus, may follow the administration of succinylcholine in a small percentage of the population and can be an isolated adverse effect, or rarely, seen in conjunction with malignant hyperthermia. The presence of hyperthermia, trismus, and metabolic derangements consequent to succinylcholine administration should precipitate a differential diagnosis and interventional plan appropriate for malignant hyperthermia. If trismus occurs subsequent to succinylcholine administration, an appropriate dose of non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents such as rocuronium or vecuronium should be administered and have proven highly effective in such circumstances.

Bradycardia may manifest following succinylcholine administration in a select population, especially children, as a result of the nicotinic activation that manifests as muscarinic stimulation and lower heart rate. Pretreatment with an age-appropriate dose of atropine has shown to be beneficial in preventing or minimalizing bradycardia that may occur as a result of succinylcholine administration. Bradycardia may also occur in patients that require a continuous infusion of the depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent and is also correctable with atropine in such situations.

Increases in intraocular pressure correlate with succinylcholine administration. However, sufficient research to support the theory and its associated risk is unavailable. Any increase in intraocular pressure can be counteracted or prevented using an appropriate sedative in conjunction with the depolarizing neuromuscular blockade.

Succinylcholine administration without assurance of adequate sedation can result in paralysis in a conscious to semi-conscious patient. This issue is avoidable by making sure the patient is adequately sedated before the administration of succinylcholine.