Men with BPH may present acutely with urinary retention or may be seen in the clinic or primary care setting. Management of male urinary retention is covered in a separate topic.

In those with LUTS, treatment options range from watchful waiting to medical and surgical intervention and depend on the degree of "bother" or disease burden to the patient (as assessed by IPSS).

**Observation**

Watchful waiting is a process to manage patients by giving lifestyle advice. Examples include weight loss, reducing caffeine intake or reducing fluid intake in the evening, and avoiding constipation to try and reduce risk factors and improve LUTS. Patients should be involved in the discussion and informed of the risks of disease progression. Clinical progression has shown to be around 31% in one observational study, with 5% developing acute urinary retention.

**Medical Therapy**

Both static and dynamic components contribute to the pathophysiology of BPH. Medical therapy aims to address both of these components.

Alpha-blockers:

Alpha 1-adrenoreceptors are present on prostate stromal smooth muscle and bladder neck. Alpha 1-adrenoreceptor blockage results in stromal smooth muscle relaxation addressing the dynamic component of BPH and thus improving flow. Examples include selective Alpha-blockers such as Tamsulosin (400mcg once daily) and Alfuzosin (10mg once daily).

5 alpha-reductase inhibitors:

Alpha-reductase inhibitors such as finasteride (5mg once daily) and dutasteride block conversion of testosterone to DHT.

Antimuscarinics:

Bladder detrusor instability can develop in patients with worsening bladder outlet obstruction. This can result in increased urgency (overactive bladder) and frequency. Muscarinic receptor antagonists can help with these symptoms by blocking muscarinic receptors on detrusor muscle. This reduces smooth muscle tone and can improve symptoms in those with overactivity. Examples include solifenacin, tolterodine, and oxybutynin. Those who fail antimuscarinic treatment may be considered for mirabegron use (a Beta-3 adrenoreceptor agonist), which causes detrusor relaxation.

In practice, the combination of an alpha-blocker and alpha-reductase inhibitor is often used to achieve improvements in voiding symptoms. This is backed by studies confirming the effectiveness of combination therapy over monotherapy.

**Surgery**

Guidelines for the indications for surgery in BPH as outlined by the European Association of Urology (EAU) are as follows:

- Refractory urinary retention

- Recurrent urinary infections

- Haematuria refractory to medical treatment (other causes excluded)

- Renal insufficiency

- Bladder stones

- Increased post-void residual

- High-pressure chronic retention (absolute indication)

Surgical management of BPH has broadened significantly over the years, with the development of further minimally invasive techniques. Recommended procedures include transurethral incision of the prostate, transurethral resection fo the prostate, in addition to newer techniques such as laser vaporization and holmium laser enucleation, which have largely replaced open prostatectomy. Surgical management options are outlined below.

**TURP/TUIP**

Transurethral resection surgery focuses on debulking the prostate to produce an adequate channel for urine to flow. This is achieved using diathermy to produce a high-frequency current that allows the cutting of tissue. By resecting all obstructing prostatic tissue, an adequate channel can be created to allow urine to flow. Bipolar diathermy has largely replaced monopolar diathermy techniques for TURP, with increased benefits such as resection in saline and reduced risk of "TUR syndrome."

**HOLEP**

Previously, open prostatectomy allowed adenoma to be removed or enucleated off its capsule. This can now be achieved with laser enucleation, referred to as HoLEP (Holmium laser enucleation of the prostate). Meta-analysis has shown improved Qmax (flow rate), reduction in post-void residual, and IPSS compared to TURP.

Benefits include a lower transfusion rate with no increase in complications compared to TURP. However, limitations include specialized equipment required making it less readily available.

**Urolift**

Tissue-sparing approaches, such as Urolift, have also been developed. This can help minimize the risk of bleeding in co-morbid patients and the associated risks of more invasive surgery (such as anesthesia risk, prolonged surgery time, etc.). By compressing prostate lobes, the channel can be widened in the prostatic urethra, improving LUTS. Studies have shown benefits, including the possibility of day-case surgery, preserved sexual function, and improved symptom scores (IPSS), and flow rates (QMax).