Excess and not enough caloric intake are detrimental to one’s health. Eating too much and moving too little cause obesity. Being obese, or in other words, carrying extra fat can lead to harmful effects on the body including heart disease, high blood pressure, increased risk of stroke, diabetes mellitus type 2, osteoarthritis, gallbladder disease, gallstones, fertility problems, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, gout, breathing problems such as sleep apnea, and multiple cancers such as endometrial, breast, and colon cancer.

Not only does obesity affect one’s physical health, but it impacts one’s mental health and social life as well. Obesity leads to depression, anxiety, and low self-esteem. Obesity can also, unfortunately, lead to unfair disadvantages such as being bullied and having fewer friends, which creates a feedback loop into even more depression and low self-esteem. This is clinically relevant because an outlook of negativity or overall harmful mental health can take a great toll on one’s physical health and vice versa. Thus, it is imperative for clinicians, especially primary care physicians, to strongly encourage and motivate their patients to take better care of themselves through healthier eating habits, choosing fewer calories with greater nutritional value, staying active, and aiming for a healthy body weight for their height.

However, too little caloric intake is also of clinical significance. There are certain diets and eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia that are simply unreasonable for sustaining a human body. Not only can there be insufficient nutrients and energy produced to maintain normal functions down to the cellular level, but the psychological stress caused by this decreased energy can actually cause weight gain in addition to slowed cognition and concentration. In fact, cortisol production is increased when one does not provide his body with enough nutrients, which in turn also causes weight gain. The body essentially turns to survival mode, and metabolism slowly starts shutting down. The body in survival mode will refuse to lose any more fat and will hold on to every calorie it can. In the most extreme version of malnutrition, when one’s body undergoes starvation from eating too little or no calories, permanent organ damage and even cardiac arrest can be imminent. There are a number of nutrients the body needs to sustain its systems, and without these, it will start to fail. One result of starvation is an electrolyte imbalance, which in turn can lead the heart to dangerous arrhythmias. The loss of electrolytes also leads to weakened bones. If starvation continues, the kidneys, heart, and skeletal muscles will lose mass