Once, it was thought that large bladder volumes needed to be drained slowly or by intermittent clamping of the catheter to prevent hematuria, vasovagal response, post-obstructive diuresis, and hypotension. However, recent studies have shown that immediate, complete drainage with an unrestricted Foley is safe and effective with no increase in these complications.

Those patients with a higher risk of developing pathologic post-obstructive diuresis should be considered for 24-hour hospitalization for close monitoring of urine output and electrolytes. Urine output should be monitored at least every 2 hours.  Serum electrolytes including sodium, potassium, urea, creatinine, magnesium, and phosphate, should be checked every 12 hours initially. They are allowed unrestricted access to water for drinking. Daily weights are helpful.  Urine samples can be collected for urinary measurements of osmolality, sodium, and potassium.

Random urine sodium levels greater than 40 mEq/L are suggestive of possible renal tubular injury which can progress to pathologic post-obstructive diuresis.

Intravenous (IV) fluid support should be normal saline and limited to no more than 75% of the prior 1 to 2-hour urine production to avoid stimulation of further diuresis.

Urine osmolality can be estimated from the specific gravity. A specific gravity of 1.010 is roughly equivalent (iso-osmolar) to serum. This would indicate that the kidneys are not concentrating the urine which is most consistent with physiological post-obstructive diuresis. If the specific gravity is 1.020 or more, the kidneys are concentrating the urine and the period of diuresis is resolving. If the specific gravity is lower than 1.010, the kidneys are not concentrating the urine, or may not be able to, which would indicate pathological salt wasting post-obstructive diuresis.

Pathological post-obstructive diuresis puts the patient at risk for hypovolemia and hemodynamic instability as well as acid-base disturbances and electrolyte imbalances. Careful monitoring of fluid status, weight, serum electrolytes, and renal function is necessary to minimize the duration of the condition and facilitate recovery.