The gold standard diagnostic test for the detection of microalbuminuria is a 24-hour urine collection as it has the lowest variability, but it is labor-intensive.

As per the National Kidney Foundation and the European Society of Hypertension, in high-risk patients, screening with a UACR is required to evaluate for microalbuminuria and its potential complications. The high-risk patient population consists of the elderly, African Americans, Asians, patients with diabetes, patients with hypertension, and patients with a family history of chronic kidney disease (diagnosed at older than 60 years).

Furthermore, the American Diabetes Association recommends that this screening be repeated every year for type 1 diabetes (if the diagnosis is older than five years ago). As for patients with type 2 diabetes and diabetic nephropathy, the recommendation is also every year, but it should start following the initial diagnosis.

Laboratory investigations should include a basic metabolic panel (to evaluate for decreased GFR, increased creatinine, and electrolyte imbalances) and a complete white count (for leukocytosis). Other blood tests to be considered for the assessment of associated conditions are blood sugars, hemoglobin A1c, lipid panel, and troponins. Additionally, ultrasound is an option to look for renal and urinary abnormalities. Renal biopsies are rare because of the procedural side effects, and there are no evidence-based recommendations for indications to acquire one.

Evaluation of microalbuminuria is carried out in outpatient clinics unless there is a complication. All patients with impaired renal function or evidence of glomerulopathy should be seen by a nephrologist. The urine dipstick can primarily detect albumin. Albuminuria is observed in glomerular proteinuria. Some factors can lead to false-positive results, such as the recent use of iodinated radiocontrast agents, gross hematuria, and alkaline urine. The normal content of urinary protein is less than 150 mg/day.

Screening for microalbuminuria can be carried out by doing early morning spot protein or urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio. If there is significant proteinuria a 24-hour urine collection must be done. This ratio or spot albumin can also be used for follow-up. If the ratio increases significantly, it becomes advisable to do the 24-hour urine collection.

Proteinuria/microalbuminuria can be transient. To determine whether it is transient in nature, the following steps should be taken:

- Urinalysis and microscopy on 3 separate occasions

- Albumin-to-creatinine ratio in a random spot urine sample

- Urinalysis of an early-morning urine sample before any physical activity

To establish whether it is a case of orthostatic proteinuria, the following should be performed:

- Urine microscopy

- Urine collection on two occasions - Daytime (between 7 am and 11 pm) and overnight (between 11 pm and 7 am)

In order to determine the cause of albuminuria as the underlying glomerular disease, the following should be done:

- Urine microscopy – Presence of dysmorphic red blood cells/casts

- 24-hour urine collection for the quantification of albumin excretion

- Serum creatinine, blood glucose, albumin, and cholesterol

- Autoantibody panel - If indicated by the clinical picture, test for antinuclear antibody (ANA), antistreptolysin O titers, anti-DNA antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), cryoglobulins, anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibodies, and complement levels (C3 and C4)

Imaging studies in albuminuria may include the following:

- Renal ultrasonography – To establish glomerular disease as the cause of microalbuminuria, it is imperative to look at the echogenicity and size of the kidneys

- Chest X-ray or computed tomography (CT) scan – If guided by the clinical picture