The noradrenergic system has various functions throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems. One major role it is involved in is the body’s “fight or flight” response. During states of stress or anxiety, norepinephrine and epinephrine are released and bind to adrenergic receptors throughout the body which exert effects such as dilating pupils and bronchioles, increasing heart rate and constricting blood vessels, increasing renin secretion from the kidneys, and inhibiting peristalsis.

Norepinephrine has also shown to play a role in metabolic effects such as stimulating glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis (while reducing glucose clearance) and inducing ketogenesis and lipolysis.

In the CNS, the noradrenergic system classically operates in its roles in promoting wakefulness and arousal and facilitating sensory signal detection. Further studies have shown that it may also influence some areas of cognition and behavior such as attention, working memory, long-term mnemonic processing, and behavioral flexibility. Specifically, alpha-1 and alpha-2 receptors have been found to influence cognitive functions such as working memory, attention, and fear and spatial learning. Beta-1 and beta-2 receptors have been found to function in auditory fear, spatial reference and fear memory, and memory retrieval. Stimulation or inhibition of these functions is dependent on agonism or antagonism of the adrenergic receptors. In general, alpha-1 and beta receptors enhance neurotransmission and plasticity, promoting stimulatory effects on the CNS, while alpha-2 receptors have inhibitory effects in the CNS such as reducing norepinephrine release and decreasing neuronal excitability.