High metabolic demand and relatively less blood supply make the tubulointerstitium susceptible to injury. The kidney has a higher exposure to drugs and toxins, increasing renal injury chances.

Production and activation of cytokines, such as tissue necrosis factors alpha (TNF-alpha) by inflammatory cells (lymphocytes, macrophages) and renal cells (interstitial fibroblasts, vascular endothelial cells, proximal tubular cells), escalate the inflammatory process. Macrophages are initially responsible for repair but later contribute to inflammation by producing fibrogenic cytokines, transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta). TGF-beta is responsible for fibrosis in chronic TIN. Tubular atrophy leads to burnout and a decrease in the number of nephrons, which overwhelms the functioning capacity of remaining nephrons by hyperfiltration leading to chronic kidney disease (CKD). TGF-beta favors the accumulation of collagen in the extracellular matrix and basement membrane and inhibits the collagenase and metalloproteinase enzymes. In the setting of tubular necrosis, a complex series of necrosis-induced inflammation, i.e., neuroinflammation, has a role in the pathogenesis of TIN. Injured renal tubular cells lose their polarity and integrity and undergo apoptosis and necrosis. Necrosed cells express various danger-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) and alarmins, which activates the immune response to induce inflammation. This process of intensifying inflammation through necrosed tubular cells is known as necroinflammation.

Drug-induced TIN is a result of allergic reactions and is immune-mediated. Only small proportions of the population taking the same medications have TIN, mainly due to variable responses of individuals to the same drug.

Another mechanism of TIN is due to cell injury and insults by bacterial, viral, and fungal infections often associated with preexisting obstruction or reflux. Without obstruction, damage and loss of functions of tubular cells by bacteria are unlikely as the kidney is resistant to structural damage by a bacterial infection. Pathogenesis of other systemic diseases such as sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease, SLE, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Sjögren syndrome, etc., is complex, and it is supposed that multiple factors such as susceptibility to autoimmunity, systemic inflammation, genetic predisposition, nutritional insufficiency, and predisposed infectious agents are involved.