Heavy metal toxicity is a major concern in both adult and pediatric populations. This is of special concern to the pediatric population as lead poisoning can affect cognition and neurodevelopment. Due to the permanent toxic effects of heavy metals, patients must be treated quickly and appropriately. Adequate management by a team of healthcare professionals plays an important role in decreasing overall morbidity and mortality associated with metal toxicity.

Healthcare providers involved in the care of a patient being treated with EDTA should be knowledgeable about the pharmacology and adverse effects of the drug. EDTA has the ability to bind various minerals within the body and should be monitored for any adverse effects. Pharmacists should be mindful of the important difference between edetate disodium and calcium disodium edetate to prevent life-threatening hypocalcemia. Nurses should verify dosing and administration with the pharmacy team and understand the adverse drug reactions mentioned to inform the managing healthcare provider promptly. [Level 5]

Clinicians should be aware of the well-known renal toxicity associated with EDTA. Patients with current renal dysfunction or disease should be monitored carefully or moved to a different chelation agent. Social workers can help the family identify any occupational or home exposure to heavy metals and assist in preventing further exposure. Each member of the interprofessional healthcare team has an important role in treating a patient with EDTA and can significantly reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with heavy metal toxicity.