Though every Purkinje cell is part of the same relatively simple circuit described above, the collective actions of these circuits are many and varied. The most definite evidence is for a major role of the cerebellar circuit in motor coordination, more precisely defined as the ability to fine-tune and course-correct a movement in progress. The large dendritic trees of the Purkinje cell are thought to be critical to this process; they receive complicated inputs from parallel fibers and integrate them into a signal, which represents what the Purkinje cell “thinks” the current motion should be. The climbing fibers are thought to represent an “error signal” that can override or modulate the signal. The entire output then gets routed via the deep cerebellar nuclei to the ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus, where it feeds into the motor cortex’s ongoing actions and hopefully smooths any error out of the motion. Signals from parallel and climbing fibers route to overlapping areas of the cortex, and Purkinje cell output routes to different areas of the motor cortex.

Throughout life, Purkinje cells continue to undergo the processes of long-term potentiation and depression that helped to shape their dendritic trees during embryonic development. Since long-term potentiation and long-term depression are dependent on the simultaneous firing of the synapse and the outgoing axon, those parallel fiber inputs which are most likely to be correlated with their Purkinje cell firing become strengthened over time. This process also contributes to motor coordination, as the correlation between the inputs and the effect of the Purkinje cell on motor activity becomes more refined over time.

The motor function of the Purkinje cell circuits is the best known and studied because injuries to the cerebellum typically result in motor coordination issues such as ataxia without loss of strength. However, there is some evidence that the cerebellum participates in other important cognitive functions, including language and emotion. The mechanism for its effects on these functions is possibly similar to the error-correction mechanism for motor coordination since they share the same basic circuits.