# Continuing Education Activity

Carnitine deficiency is a condition characterized by low carnitine levels in the body. Carnitine deficiency could be primary (due to defect in carnitine transport) or secondary to other conditions. Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder. The spectrum of presentation in PCD varies from being asymptomatic to sudden onset. To avoid the complications associated with this condition, PCD must be promptly diagnosed and treated with L-carnitine. Secondary carnitine deficiency (SCD) could result from multiple causes, either from a decrease in carnitine intake or more commonly from an increase in renal excretion as acylcarnitine. This activity reviews the causes, pathophysiology, and clinical presentation of conditions causing carnitine deficiency. It reviews the evaluation and treatment strategies of carnitine deficiency and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the etiology of carnitine deficiency.
- Outline the evaluation of carnitine deficiency.
- Review the management options available for carnitine deficiency.
- Outline interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to manage carnitine deficiency conditions and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Carnitine (beta-hydroxy-gamma-trimethylammonium butyrate) is an indispensable water-soluble molecule derived from amino acids.

Carnitine plays a substantial physiological role in lipid metabolism and intermediary metabolic pathways.

# Etiology

Primary carnitine deficiency (PCD) due to carnitine transport defect is an autosomal recessive (AR) genetic disorder of the OCTN2 (organic carnitine transporter novel type 2) carnitine-transporter system encoded by the SLC22A5 gene.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of Primary carnitine deficiency is different based on ethnicity. The frequency of PCD varies between countries. In the U.S, the incidence is approximately 1: 142,000 based on newborn screening data.

# Pathophysiology

Under normal physiological conditions, fatty acids are the main source of energy during fasting.

In carnitine deficient states, LCFAs cannot be effectively transported to the mitochondria matrix for oxidation and subsequent utilization in Kreb’s cycle and ketone body production. During periods of fasting, improper utilization of fatty acids impairs gluconeogenesis and characteristically leads to nonketotic or hypoketotic (no or minimal ketone body production respectively) hypoglycemia.

# History and Physical

The presentation of Primary carnitine deficiency is variable between patients in terms of severity.

Hyperammonemia occurs due to reduced expression of enzymes involved in the urea cycle and noted during acute metabolic decompensation.

Less frequently, adults with PCD may have no or mild symptoms (e.g. fatigue) but sudden cardiac death remains a risk in asymptomatic adults.

# Evaluation

When carnitine deficiency is suspected, the first step is to measure plasma carnitine levels.SLC22A5 gene, followed by the array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) if the sequence analysis is not conclusive. There is usually a poor correlation between genotype and phenotypic expression in PCD.

If genetic testing fails to confirm PCD diagnosis, functional assay such as the cultured skin fibroblast carnitine assay is the preferred test. In PCD, the OCTN2 transporter activity is <10% of normal controls.

In the U.S., the newborn screening test includes evaluation for PCD. By tandem mass spectrometry method, low plasma free carnitine levels are detected in newborns with PCD. Due to placental transfer of carnitine from the mother to the fetus, low fetal plasma creatinine levels shortly after birth can reflect the maternal plasma carnitine levels. Some mothers are diagnosed following their infants being detected with carnitine deficiency in their newborn screening tests. Therefore, if the newborn screening detects low carnitine levels, both the baby and the mother are re-tested, after two weeks, to determine who has PCD.

# Treatment / Management

The mainstay of primary carnitine deficiency involves lifelong treatment with a high dose of oral L-carnitine (100 to 200 mg/kg daily dose in 3 divided doses).

Maintenance therapy with L-carnitine can improve plasma levels, and the dose is titrated based on the plasma levels and also on the response.

Acute episodes of hypoglycemia in children with PCD are promptly treated with intravenous 10% dextrose and treatment of accompanying metabolic abnormalities (e.g., acid-base abnormalities), along with immediate carnitine supplementation.

# Differential Diagnosis

Secondary carnitine deficiency (SCD) could result from multiple causes, either from a decrease in carnitine intake or more commonly from an increase in renal excretion. SCD may result from severe malnutrition, ketogenic diet, severe malabsorptive states, extremely preterm infants, and prolonged parenteral nutrition without adequate L-carnitine supplementation.**.****.**

Similarly to PCD, hypoketotic hypoglycemia is highly suggestive for mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation (FAO) disorders (e.g., very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase or VLCAD, medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase or MCAD, etc.), or disorders of a defective mitochondrial carnitine-acylcarnitine cycle or simply referred to as disorders of carnitine shuttle (due to defects in enzymes, CPT-I, or CPT-II or CACT).

The clinical manifestations of FAO defects and carnitine shuttle disorders are heterogeneous and can be vague.

Carnitine is also important in binding acyl residues derived from the intermediary metabolism of amino acids.

# Prognosis

In developed countries, the majority of the PCD cases are identified by newborn screening tests. Early diagnosis and prompt supplementation with L- carnitine has improved the prognosis.

# Complications

Generally, PCD is well tolerated with early diagnosis followed by prompt and aggressive management with L-carnitine. The clinical manifestations and severity of symptoms can be variable between patients with PCD. Undiagnosed or poorly controlled PCD may lead to severe complications. Hypoglycemic episodes can result in convulsions and brain damage.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

- Carnitine supplementation and prevention of hypoglycemia are the mainstays of PCD treatment. Catabolic states such as fasting should be avoided. Other inevitable catabolic states, such as intercurrent infections, should be recognized early. Additionally, metabolic decompensation should be aggressively managed with intravenous dextrose. Patients with PCD should continue L-carnitine therapy. Hypoglycemic episodes and sudden cardiac death have been reported in patients with poor compliance with L-carnitine therapy.

- Patient and caregiver education on proper treatment, especially medication compliance is essential for the management of PCD. Untreated patients can have profound effects that may progress to death. Adult females who are planning to get pregnant should be informed that pregnancy is a metabolically challenging situation that needs to be evaluated and managed with both a metabolic and genetic specialist before conception.

- In patients with SCD, it is crucial to prevent hypoglycemic episodes by frequent feeding and avoid fasting during day time and continuous corn starch supply during the night.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

- In the U.S., newborn screening identifies most cases of PCD. The disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team approach that involves a metabolic specialist and genetic counselor, pharmacist, dietician, pediatrician, neurologist, hepatologist, endocrinologist, and cardiologist. All patients must be treated right after being diagnosed, or else this disorder may be potentially fatal.

- In PCD, the patient and caregiver should be educated on the importance of medication compliance.

- Genetic counseling should be provided in patients with inborn errors of carnitine metabolism. Antenatal diagnosis, using chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, should be performed for high-risk pregnancies as the recurrent risk in each pregnancy is 25% due to their autosomal recessive inheritance.

- Chronic management of FAO defects and carnitine shuttle disorders consists of avoiding fasting, frequent feedings, high carbohydrate, low fat, and carnitine supplementation. Potentially hepatotoxic medications such as valproate should be avoided.

- Patients with carnitine deficiency disorders with the risk of hypoglycemia can be recommended to wear medical alert devices such as bracelets. This will help paramedics and emergency department physicians to quickly recognize and manage emergencies such as hypoglycemia in carnitine deficit states.