The dermatologist generally suspects the diagnosis of congenital poikiloderma since the first clinical signs of this syndrome affect organs of ectodermal and mesodermal origin, namely skin, hair, nails, and teeth. The involvement of other organs is rarer and later.

**Skin Features**

The skin is usually normal at birth, but erythema of the cheeks appear between the third and sixth month of life, then extending to the extremities and possibly to the buttocks. The trunk and abdomen are usually spared. In case of intense erythema, it can appear swelling and blistering. The evolution is towards punctate skin atrophy with reticular hypo- and hyperpigmentation and the development of permanent telangiectasias, realizing the typical appearance of poikiloderma that persists throughout life. Recognition of the age of onset, evolution, and stabilization of this poikiloderma may be an important argument for differentiating Rothmund-Thomson syndrome from other syndromes that also include poikilothermic features.

Later, may appear latte milk cafe au lait spots. Premature aging of the skin has been reported in some subjects. One-third of individuals had hyperkeratotic palmoplantar lesions. Sparse, thin, or absent hair on the scalp, eyebrows, and/or eyelashes are common signs. Nail anomalies such as dystrophy or pachyonychia are also frequent. Dental abnormalities are usual and include microdontia, rudimentary teeth, crown formations, and an increased incidence of caries.

**Ocular Involvement**

Bilateral cataracts develop in the first years of life and are the most common ocular sign. They are subcapsular and can lead to blindness, and characterizes type 1 Rothmund-Thomson syndrome. Other ocular abnormalities have been reported, including corneal atrophy, exophthalmia, congenital bilateral glaucoma, retinal atrophy, strabismus, photophobia, and blue sclerae.

**Skeletal Abnormalities**

They are common (68% in the literature), including saddle nose, frontal bossing, and abnormalities of the long bones. All patients with bone abnormalities had a RECQL4 mutation that explains the predisposition of this mutation to osteosarcoma development.

**Systemic Manifestations**

They include growth anomalies with low birth weight and short stature, mental retardation and sensorineural deafness, anomalies of the gastrointestinal system such as pyloric stenosis and anal atresia, bronchiectasis with an increased incidence of lower respiratory tract infections, hematological signs as progressive leukopenia and chronic hypochromic anemia.

**Malignancies**

The major risk in congenital poikiloderma is the development of neoplasia, which is life-threatening. The most common are bone (30%) and skin (5%) cancers. Osteosarcoma is the most common mesenchymal cancer. It has the same characteristics as the sporadic bone but of earlier onset (14 versus 17 years). Cases of multiple osteosarcomas have been reported with a more frequent incidence than sporadic osteosarcoma (17.9 to 25.6% versus 0.4% to 10%).

The most common skin cancer is squamous cell carcinoma. Other skin cancers (basal cell carcinoma, Bowen disease, melanoma), hematologic (myelodysplasia, Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas, acute myeloid leukemia), and visceral (fibrosarcoma, gastric carcinoma) have been reported rarely.