# Introduction

Cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) is an antigenic tumor marker that is commonly expressed by the epithelial ovarian neoplasms and other tissues, such as cells lining the endometrium, fallopian tubes, pleura, peritoneum, and pericardium.

CA 125 is one of the serological tests carried out when suspecting ovarian neoplasm in a woman and is used in monitoring patients diagnosed with epithelial ovarian cancers.

# Etiology and Epidemiology

The human cancer antigen 125 (CA 125), also known as mucin 16 (MUC16), is a cell-surface, glycoprotein antigen normally expressed in tissues derived from coelomic epithelia, such as ovary, fallopian tube, peritoneum, pleura, pericardium, colon, kidney, and stomach.

In a study carried out by Bast et al. in 1983, elevated levels of serum CA 125 (> 35 U/mL) were present in 82% of patients with epithelial ovarian cancer, 28.5% of patients with non-gynecological cancers such as pancreatic, lung, breast, colorectal, and 6 % of the patients with benign diseases such as an ovarian cyst.

# Pathophysiology

The inherent function of CA 125 membrane protein is still not completely clear. The latest studies suspect that the oligosaccharides associated with CA 125 might play a role in cell-mediated immunity.

In the case of ovaries, it appears that CA 125 expresses when the ovarian epithelium undergoes metaplasia into a Mullerian-type endothelium or a neoplastic transformation.

# Specimen Requirements and Procedure

Cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) is detectable either through serological-based tests or tissue-based studies of malignant ovarian or endometrial tissue specimens.

When the CA 125 assay is used for cancer diagnosis, sampling should not be done immediately before or during menstruation because the physiological elevation of the CA 125 levels may give false positive results.

# Diagnostic Tests

Two tests exist for detecting the levels of CA 125. The original test is a radioimmunoassay using OC 125 monoclonal antibody, which recognizes the antigenic determinants on the CA 125 glycoprotein. The second-generation CA 125 test uses two antibodies; OC 125 and M 11.

These tests are made available by different commercial manufacturers in different versions, such as immunoradiometric assay (IRMA)and enzyme immunoassay (EIA), etc. When using these tests to monitor patients longitudinally, the tests conducted should preferably be of the same manufacturer, and the same version as different kits and versions can result in different absolute values and test sensitivity.

# Testing Procedures

The original CA 125 test is a homologous double-determinant assay wherein the capture and tracer antibodies are the same. The OC 125 antibody would be adsorbed onto the solid phase (capture antibody), followed by the addition of the serum. The OC 125 moieties on the CA 125 antigen would then bind to the antibody. Finally, a second radiolabelled (IRMA) or an enzyme-labeled (EIA) antibody would be added (tracer antibody), which would bind to the antigen-antibody complexes.

# Interfering Factors

The original CA 125 assay involves using murine monoclonal OC 125 antibody as both the capture and the tracer antibody. While it is supposed to bind to the corresponding epitope on the CA 125 antigen, certain individuals demonstrate the presence of the human anti-mouse antibody or human anti-murine antibody (HAMA).

Pre-analytical errors while testing for tumor markers such as CA 125 are related to simple specimen-related errors such as incorrect sample processing, an insufficient sample, and inappropriate handling. In the case of CA 125, care must be taken to time the specimen appropriately.

Human anti-murine antibodies are known to interfere with the test, and adding non-immune murine serum can neutralize this interference.

# Results, Reporting, and Critical Findings

In the original CA 125  immunoradiometric assay (IRMA) test, the cut-off point for the upper limit of normal was arbitrarily set at 35 U/mL, wherein only 1 % of the healthy population had levels greater than 35 U/mL, and this reduced to 0.2 % of the healthy population when raising the cut-off point for the upper limit to 65 U/mL.

Patients who have completed treatment for ovarian cancer and appear to be clinically free of the tumor with elevations in CA 125 (>35 U/mL) almost always have a tumor in second-look surgery.

Other studies among postmenopausal women have shown the test to have a sensitivity between 69 to 87% and a specificity between 81 to 93%. In contrast, in premenopausal women, the sensitivity was between 50 to 74%, and the specificity was between 69 to 78%.

# Clinical Significance

CA 125 plays a significant role as a tumor marker. It is an essential component in the pre-operative assessment of patients with an adnexal mass suspected to have an ovarian malignancy.

Current guidelines suggest using formal risk assessment tests such as the risk of malignancy index or the risk of ovarian malignancy algorithm (ROMA) while assessing the need for gynecological referral in premenopausal women.

CA 125 levels also indicate the tumor status, wherein most patients with levels > 35 U/mL demonstrate disease recurrence on second-look surgery, and those with levels < 35 U/mL have minimal residual disease among half of the patients.

CA 125 may also have a role in monitoring chemotherapy. Serial measurements of CA 125 correlated with clinical disease outcomes in 89% of 531 patients.

Pre- and post-operative CA 125 concentrations may be of prognostic significance.

# Quality Control and Lab Safety

For non-waived tests, laboratory regulations require, at the minimum, analysis of at least two levels of control materials once every 24 hours. If necessary, laboratories can assay QC samples more frequently to ensure accurate results. Quality control samples should be assayed after calibration or maintenance of an analyzer to verify the correct method performance.

The laboratory must participate in the external quality control or proficiency testing (PT) program because it is a regulatory requirement published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) regulations. It is helpful to ensure the accuracy and reliability of the laboratory concerning other laboratories performing the same or comparable assays.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

CA 125 has found great importance as a tumor marker to evaluate patients with suspected ovarian cancer and monitor the disease. It is an important criterion per the guidelines for referring patients with an adnexal mass suspicious of malignancy to a gynecological oncologist. While it has a higher specificity when used amongst postmenopausal women, very high levels amongst premenopausal women indicate referral. It has also been seen that patient outcomes have been better upon being treated by a specialized gynecological oncologist and when done in a hospital with necessary consult services with multidisciplinary collaboration.

Interprofessional team care involves different disciplines, such as primary care physicians, gynecological oncologists, nurses, and pathologists. Each of them has an essential role in providing care for individuals with suspected ovarian cancer or monitoring the disease process in these patients and thus influencing their management. Clinicopathologic meetings involving a meeting between pathologists and clinicians are a suggested approach as a form of interprofessional care. It has been shown to improve the accuracy of the diagnosis, achieve accurate staging and grading of the disease, and thus improve the management of the patient. In addition to improving patient care, it provides a learning opportunity for the team members.

Nurses involved in the care of a patient with ovarian cancer have a unique position to provide information and education to the patient and her family about the disease. They may be able to identify patients needing psychological support and counseling and thus can help improve the quality of life for their patients by coordinating referrals with nutritionists, physiotherapists, and psychologists.