The goal of treatment is to induce remission for either UC or CD. Treatment of IBD is divided into the management of mild, moderate, and severe disease. Agents formerly reserved for the more severe disease are now employed sooner. UC treatment depends greatly on the extent of the disease and the presence of extraintestinal manifestations. For those with mild to moderate disease limited to the rectum, aminosalicylate agents like mesalamine are the mainstays. Mesalamine is administered rectally but may be combined with oral therapy to induce or maintain remission. For those patients with the moderate disease who are refractory to mescaline, oral glucocorticoids or immunomodulators such as TNF-alpha monoclonal antibodies (infliximab) may be an option. Up to 25% of all UC patients will require total colectomy for the uncontrolled disease. Proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA) is the procedure of choice for elective cases.

Flareups are usually managed with corticosteroid therapy. For those who have more than 1-2 flareups a year, the use of anti-TNF agents or other immunosuppressive is recommended.

CD treatment depends on the portion of the GI tract involved, the degree of fistulizing or stricturing, and any extraintestinal complications. Treatment of mild ileocecal disease is usually begun with mesalamine, which can be further augmented with the use of oral budesonide, a steroid with significant first-pass metabolization to limit systemic side effects. For more extensive disease, systemic steroid therapy with prednisone is necessary. The goal is to wean these steroids within six weeks. In those patients who cannot wean, an immunomodulating agent like 6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine, or low-dose methotrexate is added. In those patients with moderate to severe disease, anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) should be initiated. Before initiating biologic therapy, patients must complete a purified protein derivative (PPD) test to assess for latent tuberculosis. Surgical treatment may be necessary for those with severe fistulizing disease including diverting ostomy.

It is vital to assess the bone density in patients who are administered steroids; osteoporosis has significant morbidity in these patients. If steroid use for more than three months is expected, then calcium supplements and bisphosphonates should be introduced.

**Stepwise Therapy**

A stepwise approach that is used for IBD management is outlined below.

The first step in pharmacologic therapy for IBD is aminosalicylates. If the patient does not respond to an appropriate dose of aminosalicylates, the second step is the addition of corticosteroids, which tend to result in a significant decrease in inflammation. Once the response is seen, the dose can be tapered.

The immune-modifying agents (e.g Anti-TNF agents) are the step three drugs. These are used when the patient does not respond to corticosteroids, steroids are required for prolonged periods, or the steroids cannot be tapered down without recurrence of symptoms.

Lately, a step-down approach is being favored more for patients with high-risk or severe disease. This includes the early introduction of higher step medications such as anti-TNF agents with rapid de-escalation when the response is seen. Step down approach improves patient outcomes and prevents complications in patients with high-risk or severe disease.Step four includes clinical trial agents that tend to be disease-specific i.e., some work only for ulcerative colitis and others for Crohn disease. Examples of these experimental agents include thalidomide and interleukin (IL)-11 for Crohn disease, butyrate enema, nicotine patch, and heparin for ulcerative colitis. Multiple contraindications and serious side effects are associated with these experimental agents.