Medial collateral ligament tears are frequently seen in professional baseball players due to the extreme amount of torque placed on the elbow joint by pitchers.  "Tommy John surgery" has become the more recognizable name for the surgery performed to repair the medial (ulnar) ligament.  Surgery success is high and the return to play is approximately 90%.

Medial epicondylitis (golfer’s elbow) is very common especially in an aging population and is caused by repetitive flexion and valgus force on the elbow joint.  Typically, these are treated conservatively using NSAIDs, ice, and steroid injections. However, treatment-refractory epicondylitis may be treated arthroscopically and has been shown to reduce pain in an affected individual. The surgery consists of debridement of the common flexor tendon insertion at the medial epicondyle, thus relieving stress on the medial epicondyle.

Distal biceps tendon ruptures account for about 10% of all biceps ruptures and occur after a sudden extension force applied to a flexed arm.  The majority of these injuries are complete ruptures where the tendon of insertion avulses from the radial tuberosity.  Tears of the bicipital aponeurosis may or may not occur in these cases. Operative treatment where the tendon is reinserted onto the radial tuberosity is generally preferred unless the patient is elderly in which case management is non-surgical. The clinical outcome of such surgeries is usually very positive.

Osteochondritis dissecans of the elbow is an avascular necrosis of the articular cartilage as well as the subchondral bone in the capitellum.  It predominately occurs in young athletes and can be treated using debridement, drilling, micro-fracturing, and fragment fixation procedures when conservative measures fail.

There are many other surgical considerations for the elbow joint including those related to osseous and other ligamentous injuries that may occur with dislocation and blunt trauma injuries.  Other minor procedures are also seen in cases of bursitis or other inflammatory conditions.