Methylprednisolone and its derivatives, methylprednisolone acetate succinate, and methylprednisolone sodium, are intermediate-acting, synthetic glucocorticoids. They are used mainly as anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive agents. Methylprednisolone is five times more potent in its anti-inflammatory properties relative to hydrocortisone (cortisol), with minimal mineralocorticoid activities compared to the latter.

Methylprednisolone diffuses passively across the cellular membrane and binds to the intracellular glucocorticoid receptor. This complex translocates into the nucleus, where it interacts with specific DNA sequences, resulting in either enhancement or suppression of transcription of particular genes. The methylprednisolone-glucocorticoid receptor complex binds and blocks promoter sites of proinflammatory genes,

Like the rest of the corticosteroids, methylprednisolone also suppresses the synthesis of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, responsible for the production of prostaglandins in damaged tissue leading to the inflammation cascade.

By reversing capillary permeability, suppressing the migration of fibroblasts and polymorphonuclear leukocytes, controlling the rate of protein synthesis, and stabilizing lysosomes at the cellular level, methylprednisolone may control or prevent inflammation through these actions as well.

Methylprednisolone inhibits cell-mediated immunologic functions, especially those dependent on lymphocytes. Glucocorticoid administration results in neutrophilic leukocytosis, smaller elevations in monocytes, dramatic reductions in circulating eosinophils, and lesser reductions in lymphocytes. The use of methylprednisolone and other glucocorticoids results in a reduced ability of leukocytes to adhere to vascular endothelium and exit from the circulation. Glucocorticoids impair a variety of T cell functions, and moderate-to-high doses induce T cell apoptosis while keeping B cell function and antibody production preserved.

Tissue-specific responses to steroids can occur by the presence in each tissue of specific protein regulators controlling the interaction between the hormone-receptor complex and particular DNA response elements. This activity leads to a wide array of gene expression and physiological responses by corticosteroids.

Some of the most important effects of methylprednisolone and the rest of the corticosteroids are the result of homeostatic responses by insulin and glucagon. Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis, which results in elevated blood glucose, catabolism of muscle protein, and stimulation of insulin secretion. Both lipolysis and lipogenesis become stimulated, with a net increase of fat deposition in certain areas (e.g., face, shoulders, and back).

Methylprednisolone and the rest of the glucocorticoids cause muscle protein catabolism. Also, lymphoid and connective tissue, fat, and skin undergo wasting under the influence of high concentrations of these steroids. Catabolic effects on the bone can lead to osteoporosis. In children, growth inhibition takes place.