Os peroneum is identified radiographically as an oval or round well-corticated accessory ossicle adjacent to the cuboid, near the calcaneocuboid joint, and is best seen on oblique views of the foot.

Distinguishing between a bipartite or multipartite os peroneum and a fracture can be difficult on radiographs, specifically in the absence of a prior comparison study. Since the os peroneum is commonly bilateral, radiographs of the contralateral foot can sometimes be enlightening. In challenging cases, CT can provide a more detailed evaluation of osseous margins allowing for the distinction between a non-displaced fracture versus a bipartite or multipartite os peroneum.

On ultrasound, the os peroneum, if present, may be seen as a hyperechoic structure with posterior shadowing, with only its outer cortex visible; it is best evaluated by following the peroneus longus tendon distal to the peroneal tubercle of the calcaneus.

Magnetic resonance imaging of the os peroneus will demonstrate marrow characteristics similar to the cuboid, with a hyperintense signal on T1-weighted and a hypointense signal on T2-weighted fat-suppressed sequences.

A classification scheme has been developed to describe peroneus longus tendon injuries and helps describe/explain the radiographic appearance of the os peroneum. The tears have been divided into three subtypes: proximal to the os peroneum (type 1), at the level of the os peroneum (type 2), or distal to the os peroneum (type 3). Isolated tears of the peroneus longus tendon proximal to the os peroneum generally present as an os peroneum with normal morphology and position. Type 2 tears occurring at the os peroneum are normally associated with fractures or distraction of bi- or multipartite fragments. Distraction of the os peroneum fragments greater than 6 mm is highly suspicious for complete disruption of the peroneus longus tendon. If comparison radiographs are available, the new or increasing distraction of the fragments is concerning for tendon injury (partial or complete depending on the extent of distraction). When the tendon injury is distal to the os peroneum, it can be displaced proximally. The ossicle is rarely displaced proximally to the peroneus tubercle (< 2 cm) along the lateral margin of the calcaneus unless there is a strong contraction force of the tendon. It should be noted that in the acute setting, the os peroneum may not be displaced or only minimally displaced; however, short interval follow-up may show new or increasing displacement as the torn tendon continues to retract.