The etiologies of the various dental emergencies differ depending on the diagnosis, but general themes can be observed within each category.

**Traumatic Dental Emergencies**

Traumatic dental emergencies are all sustained by the direct or indirect impact on the dentition or surrounding structures.

Whether the inciting trauma will result in a tooth fracture, luxation, or avulsion depends on multiple factors, including the location of the tooth in the dental arch, the force and direction of the impact, the structure of the impacting object, and the integrity of the tooth and its surrounding structures.

It takes a significant amount of force to avulse a tooth; thus, additional injuries to the surrounding alveolar bony structures and the entire head and neck should be considered in patients with avulsed teeth.

**Infectious Dental Emergencies**

Dental caries are the basis for the majority of dental infections. While dental caries themselves are not life-threatening, their presence can predispose patients to infections of the oral cavity. Other causes of dental infections include trauma or operative manipulation such as root canal treatment and third molar extractions.

Infections of dental origin prompt patients to seek emergency treatment mainly due to severe pain or swelling. These include irreversible pulpitis, pulp necrosis, periodontitis, and apical and periodontal abscesses. While periodontal disease does not normally induce pain, a severe necrotizing form of the disease exists, which is characterized by an aggressive infection with extreme gingival pain.

The progression of dental infections can lead to deep space infections of the head and neck and osteomyelitis of the facial bones. In one study, dental infections were the most common cause of almost 50% of deep neck abscesses.

**Post-procedural Dental Emergencies**

**Post-procedural Bleeding**

Hemostasis may be disrupted by multiple mechanisms, which can be organized into local and systemic etiologies. Hemostasis can be disrupted locally when the blood clot fails to form or is lost at the site of vessel injury. This depends on intrinsic factors, including the surgical location (whether the site is easily accessible) and wound size, with smaller lesions responding better to local treatment. Extrinsic factors, including accidental disruption of the clot through persistent spitting or rinsing, as well as constant suctioning, can also affect local hemostasis.

A systemic disruption of the hemostasis is seen in congenital and acquired coagulopathies. Congenital coagulopathies are rare, but the most commonly encountered are hemophilia A, hemophilia B, and Von Willebrand Disease, which inhibit stable clot formation.

**Alveolar Osteitis**

While the etiology of alveolar osteitis is not fully understood, many hypotheses have been studied to determine why clot formation at the extraction site either doesn’t develop or prematurely breaks down. The etiology is likely multifactorial as many studies have found both physiologic and non-physiologic mediators which promote premature clot lysis. Although poorly understood, cytokines (specifically IL-6), biomarkers, local intraoral bacteria, and poor oral hygiene have all been implicated as potential culprits in the pathogenesis of this disease.