The diagnosis of Freiberg disease can be confirmed following the clinical exam with radiographs. On weight-bearing foot radiographs, there may be subtle changes early in the disease presentation, characterized by joint space widening due to effusion, that may be present for 3 to 6 weeks following the onset of symptoms. As the disease process progresses, there is increased bone density at the subchondral region and flattening of the metatarsal head. Oblique radiographs assist in the evaluation of the dorsal aspect of the metatarsal head, allowing for a full evaluation in the identification of flattening of the metatarsal head in subtle cases. As the disease progresses, later findings include central joint depression, loose bodies, and sclerosis of the metatarsal head. There may be reactive thickening of the metatarsal shaft as a late response due to abnormal stress. The final stages of this disease include joint space narrowing and arthrosis.

Although classically described inter-operatively through observed structural changes to the metatarsal head by Smillie,

- Stage 1: A fissure fracture in the ischemic epiphysis. The cancellous bone at the fracture appears sclerotic. Compared with the adjacent metaphysis, the epiphysis shows the absence of blood supply.

- Stage 2: Absorption of cancellous bone occurs proximally. The central cartilage sinks into the head while the margins and plantar cartilage remain intact. This process results in an altered contour of the articular surface.

- Stage 3: Further absorption occurs, and the central portion sinks deeper, creating larger projections on either side. The plantar cartilage remains intact.

- Stage 4: The central portion continues to sink such that the plantar hinge gives way. The peripheral projections fracture and fold over the central portion. Restoration of the anatomy is no longer possible.

- Stage 5: The final stage showing arthrosis with flattening and deformity of the metatarsal head. Only the plantar portion of the metatarsal cartilage retains the original contour of the head. Loose bodies have reduced in size, and the shaft of the metatarsal is thickened and dense.

MRI can also be used in the evaluation of these patients and may assist in the early detection of Freiberg disease when radiographs are normal. The MRI will reflect changes in the marrow signal with an edema-like signal localized to the affected metatarsal head. As the process progresses, changes similar to osteonecrosis seen in other parts of the body will occur. These changes include a hypointense signal on T1-weighted images and mixed hypointense and hyperintense signals on T2-weighted images with flattening of the affected metatarsal head, best appreciated on the sagittal images.

Nuclear medicine bone scans can also be used in the evaluation of these patients in the setting of early presentation or if there are no appreciable changes on radiographs. Early changes on bone scan include a photopenic area surrounded by increased radiotracer uptake, the typical pattern for early avascular necrosis. In later stages, these will be diffuse hyperactivity secondary to revascularization, osseous repair, and progression to arthritic involvement of the MTP joint.