Homonymous hemianopsia is a field loss deficit in the same halves of the visual field of each eye. These patients may also exhibit non-specific signs and symptoms such as nausea, coordination difficulty, vertigo, and dyslexia. The cause of homonymous hemianopsia is often due to a myriad of diagnoses, including metabolic, neurologic, immunologic, traumatic, infectious, and vascular etiologies. While the physical exam may reveal that the patient has a visual field deficit, the cause is difficult to know without proper imaging studies.

While the primary care or emergency physician is almost always involved in the care of patients with a visual field deficit, it is important to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that often include an ophthalmologist, neurologist, neurosurgeon, radiologist, or interventional radiologist. The nurses are also vital members of the interprofessional group as they will monitor the patient's vital signs and assist with educating the patient and their family. If the causal lesion is classified as surgical in nature, the patient may undergo an operation as part of the treatment plan. In the postoperative period for pain, wound infection, and ileus, the pharmacist will ensure that the patient is on the right analgesics, antiemetics, and appropriate antibiotics.

The radiologist also plays a vital role in determining the cause. Although homonymous hemianopsia is most commonly secondary to cerebrovascular injury, trauma, or tumors, the specific location of the causal lesion can be difficult to glean from the visual field loss alone. With that said, to best improve outcomes, prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of specialists is recommended.