Ulcerative colitis most commonly presents as bloody diarrhea with or without mucus. Patients commonly describe tenesmus, a sensation of incomplete evacuation, and abdominal pain. The physical exam may reveal predominantly left lower or left upper quadrant abdominal pain. Signs of an acute abdomen including guarding, rebound tenderness, or percussion tenderness warrant investigation for toxic megacolon.

Presentations of Crohn disease vary considerably depending on the region of gastrointestinal involvement. Manifestations vary based on the underlying etiology of inflammation, fistula formation, or stricture formation. The symptom complex of right lower quadrant pain, weight loss, and non-bloody diarrhea are suggestive of Crohn disease flare-up. Fistula formation may result in fecaluria, pneumaturia, and rectovaginal fistulas. Masses in the right lower quadrant suggest an abscess.

Affected children may present with growth retardation and delay in sexual maturation.

**The World Gastroenterology Organization Based Symptoms for IBD**

- Diarrhea may be associated with blood or mucus; diarrhea may also occur at night and fecal incontinence is not uncommon

- Some patients with ulcerative colitis may present with constipation when the disease is localized to the rectum

- Abdominal pain, tenesmus, and severe urgency are also common presentations

- Crohn disease can present with right lower quadrant pain and ulcerative colitis may present with left lower quadrant pain

- Nausea and vomiting are more common in Crohn disease

**Physical Exam**

- Tachycardia, anxiety, fever, and dehydration are common.

- Depending on the anemia, pallor may be noted.

- Toxic megacolon may present with severe pain, fever, abdominal distension, chills, and lethargy. This surgical emergency should always be in consideration as it is fatal if missed.

- In Crohn disease, one may note anal fistulas, abscesses, or even rectal prolapse.

- Occult blood on a digital rectal exam is common.

- In children, one may only note growth retardation.