The subthalamic nucleus is a small lens-shaped structure located within the diencephalon near the junction with the midbrain. The subthalamic nucleus composes the majority of the subthalamus along with the subthalamic fasciculus, ansa lenticularis, and several other smaller structures. The subthalamic nucleus is located medially to the internal capsule, dorsally to the substantia nigra, and ventrally to the thalamus.

The primary function of the subthalamic nucleus is movement regulation along with the rest of the basal ganglia. The majority of the neurons arising from the subthalamic nucleus are excitatory glutaminergic neurons and project to the internal globus pallidus. The internal globus pallidus primarily contains inhibitory GABAergic neurons that project to the thalamus. The thalamus then sends excitatory outputs to the cortex. The subthalamic nucleus receives input from the external globus pallidus, which contains mostly inhibitory GABAergic neurons. The subthalamic nucleus plays an essential role in the indirect pathway of the basal ganglia by preventing unwanted movements by increasing its glutaminergic output to the internal globus pallidus. The stimulation of the GABAergic neurons of the internal globus pallidus result in decreased excitation of the thalamus and decreased movement.

The medial portion of the subthalamic nucleus also contains limbic connections with the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area. Chronic deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in patients with Parkinson’s Disease can result in limbic system-related symptoms due to these connections.