# Continuing Education Activity

Anticoagulation is a class of medications used in the management and prevention of stroke. This activity outlines the role, indications, action, and contraindications for using anticoagulation in acute ischemic stroke. This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, indications, contraindications, and the interprofessional team's role in managing patients with acute ischemic stroke.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the indications for anticoagulation in acute ischemic stroke.
- Describe the anatomy of acute ischemic stroke.
- Review appropriate evaluation of the potential complications and clinical significance of stroke anticoagulation.
- Summarize interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance stroke anticoagulation and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Stroke is one of the leading causes of death and long-term disability worldwide.

Various etiologies lead to ischemic stroke, including both modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors. Non-modifiable risks include age, sex, and race/ethnicity.

Stroke rule out should be completed in patients presenting with altered consciousness or sudden, focal, or global neurological deficits. Time is of the essence in completing a thorough history and physical in patients presenting with stroke-like symptoms. Upon presentation, one of the most crucial steps is identifying the time of ischemic stroke symptoms onset, as that helps determine eligibility for antithrombotic treatment or endovascular intervention. Physical examination goals are to determine stroke location, distinguish stroke mimics, complete neurological deficit assessment, and identify comorbidities and conditions that can affect treatment. A clinician should complete a neurological assessment and baseline function calculated via the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS). The history and physical examination should be used to rule out other mimics of stroke, including hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, seizures, syncope, migraines, or drug toxicity, etc. A focused history should identify ischemic stroke risk factors discussed earlier in this article and identify any recent trauma, coagulopathies, oral contraceptives, illicit drug use such as cocaine, and migraines.

The following merit consideration when starting therapy: non-contrast brain CT or MRI, blood glucose, and oxygen saturation. Further, all patients should also have baseline labs that include: complete blood count with platelet count, serum electrolytes/renal function, cardiac panel, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin time/international normalized ratio (INR), and electrocardiogram (ECG); although it is desirable to know the results of the preceding labs, therapy should not be delayed while results are pending, the exception being if there is suspicion for thrombocytopenia or bleeding abnormalities, and use of heparin or warfarin or other anticoagulants. In patients with suspected stroke, an emergent non-contrast computed tomography (CT) is generally the first step in the diagnostic study to rule out any bleeding. The results of the CT will also help determine if the patient is a candidate for antithrombotic therapy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) testing may also be used to identify intracerebral hemorrhaging and is more sensitive than CT for early detection of brain infarction. The essential lab before initiation of therapy is blood glucose, as hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia can mimic stroke.

The clinicians should also perform a vitals assessment focusing on respiration, temperature, and blood pressure upon presentation. Elevation in blood pressure could indicate the body’s response to maintain brain perfusion to the occluded section. Patients with hypoventilation can result in an increase in carbon dioxide partial pressure, which can further cause cerebral vasodilation and elevation in intracranial pressure (ICP), at which point there should be an assessment of the need for intubation. Finally, normothermia is important for the first few days post-acute stroke, as fever can worsen ischemia.

There are significant updates to literature that have come to the surface for effective and appropriate management of patients with ischemic stroke. The American Heart Association/American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) has published guidelines, most recent being in 2018, outlining optimal treatment for the early management of patients with ischemic stroke. Ischemic stroke intervention includes the use of thrombolytic, anticoagulants, antiplatelet, statins, antihypertensive, and blood glucose management.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Acute ischemic stroke (AIS) is the result of the sudden loss of cerebral blood flow. Usually, there is cerebral artery thrombotic or embolic occlusion that corresponds with a loss of neurologic function. In general, ischemia leads to hypoxia and a decrease in cellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which results in a lack of energy to maintain an ionic concentration gradient across the cellular membrane. Inhibition of the ion pump leads to cellular depolarization and influx of sodium and calcium ions and H2O into cells, leading to cytotoxic edema. The exact pathophysiology of ischemic stroke depends on the etiologic process. The differing etiologic subtypes that can lead to stroke include lacunar, cardioembolic, atherosclerotic, dissections, vasculitis, specific genetic disorders, idiopathic, etc.

The histopathological consequences of ischemic stroke can lead to deficits in cognitive and motor function—severe focal ischemia results in structural changes in both gray and white brain matter. Furthermore, changes develop in inflammatory, neuronal, vascular endothelial, and astrocytic cells. In white matter regions, axonal damage occurs with oligodendrocyte injury and subsequent demyelination. If the ischemic attack is less severe, there may be a selective neuronal injury to weak neuronal populations without damage to neighboring cells.

# Indications

Restoring blood flow in a timely fashion is the most effective intervention to salvage ischemic brain tissue. The use of intravenous (IV) thrombolytic to restore blood flow using recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator or rt-PA, also known as alteplase, is well established in the literature through major clinical trials and has remained unchanged in recent years. Patients treated with IV alteplase within 3 to 4.5-hours from stroke onset generally see significant improvement. The decision to administer alteplase is based on certain inclusion and exclusion criteria. Trials have recommended the expansion of treatment with IV alteplase to patients with mild but disabling stroke.

The current AHA/ASA 2018 guidelines provide a grade-A recommendation against the use of anticoagulation in AIS, regardless of the extent of stenosis.

The guidelines also recommend further clinical trials and suggest a lack of well-established data for the use of direct thrombin inhibitors and factor Xa inhibitors, including argatroban, dabigatran, etc., as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy to alteplase in AIS.

Furthermore, the use of prophylaxis anticoagulation, such as unfractionated heparin (UFH) or LMWH, in immobile patients with AIS is also controversial. Meta-analysis data suggests that prophylactic doses of anticoagulation did not significantly affect functional status or mortality. Although there were statistically significant reductions in symptomatic pulmonary embolisms (OR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.49–0.98) and deep vein thrombosis (DVTs) (OR, 0.21; 95% CI, 0.15–0.29), there was a significant increase in symptomatic intracranial (OR, 1.68; 95% CI, 1.11–2.55) and extracranial (OR, 1.65; 95% CI, 1.0–2.75) hemorrhage. There was a suggestion that if patients are at increased risk of VTE, it may be more beneficial to treat prophylactically, specifically with LMWH once daily vs. UFH. However, there has yet to be the identification of such subgroups.

Although the use of anticoagulation is controversial in AIS, the use of oral anticoagulation (OAC) is currently strongly recommended as first-line therapy for the prevention of primary and secondary strokes in patients with atrial fibrillation. Patients with atrial fibrillation with moderate to high risk of thromboembolic events may benefit from long-term anticoagulation. Most studies have shown that using direct thrombin and factor Xa inhibitors, such as apixaban and rivaroxaban, may have less risk of intracranial hemorrhage than patients on warfarin. The risk versus benefit for assessing anticoagulation for patients with atrial fibrillation can be calculated using validated calculations, such as CHA2DS2-VASc for stroke risk and HAS-BLED for bleeding risk. Although these tools do not have high predictive ability, they can still help establish an individualized clinical plan considering risks versus benefits. The recommendation is to initiate OAC if the CHA2DS2-VASc stratification score is greater than or equal to 2.

The appropriate time to initiate or reinitiate anticoagulation in a patient that received IV alteplase for AIS is individualized based on risk factors. The guidelines agree that this area remains controversial, and the risk of conversion to intracranial hemorrhage within 24-hours post tPA therapy remains unclear.

# Contraindications

The use of anticoagulation for the prevention of stroke is a risk-vs-benefit assessment. Patients initiated on anticoagulation should not be bridged with unfractionated heparin or LMWH, as there is an increased risk of hemorrhagic transformation and ischemic recurrence. Furthermore, for patients with severe stroke (NIHSS score over 8), a longer delay in initiation of anticoagulation may be reasonable.

Patients at increased risk of bleed, where risk is greater than benefit, should most likely avoid anticoagulation. There are unresolved questions, yet anticoagulation is unsuitable in patients who have severely impaired renal function, severely impaired liver function, and severe and symptomatic hemorrhagic transformation, such as parenchymal hematoma.

# Complications

The most obvious complication associated with ischemic stroke is conversion to hemorrhagic stroke, especially with the use of anticoagulation.

# Clinical Significance

Anticoagulation decreases the risk of ischemic stroke or other embolic events by over two-thirds, regardless of baseline.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Managing AIS with an interprofessional healthcare team is essential to provide safe and optimal care to patients. These patients should have a careful ongoing clinical assessment, including frequent neurological examinations. The AHA/ASA 2018 guidelines recommend designating an acute stroke team consisting of physicians, nurses, laboratory/radiology personnel, and others such as a pharmacist. (Class I, Level B-non-randomized) The pharmacist will play a significant role in helping the clinicians select the appropriate agent, verifying dosing and the absence of drug interactions, and counseling patients about anticoagulation. They can also help develop proper pharmacotherapeutic regimens, monitor medications, order appropriate labs, and perform dose adjustments, including thrombolytic, antiplatelets, and anticoagulants. Cardiovascular specialized nursing will administer these agents, and they should have open and active communication with both pharmacy staff as well as the clinicians/specialists managing the case. Finally, discussion with other healthcare providers, including neurology specialists, will optimize both acute and chronic management.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Nurses play a role in educating patients and their families about stroke burden and secondary-prevention, including lifestyle changes and medications. The nurses assist in early intervention emergency department triage, including ensuring medical stability for airway, breathing, and circulation. Nurses are needed at the bedside while antithrombotic therapy is infusing for close monitoring of therapy. Furthermore, nurses can intervene in interrupting therapy should the patient develop signs/symptoms of bleeding or changes in mental status. Nurses can encourage and recommend treatment for blood pressure, fever, and blood glucose.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Protocols are available for the initiation of antithrombotic and anticoagulation. If antithrombotic therapy is initiated, nurses will monitor vitals at least every 15 minutes and provide neurological assessments hourly. Nurses may also play a role in short-term and long-term monitoring, especially in closely identifying signs/symptoms of bleeding. Nurses can also follow-up with patients post-hospital discharge. All patients should have baseline labs collected before the initiation of anticoagulation. For warfarin monitoring, baseline INR is measured, as well as liver function tests and renal function. For other OAC monitoring, baseline complete blood count, liver function tests, prothrombin time, aPTT, renal function is appropriate to measure and follow-up annually and when clinically indicated.