To the present moment, there are some options for pharmacotherapy for obesity; however, they are far from being a solution to the problem despite having shown satisfactory results in the improvement of cardiometabolic parameters. Some of them have unacceptable side effects, and it is impossible to predict which person is going to have a better response or who is going to tolerate well.

Some anti-obesity drugs have been withdrawn from the market due to significant side effects. Currently, the only approved drugs in the US are orlistat, liraglutide, phentermine-topiramate, phentermine alone, and bupropion-naloxone. Sibutramine was withdrawn more than ten years ago, and lorcaserin was removed more recently due to an increased risk of various types of cancer.

The currently approved medications lack long-term safety studies.

In view of all these negative aspects and considering the significant adverse effects, limited efficacy, and warnings over the safety of medications, doctors need to endorse the fact that obesity is a chronic condition that requires life long monitoring, accompanied by a low-calorie diet, regular physical activity, and a multidisciplinary team that can provide behavioral counseling and close monitoring with a dietician, primary care provider, endocrinologist and sometimes, psychiatrist or therapist. Bariatric surgery should also merit consideration as an option in patients with refractory obesity who have tried other medical therapies or who have complications from obesity and who have been evaluated by a behavioral therapist who has ruled out binge eating disorder or other compulsive disorders.