Since the inception of liposuction, the cannulas used have encountered several evolutions. Once sharp and single holed, today's preferred cannulas are blunt with multiple holes placed near the tip. Blunt tip cannulas help lower the risk of inadvertent puncturing into the pleura, peritoneum, or deep spaces of the neck and help lower intraoperative blood loss as well.

The cannula functions to avulse adipose cells from the fibrous stroma separating the fat, which allows the fat to enter the suction system. Accordingly, a cannula with a larger diameter (and surface area) causes more stromal disruption and fatty avulsion; however, the larger diameter cannulas also cause more indirect trauma and blood loss than smaller diameter cannulas.

The choice of suction device for liposuction (manual syringe versus suction machine) depends on the amount of fat to be removed and its intended use. For instance, if the harvested fat is planned to be used for autologous fat grafting, one would generally avoid high-pressure suction devices to maximize the viability of the harvested fat. So too, consider using a manual syringe for liposuction if only a small portion of fat needs to be harvested (e.g., for facial fat grafting). The liposuction aspirate system is a delicate balance of physical forces, with the cannula demonstrating the highest point of resistance to flow in any negative pressure liposuction system.

One technique that owes its origins to liposuction is the use of a wetting solution (i.e., tumescent solution) that is composed of a diluted lidocaine and epinephrine mixture infiltrated subcutaneously prior to the actual liposuction being performed. The use of the tumescent solution, which is nearly ubiquitous in all liposuction procedures, should be administered using a 1 to 1 ratio of the wetting solution to projected lipoaspirate volume. For example, if 50 ccs of fat are planned to be harvested from the abdomen for autologous fat grafting, then 50 cc of the wetting solution should be administered before liposuction is performed.