Currently, nicotine, alcohol, and opioids are the only substances with FDA-approved medication treatments. Individuals with severe addiction may require assistance in a structured environment for the recovery process. The American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) provides a set of criteria for individualized treatment planning and placement of individuals with addiction. The ASAM criteria involve six dimensions: intoxication/withdrawal potential, medical condition and history, mental health, individual's willingness to change, relapse/continue use potential, and recovery/living situation.

To treat nicotine use disorder, bupropion, varenicline, and nicotine replacement therapy are available.

Bupropion is a dual reuptake inhibitor of dopamine and norepinephrine, which helps with nicotine cravings and withdrawal symptoms.

For stimulant use disorder, such as with cocaine and amphetamine drugs, there are no approved pharmacological treatments.

The FDA approves acamprosate, naltrexone, and disulfiram to treat alcohol use disorder.

For opioid use disorder, several treatment options are available. They include methadone, naltrexone, and buprenorphine, which are frequently combined with naloxone to reduce the risk of misuse. Methadone (full mu agonist) can only be used to treat opioid use disorder by specific treatment facilities designated as Opioid Treatment Programs (OTPs). Methadone has decades of research demonstrated reduced illegal drug use, criminal activity, mortality, and morbidity, buprenorphine-naloxone (partial agonist at the mu-opioid receptor). As a partial agonist, this agent has less potential for overdose.

**Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act**

The Mainstreaming Addiction Treatment (MAT) Act provision updates federal guidelines to expand the availability of evidence-based treatment to address the opioid epidemic. The MAT Act empowers all health care providers with a standard controlled substance license to p escribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder (OUD), just as they prescribe other essential medications. The MAT Act is intended to help destigmatize a standard of care for OUD and will integrate substance use disorder treatment across healthcare settings.

As of December 2022, the MAT Act has eliminated the DATA-Waiver (X-Waiver) program. All DEA-registered practitioners with Schedule III authority may now prescribe buprenorphine for OUD in their practice if permitted by applicable state law, and SAMHSA encourages them to do so. Prescribers who were registered as DATA-Waiver prescribers will receive a new DEA registration certificate reflecting this change; no action is needed on the part of registrants.

There are no longer any limits on the number of patients with OUD that a practitioner may treat with buprenorphine. Separate tracking of patients treated with buprenorphine or prescriptions written is no longer required.

Pharmacy staff can now fill buprenorphine prescriptions using the prescribing authority's DEA number and does not need a DATA 2000 waiver from the prescriber. However, depending on the pharmacy, the dispensing software may still require the X-Waiver information in order to proceed. Practitioners are still required to comply with any applicable state limits regarding the treatment of patients with OUD. Contact information for State Opioid Treatment Authorities can be found here: https://www.samhsa.gov/medicationassisted-treatment/sota.