The grid measures 10 cm × 10 cm. When used at 33 cm from the eye, the grid can check for changes in a 20° field. This field spans 10° on each side (above, below, and on the left and right side) of the fixation.

There are 7 charts of the Amsler Grid each with a dimension of 10 cm × 10 cm.

- Chart 1- The lines are white in a black background. There are 20 small squares in each side of the grid. Thus each side of the small squares measures 10cm/20= 5mm. Each small square cast an angle of 20°/20=1° field when the grid is held at 33 cm from the eye.

- Chart 2- Four diagonal white lines are placed over the chart 1 to help fixation in an eye with a central scotoma.

- Chart 3- It is similar to chart 1, except the fact that there are red (in place of white) lines over a black background. Red specifically stimulates the long wavelength cones. This chart is to pick up subtle red desaturation in diseases including bitemporal hemianopia in a pituitary tumor, toxic optic neuropathy, and toxic maculopathy.

- Chart 4- There is no line. Over a black background, there is a central large round white dot. In other spaces, there are multiple small random white dots. This chart is used to differentiate scotoma from metamorphopsia as there is no form appreciable for distortion.

- Chart 5- There is a square with 21 horizontal white lines on black background 5mm apart. A central white dot is present for fixation. It is used to determine any specific meridian of metamorphopsia specifically in patients with reading difficulties.

- Chart 6- This is a modification of chart 5. Of the 7 charts, only this chart has black lines on white background. The central lines are closer than the chart 5, helping to evaluate fine metamorphopsia near fixation.

- Chart 7- This is a modification of chart 1. There is a central area with smaller squares each one subtending 0.5° field. Small scotoma or area of metamorphopsia near the fixation can be demonstrated with this chart.