# Continuing Education Activity

Mirabegron is a medication used in the management of overactive bladder. It is in the sympathomimetic class of medications. It received approval from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in June 2012 for treating overactive bladder with symptoms of urge urinary incontinence, urgency, and urinary frequency. This activity reviews the indications, action, and contraindications for mirabegron as a valuable agent in the management of overactive bladder, including the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with overactive bladder and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the mechanism of action of mirabegron.
- Review the indications for initiating therapy with mirabegron.
- Outline the possible adverse effects associated with mirabegron.
- Explain the importance of improving care coordination among the interprofessional team to enhance care delivery for patients who can benefit from mirabegron therapy.

# Indications

The International Continence Society definition of overactive bladder (OAB) is "urinary urgency, usually accompanied by frequency, nocturia, with or without urge urinary incontinence."

The medications typically used in OAB are in the antimuscarinic class. However, their broad side-effect profile must be used cautiously, especially in patients with acute angle-closed glaucoma, older patients, and chronic constipation. Mirabegron, a beta-3 adrenoceptor agonist, has been shown to have high safety and efficacy profile by large random placebo-controlled clinical trials. Mirabegron is used to treat urgency, urge urinary incontinence, and increased urinary frequency found in the overactive bladder.

# Mechanism of Action

The human bladder expresses various sympathetic and parasympathetic receptors to help regulate micturition. Activation of the parasympathetic system will result in bladder contraction. Receptors positively affecting bladder contraction and micturition include the M2 and M3 receptor subtypes, which function via the parasympathetic nervous system.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: According to the manufacturer's product labeling, mirabegron reaches maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) at approximately 3.5 hours. Steady-state concentrations are achieved within seven days. In adults, there are no clinically significant differences in mirabegron pharmacokinetics when administered with or without food. However, in pediatric patients, fasted Cmax and AUC increased by 170% and 80%, respectively, compared to the fed state following the administration of mirabegron Granules.

Distribution: Mirabegron has an extensive distribution with the volume of distribution at steady-state (Vss) 1670 L. Mirabegron is bound (approximately 71%) to human plasma proteins, including albumin and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein. Mirabegron distributes to erythrocytes. Mirabegron volume of distribution is relatively higher in pediatric patients and is proportional to body weight.

Metabolism: Mirabegron is metabolized in the liver via multiple pathways involving dealkylation, oxidation, glucuronidation, and hydrolysis. Metabolites are not pharmacologically active. Studies have also shown the involvement of butyrylcholinesterase, and UGT in the metabolism of mirabegron, in addition to CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. In poor metabolizers of CYP2D6, mean Cmax and AUC are approximately 16% and 17% higher than in extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6.

Excretion: The mean elimination half-life (t1/2) of mirabegron is approximately 50 hours in adult patients and 26 to 31 hours in pediatric patients(mirabegron granules). Renal elimination of mirabegron is primarily through active tubular secretion and glomerular filtration. Approximately  55% is excreted in the urine, 34% in the feces, and ~25% in the urine(unchanged).

# Administration

Mirabegron is a once-daily orally administered drug.

In addition to monotherapy, combination therapy with low dose mirabegron (25 mg) and a low dose of solifenacin (5 mg), an anti-muscarinic, has been shown to significantly improve urinary urgency and urgency incontinence when compared to monotherapy. Three large double-blind, randomized controlled trials (SYMPHONY, BESIDE, and SYNERGY) have shown the safety and efficacy of combination therapy.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

For mild(Child-Pugh Class A  starting dose is 25 mg, and the maximum dose is 50 mg. For moderate hepatic impairment(Child-Pugh Class B). starting, and the maximum recommended dose is 25 mg. The use of mirabegron is not recommended for severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C)

**Patients with Renal Impairment**

- eGFR 30 to 89 mL/min/1.73 m^2 -  maximum dose is  50 mg once daily

- eGFR 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m^2 -  maximum dose is 25 mg once daily

- eGFR < 15 mL/min/1.73 m^2 or patient requiring dialysis- Use is not recommended

**Pregnancy Considerations**

In preclinical studies, decreased fetal weight and increased fetal mortality were observed, and, in rabbits, fetal cardiomegaly was observed. No studies have been conducted regarding the use of mirabegron in pregnant patients to inform a drug-associated risk of miscarriages, significant congenital disabilities, or adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. Use with caution.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

There is a lack of safety data regarding using mirabegron during breastfeeding. Hypothetically, mirabegron has moderately high protein binding and relatively low bioavailability, so exposure to the breastfed infant is likely to be low. If the mother requires mirabegron, discontinuing breastfeeding is not a reason. Still, until more data become available, an alternate drug may be preferred while nursing a newborn or preterm infant. Hence, the risk-benefit analysis should be considered while prescribing mirabegron to nursing mothers.

# Adverse Effects

Adverse drug reactions to mirabegron are generally mild and tolerable. One study showed that the adverse effects of mirabegron include hypertension (most commonly), nasopharyngitis, and urinary tract infection.

Mirabegron is generally considered a safe and effective drug. Mirabegron may also be more useful in the elderly population as the neurocognitive concerns of anti-muscarinic therapy may not be as much of a problem; however, this requires further investigation. According to the manufacturer's labeling, cases of angioedema have been reported, which can be life-threatening and require immediate drug discontinuation and prompt treatment. Mirabegron can increase blood pressure significantly, and its use is not recommended for use in patients with uncontrolled hypertension. In three years of post-marketing surveillance study, an increase in residual urine volume and urinary retention was recognized as a serious adverse drug reaction related to mirabegron therapy. The risk of urinary retention increases in patients with significant bladder outlet obstruction with simultaneous use of anti-muscarinic drugs to treat an overactive bladder. Other common ADRs reported were constipation and dysuria.

# Contraindications

Previous hypersensitivity reaction to mirabegron or any excipients of tablet or oral suspension is a contraindication to mirabegron use.****Mirabegron use correlates with hypertension, and its contraindication includes severe uncontrolled hypertension.

# Monitoring

It is recommended to monitor blood pressure at baseline and during follow-up visits. Monitor quality of life based on the overactive bladder questionnaire (OAB-q) to assess the response to therapy.

The liver’s CYP450 system predominantly metabolizes mirabegron. Monitoring and dose adjustment should occur with patients on other medications with a narrow therapeutic index and also undergo metabolism via CYP2D6.

# Toxicity

Mirabegron has been shown to have a very broad safety level in humans. Caution is advisable with drugs that exert effects on or are metabolized by the liver, as mirabegron is also hepatically metabolized. Though safe in humans, studies have shown toxicity in dogs in the form of tachycardia and erythema.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A study reviewed the interdisciplinary care of urinary incontinence between clinicians, nursing, physical therapy, and pharmacy. Advanced Practice Registered Nurses and physical therapists had a significant role in Long-term Care Facilities. “Prevention Focused Intervention: UI Based on the Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Model”  demonstrated that interdisciplinary team approaches are crucial to achieving better patient outcomes, as demonstrated by statistically significant reductions in urinary incontinence episodes.

According to one study, the rate of serious adverse effects of mirabegron was low and not directly related to the drug itself.