The tumor specimens will be tested for O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation (type 1 or type 2). The presence of methylation of the MGMT promoter predicts improved survival and benefit from chemotherapy with alkylating agents.

According to NCCN guidelines, patients with newly diagnosed MGMT-methylated glioblastoma, age 70 years or younger, should be treated with temozolomide and radiotherapy. Trails have shown increased overall survival at 2 and 5 years on continued follow up in a group who received radiotherapy with concurrent daily temozolomide followed by six monthly cycles of adjuvant temozolomide. Results are similar in patients with age >60 and poor prognostic factors.

Treatment is similar in MGMT-unmethylated glioblastoma, age 70 years or younger; however, these patients derive less benefit from temozolomide when compared to the methylated group. Standard therapy with temozolomide and radiotherapy is recommended if MGMT status is unknown due to benefit from temozolomide with tolerable side effect profile along with the lack of available alternatives for unmethylated tumors.

In patients with age 70 years or older with good performance status, temozolomide and radiotherapy are recommended, But a hypofractionated radiation course can be done rather than the standard course. Twelve cycles of adjuvant temozolomide are recommended with hypofractionated radiotherapy rather than six cycles in such patients ( I, A recommendation).

No strong evidence exists for alternatives to temozolomide for MGMT- unmethylated tumors, although trials have been conducted using a combination of bevacizumab/irinotecan in the past.

Temozolomide is given orally daily during radiation therapy. Adjuvant treatment starts four weeks after radiotherapy, and it is given for six cycles, daily for five days in a 28-day cycle. Side effects include leucopenia, thrombocytopenia, hepatotoxicity, nausea, constipation, fatigue, etc.  Regular CBC should be done, and therapy should be held if absolute neutrophil count (ANC) falls below 1500/microL or platelets fall below 100,000/microL.

Prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) should be given to all patients receiving concomitant chemoradiotherapy due to the high risk of CD4 T cell depletion by temozolomide.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast is recommended within one month after completing radiotherapy and then frequently every two months during adjuvant temozolomide to assess the disease status. Further recommendations, according to NCCN, includes MRI every two to four months for two to three years, and less frequently after that.

Treatment recommendation guidelines:

Class of recommendation: Class I A,  Age> 70- radiotherapy plus concomitant therapy with temozolomide followed by adjuvant temozolomide with six cycles.

Age< 65-70, hypofractionated radiotherapy plus concomitant therapy with temozolomide followed by adjuvant temozolomide with 12 cycles.

It also recommended considering age and performance status while making clinical decisions in GBM patients.