One of the unique glands in the human body is the pituitary gland. The gland is oval and weighs 500 mg. The dimension of the pituitary gland is about 12 mm transverse and 8 mm in anterior-posterior diameter.  The pituitary is located in the hypophysial fossa, in a bony depression of the sphenoid bone called the sella turcica. The sella turcica surrounds the inferior, anterior, and posterior aspects of the gland. Various structures surround the endocrine gland. The optic chiasma lies anteriorly, and the mammillary bodies lie posteriorly. Superior to the pituitary gland is the diaphragma sellae, inferior lies the sphenoidal air sinuses, and lateral is the cavernous sinuses. A fold of dura matter covers the pituitary and has an opening to allow for the infundibulum to pass through, allowing a connection to the hypothalamus.

The gland consists of two lobes:

- Adenohypophysis

- Neurohypophysis

This article focuses on the adenohypophysis. The anterior pituitary is composed of the following parts:

- Pars distalis: This is the portion in which the majority of the hormone production occurs. It is the distal part of the pituitary and forms the majority adenohypophysis.

- Pars tuberalis: this is a tubular sheath that extends from the pars distalis and winds around the pituitary stalk. Epithelial cells arranged in cords and hypophyseal portal vessels reside in this space.

- Pars intermedia: This is a section of tissue that resides between the posterior pituitary and pars distalis. This section of the adenohypophysis consists of pale cells that are large. These cells of the pars intermedia encompass follicles containing a colloidal matrix. The main hormone secreted by this portion of the adenohypophysis is MSH, otherwise known as the melanocyte-stimulating hormone.