The etiology of acute cholecystitis is, by definition, cystic duct blockage, which causes inflammation. Normally, bile is made in the liver and travels down the bile duct, and is stored in the gallbladder. After eating certain foods, especially spicy or greasy foods, the gallbladder is stimulated to empty the bile of the gallbladder, through the cystic duct, down the bile duct into the duodenum. This process aids in food digestion.

The gallbladder not only stores the bile, but it also can concentrate it. Concentrated bile is susceptible to precipitation forming stones when homeostasis is disrupted, which can occur due to bile stasis, supersaturation from the liver of cholesterol and lipids, disruption in the concentration process, and cholesterol crystal nucleation.

When cystic duct blockage is caused by a stone, it is called acute calculous cholecystitis. It is important to know, one can have pain due to temporary obstruction by gallstones, and that is called biliary colic. The diagnosis of biliary colic is upgraded to acute calculous cholecystitis if the pain does not resolve in six hours. If no stone is identified, it is called acute acalculous cholecystitis.

Regardless of the cause of the blockage, the gallbladder wall edema will eventually cause wall ischemia and become gangrenous. The gangrenous gallbladder can become infected by gas-forming organisms, causing acute emphysematous cholecystitis; all of these conditions can quickly become life-threatening, and rupture has a high rate of mortality.

About 95% of people with acute cholecystitis have gallstones.