Innervation to the lower leg originates from the lumbar plexus and the sacral plexus.

The lumbar plexus gives rise to the femoral nerve, which becomes the saphenous nerve when it reaches the medial side of the knee. The saphenous nerve descends along the medial leg and then divides into two branches (a branch that ends at the ankle and a branch that passes in front of the ankle to the medial side of the foot) and provides sensory innervation to the medial ankle joint and the medial arch of the foot.

The sciatic nerve forms from the sacral plexus, which further branches into the tibial and common fibular nerve.

The tibial nerve travels posterior to the medial malleolus and branches into the medial calcaneal nerve (provides sensory innervation to the heel), medial plantar nerve (provides sensory innervation to the medial two-thirds of the plantar surface of the foot and motor innervation to the muscles on the medial sole), and lateral plantar nerve (provides sensory innervation to the lateral sole and lateral one-third of the plantar surface of the foot and motor innervation to the deep muscles of the foot).

The common fibular nerve travels around the fibular head and subdivides into the superficial and deep peroneal nerves.

The superficial peroneal nerve travels in the lateral compartment of the leg down to supply sensory innervation to the lateral malleolus where it divides into the intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerve (sensory innervation to the dorsal foot) and the medial dorsal cutaneous nerve (sensory innervation to the medial hallux).

The deep peroneal nerve runs in the anterior compartment of the leg along with the anterior tibial artery and passes under the inferior and superior extensor retinaculum. The medial branch supplies sensory innervation to the interdigital space between the first and second toes. The lateral branch supplies motor innervation to the extensor hallucis brevis and the extensor digitorum brevis. The tibial and common fibular nerves also give rise to a medial and lateral sural nerve, respectively, which provides sensory innervation to the lateral heel and foot.