Different human mixtures of vWF/FVIII products are available for replacement therapy. These concentrates were originally introduced in clinical practice for the management of Hemophilia. The mixture of vWF/FVIII concentrates available are plasma-derived and vary in the quantity of FVIII.

The vWF:Rco activity is expressed in international units. One international unit corresponding to the level of vWF:Rco present in 1 mL of human plasma concentrate. An infusion of 1 IU/kg of vWF:Rco is said to raise the plasma level of vWF:Rco by around 1.5 IU/dL. In general, an initial dose of plasma vWF concentrate of 40 to 60 international units (expressed as units of ristocetin cofactor activity [vWF:RCo]) per kg/body weight is given to obtain plasma levels of 50 to 100 IU/dL.

Patients with acquired WS or the presence of inhibitors require higher and more frequent doses to achieve desired vWF levels. Rarely continuous infusion of vWF can be used in patients whose levels cannot be maintained with intermittent infusions and fail to respond clinically; the doses range between 2 and 15 international units per kg per hour.

The recommended general dose range varies from 30 to 100 vWF:RCo units/kg. However, this can be adjusted based on the patient's residual activity, the presence of autoantibodies and inhibitors, and the severity of bleeding.

The dose given is also dependent upon the severity of bleeding, as seen below:

- Spontaneous bleeding episodes - Daily dose/ Single dose of 30 to 60 IU/kg of vWF to maintain FVIII:C levels greater than 30 U/dL or until bleeding stops (generally 2 to 4 days)

- Major Surgery - Daily doses of 50 to 60 IU/kg of vWF to achieve preoperative levels FVIII:C and vWF:RCo levels of 80 to 100 U/dL until 36 hours postoperatively and then levels greater than 50 U/dL until recovery is complete (usually 5 to 10 days)

- Minor Surgery - Daily doses of 30 to 60 IU/kg of vWF to obtain FVIII:C levels greater than 30 U/dL until completion of healing  (2 to 4 days)

- Dental Extraction/Invasive procedures - Single dose of 30 IU/kg of vWF to obtain  FVIII:C levels greater than 50 U/dL for 12 to 24 hours

- Delivery/ Postpartum - Daily doses of 50 IU/kg of vWF to obtain FVIII:C levels greater than 50 U/dL for 3 to 4 days

There is limited data available on the use of recombinant vWF in avWS; theoretically, it has more advantages due to its longer half-life and lack of factor VIII content, particularly in patients who already have high factor VIII levels and are at high risk for thrombosis. The usual starting dose is 80 mcg/kg intravenously.