As this condition is treated in an intensive care unit setting, the patient’s medical treatment will be managed primarily by an intensivist with consultations from other specialists, such as a cardiologist, neurologist, and radiologist, as dictated by other organ involvement.

Encouraging patients to develop a medical home with their primary care provider is important as this contributes to better patient outcomes. Once discharged from the hospital, follow-up with a primary care provider is essential to encourage continued blood pressure monitoring and hypertension management. A pharmacy consult to determine the appropriate agents and dosing is beneficial. The pharmacist, nursing staff, and primary care provider should educate the patient and their family about the importance of medication compliance and instructions on the use of antihypertensive medications. The primary care team should emphasize educating the patient on lifestyle changes such as exercise, smoking cessation, and healthy eating habits.

Consultation with a social worker may be needed in the case of those patients that do not have primary care options. Unfortunately, a high percentage of this patient population does not remain compliant with antihypertensive medications and seeks management in the emergency room. Healthcare outcomes are improved when hypertension is managed as an outpatient with their primary care provider rather than in an emergency. When the interprofessional healthcare team functions collaboratively and not in "silos," patient outcomes will improve. [Level 5]