Plasminogen serves as a zymogen which initiates the fibrinolytic cascade by binding to intact fibrin via structural domains within plasminogen called ‘kringle’ domains. Structurally, kringle domains are large loops of amino acids stabilized by disulfide bonds. These kringle domains, present in several enzymes within the fibrinolytic system, allow for plasminogen binding to carboxy-terminal lysine residues and has been considered to be the first stage of fibrinolysis.

Studies indicate that plasminogen exists in three distinct conformational forms, alpha, beta, and gamma. The alpha-conformation is a closed conformation and is the confirmation adapted predominantly while plasminogen is circulating. The beta-conformation or a semi-open conformation occurs when plasminogen is bound to intact fibrin via one carboxy-terminal lysine residue, and lastly, the gamma-conformation is described as a fully open conformation and occurs when plasminogen is bound to two carboxy-terminal lysine residues.

The most physiologically active plasminogen activator is tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), its production and secretion are predominantly from endothelial cells.

Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is the second major plasminogen activator and is known to have numerous functions beyond its involvement in plasminogen activation.

Once activated, mechanisms exist within the plasma to degradant the plasmin response. Inhibition of plasmin occurs by alpha-antiplasmin which is a member of the serpin protein family, alpha-antiplasmin circulates within the plasma at a relatively high concentration to inhibit the activity of plasmin.

Numerous cell types including endothelial cells and platelets release PAI-1 and PAI-2 in response to cytokines involved in inflammatory cascades. PAI-1 is produced in endothelial cells. Synthesis is highly regulated, and PAI-1 produced is in an active form which rapidly decays in solution.

More recent evidence has come to suggest the endocrine role adipose tissue plays, and in plasminogen activation, an adipose-derived plasminogen activator inhibitor has been identified. Production of adipose-derived plasminogen activator inhibitor increases as total visceral body fat increases, thus resulting in an increasing inhibiting effect on plasminogen activation and leading to dysregulation of fibrinolysis.

In summary, plasminogen exists in three distinct conformational forms, which confer different accessibility to plasminogen’s activating site.  Activation can occur via several different catalytic enzymes, tPA and uPA being the most physiologically important. The activity of these plasminogen activators is regulated primarily by PAI-1 and PAI-2, while the active form of plasminogen, plasmin, is inhibited by alpha-antiplasmin, a serpin protein in the same class as PAI-1 and PAI-2.