The DSM-5 defines substance use disorder. It is divided into mild, moderate, and severe. Substance use disorders occur when the recurrent use of alcohol and/or drugs causes significant impairment, including health problems, disability, and the inability to meet major responsibilities at home, work, or school. A substance use disorder diagnosis is based on evidence of social impairment, impaired control, risky use, and pharmacological criteria.

**Substance Use Disorder**

As with most behavioral and psychiatric disorders, the interplay between genetic risk, temperamental traits, and the environment may predispose an individual to substances use. Once exposed to substances, brain reward systems reinforce substance use, resulting in repeated use and lower ability to control substance use.

**Alcohol Use Disorder**

The pathophysiology of alcohol use disorder is unknown, but its development may result from a complex interplay of genetics, environmental factors, personality traits, and cognitive functioning.

**Tobacco Use Disorder**

There are almost half a million deaths each year in the United States secondary to cigarettes.

**Stimulant Use Disorder**

Cocaine, methamphetamine, and amphetamine are the most commonly used substances in this group.

**Hallucinogen Use Disorder**

LSD, ecstasy, and psilocybin are included in this group.

**Opioid Use Disorder**

In the United States in 2014, it was estimated that 1.9 million individuals were using prescription opioids, and 586,000 were using heroin.