Patients will complain of ulnar-sided wrist pain that often gets worse with activity. There may also be a weakness in the grip, instability, or clicking. There are some elements of history that can occur in conjunction with individual sports. For example, baseball-specific acute injury can be due to forced wrist extension while doing a head-first slide or when a hitter attempts to hit an inside pitch and gets “jammed.” Chronic injury can occur in baseball players as a result of the heavy load placed on the wrist during the swing. These athletes can sustain TFCC injuries even if they do not have positive ulnar variance.

If patients have distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) instability, this is associated with weakness in pronation and supination, which may also be a feature with TFCC injury.

On exam, palpation of the TFCC is best with the wrist in pronation. It is between the flexor carpi ulnaris, ulnar styloid, and os pisiform. Several physical exam tests can suggest the diagnosis of TFCC injury. These include:

- TFCC compression test: forearm in the neutral position with ulnar deviation reproduces symptoms

- TFCC stress test: applying a force across the ulna with the wrist in ulnar deviation reproduces symptoms

- Press test: Patient lifts themselves out of a chair using the wrists in an extended position. Pain indicates a positive test.

- Supination test: The patient grabs the underside of a table with the forearms supinated; this causes a load on the TFCC and dorsal impingement, which will cause pain if there is a peripheral, dorsal tear.

- Piano key test: Place both hands on an exam table and press the palms on the table. If the distal ulna is prominent on the affected side, this suggests distal radioulnar joint instability, which can have associations with TFCC injury. If the palms are relaxed and the ulnar head goes back to normal position, this is a positive test.

- Grind test: Compress the radius and ulna and have the patient rotate the forearm. Pain could indicate a degenerative process.