Amenorrhea is a common problem at some point in the life of most females. After ruling out pregnancy, however, determining the cause can be a challenge. Asides from the gynecologist, the disorder is best managed by an interprofessional team of healthcare workers that includes an endocrinologist, dietitian, internist, mental health worker, and fertility expert. Besides trying to determine the cause of amenorrhea, other professionals need to managed other secondary features of the problem.

Since osteoporosis is a major risk factor in women with amenorrhea, these patients need to follow up with an endocrinologist, dietitian, and pharmacist. The patients need to be prescribed vitamin D and calcium supplements for months or even years. Since amenorrhea results in infertility, this also leads to depression and anxiety in many females. In these cases, a mental health professional may be needed to provide emotional support. Women who undergo surgery to excise the prolactinoma need neurosurgery follow-up to ensure that no other hormone deficit has occurred due to surgery. Finally, women who have amenorrhea due to exercise need extensive cognitive behavior therapy from a psychologist. In addition, these women need to be seen by a dietitian to ensure that they eat healthily.

The follow-up of women with amenorrhea is often long-term as no treatment works right away; the resumption of menstrual cycles may take months or years, and this can be an agonizing time for most women. The clinician, nurse, and pharmacist must coordinate care, treatment, and education of the family and patient to assure close follow-up. Only with an interprofessional team approach can the quality of life of these women be improved.

**Outcomes**

The outcomes in women with amenorrhea depend on the cause. Some women with PCOS need lifelong treatment as they are at high risk for adverse cardiac events and metabolic syndrome. Patient education is vital, and the patient should be encouraged to pay attention to factors that affect bone density. In addition, these women need to eat a healthy diet fortified with calcium and participate in regular exercise.