The muscles that make up the thorax wall include the three intercostal muscles (external, internal, and innermost), the subcostalis, and the transversus thoracis. Eleven pairs of intercostal muscles are in each of the intercostal spaces, arranged from superficial to deep. The most superficial layer is the external intercostal muscle, which originates from the inferior aspect of the rib above and inserts onto the superior aspect of the rib below in an inferomedial direction. These muscles extend from the rib tubercle posteriorly and attach to the costochondral junction anteriorly where they continue as thin connective tissue aponeuroses known as the anterior (external) intercostal membrane.

During inspiration, the external intercostals contract and raise the lateral part of the ribs, increasing the transverse diameter of the thorax in a bucket handle motion. The internal intercostal muscle forms the intermediate layer. These muscles originate from the lateral aspect of the costal groove of the rib above and insert into the superior aspect of the rib below in a direction perpendicular to the external intercostal muscles. This arrangement allows them to depress the ribs and subsequently reduce the thoracic volume during forced expiration. Further, these muscles extend from the sternum anteriorly to the rib cage posteriorly where they continue as the posterior (internal) intercostal membrane. The deepest layer of the thorax wall is made up of the innermost intercostal muscles. They originate from the medial aspect of the costal groove of the rib above and insert onto the internal aspect of the rib below. These muscles are lined internally by the endothoracic fascia, which appears just superficial to the parietal pleura of the lungs. They are thought to act with the internal intercostal muscle during forced expiration.

In addition to the intercostal muscles, the subcostalis and the transversus thoracis also make up the thoracic wall. The subcostalis exists in the same layer as the innermost intercostal muscle and is present in abundance in the lower regions of the posterior thoracic wall. They originate from the internal aspect of one of the lower ribs and insert onto the internal aspect of the second or third rib below. The transversus thoracis also appears in the same space at the innermost intercostal muscle. They originate from the lower posterior sternum, spread across the inner surface of the thoracic cage, and inserts onto ribs 2 through 6. Both of these muscles aid in depressing the ribs during forced expiration.

Muscles of the posterior thorax, such as the levatores costarum and serratus posterior superior and inferior, may also aid in respiration. The levatores costarum originates from the transverse processes of C7 to T11 and inserts onto the rib below. It minimally aids in inspiration via rib elevation. The serratus posterior superior attaches to ribs 2 through 5 and elevates them during inspiration whereas the serratus posterior inferior attaches the vertebrae to ribs 8 through 12 and depresses them during forced expiration.

The major muscle of inspiration, however, comes from the diaphragm. The diaphragm is attached peripherally to the xiphoid process (sternal portion), the costal margin of the thoracic wall and lower sixth ribs (costal portion), and the lumbar vertebrae (lumbar part). During inspiration, the muscle contracts and pulls down its central tendon inferiorly, thus flattening the diaphragm - this action increases the vertical diameter of the thorax and increases the negative thoracic pressure, which ultimately draws air into the thoracic cavity. During expiration, the diaphragm relaxes and elevates, forcing the air with the lungs to be expelled from the body. Other accessory muscles that aid inspiration include the scalene muscles (helps elevate the first and second ribs) and sternocleidomastoid muscle (assists in raising the sternum). Besides respiration, the diaphragm also functions to aid abdominal straining and increase intra-abdominal pressure upon contraction during times of micturition, defecation, and even weightlifting.

Other muscles of the thorax are involved in upper limb movement, which include the pectoralis major and minor, subclavius, and serratus anterior muscles. The pectoralis major originates from the medial half of the clavicle, anterior sternum, first seven costal cartilages, and aponeurosis of the external oblique and inserts on the lateral lip intertubercular sulcus of the humerus. It functions to flex, adduct, and medially rotate the arm at the glenohumeral joint. Its clavicular head causes flexion of the extended arm while its sternoclavicular head causes extension of the flexed arm.

The serratus anterior muscle originates on the superolateral surfaces of the first to eighth ribs or the first to ninth ribs at the lateral wall of the thorax and inserts along the superior angle, medial border, and inferior angle of the scapula. It mainly functions to protract the scapula as seen in punching, hence its colloquial nickname as the "boxer's muscle," thus facilitating scapular rotation. The serratus anterior may also assist in inspiratory efforts by elevating the ribs when the shoulder girdle is in a fixed position.