# Introduction

The indium 111- tagged white blood cell (WBC) scan is a type of imaging modality used to help identify regions of inflammation and thus infections when other imaging studies are equivocal or contraindicated.

# Specimen Collection

The patient’s blood is drawn in a vial and then placed in a centrifuge. This process will separate the plasma from red blood cells. It is essential to ensure that an anticoagulant such as heparin or acid citrate dextrose is used in the collection tube to prevent the blood from clotting.

# Procedures

After the indium-labeled white blood cells are injected into the patient, the patient undergoes nuclear imaging.  The patient must be able to cooperate for roughly 60 minutes to obtain the imaging scans.

Depending on the clinical situation, imaging is obtained at varying time intervals after administering the tagged white blood cells. It is most common to obtain imaging 1 to 4 hours after administration or 16 to 30 hours after, depending on the clinical situation.

# Indications

111-Indium white blood cell scan may be utilized to detect and localize the site of infection and to correlate clinically with the patient presentation of various pathologic processes, including

- Osteomyelitis not involving the spine (radionucleotide scans utilizing gallium have been shown to be superior to indium alone in detecting osteomyelitis of the spine).

- Prosthetic joint infection

- Vascular grafts

- Intra-abdominal infections

- Abscesses

- Endocarditis

- Foot ulcers

- Infected implanted devices such as central venous catheters

- Fevers of unknown origin when there is a high probability of infection

- Inflammatory bowel disease

# Potential Diagnosis

All of the indications mentioned above are potential diagnoses that are potentially obtainable from the utilization of a 111-indium white blood cell scan.

# Normal and Critical Findings

Interpretation of a radionucleotide labeled leukocyte study requires knowledge of normal and abnormal variants. Normal findings at 18 to 24 hours of the study include uptake primarily by the reticuloendothelial system of the spleen, liver, and bone marrow.

When detecting an abscess, the uptake in that pathologic area may have uptake either greater than or equal to the uptake of the liver. Up to one-half of the cases can be visualized four hours after injection, with greater than 90% uptake by 24 hours.

In cases of osteomyelitis, radiolabeled indium-111 uptake significantly increases. However, if a patient has been receiving treatment with IV antibiotics before obtaining a nuclear scan with radiolabeled indium, the results may show limited uptake in that area, producing a false negative result.

In cases of infected orthopedic hardware, the indium 111- tagged leukocyte scan shows uptake that usually increases in the area of interest. However, in the presence of orthopedic hardware or a prosthesis, it may make radiological interpretation difficult as the orthopedic device displaces bone marrow.

# Interfering Factors

There are potential false positives and false negatives during the interpretation of a 111-indium leukocyte scan. There is the possibility for localization of uptake in instances unrelated to infection.

Pathologic disease processes including chronic abscess, any lymphocytic mediate infection such as sarcoidosis or tuberculosis, and hepatic or splenic abscess given these organs uptake 111 indium to metabolize may cause false-negative nuclear scans with 111- indium.

Given the numerous false positive and false negative interpretations of the 111-indium WBC labeled nuclear scan, correlating clinically to a specific patient's history and physical exam, as well as previously obtained imaging studies, is extremely important.

# Complications

A complication of a 111-indium white blood cell scan is radiation exposure, mostly affecting the organs that metabolize the indium, such as the spleen, liver, and bone marrow.

# Patient Safety and Education

Before obtaining a radiolabeled nuclear scan with indium, it is essential to discuss the clinical utility, radiation exposure, and overall process of a 111-indium WBC scan with patients.

# Clinical Significance

The indium 111- tagged white blood cell (WBC) scan is used to help identify regions of inflammation and thus infections when other imaging studies are equivocal or contraindicated.