Brain trauma has both primary and secondary effects. Primary insult occurs due to the initial injury and may result in contusions, intracranial hemorrhage, and diffuse axonal injury. There may be no visible injury on imaging, and imaging is not always indicated to assess the primary injury. There are multiple types of traumatic intracranial hemorrhage, including epidural hematomas, subdural hematomas, intraparenchymal hemorrhage, intraventricular hemorrhage, and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Diffuse axonal injury results from shearing forces and can cause neuronal axon stretching and tearing, leading to secondary damage. Diffuse axonal injury often impacts the junction between gray and white matter. There may also be coup-contrecoup injuries; coup injury occurs at the site of impact, whereas contrecoup injury occurs on the opposite side of the impact from rapid brain movement.

In the hours, days, and weeks that follow the primary injury, the initial damage triggers numerous secondary effects — secondary injury results from multiple factors. Calcium and sodium shifts, mitochondrial damage, and production of free radicals occurs, which may lead to the expansion of the initial injury. There is a release of presynaptic neurotransmitters such as glutamate, which activate NMDA receptors. This release leads to an influx of sodium and calcium and an efflux of potassium. The Na+-K+-ATPase pump attempts to re-establish balance and depletes ATP. TBI may also induce changes in the magnitude and duration of glucose metabolism, with a temporary increase in glucose uptake followed by glucose depression ipsilateral to the injury. Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species may be increased in the period immediately following an injury. These changes may lead to damage to the axons, impairment of axonal function, and neuronal death. The secretion of cytokines may contribute to the development of vasogenic edema.