**Females of Child-Bearing Potential (FCBP)**

Two negative pregnancy tests are necessary before the initiation of therapy with isotretinoin. The first pregnancy test occurs up to 30 days before medication initiation. The second pregnancy test must occur at least 19 days after the first negative pregnancy test and within the first five days of the patient’s menstrual cycle. Each subsequent month the patient must have a recorded negative pregnancy test to continue therapy. After discontinuation of therapy, a final pregnancy test should take place 30 days following therapy completion.

Females of child-bearing potential (FCBP) must be on two effective forms of birth control or complete abstinence while receiving isotretinoin therapy. The iPLEDGE program defines abstinence as no sex or sexual contact with any male 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The iPLEDGE program does not recommend abstinence as a way to prevent pregnancy while on isotretinoin. If a patient chooses birth control, one of the birth control methods must be a “primary form,” which includes tubal sterilization, partner’s vasectomy, intrauterine device, or hormonal (combination birth control pills, skin patches, shots, under-the-skin implants, or vaginal rings). Secondary forms include male latex condoms, diaphragm, cervical cap, or vaginal sponge, all with the co-use of spermicide. Natural family planning, birth control pills without estrogen, female condoms, withdrawal, and cervical shield are not acceptable forms of birth control according to the iPLEDGE program.

**Pretreatment Monitoring (All Patients)**

Liver function tests (LFTs), fasting lipid profile (including triglycerides), blood glucose, creatinine phosphokinase (CPK), and complete blood counts (CBC) with differential should be drawn before initiating therapy with isotretinoin. Screening for mood alteration, psychosis, aggression, suicidal ideation, skin changes, and visual changes should also occur before starting therapy.

**Ongoing monitoring (All Patients)**

Liver function tests (LFTs) and lipids should require monitoring at a biweekly interval until establishing a response to isotretinoin.