A cross-section of the spinal cord shows a butterfly-shaped area of gray matter composed of nerve cell bodies surrounded by white matter composed of myelinated nerve fibers. The anterior white commissure is a rectangularly-shaped collection of nerve fibers located directly anterior to the central canal and gray commissure, posterior to the anterior median fissure. Sensory fibers from the spinothalamic tract and motor fibers from the anterior corticospinal tract decussate in the anterior white commissure. The anterior white commissure is particularly important in the relay of contralateral sensory and motor information because of these crossing fibers.

The spinothalamic tract is a major ascending neural pathway in the sensory detection of pain, temperature, touch, and pressure. Sensory fibers synapse on cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglion. These axons of second-order neurons from the spinothalamic tract cross over at the anterior white commissure and also ascend one to three levels in the spinal cord through the Lissauer tract. After decussating, they ascend and synapse in the ventroposterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus.  Third-order neurons continue to transmit sensory information to the primary somatosensory cortex.

The corticospinal tract is a major descending neural pathway for the control of voluntary movement. Most of the fibers of the corticospinal tract decussate in the medulla and form the lateral corticospinal tract. Up to 15% of fibers within the anterior corticospinal tract, however, cross at the anterior white commissure. These fibers then synapse with cell bodies of lower motor neurons in the gray matter of the contralateral ventral horn.