# Continuing Education Activity

Insulinoma is a type of functional neuroendocrine tumor characterized by hypersecretion of insulin, causing hypoglycemia. It typically presents as a solitary benign tumor but can be associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). Patients with insulinoma have hypoglycemic episodes, more characteristically as fasting hypoglycemia. Insulinoma is usually diagnosed by biochemical testing. Surgical resection is the preferred treatment choice. This activity reviews the manifestations, evaluation, and treatment of insulinoma and highlights the importance of an interprofessional team in managing patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the typical presenting symptoms of insulinoma. 
- Review the evaluation of insulinoma, including appropriate biochemical tests and localization modalities.
- Summarize the management of insulinoma. 
- Outline the importance of collaboration of an interprofessional team in managing insulinoma to improve the patient quality of care.

# Introduction

Insulinoma is a type of functional neuroendocrine tumor (NET) that manifests with hypoglycemia caused by inappropriately high insulin secretion. It more commonly presents as a solitary benign tumor, but it can sometimes be associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). Patients with insulinoma have hypoglycemic episodes, more characteristically as fasting hypoglycemia. Insulinoma is usually diagnosed by biochemical testing when there is high clinical suspicion. Surgical resection is the preferred treatment choice. Localization with imaging studies is fundamental to characterize the tumor better before surgical resection. Other treatment options are also available depending on the stage and grade of the tumor.

# Etiology

The etiology of solitary insulinoma is not clearly understood. Normally high plasma glucose concentration would trigger the secretion of insulin from the pancreatic beta cells and vice versa. In patients with insulinoma, insulin still gets secreted, even when plasma glucose concentration is low. Hyperinsulinemia could result from an upregulated translation process due to a variant of insulin splice.

MEN1 is a disorder characterized by a predisposition to the pituitary, parathyroid, and enteropancreatic tumors. When insulinomas are associated with MEN1, a mutation in the MEN1 gene at chromosome 11q13 is typically present in most cases.

# Epidemiology

The incidence of insulinoma is around 1 to 4 per million per year.

# History and Physical

Fasting hypoglycemia is the most characteristic finding of insulinoma, reported in 73% of the population.

Hypoglycemia presents in different ways. Sympathoadrenal activation symptoms can be seen, including palpitations, tremulousness, and diaphoresis. Severe hypoglycemia can cause neuroglycopenic symptoms, including blurry vision, confusion, seizures, or a behavioral change. Amnesia of the hypoglycemic event is common.

Insulinoma should be suspected when a patient presents with the Whipple’s triad, which includes: symptoms of hypoglycemia, a documented low plasma glucose concentration, and subsequent improvement of the symptoms with the use of glucose treatment.

In rare cases reported in the literature, the insulinoma may present with psychiatric symptoms, especially panic attacks.

# Evaluation

There are two crucial steps in evaluating an insulinoma. The first is to establish the diagnosis with biochemical tests when there is high clinical suspicion, and the second is to localize the tumor.

A 72-hour fast is the gold-standard test for diagnosing insulinoma.

A successful preoperative localization by non-invasive modalities remains around 75%.

When there is a high suspicion of insulinoma with negative non-invasive studies, invasive tests such as endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) or a selective arterial calcium stimulation test (SACST) with hepatic venous sampling could be considered. EUS has a sensitivity of 70 to 95% and is superior to CT for localization.

Histology examination and immunostaining for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and insulin should be done to support the diagnosis of insulinoma.

Tumor size of greater than or equal to 2 cm, Ki67 more than 2%, and molecular features including chromosomal alteration such as 3p and 6q loss and 12 q gain or chromosomal instability, are possible predictors for metastatic disease and poor progression-free survival (PFS).

Malignant insulinomas have evidence of extrapancreatic regional lymph nodes or even remote extension. Certain factors include fasting time for hypoglycemia being under 8 hours, higher blood insulin level (greater than or equal to 28 microUnits/mL), and higher C-peptide level (greater than or equal to 4.0 ng/mL) at the glycemic nadir. These factors, as well as larger tumor size (greater than or equal to 2.5 cm), all correlate with an increased risk of malignant disease.

The recommendation is that all young patients with insulinoma undergo genetic testing. MEN1 syndrome should be considered in patients with family and/or personal histories of other endocrinopathies.

# Treatment / Management

Surgical resection is recommended for local disease but should also be considered for advanced disease.

Clinicians can attempt medical treatment before surgery in recurrent or malignant cases.

If the tumor is unresectable, if the patient has metastatic disease, or if he is a poor surgical candidate, diazoxide is an option.

For patients with refractory symptoms and increasing tumor volume, oncologic control with referral to specialty centers is recommended.

For advanced disease, surgical resection could still be an option if most (90% or more) of the tumor is safely resectable or if the liver metastases seem to be resectable.

Some research suggests neoadjuvant therapy involving peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) in unresectable or borderline resectable pNET because of survival benefits.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (PHHI)

- Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia syndrome (NIPHS)

- Post-gastric bypass hypoglycemia

- Factitious use of insulin

- Sulfonylurea-induced hypoglycemia

- Insulin autoimmune hypoglycemia

- Non-islet-cell tumors that secrete insulin-like growth factors (IGF)

- Nesidioblastosis

# Staging

Researchers have developed several classification and grading systems (WHO2010, ENETs, AJCC) for pNET. Most of them provide essential prognostic values.

Newer classification systems include WHO2017 and AJCC 8 edition. AJCC (8th edition, 2017) includes ENETs definitions for T stage and prognostic stage grouping. Further modification of this staging system is available, which might provide better prognostic information.

**TNM Staging**

- TX - Tumor cannot be assessed

- T1 - Tumor limited to the pancreas, less than 2 cm

- T2 - Tumor limited to the pancreas, 2 to 4 cm

- T3 - Tumor limited to the pancreas, greater than 4 cm; or tumor invading the duodenum or common bile duct

- T4 - Tumor invasion of adjacent organs (e.g., stomach, spleen, colon, adrenal gland) or the walls of large vessels (celiac axis or the superior mesenteric artery)

- NX - Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed

- N0 - No regional lymph node involvement

- N1 - Regional lymph node involvement

- M0 - No distant metastasis

- M1 - Distant metastasis

- M1a - Metastasis confined to the liver

- M1b - Metastasis in at least one extrahepatic site (e.g., lung, ovary, nonregional lymph node, peritoneum, bone)

- M1c - Both hepatic and extrahepatic metastases

# Prognosis

In insulinoma patients, the 10-year survival rate is 88% after successful surgical removal, and 87.5% of patients get cured (being free of symptoms for at least six months) after surgery.

# Complications

The complications associated with insulinoma include persistent hypoglycemia causing interference with daily activities, irreversible neurocognitive impairment, and even death.

# Postoperative and Rehabilitation Care

Insulinoma patients without MEN1 should have a follow-up at 3 to 6 months post-resection.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients and family members should receive education about recognizing symptoms associated with hypoglycemia and also be trained to use convenient ways to correct hypoglycemia quickly. Patients should follow up with endocrinology specialists for evaluation and treatment of insulinoma. Genetic testing is sometimes necessary.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The evaluation of insulinoma includes biochemical testing and localization with imaging studies. An interprofessional healthcare team, including primary care clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, and PAs), specialists (endocrinologists and oncologists), radiologists, surgeons, specialty-trained nurses, pharmacists, and sometimes genetic specialists, could facilitate better management of insulinomas.

Patient education is paramount; therefore, every interprofessional team member must educate the patient whenever possible and is also responsible for tracking patient progress or lack thereof. Any changes in status should be recorded in the patient's health record and immediately reported to other team members so therapeutic changes can be implemented, if necessary. The length of follow-up required post-resection varies, and a timely treatment plan adjustment is more accessible if patients follow up as instructed. This kind of interprofessional teamwork and case management will improve outcomes for patients with insulinomas. [Level 5]