The first step in the transcatheter PFO closure procedure is getting access. The femoral venous site is the easiest, safest, and therefore the most used to perform PFO closure. It allows insertion of the occluder vertically from the inferior right atrium to the superior left atrium. After femoral venous sheath insertion, a heparin bolus is given to achieve anticlotting properties. More heparin is used intermittently throughout the procedure to maintain anticlotting activity. Oxygenation is administered via nasal cannula oxygen to achieve hyperoxygenation. Hyperoxygenation is preemptively treats a possible event of air embolus while catheterizing the LA. Using a balloon-tipped angiographic catheter or pigtail catheter is inserted and cineangiography done to outline the left atrial  (LA) anatomy. A 6-F multipurpose catheter is then advanced over a guide-wire into the superior vena cava (SVC). The catheter is then positioned posteriorly and withdrawn to the fossa ovalis.

When the catheter is in the fossa ovalis, the guide wire advances across the PFO into the left superior pulmonary vein. The multipurpose catheter then gets advanced into this pulmonary vein, and its position is confirmed by hemodynamic measurement of LA pressure. In some circumstances the guide wire is difficult to pass into the LA. In these circumstances a different guide-wire might be used. The multipurpose catheter is then exchanged over a straight tetrafluoroethylene- coated stainless steel guide wire for the guide or a flex sheath placed in the left atrium. A sheathless approach is undertaken with removal of both the multipurpose catheter and the femoral venous sheath. Many operators attach an accessory adapter to the guiding catheter to administer continuous saline hand flushing while advancing the guide to the left atrium. Tunnel length can be determined with gentle balloon sizing of the PFO.  After selecting the appropriate device, the LA disc is placed in the LA. The sheath and device are then drawn back until the LA disc attaches to the LA septum. With slight tension against the LA septum, the RA side of the device is then deployed. Contrast is pushed through the sheath beside the RA disc to confirm proper device positioning. The left anterior oblique projection is then used to view the discs. The space between the two discs is associated with the width of the septum secundum. After device release, RA angiography may be done to assess correct positioning and function of the device implanted.

The data is inconclusive as to whether intracardiac or transesophageal echocardiographic guidance is better between PFO closure as compared to fluoroscopic guidance alone. One study confirms the efficacy and safety of TTE guidance during percutaneous closure of PFO, which shortens the procedural time and removes the need for general anesthesia or endotracheal intubation.

After completion of the procedure, transthoracic echocardiography with bubble study is used to confirm the positioning of the device and to assess for residual shunting. An electrocardiogram and chest x-ray are also useful to evaluate for complications and accuracy of the procedure. Anticoagulation therapy is given for 6 months post-operation. Dental procedures should be postponed for 6 months. If dental procedures are required, antibiotic prophylaxis should be given to prevent endocarditis within the first 6 months. Follow-up with transthoracic echocardiography is at 1 and 6 months following the procedure.