The etiology of Major depressive disorder is believed to be multifactorial, including biological, genetic, environmental, and psychosocial factors. MDD was earlier considered to be mainly due to abnormalities in neurotransmitters, especially serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine. This has been evidenced by the use of different antidepressants such as selective serotonin receptor inhibitors, serotonin-norepinephrine receptor inhibitors, dopamine-norepinephrine receptor inhibitors in the treatment of depression. People with suicidal ideations have been found to have low levels of serotonin metabolites. However, recent theories indicate that it is associated primarily with more complex neuroregulatory systems and neural circuits, causing secondary disturbances of neurotransmitter systems.

GABA, an inhibitory neurotransmitter, and glutamate and glycine, both of which are major excitatory neurotransmitters are found to play a role in the etiology of depression as well. Depressed patients have been found to have lower plasma, CSF, and brain GABA levels. GABA is considered to exert its antidepressant effect by inhibiting the ascending monoamine pathways, including mesocortical and mesolimbic systems. Drugs that antagonize NMDA receptors have been researched to have antidepressant properties. Thyroid and growth hormonal abnormalities have also been implicated in the etiology of mood disorders. Multiple adverse childhood experiences and trauma are associated with the development of depression later in life.

Severe early stress can result in drastic alterations in neuroendocrine and behavioral responses, which can cause structural changes in the cerebral cortex, leading to severe depression later in life. Structural and functional brain imaging of depressed individuals has shown increased hyperintensities in the subcortical regions, and reduced anterior brain metabolism on the left side, respectively. Family, adoption, and twin studies have indicated the role of genes in the susceptibility of depression. Genetic studies show a very high concordance rate for twins to have MDD, particularly monozygotic twins.