Vasopressors act to increase CO and SVR through increasing contractility and HR as well inducing vasoconstriction peripherally.

**Catecholamines**

The most common catecholamine-active medications are phenylephrine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Other agents in this class include isoproterenol, dobutamine, and dopamine. Each of these three medications has varying activity on the alpha and beta receptors. Alpha receptors are peripheral vasoconstrictors to increase SVR. Beta-1 receptors have mostly positive chronotropic (heart rate) and inotropic (contractility) effects on the heart. Beta-2 receptors act as vasodilators in many organ systems.

Phenylephrine is a pure alpha-1 agonist, inducing peripheral arterial vasoconstriction. Reflex bradycardia may occur due to selective vasoconstriction and elevation of blood pressure. Blood pressure, MAP, and SVR are increased.

Epinephrine has essentially comparable activity on alpha-1 and beta receptors. Epinephrine increases systemic vascular resistance, heart rate, cardiac output, and blood pressure.

Isoproterenol is an isopropylamine analog of epinephrine used in bradyarrhythmias (such as torsades des pointes) and Brugada syndrome.

Dopamine is a precursor of norepinephrine and epinephrine, which acts in a dose-dependent fashion on dopaminergic receptors as well as alpha and beta receptors. At low doses, dopaminergic receptors activate renal artery vasodilation. At doses 5 to 15 micrograms/kg/min, alpha and beta-adrenergic activation increase renal blood flow, HR, contractility, and CO. At higher doses greater than 15 micrograms/kg per minute, the main effects are on alpha stimulation.

Dobutamine increases CO mostly through its effects on beta and alpha stimulation. Dobutamine has an affinity for beta-1 greater than beta-2 greater than alpha. Dobutamine increases contractility and CO with minimal effects on BP.

**Vasopressin**

Vasopressin acts on V-1 receptors to stimulate smooth muscle contraction of the vessels as well as V-2 receptors in the kidneys as an anti-diuretic. There are no inotropic or chronotropic effects. Only BP and SVR are increased with vasopressin.

**Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors**

Milrinone is a phosphodiesterase inhibitor that causes increased levels of cyclic AMP. In cardiac myocytes, this results in cardiac stimulation and increased CO. cAMP has vasodilatory effects in the smooth peripheral vessels leading to vasodilation and decreased BP. Milrinone is used to treat low CO as in decompensated HF.