**Distal Forearm Injuries**

There are many potential complications resulting from distal forearm fractures, including compartment syndrome, neurovascular injury, tendon rupture, arthritis, carpal tunnel syndrome, malunion/nonunion. Incorrect management of a distal ulnar fracture can result in decreased pronation-supination, chronic ulnar-sided wrist pain, DRUJ instability, tendon injury, and arthritis.

**Distal Ulnar Metaphyseal Fractures**

The ulnar nerve and artery are located just dorsal to the flexor carpi ulnaris and are at risk for injury during dissection and plate fixation. The ulnar nerve bifurcates into the dorsal sensory branch approximately 9 cm proximal to the distal wrist crease. It arises from the deep fascia 1 to 4 cm proximal to the ulnar styloid.

**DRUJ Injury**

Injury to the distal radioulnar joint can risk damage to the extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU) and extensor digiti minimi (EDM). DRUJ injury can result in ligament entrapment, limiting wrist mobility and reducing grip strength.

**Malunion**

Distal ulna fracture malunion is uncommon and unlikely to occur if appropriate reduction and fixation are performed. Treating the distal radius alone makes malunion unlikely in concomitant distal radius fractures.

**Nonunion**

Ulnar styloid nonunion is frequently encountered with an incidence between 20 to 70%).

Rarely nonunion can lead to other complications such as carpus abutment, ECU tendon impingement, TFCC detachment, or DRUJ instability.

**Specific Operative Complications**

- **Darrach Procedure**is associated with radioulnar pain and impingement

- **Tension Banding**can cause nerve and soft tissue irritation secondary to pin placement or migration.

- **Plate Fixation**frequently leads to symptomatic hardware prominence, irritation of the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve, longer operative times, ECU and FCU tendinopathy, and tendon rupture.

- **Scheker DRUJ Prosthesis**can cause extensor carpi ulnaris tendinitis but is managed by placing an adipofascial flap in between the prosthesis and tendon.