The exact pathogenesis of the development of IFN retinopathy is not clear. Some authors suggest ischemia as the cause of the vascular changes. Others implicate immune complex deposits in the blood vessel walls, which can cause a reduction in retinal capillary perfusion and formation of cotton wool spots. There are also suggestions that inflammatory cytokine deposition in the blood vessel wall may be the underlying causative factor for this condition. Some studies have found an association between IFN retinopathy and elevated serum vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) levels. Vascular endothelial growth factor is associated with neovascularization, but the correlation between IFN retinopathy and high serum vascular endothelial growth factor levels is not clear. Studies were conducted by Abe and associates about the long-term effect of IFN on mice. They discovered that there was occlusion of the retinal vascular bed in mice pretreated with urethane and not in those without pretreatment. They concluded that a diseased retina predisposed to the development of IFN retinopathy.

Different authors have suggested that certain risk factors predispose the patient to the development of IFN retinopathy. They include systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus, the age of the patient, and the dose of interferon. Concomitant administration of drugs like ribavirin may predispose patients to the development of retinopathy. Arterial sclerosis, erythrocyte count, leukocyte count, platelet count, serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) levels, serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) levels, hemoglobin, triglycerides, and total cholesterol have been examined as risk factors, but so far, the results are inconclusive.