The EVs exert their functions through different mechanisms. They can transfer their cargo or membrane constituents from one cell to another, thus transferring functions between cells. In doing so, they perform several roles based on the type of donor and recipient cells.

Another mechanism of EVs function is what we can call "the decoy" function in which surface proteins on the EVs membrane capture external molecules or pathogens to neutralize their effects. Whatever is the mechanism of action, the final role of EVs, either physiological or pathological, depends on their cell of origin and the conditions through which they have been stimulated. These factors determine the final cargo of the EVs and the lipid and protein content of their membranes, which, by turn, decides their ultimate destination and actions.

EVs play essential roles in several physiological processes, like embryonic growth, pregnancy, blood hemostasis, and body metabolism. With regards to coagulation functions, EVs were first identified as "platelet dust," which were described as factors in the plasma that enhance the coagulation process. These platelet dust were recognized later as the "platelet-derived EVs."  Molecules exposed on the surface of these EVs, such as the tissue factor or phosphatidylserine, work as activators of the coagulation cascade. These types of EVs are available in the blood during injury or endothelial damage, but they are absent in healthy circulating blood. On the other hand, normal circulating EVs carry plasminogen activators, so they induce fibrinolytic activity, preventing thrombus formation. Additionally, exosomes released from platelets under normal conditions inhibit platelet aggregation.

EVs also play essential metabolic functions; this occurs by transferring enzymes and metabolites between cells or by performing extracellular metabolic activities. This reason is why some scientists call them "metabolic nanomachines."

**The role of EVs in the Host-pathogen Relationship**

EVs plays several roles in the war between the human body and its invaders. They are utilized by both sides, endeavoring to win the war. This process applies to all types of pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites. The pathogens, for instance, could use their EVs to evade the immune system through several mechanisms like complement inhibition and antibody degradation.  This process is in addition to the direct utilization of the EVs in their pathogenic actions like delivery of virulence factors, disruption of natural barriers, cytotoxicity, and modulation of host cells.

Proteomic studies on bacterial EVs suggested that the protein cargo of these EVs have been loaded selectively from the cytoplasm, and not randomly, to perform these functions.

On the other hand, EVs play essential roles in the recognition and destruction of the microbes by the immune system. Different components of the innate and the adaptive immune systems communicate EVs among each other to orchestrate their actions aiming at combating the invaders. This process involves EVs from several sources, including both the pathogen and the host immune and non-immune cells. Besides, the immune system utilizes these EVs as direct tools in their war against these attackers. For example, decoy exosomes carry molecules that neutralize bacterial toxins like diphtheria toxins and toxins released by Staphylococcus aureus.

Another example is that MVs released from neutrophils under the effect of specific bacterial stimulation play direct antibacterial actions against the stimulating bacteria.

EVs isolated from different body fluids carry immune response-related and immune-modulatory molecules. These molecules include proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. EVs released by different types of immune cells vary in their content and surface markers and perform different roles in the immune system.