Individuals who have had 2 or more unprovoked seizures over 24 hours apart can be diagnosed with epilepsy. However, the current standard of care for a single unprovoked seizure is avoiding the triggers. Anticonvulsants are usually not recommended unless the individual has risk factors to endure recurrent seizures.

- Differential diagnosis of new-onset, seizure-like event includes migraine, TIA, syncope, and psychogenic events.

- Ancillary tests: Computed head topography study is less sensitive when compared to magnetic resonance brain imaging with sensitivity reaching 30%. Commonly missed abnormalities include low-grade gliomas and hippocampal sclerosis. About 29% of patients with new-onset epilepsy will have an abnormal electroencephalogram following their first routine (i.e., 20-minute study) study.

- Discuss seizure triggers: Older data suggest that up to 30% of patients with suspected alcohol withdrawal seizures had a potentially epileptogenic structural abnormality related to a traumatic injury.

- Prolactin level can conditionally differentiate a convulsive seizure from a nonepileptic event; this requires measuring prolactin level 10 to 20 minutes after a suspected event compared with a baseline prolactin level collected at least 6 hours before the suspected event. Prolactin test cannot distinguish epileptic seizure from syncope

Beside recurrent seizures, consider antiseizure therapy following a single seizure with either abnormal EEG with seizure tendency or abnormal MRI brain.