The diagnosis of these tumors is often delayed by five to seven years as these patients are often asymptomatic or present with non-specific symptoms. Metastases occur in 30% of patients at the time of diagnosis and can be as high as 70% in midgut carcinoids. The diagnosis is mainly based on clinical suspicion and biochemical evaluation. Imaging is often used for localization and assessment of tumor spread.

**Biochemical Tests**

It is recommended that all patients with carcinoid tumors have chromogranin A, pancreastatin and 24-hour urine for 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) checked. Chromogranin A, a non-specific neuroendocrine marker, can be useful in the screening and follow-up of both functioning and non-functioning carcinoids, like other neuroendocrine tumors. Levels should be obtained while fasting and exercise should be avoided before testing. Chromogranin A levels correlate with tumor volume and may provide prognostic information and be a useful tool for monitoring response to therapy. Small tumors may be associated with a normal level, and thus missed. False-positive measurements can occur with severe hypertension, chronic gastritis, proton pump inhibitor use and renal insufficiency. Results from different laboratories are not directly comparable, and it is important to send samples to the same laboratory when chromogranin A is used for serial monitoring. Pancreastatin, a post-translational processing product of chromogranin A, appears less susceptible to assay artifacts and use of proton pump inhibitors, may be a negative prognostic indicator and has the potential to be an alternate biomarker.24 hour urine collection for 5-HIAA, a serotonin breakdown product is useful for the diagnosis and follow-up of carcinoid tumors secreting serotonin: mainly midgut carcinoids. It is important to avoid certain foods (rich in serotonin and tryptophan) and medications that can result in false elevations of 5-HIAA, for three days before and during collection.Serum serotonin is not useful due to variability from daily activities. Measurement of single fasting plasma 5-HIAA level is convenient but needs further study.Foregut carcinoids being deficient in dopa-decarboxylase (converts 5-hydroxytryptophan to serotonin) lead to only modest elevations of 5-HIAA.

**Imaging**

CT with multiphase contrast study, MRI, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy with Octreoscan and PET scan with DOTATOC are useful imaging modalities for localizing carcinoid tumors and assessing metastatic spread. CT is insensitive for small liver metastases for which MRI with hepatocyte-specific contrast agent is a better imaging modality. FDG-PET is not useful due to the low proliferative activity of carcinoid tumors. Upper and lower GI endoscopy are useful for direct visualization and biopsy of accessible lesions. CT enterography can also be used. Small bowel enteroscopy and pill-cam endoscopy are useful for small bowel tumors beyond the reach of standard endoscopy. Pill-cam can be retained at the tumor site with resultant small bowel obstruction, and therefore routine use is not recommended. An echocardiogram is useful for detecting carcinoid valvular disease and should be done before any surgery. Octreotide scan is useful for predicting treatment response to octreotide treatment.