Due to the complex presentation of the pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs), the diagnosis is mostly delayed. The precise diagnosis of the PNETs requires endocrine testing and evidence of the tumor through imaging. Moreover, histological findings of the tumors also play a major role in the whole process. The goal of the evaluation is to establish the nature of the PNETs, to gauge the tumor grade, identify primary and metastatic lesions, and to assess whether the tumor is functional or not.

Biochemical testing becomes an important modality in the evaluation of the tumor if functional PNETs are suspected. Biochemical testing is followed by imaging, endoscopy, and biopsy of the lesion. Biochemical testing is recommended in patients without suspicion of hormonal hypersecretion syndrome. The rationale behind this practice is that the patient may have subclinical secretion of the hormones. And in this case, the hypersecretion hormones can be used as tumor markers in subsequent evaluations. PNET markers include Chromogranin A (CGA), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), and pancreastatin are the most useful PNET markers. Since functional PNETs often produce pancreatic polypeptide, glucagon, gastrin, insulin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, and proinsulin, the fasting levels of these hormones should also be measured.

Evaluation of potential metastases to liver, pancreas, lymph nodes is done through magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis.

In addition to positive imaging findings for a carcinoid tumor of the pancreas; one of the following is required to make a diagnosis of carcinoid type of pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasm: Elevation of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid in the urine and/or detection of 5- hydroxytryptamine in the tissue sample or its elevation in the serum.