Nitrous oxide has multiple supraspinal and spinal targets. The anesthetic effect of nitrous oxide is through non-competitive NMDA inhibition in the central nervous system. The analgesic effects occur by releasing endogenous opioids that act on opioid receptors; its analgesic actions are like morphine. The anxiolytic effects are through GABA-A activation. Nitrous oxide has a central sympathetic stimulating activity that supports blood pressure, systemic vascular resistance, and cardiac output. Nitrous oxide stimulates cerebral blood flow and increases intracranial pressure.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Absorption: Inhaled nitrous oxide is rapidly absorbed through alveoli. The onset of action is within 2 to 5 mins.

Distribution: Nitrous oxide may produce the second-gas effect because nitrous oxide diffuses more rapidly across alveolar basement membranes than other gases. The rapid exit of nitrous oxide from the alveoli results in remaining alveolar gases being concentrated, thus accelerating nitrous oxide uptake into the blood and speeding the onset of anesthesia. Nitrous oxide has a MAC of 105%. Minimal Alveolar Concentration (MAC) relates to the potency of volatile anesthetic agents. It is defined as the minimum alveolar concentration of inhaled anesthetic at which 50% of people do not move in response to noxious stimuli. Thus N2O is a weak anesthetic inhalational agent but has good analgesic effects. The reversal may occur at the end of anesthesia when nitrous oxide enters the alveoli far more rapidly, causing oxygen dilution within the alveoli and may cause diffusion hypoxia.

Metabolism: Nitrous oxide (a trace amount) is metabolized through reduction by anaerobic bacteria in the gut.

Excretion: Nitrous oxide is primarily eliminated via the lungs.