The preparation for extubation is a long process, which begins on the day of the patient's intubation and continues through the acute management of the primary problem which caused respiratory failure.

All ventilated ICU patients should be assessed daily for readiness to wean. Physicians should determine the benefits of early weaning versus morbidity and mortality associated with failed extubation. A weaning/liberation protocol should be in place to achieve this goal. It should have the following components:

- The first step involves screening for any exclusion from initiating the liberation pathway. Please refer to the contraindications section to review all those criteria.

- The patient should be evaluated and screened with weaning parameters if there are no exclusions.

- If deemed a good candidate, the patient should start the SBT.

- During the SBT and at the end of the SBT, assess for failure/pass of the SBT.

- If the patient passes the SBT, proceed with extubation without delay.

During the preparation phase of extubation, practitioners should pay attention to the following:

- Nocturnal rest with full ventilatory support before the morning of the trial.

- Ensure adequate nutrition.

- Avoid excessive intravascular volume and consider diuresis if not contraindicated.

- Treat any infections and avoid fever, as it may increase the ventilatory requirement.

- Ensure appropriate body position with head up and propped up if possible.

- Avoid obstipation, urinary retention, gastric distension, musculoskeletal pain, and severe anemia.

- If significant pleural effusion is present, consider tapping before extubation.

- Avoid chemical imbalances.

- Manage secretions aggressively before the SBT and even consider bronchoscopy to inspect airways to clean out inspissated secretions if appropriate.

**Assessment of Readiness to Wean**

The assessment considers all the contraindications above, including clinical improvement of the cause of respiratory failure, oxygenation and ventilation parameters, mental status, secretions, cardiovascular stability, and specific weaning parameters.

**Weaning Parameters**

Several weaning parameters have undergone assessment and use in clinical studies, which are helpful when taken into account with the overall clinical picture, but they are not very sensitive or specific when considered individually.

- Minute ventilation (tidal volume x respiratory rate) of less than 10 L per minute only correlates with a positive predictive value of 50% and a negative predictive value of 40%.

- Maximum negative inspiratory pressure of greater than 30 cm of water is considered a measure of inspiratory muscle strength and a good predictor of weaning success, but this finding has not been replicated in studies.

- Static compliance (tidal volume/plateau pressure minus PEEP) has low negative and positive predictive values in the range of 50 to 60%.

- Occlusion pressure (P 0.1), which is the pressure at 0.1 seconds after initiation of a spontaneous breath, has shown conflicting results in studies.

- Reduction of venous oxygenation saturation (ScvO2 over 4.5%) after 30 minutes of the SBT in patients who failed their first T-tube SBT is an independent predictor of reintubation with a sensitivity of 88% and specificity of 95%.

- Rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI; respiratory rate / tidal volume) measured over one minute in a spontaneously breathing patient on low-level PEEP only has higher sensitivity of 97% and moderate specificity of 65% for predicting patients who will subsequently pass the SBT.

- The most common weaning parameters to consider initiating the SBT are RSBI of less than 105, maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP) of less than -30 cm of water, and minute ventilation of lesser than 10 liters per minute.

**Spontaneous Breathing Trial (SBT)**

Initiation of the weaning trial commences at the time of the first spontaneous breathing trial. The duration of the SBT can be between 30 minutes and 2 hours.

- T-tube (T-piece) trial

- Pressure support ventilation

- Automatic tube compensation

- Continuous positive airway pressure

- Automated weaning

Several studies have evaluated pressure support ventilation, automated tube compensation, CPAP, and T-piece trial and noted that none is superior to the other.

**T-tube Trial**

This approach is a well-established method. It involves attaching the end of the ETT to a short piece of tubing that acts as a reservoir and provides a connection to humidified fresh gas flow. This method is simple, well tested, and imposes a pulmonary workload comparable to that encountered after extubation; this is labor-intensive, and there is no monitoring of flow, pressure, or volume, and there are no alarms. A similar method called "flow by" can also be used when ventilating pressures, rate, and tidal volume are set to zero while the patient is still attached to the ventilator.

**Pressure Support Ventilation**

It is becoming a more widespread technique for conducting the SBT. Despite theoretical concern that pressure support ventilation may not mimic the true post-extubation workload and difficulty predicting the level of support necessary to compensate for resistive load completely, this does not appear problematic in practice.

**Automatic Tube Compensation**

In this method, the ventilator compensates for the degree of resistance provided by the ETT. It is available on most modern ventilators.

**Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP)**

CPAP is said to increase functional residual capacity and maintain small airways. It is also beneficial for left ventricular dysfunction and has minimal side effects. Despite the potential risk that a patient may pass the SBT but experience cardiac failure on extubation, most clinicians are comfortable using low CPAP levels with other techniques mentioned earlier.

**Automated Weaning**

Automated weaning aims to reduce the requirement for clinician input in a weaning process and improve outcomes. These automated systems use closed-loop controls to interpret clinical data in real time, gradually reduce pressure support, and perform the SBT. At least three different clinical trials and one meta-analysis have shown that the weaning time can be reduced with a computer-driven automated weaning protocol.

**Suitability for Extubation**

If the patient has passed the SBT, they should undergo reassessment for the suitability of extubation. Many of these assessments may have been done at the start of the weaning trial or as a part of the daily assessment of the patient's readiness to wean.

The most important part of this assessment is assessing the ability of the patient to protect and maintain a patent airway.

- The patient should have an adequate level of consciousness - a GCS greater than 8 suggests a higher likelihood of successful extubation.

- The patient should have a strong cough:

- Most clinicians objectively determine the presence of a moderate to strong cough before extubation, although there are other objective measures like card moistening and spirometry testing for maximal expiratory pressure (MEP).
- The presence of a weak cough, measured as a cough peak flow of 60 L/min or less, is a strong independent risk factor for extubation failure.

- The patient should be assessed for the volume and thickness of respiratory secretions.

- The most common test for airway patency is the cuff-leak test which is neither sensitive nor specific.

- Providers need to ensure that they know the airway anatomy noted at the time of intubation, potentially difficult airway, and techniques used to intubate the patient - in the case of the known difficult airway, ensure to have all equipment available for difficult airway. If extra personnel is needed, they should be informed beforehand and be available at very short notice.