Opioids increase the risk of addiction and overdose. The United States is currently in the midst of an opioid epidemic. Moreover, there is limited evidence supporting the use of long-term opioid use for managing chronic pain. The list of non-opioid treatments for pain is extensive. It includes medications such as NSAIDs, acetaminophen, corticosteroids, antidepressants, anticonvulsants, and topical medications. Physical therapy, chiropractic therapy, acupuncture, TENS unit, and behavioral therapy are other treatment modalities. Interventional pain management procedures include peripheral nerve blocks, joint injections, trigger point injections, epidural steroid injections, and radiofrequency ablations. More invasive neuromodulation procedures such as SCS therapy, DRG, and peripheral nerve stimulation can also be considered for intractable pain.

However, each patient is not a candidate for every available non-opioid pain therapy. The care team of a patient should be aware of the vast array of available non-opioid treatment options and have a basic understanding of the mechanism of action, indications, and associated complications of the modalities. The level of existing evidence in support of efficacy should also be considered. When making a treatment decision, existing medical and psychiatric comorbidities and patient preferences should also be taken into account. A biopsychosocial model has been recommended for designing an individualized multimodal treatment plan. Pain clinic consultations should be considered early in the care of chronic pain patients to aid in optimal treatment selection.