Stimulants can induce a broad range of short-term and long-term adverse effects. The side effect profile is dependent on numerous variables. The major factors that influence adverse effect outcomes are the user's body weight, the specific stimulant used, the dose of the agent taken, and tolerance. Other factors include the use of other drugs and stimulants and oral intake on an empty stomach. The adverse effects of stimulants include the following

- Decreased appetite - possible therapeutic effect in specific users

- Anxiety

- Jitteriness

- Headaches

- Weight loss

- Insomnia

- Psychosis

- Pruritus

- Paranoia

- Sweating

- Palpitations

- Shortness of breath

- Chest pain

- Hypertension

- Tachycardia

- Seizures

- Arrhythmias

- EKG abnormalities: inappropriate sinus tachycardia, sinus arrhythmia, prolonged QT, premature ventricular contractions, ventricular tachycardia

- Cerebrovascular event

- Sudden cardiac death

The above list is general and depends on a number of factors, including the specific agent, mode of administration, and the underlying health and comorbidities of the person using the drug.

If intranasal administration occurs, particularly with cocaine, there is a risk of nose bleeds and significant rhinorrhea.

Other long-term adverse effects from stimulant use involve increased risks of strokes and myocardial infarctions. The reasoning behind the elevated risks appears to be multifactorial and primarily due to the cardiovascular effects of stimulants.