As previously stated, individuals may suffer from either a lack of a gag reflex or a hypersensitive gag reflex (HGR).

It is not uncommon for an individual to lack a gag reflex. According to one study involving 140 people, 37% were found to have an absent gag reflex.

Testing the gag reflex can help assess CN IX and CN X damage. To test the gag reflex, you gently touch one and then the other palatal arch with a cotton swab or tongue blade, waiting each time for gagging. If the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve is damaged on one side, there will be no response when touched. If the vagus (X) nerve is damaged and either side is touched, the soft palate will elevate and move toward the affected side. If both CN IX and CN X are damaged on one side, touching the intact side will result in a unilateral response with a deviation of the palate to that side. There will be no response when touching the damaged side.

Conversely, another study showed that 10-15% of individuals have a hypersensitive gag reflex.

Following intraoral stimulation, afferent fibers from the trigeminal (CN V), glossopharyngeal (CN IX), and vagus (CN X) nerves pass to the medulla oblongata. From here, efferent impulses give rise to spasmodic and uncoordinated muscle movements characteristic of gagging. The portion of the medulla oblongata that receives these afferent impulses is also close to the vomiting, salivary, and cardiac centers, which may be stimulated during gagging.

**Bulbar Palsy**

Bulbar palsy is a set of signs and symptoms that present following damage to the lower cranial nerves; the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX), vagus nerve (CN X), accessory nerve (CN XI), and hypoglossal nerve (CN XII). Bulbar palsy symptoms can include a lack of a gag reflex, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), excessive drooling, and slurred speech (dysarthria), most commonly caused by a brainstem stroke or tumor. Other causes of bulbar palsy include genetic (acute intermittent porphyria), degenerative (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), infective (Guillain-Barré syndrome, Lyme disease), toxic (botulism), and autoimmune (myasthenia gravis) causes.