**TOXICITY OF COSMECEUTICALS - NOT TO BE IGNORED**

The consumer-manufacturer enthusiasm revolving around cosmeceuticals has unfortunately eventuated into addition f many chemicals as additives in the commercially available preparations to enhance their properties, qualities, significance, performance, and viability.

**1,4-dioxane (C4H8O2, dioxane)**- It is an ether with emulsifying, detergent, and solvent properties making it a preferred additive in shampoos, mouthwashes, and kinds of toothpaste. Accidental significant exposure to this chemical by ingestion/other modes of consumption at levels beyond standard lab animals' threshold can act as a potent carcinogen eliciting cancer of breast, skin, and liver; potent inducer of irritation in the nasal cavity and tumors in the liver of animals, and endocrine disruption properties of 1,4-dioxane in animals. Fortunately, there is no proof of genotoxicity effects on the human reproductive system to date.

**Formaldehyde and paraformaldehyde**- Formaldehyde, commonly used as its 37% concentrated solution 'formalin' and paraformaldehyde, are popular preservatives in various cosmetic products, including liquid soaps and shampoos. Since inhalation constitutes the most common route of exposure, this set of preservatives are considered one of the most common indoor contaminants. The toxic properties of formaldehyde and derivatives include - pro-allergenicity, carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and high-level exposure correlates to an increased risk of developing myeloid leukemia.

**Parabens**-  Parabens are esters of p-hydroxybenzoic acid. They have extensive use as preservatives in cosmetics, cleansing products, and moisturizers. Methylparaben, ethylparaben, benzyl paraben, butylparaben, and propylparaben are common congeners used. Although they have a good safety profile, their continuous high-dose application may exert a potential menace to human health. Recently, research ash identified ill-effects of parabens - on male reproductive health (damage to spermatozoa),

The list of such additives with potential or established toxicity profile is enormous and beyond the scope of this chapter; and includes benzalkonium chloride, imidazolidinyl urea, and diazolidinyl urea, trace metals, phthalates, isothiazolinone derivatives, phenoxyethanol and many more. Readers are advised to refer to an exhaustive review devoted to his aspect for further details.

The same molecule could be a cosmetic constituent in one concentration, while it could be used as a cosmeceutical in another like salicylic acid in lower concentrations are used in cosmetics, but 2% salicylic acid used in creams have a completely different effect. Similarly, kojic acid is used in many cosmetic creams in lower concentrations, while in concentrations of 2 to 5%, it attains the status of a cosmeceutical.