The Prescription for Health: Promoting Healthy Behaviors in Primary Care Research Networks initiative was funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) in association with the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ).

The $9 million six-year initiative was launched in 2002 with the aim of counseling patients to change their unhealthy behaviors by experimenting with evidence-based models in primary care settings. The initiative's primary focus concentrated on the four top unhealthy lifestyle behaviors related to premature death: smoking/tobacco use, unhealthy diet, unhealthy alcohol use, and the lack of physical activity.

Four unhealthy behaviors were designed, experimented with, and assessed by 27 applicable evidence-based methods in 22 primary care practice-based research networks (PBRNs) to enhance the change of unhealthy behaviors in primary care settings. The initiative was conducted between 2003 and 2007, following two rounds of funding by The Prescription for Health, which rewarded 27 grants, 17 in round one and 10 in round 2. The first round focused mainly on the feasibility of implementation strategies for improving the spread and usefulness of behavior change counseling in primary care settings. In contrast, the second round aimed to gauge the effectiveness and expenditures related to more comprehensive health behavior change approaches.

As discussed by the American Board of lifestyle medicine (ABLM), other successful primary care and office-based models for lifestyle modification can include the Primary Care First (PCF) model, which is intended for physician practices, or the Direct Contracting (DC) model, intended for Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) and health plans. The PCF model comprises a voluntary five-year alternative payment model (APM) that can be further classified into the general and high-needs population models.

The PCF model aims to provide shared savings, value, and quality to physician practices by proposing a prescient payment system to provide progressive primary care services. The PCF model aims to improve patient care, primarily for those with complex chronic conditions, seriously ill patients, and the high-needs population.