**Neurons**

In the simplest sense, the neuron consists of a cell body, axons, and dendrites.

**Cell Body**

The cell body contains the nucleus and is the site of metabolic activity. Most of the neurotransmitters that will eventually be released at the synapse are synthesized here.

**Dendrites**

These are small projections from the cell body that serves a receptive role in the physiology of the neuron. They receive incoming signals from other neurons and relay them to the cell body, where the signals are integrated, and a response will be initiated.

**Axons**

Generally, the outflow tract of the neuron. It is a cylindrical tube that is covered by the axolemma and is supported by neurofilaments and microtubules. The microtubules will help to transport the neurotransmitters from the cell body down to the pre-synaptic terminal, where they will be released.

**Synapses**

The synapse itself is the site of transmission from the pre-synaptic neuron to the post-synaptic neuron. The structures found on either side of the synapse vary depending on the type of synapse:

**Axodendritic**

A connection formed between the axon of one neuron and the dendrite of another. These tend to be excitatory synapses.

**Axosomatic**

A direct connection between the axon of one neuron to the cell body of another neuron. These tend to be inhibitory synapses.

**Axoaxonic**

A connection between the terminal of one axon and another axon. These synapses generate serve a regulatory role; the afferent axon will modulate the release of neurotransmitters from the efferent axon.

The above discussion focuses on chemical synapses, which involve the release of a chemical neurotransmitter between the 2 neurons. This is the most common type of synapse in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS). However, it is important to note that there are electrical synapses, where electrical current (or signals) will pass directly from one neuron to another through gap junctions. The differences between the two will be expanded on in the mechanism section.