**Congenital Deafness:**

Patients who are congenitally deaf never receive auditory stimulation to the primary auditory cortex. Even though these regions of the brain are not stimulated by sound information, studies have shown no difference in the overall volume of Heschl gyrus between patients who are congenitally deaf and hearing controlled patients. Patients who were congenitally deaf demonstrated that they had larger gray matter to white matter ratios in Heschl gyrus compared to hearing controls, demonstrating a reduction in afferent or efferent fibers and/or myelination originating from the primary auditory area. Research has shown that individuals who communicate using American Sign Language respond to visual stimuli of another individual signing with increased activity in the primary auditory cortex. This finding can be explained by neural plasticity, a phenomenon that explains that neurons can change their function and adapt to the surrounding environment based on stimuli that are received.

**Primary Progressive Aphasia:**

Patients who have primary progressive aphasia have difficulties with speech production, understanding, and communication, often secondary to a neurodegenerative process such as Alzheimer Disease. Patients presenting with the non-fluent variant of primary progressive aphasia demonstrate increased effort associated with speaking, slowed speech production, difficulties utilizing grammar correctly, as well as reduced communication attempts, which can eventually lead to the patient becoming mute as their disease progresses. Studies have demonstrated that patients with non-fluent primary progressive aphasia have a reduction in the activity of the primary auditory area after auditory stimulation, suggesting that neurodegeneration is occurring in regions of Heschl gyrus.

**Mild Traumatic Brain Injury:**

Individuals suffering from symptoms after a traumatic brain injury often report difficulties associated with auditory processing. Researchers have shown through fMRI studies that individuals with diagnosed mild traumatic brain injuries have less primary auditory area activation during auditory stimuli compared to healthy control patients. This study also showed that there were reductions in baseline connectivity between the left and the right primary auditory cortices, suggesting alterations in the organization and responsiveness of the cerebral cortex.

**Schizophrenia:**

Individuals with schizophrenia display positive symptoms, including auditory hallucinations. As part of the physiological mechanism of auditory processing when an individual speaks, there is a normal speaking-induced suppression that occurs to reduce activity in the auditory cortex in response to self-generated speech so that the individual can focus more attention on sounds externally produced. Individuals with schizophrenia do not demonstrate speaking-induced suppression of the primary auditory cortex. These findings may provide insight into a mechanism behind auditory hallucinations often experienced by patients with schizophrenia.