The only definitive management of food protein intolerance is the strict elimination of the offending food protein in the diet. Patients should be counseled on monitoring the ingredients of manufactured food and compliance with the elimination diet. Patients on long-term elimination diets should also have access to appropriate diet counseling, ideally by a nutritionist or dietitian, and regular monitoring of growth, especially in children.

In breastfed infants, the mothers should be advised to avoid cow's milk and dairy products. Extensively hydrolyzed formula with documented hypoallergenicity must be recommended as the choice for the treatment of cow's milk allergy, especially in non-breastfed infants and young children. For patients with more severe symptoms, amino acid formulas can also be recommended.

Steroids are the mainstay treatment in IgE-mediated immunological food protein intolerance, including eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders.

Infants with acute FPIES with mild symptoms (without lethargy, pallor, or listlessness) can be treated at home with oral rehydration. But for severe symptoms, they must be managed at a medical facility with IV fluids. Intramuscular epinephrine and antihistamines do not have any role in the management of FPIES reactions.

If acute allergic reactions or anaphylaxis is suspected, the probable offending food must be immediately avoided, and emergency medical care should be provided. They may be given a prescription for an auto-injectable epinephrine device and instructed for their proper use.