Evaluation of Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1 (MEN1) involves a comprehensive laboratory and radiographic workup to help identify individual conditions. The following discussion will focus on the workup of the individual parathyroid, anterior pituitary, and neuroendocrine tissue systems involved.

**Parathyroid Glands**

Evaluation of hyperparathyroidism involves the measurement of serum calcium and parathyroid hormone intact (PTH) levels. The PTH level may be minimally elevated or within the upper limits of normal, which can lead to a delay in diagnosis. Imaging modalities such as parathyroid ultrasound and 99-Technetium Sestamibi scans are of limited value due to diffuse hyperplasia involving multiple glands that may be seen in MEN1 patients.

**Neuroendocrine Tissue Systems**

Evaluation of gastro-entero-pancreatic tumors involves measuring serum levels of gastrin, glucagon, insulin, proinsulin, C-peptide, chromogranin A, pancreatic polypeptide, and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). Elevated levels of typically one and sometimes more of the aforementioned markers indicate a diagnosis of neoplasia within gastric, enteric, or pancreatic tissues. Different modalities such as transabdominal ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance angiography (MRI), octreotide scan (Octreoscan), and 68Ga-DOTATOC PET imaging are used for localization of the tumors and possible metastases. Of the imaging modalities, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is the most sensitive single modality to detect pancreaticoduodenal tumors. Multiple studies have reported significant superiority of EUS as compared to CT scans and somatostatin-receptor scintigraphy.

**Anterior Pituitary Gland**

Evaluation of pituitary gland tumors involves measurement of pituitary hormones, including prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), thyroxine (T4), and cortisol levels.