Gathering the proper equipment is an important part of massive transfusion. Access is necessary to deliver intravenous blood products adequately. Blood products can be delivered through peripheral intravenous (IV) catheters, central IV catheters, or through intraosseous (IO) catheters. With all of these catheters, the same principles of flow apply. The flow through a catheter described by the Hagen-Poiseuille equation. It is proportional to the change in pressure between points and the radius to the fourth power. It is inversely proportional to the length of the catheter and the viscosity. From this equation, we can conclude that the rate of flow is directly related to the radius of the catheter and inversely related to the length of the catheter. In most patients receiving a massive transfusion, we would like to give blood products quickly. Therefore, catheters larger in diameter and shorter in length will give us higher flow rates and are more desirable. Large-bore IV catheters (14 to 18 g), central IV catheters, and intraosseous catheters should be gathered and inserted into the patient as necessary keeping in mind that a few large-bore peripheral lines may have higher flow rates than some central catheters.

Other equipment such as high-speed transfusion devices and blood warming devices should also be collected. Materials to send frequent laboratory testing for hemoglobin levels, ABGs, coagulation, electrolyte, lactate, and thromboelastogram (TEGs), as well as point-of-care testing devices, should be collected, if available. There should also be monitors available for continuous reassessments of temperature, pulse oximetry, blood pressure, and heart rate.