The majority of toxicities associated with taxanes are reversible with appropriate and timely management. Both prophylactic measures and treatment modalities help counter adverse events.

Hypersensitivity reactions can be prevented by using prophylactic steroids and premedication. The typical docetaxel regimens include 3-weekly infusions, and prophylactic steroids are recommended for 72 hours, starting 24 hours before the drug administration. The dose of dexamethasone is 8mg bid. Cabazitaxel is used as a single agent given every three weeks. The dose of dexamethasone is 10mg daily through all the cycles of cabazitaxel.

In the case of paclitaxel, dexamethasone is given 20mg, 12 and 6 hours before drug administration. Apart from steroids, the premedication is given 30 minutes before starting the taxane infusion and usually includes diphenhydramine 50mg IV and cimetidine 300mg IV or any other H2-blockers. Nab-paclitaxel is the only taxane that doesn't require routine use of prophylactic steroids or premedication.

If a major hypersensitivity reaction occurs despite premedication, immediately stop the infusion and give high-dose steroids. The minor reactions don't need any medication. Life-threatening anaphylactic reactions may require adrenaline. Symptoms usually resolve within 15 minutes. Taxane skin testing and the severity of hypersensitivity reaction dictate the re-introduction of the drug, which could include rapid drug desensitization or graded exposure. Rapid desensitization is safe and effective with premedication given 30 minutes before rechallenge.

Taxane-induced neurotoxicity can be challenging to treat. There is no convincing evidence that any antidotes are effective at ameliorating the existing complaints or helping prevent the onset of neuropathy. Neuropathic pain is less responsive to conventional non-opioid and opioid analgesics. The preferred management of painful neuropathy revolves around antidepressants. Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have been used historically preferred in this context.

Agents like amitriptyline, doxepin, imipramine, and nortriptyline have analgesic effects, and the dose required for pain relief is much less than the one used for depression.

Clinically, it has been the preferred agent to treat taxane neuropathy, particularly the painful disease.

Hilotherapy has had some success in treating Taxane-peripheral neuropathy.

Neutropenia is the main dose-limiting toxicity of docetaxel, while it is also frequently seen with paclitaxel. Docetaxel should not be given if the absolute neutrophil count is less than 1500/mm3.

Docetaxel-containing regimens given every three weeks fall into this high-risk category and require routine G-CSF prescription. If patients have ANC of <1500/mm^3 despite G-CSF and no active complaints, it's best to delay the therapy. Patients with low ANC and fever should be managed as neutropenic sepsis on an outdoor or indoor basis, according to the MASCC score.

The chief purpose of steroids prophylaxis in docetaxel is the prevention of fluid retention rather than hypersensitivity reactions, although it helps with both. Severe ascites or pleural effusion can be treated with diuretics like furosemide, and fluid paracentesis is rarely needed.

The paclitaxel-associated bradycardia is an incidental finding that doesn't require cardiac monitoring during therapy. Often, no active management or cardiologist opinion is needed.

Taxane-induced arthralgias and myalgias have been found to have a possible ideal treatment with flupirtine.