Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is classified as a serine protease (enzymes that cleave peptide bonds in proteins). It is thus one of the essential components of the dissolution of blood clots. Its primary function includes catalyzing the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, the primary enzyme involved in dissolving blood clots.

Recombinant biotechnology has allowed tPA to be manufactured in labs, and these synthetic products are called recombinant tissue plasminogen activators (rtPA). These drugs have undergone various modifications to amplify their pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, especially prolonging their short half-life in the circulation and further increasing their fibrin specificity to prevent an unwanted fibrinolytic state. Examples of these drugs include alteplase, reteplase, and tenecteplase.

Indications for the use of tPA include the following:

- Ischemic stroke (most common) in patients presenting to the treating facility within 3 hours (4.5 hours in certain, eligible people) after the onset of symptoms.

- Myocardial infarction would be a delay of more than 1 to 2 hours before percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.

- Pulmonary embolism in massive pulmonary embolisms, causing severe instability due to high pressure on the heart.

- Thrombolysis (e.g., deep vein thrombosis).

**Definitions**

- **Alteplase**is****the normal human plasminogen activator and is FDA-approved for managing patients with ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction with ST-elevation (STEMI), acute massive pulmonary embolism, and those with central venous access devices (CVAD).

- **Reteplase**is a modified form of human tPA with similar effects but a faster onset and longer duration of action. It is currently FDA-approved for the management of acute myocardial infarction. Preferred over alteplase due to its longer half-life, allowing it to be given as a bolus injection rather than through an infusion like alteplase.

- **Tenecteplase**is another modified version of tPA with a longer half-life. Its indication is the management of acute myocardial infarction.