At the time of presentation, the cause of liver injury and cardiac decompensation needs to be evaluated. A careful history and physical examination should be done to evaluate possible causes of liver injury like hepatitis, medications, gallbladder disease, and others. An initial evaluation of liver function should also be done. The most common finding is the elevation of the total bilirubin due to increasing indirect bilirubin. This finding has been found in 70% of patients with cardiac cirrhosis, and the bilirubin levels are rarely greater than 3 mg/dl. Alteration of the synthetic function of the liver presents with prolongation of the coagulation times. Despite this, increases in the international normalized ratio are not that common but can be elevated in severe cases of ischemic injury. Serum albumin levels can be decreased in 40% of patients. Hypoalbuminemia is rarely less than 2.5 g/dL.  This factor is an independent predictor of death in patients with acute on chronic heart failure.  The degree of reduction in serum albumin does not correlate with the degree of liver damage.  This is because the loss of albumin is more likely secondary to bowel edema from heart failure causing protein-losing enteropathy and malnutrition. Severe elevation in LDH and ALT/LDH ratio of less than 1.5 helps to differentiate perfusion injury from other causes of acute hepatitis.

Evaluation of causes that can explain exacerbation of heart failure is important. Cardiac enzymes and brain peptide natriuretic peptide (BNP) may be elevated. An electrocardiogram can demonstrate arrhythmias and ischemic changes as well as suggest right ventricular hypertrophy. An echocardiogram is an important test to evaluate the underlying cause of congestive hepatopathy. The echo evaluates for valvular disease, wall motion abnormalities, pulmonary artery systolic pressure, mitral inflow, atrial and ventricular size, and evaluation for pericardial effusion or constrictive pericarditis. Inferior vena cava (IVC) evaluation would help to define volume status and pressure between the right atrium and the hepatic circulation. IVC respiratory variation (normally greater than or equal to 50% narrowing during inspiration) or IVC diameter greater than or equal to 2.3 cm suggests right-sided cardiac disease with increased right atrial filling pressures. CT and MRI evaluations of cardiac and hepatic conditions also can be used to determine the etiology of the clinical presentation. Due to common signs and symptoms of biliary disease, imaging evaluation should be considered. Abdominal ultrasound for evaluation of the biliary tract and gallbladder can rule out acute obstructive disease or hepatic vein thrombosis. In the presence of ascites, paracentesis should be performed. This fluid typically reveals a high protein content, commonly more than 2.5 g/dl. This increase in protein can be related to hepatic lymphatic ruptured with leakage of protein-rich fluid. Serum to ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) greater than 1.1 reflects portal hypertension.