Normal breast ducts terminate into a terminal duct lobular unit (TDLU). The duct ends into lobules made up of small glandular structures called acini. There is a bilayer of cells lining the ductal-lobular system consisting of inner luminal epithelial cells and outer luminal myoepithelial cells. The majority of breast lesions (benign or malignant) develop in the TDLU.

Ductal carcinoma in situ is a clonal proliferation of epithelial cells in the breast ductal-lobular unit confined to the myoepithelial cell basement membrane. This confinement to the myoepithelial cell layer demarcates it from invasive breast carcinoma. Immunostains can be performed to show myoepithelial cell retention, such as cytokeratin 5/6, smooth muscle myosin, and p63. Histologically DCIS is classified by architecture features, nuclear grade, and/ or the presence of necrosis.

The five major architectural patterns are comedo, cribriform, micropapillary, papillary, and solid. In comedo DCIS the malignant cells at the center of the duct undergo necrosis, sometimes with calcifications. In cribriforming DCIS, the tumor cells fill the duct and form pseudo-lumens that appear as punched out spaces. In micropapillary DCIS the proliferating cells form club-shaped tufts and project into the duct lumen and lack a fibrovascular core. In papillary DCIS the cells proliferate around fibrovascular cores. In solid DCIS, the cells fill and distend the duct. It is common to see multiple architectural patterns in DCIS. Micropapillary, cribriforming, and papillary DCIS are considered low grade lesions. DCIS with solid or comedo features are considered high grade lesions and have more of a propensity to develop into invasive carcinoma.

DCIS is classified into three nuclear grades designated as low, intermediate, or high. Low nuclear grade DCIS is characterized by small cells with uniform size and shape and inconspicuous nucleoli. High nuclear grade DCIS is composed of large cells with pleomorphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and frequent mitosis. Intermediate nuclear grade DCIS is considered when features do not fulfill the criteria for low or high nuclear grade DCIS. Intermediate nuclear grade DCIS has mild to moderate changes in nuclear size and shape and a variable amount of mitosis and prominent nucleoli. DCIS with a high nuclear grade has more of a likelihood to develop into invasive breast carcinoma.