In a similar fashion to previous sections, the process and enzymatic steps of the beta-oxidation spiral will primarily undergo discussion with alternative oxidation pathways mentioned later, as they pertain to and produce metabolic products destined for mitochondrial beta-oxidation. Variation of fatty acid molecular structure and additional required enzymes will also be discussed.

Mitochondrial beta-oxidation of fatty acids requires four steps, all of which occur in the mitochondrial matrix, to produce three energy storage molecules per round of oxidation, including one NADH, one FAD(H2), and one acetyl CoA molecule.

Step 1. The first enzyme required is called acyl CoA dehydrogenase, and as other enzymes involved in the handling of fatty acids, it is specific to chain length. Members of this enzyme family include long-chain, medium-chain, and short-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenases (LCAD), (MCAD), and (SCAD), respectively. These enzymes catalyze the formation of a trans double bond between the alpha and beta carbons on acyl CoA molecules by removing two electrons to produce one molecule of FAD(H2), which eventually accounts for 1.5 ATP molecules produced in the electron transport chain (ETC).

Step 2. Next, the enzyme, enoyl CoA hydratase, performs a hydration step of the double bond between the alpha and beta carbons; this results in the addition of a hydroxyl (OH-) group to the beta carbon and a proton (H+) to the alpha carbon. There is no energy production associated with this step.

Step 3. Following hydration, the next step is carried out by beta-hydroxyl acyl CoA dehydrogenase; as the name implies, electrons and two protons are removed from the hydroxyl group, and the attached beta carbon to oxidize the beta carbon and produce a molecule of NADH. Each molecule of NADH will result in the production of 2.5 ATP molecules from the ETC.

Step 4. The final step in Beta oxidation involves cleavage of the bond between the alpha and beta carbon by CoASH. This step is catalyzed by beta-keto thiolase and is a thiolytic reaction. The reaction produces one molecule of acetyl CoA and a fatty acyl CoA that is two carbons shorter. The process may repeat until the even chain fatty acid has completely converted into acetyl CoA.

Steps 1 through 4 refer to the beta-oxidation of a saturated fatty acid with an even-numbered carbon skeleton. Unsaturated fatty acids, such as oleate (18:1) and linoleate (18:2), contain cis double bonds that must be isomerized to the trans configuration (enoyl CoA isomerase) or reduced at the expense of an NADPH molecule (2,4-dienoyl CoA reductase).

Odd-chain fatty acids undergo beta-oxidation in the same manner as even chain fatty acids; however, once a five-carbon chain remains, the final spiral of beta-oxidation will yield one molecule of acetyl CoA and one molecule of propionyl CoA. This three-carbon molecule can be enzymatically converted to succinyl CoA, forming a bridge between the TCA cycle and fatty acid oxidation.

VLCFA beta-oxidation in peroxisomes occurs by a process similar to mitochondrial beta-oxidation; however, some key differences exist, including the fact that different genes encode fatty acid oxidation enzymes in peroxisomes, which is significant is certain inborn errors of metabolism.

Branched-chain fatty acids also require additional enzymatic modification to enter the alpha-oxidation pathway within peroxisomes. Phytanic acid, 3,7,11,14-tetramethylhexadecanoic acid, requires additional peroxisomal enzymes to undergo beta-oxidation. Phytanic acid initially activates to phytanyl CoA; then, phytanyl CoA hydroxylase (alpha-hydroxylase), encoded by the PHYH gene, introduces a hydroxyl group to the alpha carbon.

Omega-oxidation of fatty acids in the endoplasmic reticulum primarily functions to hydroxylate and oxidize fatty acids to dicarboxylic acids to increase water solubility for excretion in the urine. This enzymatic conversion relies on the cytochrome P450 superfamily to catalyze this reaction between xenobiotic compounds and molecular oxygen.