Delirium, also referred to as acute brain failure, requires an urgent evaluation, whereas dementia is more of an outpatient diagnosis requiring a more detailed neurocognitive assessment. To diagnose delirium, there should be evidence from history, physical exam, medical or laboratory values that the change in mentation is the direct consequence of underlying medical condition or substance intoxication or withdrawal, medication or toxin exposure, or a combination of factors.

The key element in delirium diagnosis remains a change from the patient's baseline mental status and the change's acuity. The Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) algorithm includes the 4 main features (acute onset and fluctuating course of symptoms, inattention, and disorganized thinking or altered mentation). It is the most widely used criteria for diagnosing delirium. The 3-Minute Diagnostic Assessment (3D-CAM) provides a brief assessment (3 orientation items, 4 attention items, 3 symptom probes, and 10 observational items) has a sensitivity of 95% and specificity of 94% when compared to a clinical reference standard rating in a prospective validation study in hospitalized patients.

For a definitive diagnosis, an examination should be conducted by a trained professional with expertise who can perform cognitive testing. For delirium, the physician should test the key components of the CAM algorithm and establish an underlying organic etiology or etiologies to explain the delirium. In addition to doing a targetted toxic, metabolic, and infectious workup in a case of delirium, neuroimaging should be performed. In some cases, Electroencephalography (EEG) is performed to rule out status epilepticus. Rarely a lumbar puncture (LP) is needed when suspecting meningoencephalitis.

On the other hand, once an acute pathology is ruled out, patients with suspected dementia should undergo a thorough evaluation by a neurologist followed by neurocognitive testing and neuroimaging studies. The neurocognitive testing provides a more accurate diagnosis of the subtype of dementia based on the different domains affected. Neuroimaging such as magnetic resonant (MR) with neuro quant, nuclear positron emission test (PET), SPECT, and functional MRI are sometimes performed to look for the pattern of cerebral atrophy, hippocampal volume, and hypometabolic areas. The rest of the diagnostic modalities are reserved for specific diagnoses, such as Dopamine Transporter Scan (DAT) for Parkinson and Parkinson plus syndromes. Seldomly, genetic testing is performed for cases such as Huntington's disease, some cases of AD (early and late-onset).