The accepted pathophysiology of a coma involves neuronal dysfunction from a decrease in the supply of glucose or oxygen to the brain. A myriad of etiologies may lead to essential substrate disruption with diffuse central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction and coma as the extreme clinical condition. For example, any clinical process that causes circulatory collapse or profound hypoxemia may manifest as a coma. As little as fifteen seconds of circulatory collapse will result in loss of consciousness. If the cause of the circulatory collapse is brief and promptly restored, such as from a simple faint, consciousness is regained. If hypotension or hypoxemia continues, the altered mental state continues, and secondary CNS damage may occur. Hypoglycemia is encountered frequently in clinical practice most often in the association of treatment for diabetes mellitus or as a complication of alcoholism. Electrolyte abnormalities such as hyponatremia or hypercalcemia may disrupt normal neuronal metabolism. The pathophysiology of other causes of metabolic coma is not clear but may involve false neurotransmitters as is suggested in hepatic encephalopathy. Global depression of neuronal functioning is the most common mechanism of coma in toxins and poisonings.

Structural lesions of the CNS, such as intracerebral hemorrhage, may lead to coma from direct destruction of arousal areas of the brain or from secondary damage from shifting of intracranial structures, vascular compression, or increased intracranial pressure. Herniation syndromes describe clinically recognizable physical examination features that may suggest the anatomic location of the CNS lesion. The most discussed of the herniation syndromes is uncal herniation, where the medial portion of the temporal lobes shifts with resulting loss of consciousness from brainstem compression. The pathophysiologic findings are often compression of the brainstem and cranial nerve III as it exits the brainstem and crosses the tentorium cerebelli. This results in impairment of the parasympathetic fibers (pupilloconstrictors) that travel with the third nerve, and in most cases pupillary dilatation on the same side (roughly 90%) of the mass lesion.

Increased intracranial pressure is a frequent cause of coma. Since the brain is enclosed in the closed skull, conditions that increase intracranial pressure may impair cerebral perfusion. The equation that approximates this relationship is unforgiving CPP (cerebral perfusion pressure) = MAP (mean arterial pressure estimated as 1/3 systolic BP [blood pressure] + 2/3 diastolic BP) - ICP (intracranial pressure). As ICP approaches MAP, cerebral perfusion diminishes. It is essential to maintain CPP by reducing increased intracranial pressure while avoiding hypotension.