**Decreased renal excretion**

Hypermagnesemia occurs primarily in patients with acute or chronic kidney disease. In these individuals, some conditions, including proton pump inhibitors, malnourishment, and alcoholism, can increase the risk of hypermagnesemia. Hypothyroidism and especially cortico-adrenal insufficiency, are other recognized causes.

Hyperparathyroidism and alterations in calcium metabolism involving hypercalcemia and/or hypocalciuria can lead to hypermagnesemia through an increased calcium-induced magnesium absorption in the tubule. Patients with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH), a rare autosomal dominant condition, can manifest hypermagnesemia.

Lithium-based psychotropic drugs can also lead to hypermagnesemia by reducing excretion.

**Increased intake**

The disorder may rarely develop even without renal impairment, mostly in the elderly, where an underlying bowel condition may lead to increased absorption through a decreased gut motility. Patients treated with anticholinergics or opioids, or those with inflammatory bowel diseases are at higher risk.

Some drugs such as laxatives and antacids that contain magnesium (e.g., magnesium oxide) can lead to increased values of magnesium, especially in elderly patients with renal function impairment. For instance, although poor bioavailability makes magnesium oxide relatively safe, its prolonged use may lead to risks of hypermagnesemia.

Severe hypermagnesemia has also been described after the administration of bowel preparation agents (e.g., sodium picosulphate magnesium citrate).

Patients with milk-alkali syndrome due to the ingestion of large amounts of calcium and absorbable alkali are more susceptible to develop hypermagnesemia.

Since magnesium is useful in the management of eclampsia (e.g., therapeutic serum magnesium level 1.7 to 3.5 mmol/L), the excessive infusion can induce iatrogenic hypermagnesemia. Newborns of mothers who have received magnesium sulfate parenterally during labor may present with toxicity even with normal serum magnesium levels.

**Compartment shift or leak**

Magnesium levels can increase in hemolysis patients. Red blood cells contain three times as much magnesium as compared to plasma. The rupture of these cells pours magnesium into the plasma. However, symptomatic hypermagnesemia occurs only in the case of aggressive hemolysis.

Tumor lysis syndrome, rhabdomyolysis, and acidosis (e.g., decompensated diabetes with ketoacidosis) can also induce hypermagnesemia through extracellular shifts.