**Quality Controls**

Like any experiment, quality controls should be used to validate findings. In a western blot, a positive control, negative control, loading control, and a no first-degree A-B control are all effective in achieving and maintaining robust experiments.

Positive controls are powerful in verifying that the workflow is well-optimized, even in the absence of bands in sample lanes. Also, a positive control can verify a negative result.

**Troubleshooting**

Unfortunately, this method has many error arms due to many steps and a lengthy workflow. Discussing every possible error, its cause, and the solution is outside the scope of this review. Instead, the most common issues and how to troubleshoot them are described below.

**Smiling of Bands**

When bands are not migrating equally down the gel, this pattern can exaggerate to a smiley pattern. This indicates that the gel has air bubbles, the voltage is too high, or the volume of the loading sample is too large.

**Absence of Bands**

If the detection system shows no signal across all lanes except the ladder, there are many possible causes. It is best first to localize where in the workflow the error occurred. Typically, the most common culprits are poor transfer efficiency or poor probing.

By staining the membrane with Ponceau S, a membrane-safe red dye, bands can be visualized. If bands are well illustrated on the membrane, particularly where the target protein is expected, it indicates that transfer efficiency is not likely the cause. If there are no bands, transfer settings must be altered.

A poor transfer can also occur if little to no proteins are adsorbed on the membrane. To understand the directionality of transfer, the gel can be stained to reveal bands.

If a positive control lane is used and bands are absent, this can be due to a poor detection kit, poor antibodies, or even an incorrect antibody concentration. Antibody concentration is optimized by running titration experiments.

**Multiple Bands**

Only a single row of bands should be visualized in detection. The presence of multiple bands suggests the nonspecific binding of antibodies.

**High Background With or Without Splotches**

Poor membrane blocking, excessive antibody concentration, and a dry membrane can result in high background signals. Increasing the period for blocking or changing the type of protein used in blocking buffer may solve this.

**Lab Safety**

Standard lab safety rules apply. When casting gels, acrylamide is a potent neurotoxin; however, it is chemically inert once polymerized. The careful handling of this reagent is necessary, and proper precautionary measures should be met before handling it.