Hellervorden Spatz Disease or PKAN is characterized by progressive dystonia, a motor disorder of extrapyramidal type with gait difficulty. In classic form, usually, onset occurs in the first decade. Clinical manifestations of Hellervorden Spatz disease or PKAN vary from patient to patient.

Patients with this disease suffer from a variety of other neurological symptoms and signs including:

- Extrapyramidal symptoms

- Dystonia, dysarthria, muscular rigidity, spasms, Parkinson-like symptoms.

- Dystonia  (continuous spasms and muscle contractions)- A prominent and early feature

- Tremors, rarely bradykinesia (slowness of movement) and Choreoathetosis(involuntary movements in along with chorea(irregular migrating contractions) and athetosis (twisting and writhing)

- Significant speech disturbances - Can occur early

- Dysphagia - A common symptom; caused by rigidity of muscles and  associated corticobulbar abnormality

- Dementia - Present in most patients with PKAN

- Visual impairment - Consequence of optic atrophy or retinal degeneration; can be the presenting symptom of the disease, although this is rare

- Seizures - Have been reported frequently

- Akathesis- (feeling of internal motor restlessness that can present as tension, nervousness, or anxiety)

- Neuropsychiatric dysfunction

- Optic atrophy

- Retinal degeneration

Approximately 25% of individuals have an 'atypical' presentation with onset later in life (onset mostly in a second and third decade), delay of extrapyramidal dysfunction for several years, and more gradual progression of the disease process. Prominent speech defects, spasticity, psychiatric disturbances also dominate in the atypical form.

Based on the common clinical features, the following diagnostic criteria have been proposed. For a definitive diagnosis, all of the obligate findings and at minimum two of the corroborative findings should be present.

Obligate features of PKAN  are following:

- Onset in the first two decades of life

- Progression of signs and symptoms; classic form: loss of ambulation occurring within 10-15 years of onset, atypical form: ambulatory loss occurs within 15-40 years of disease onset.

- Evidence of extrapyramidal dysfunction, including one or more of these neurological impairments: dystonia, rigidity, choreoathetosis.

Corroborative features are listed as follows:

- Corticospinal tract involvement: spasticity, hyperreflexia, and extensor toe signs

- Progressive intellectual deterioration

- Retinitis pigmentosa and/or optic atrophy( seen with electroretinogram or visual field testing)

- Seizures

- Family history consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance( may include consanguinity)

- Hypointense areas on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in  the involved  basal ganglia

- Abnormal cytosomes in circulating lymphocytes

- Red blood cell acanthocytosis