The hormonally-mediated physiologic changes of pregnancy increase maternal risk for certain infections and may likewise increase the severity of disease in these patients.

Toxoplasma gondii causes toxoplasmosis, a protozoan that can cause human infection through ingestion of raw or undercooked meat or contaminated product, contact with cat feces or contaminated food or soil, or transfusion of infected blood products or donor organs.

Maternal rubella infection occurs following the exposure of a nonimmune individual to aerosolized viral particles.

Maternal HIV infection occurs through contact with infected bodily fluids, including through sexual contact, needle sticks, or blood transfusions.

Primary CMV is acquired through contact with infected bodily fluids, including saliva, urine, cervical or vaginal secretions, semen, blood, and breastmilk.

The Treponema pallidum causes syphilis. Maternal infection occurs through sexual contact, and congenital infection is transmitted transplacentally with increased risk in mothers with high spirochete titers, an early stage of infection at the time of pregnancy, and late or incomplete treatment.

Primary infection with parvovirus B19 occurs through exposure to respiratory droplets or infected blood products. Congenital infection is transplacental.

Primary infection with HBV is through contact with infected bodily fluids, with sexual contact being the most common cause of primary infection in the United States.

The mosquitoes spread the Zika virus in the Aedes genus, and an unknown primate reservoir is theorized to exist.

The majority of cases of chorioamnionitis occur secondary to ascending infection with maternal urogenital organisms in the setting of ruptured fetal membranes. As such, the most commonly implicated organisms in chorioamnionitis are the aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, which typically colonize the urinary and genital tracts, including Ureaplasma urealyticum, Mycoplasma hominis, GBS, Escherichia coli, and Gardnerella vaginalis.

A less common cause of chorioamnionitis is the hematogenous transplacental spread of infection from mother to fetus.Listeria monocytogenes, which causes chorioamnionitis in the setting of intact fetal membranes.

Bacterial vaginosis occurs secondary to an imbalance of the physiologic vaginal flora, in which Lactobacillus sp. usually are predominant.Gardnerella vaginalis, which then allows for the opportunistic growth of other aerobic and anaerobic species.

Finally, maternal colonization with GBS is an essential contributor to neonatal morbidity and mortality. Neonatal infection can occur through ascending vaginal infection or through contact during parturition.