Clopidogrel is only supplied in a tablet formulation, and thus all doses are given via an oral route. Doses of clopidogrel can be administered without respect to meals. Due to the dependence of CYP2C19 for metabolism for activation, the recommendation is that the administration of agents that inhibit CYP2C19 metabolism should be avoided (e.g., omeprazole, lansoprazole). Furthermore, recommendations are to avoid agents that slow down gastrointestinal motility can delay absorption (e.g., opioid agents) in the acute setting.

Regarding pregnancy risk factors, clopidogrel has a risk factor B classification, meaning no evidence of risk. However, most of the data supporting this have been from animal models that found no adverse events in reproduction studies. It is not known if clopidogrel is secreted into breast milk. At the moment, the expert recommendation is to stop nursing or stop the drug in these situations.

Below are the typical dosing regimens for clopidogrel:

- Medical treatment of UA/NSTEMI: Administer a 300 mg to 600 mg loading dose followed by 75 mg daily, in conjunction with aspirin, ideally for up to 12 months.

- STEMI patients receiving fibrinolytic therapy: If the patient’s age is 75 years or younger, then give a 300 mg loading dose followed by 75 mg daily for at least 14 days and up to 1 year. If the patient is older than 75 years, then the loading dose is omitted.

- PCI during ACS/non-ACS setting: Administer a 600 mg loading dose as early as possible before PCI, followed by 75 mg daily. Ideally, clopidogrel should be administered with aspirin for at least 12 months post-ACS. The duration can vary depending on the stent type, the location of the stent, and the risk of bleeding. Any decision to alter this duration should occur in conjunction with the primary prescriber.

- Peripheral artery percutaneous angioplasty or peripheral artery bypass grafting: Administer 75 mg daily.

- Primary prevention of thromboembolism in atrial fibrillation: Administer 75 mg daily.

- Symptomatic carotid stenosis: Administer 75 mg daily.

- Secondary prevention of coronary artery bypass graft surgery: Administer 75 mg daily.

Of note, there is no adjustment required for renal or hepatic impairment.