The presentation of a patient with an electrical injury can vary greatly depending on the amount of electrical energy encountered. Additionally, the extent of contact is also important because the electrical field strength, which is directly related to voltage and inversely related to the total area of contact, can vary greatly and with small surface areas causing greater transmission of the electrical energy.

In the field, the first step in evaluating a victim of electrical shock is to ensure the area is safe. The presence of a live wire, fire, or if the patient is lying in water may make the scene unsafe. After establishing a safe scene, the patient should quickly be assessed for breathing and circulation. Appropriate life support should be performed as the patient is transported to the hospital. Upon arrival, if the patient is awake and alert, a history of the event should be taken. However, it is possible they will not be conscious. Given the potential for electrical shocks to influence heart conduction, an electrocardiogram should be taken. A complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, urinalysis, arterial blood gas, and serum creatine kinase should be performed for all patients and serum troponin levels if suspicious for cardiac involvement.

Because the injury is likely to affect muscles, patients may experience rhabdomyolysis resulting in greatly elevated creatine kinase and myoglobinuria. Burns to the skin are also likely and should be managed appropriately, focusing on hydration, electrolyte balance, and cleaning the affected area acutely with betadine and chlorohexidine and during healing with silver sulfadiazine.

While electrical injuries are very dangerous, electrical energy also plays a key role in modalities across many fields of medicine. An automated external defibrillator is a common example that can provide an electrical impulse to the heart to cease an abnormal rhythm.

Electrical energy can also be applied directly to nerves to modulate their firing or the propagation of their impulses, called neuromodulation. This can be used to manage chronic pain like dorsal root ganglion stimulation or with deep brain stimulation for Parkinson disease patients.

Techniques like neuromonitoring are even developed to reduce the potential risks associated with these electrical devices.