On initial presentation, the patient with a SEA often has vague and subtle symptoms. There must be a high index of suspicion to diagnose an SEA before it causes neurologic deficits. Localized vertebral tenderness to palpation or percussion is almost always present. This pain will inevitably become more severe and harder to treat. During the illness, usually, a few days after the onset of spine tenderness, 90% of patients will develop radicular pain. Most patients will also develop fevers above 38 C. Other nonspecific findings may also be present such as generalized malaise, fatigue, headaches, irritability, or vomiting.

Heusner (1948) conceptualized the manifestations of spinal epidural abscess as progressing through four distinguishable but overlapping stages: (1) spinal ache (or back pain); (2) root (or radicular) pain; (3) weakness; and finally, (4) paralysis. The specific time between the onset of back pain and the development of neurologic deficits can be highly variable. The often rapid evolution from backache to neurologic catastrophe (or even death) forces clinicians to consider this entity in the differential diagnosis of all patients with new or changing back pain, particularly when fever and localized spinal tenderness coexist.

While early symptoms of backache may be indolent and persist for weeks, severe back pain usually progresses to root pain within 3 to 4 days. This pain is followed by advanced signs of spinal cord dysfunction within the next 4 to 5 days. The neurologic deficits at this stage are often still reversible; yet, rapid surgical intervention may be needed because progression to complete paralysis may occur within a few hours despite the chronicity of the process. Neurologic signs depend upon the level of spinal cord involvement. These signs are another factor that influences the differential diagnosis at the time of presentation.

In IEA, signs and symptoms can happen because of infection or because of slowly increasing intracranial pressure (ICP). More common symptoms are fever, headache, lethargy, nausea, vomiting, and photophobia. More common signs are papilledema, sinus drainage, cranial nerve palsies, and focal neurologic deficits. Many times, IEA is a complication of surgery or other invasive processes, and that makes the diagnosis extra difficult since the focus is on the primary process and procedure and not the complication. Anyone who has a fever and headache should be considered for this diagnosis especially if there has been a recent intracranial or head/neck surgical procedure. This is even more critical when there are sources of infection present in the head and neck region, for example, sphenoid/ethmoid sinusitis or chronic otitis media.