Treatment options include expectant management, medication, or surgical interventions.

Decisions are often made jointly with the patient and the obstetrician as to which path to choose. As long as patients are hemodynamically stable and do not require emergency surgery, there is no difference in long-term outcomes when comparing these treatment options.

Expectant management is typically limited to those miscarrying in the first trimester due to lack of studies beyond that timeframe and presumed increased risk of bleeding complications beyond that. Approximately 80% of women achieve complete passage of intrauterine contents within 8 weeks.

Medical management can be used in the absence of contraindications, including severe anemia, bleeding disorders, or infection.

Surgical evacuation is another option in the treatment of early pregnancy loss and is achieved either with sharp curettage or suction curettage. Surgical evacuation is preferred in women who present with hemorrhage, hemodynamic instability, or signs of infection because these conditions require urgent treatment.

While success rates for surgical evacuation reach 99%,

Another important consideration that must be taken into account when evaluating pregnant females with complaints consistent with miscarriage is their Rh status. This is important due to the fact that the fetus could differ in Rh type from the mother.  If mother and fetus have different Rh types, this sets up a scenario where the mother could be exposed to a differing Rh from exposure to the fetal blood type. This could cause the mother to produce antibodies against the different Rh to which it was exposed. These antibodies can then cross the placenta and affect the fetus.   This can then present serious consequences to the fetus and cause the fetus to develop a high output cardiac failure state known as hydrops fetalis, which is nearly 100% fatal.  All women who have a blood type that is Rh(D) negative who are diagnosed with early pregnancy loss, and have not been sensitized, should receive Rh(D)-immune globulin 50 micrograms (or 300 micrograms if available) to prevent alloimmunization. Rh(D)-immune globulin should be administered as early as possible, within 72 hours, of diagnosis of miscarriage and immediately following surgical intervention.

To date, there exists no proven strategy to prevent early pregnancy loss. Suggestions such as pelvic rest and hormone administration have not been proven. However, some physicians advocate progestin administration early to women who have experienced multiple prior miscarriages. Anticoagulants or aspirin administration has only been proven to be beneficial in women with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.