The arterial blood supply of the hip joint is complex and comes from multiple sources.

The following list includes the branches of the anterior trunk of the internal iliac artery:

- Obturator artery

- Umbilical artery, which branches to form the superior vesical artery

- Inferior vesical artery

- Vaginal artery (female)

- Uterine artery (female)

- Middle rectal artery

- Internal pudendal artery

- Inferior gluteal artery

The following list includes the branches of the posterior trunk of the internal iliac artery:

- Superior gluteal artery

- Lateral sacral arteries

- Iliolumbar artery

Most of the arteries of the hip region originate from the external iliac artery and include:

- Femoral artery

- Superficial circumflex iliac artery

- External pudendal artery

- Superficial femoral artery

- Profunda femoral artery (the deep artery of the thigh)

- Lateral femoral circumflex artery

- Medial femoral circumflex artery

The capsular blood supply receives contributions from four key vessels: the medial and lateral circumflex femoral arteries (MFCA and LFCA, respectively), which are branches of the profunda femoris artery, as well as the superior gluteal artery (SGA), a branch of the posterior division of the internal iliac artery, and the inferior gluteal artery (IGA), a branch of the anterior trunk of the internal iliac artery. In a study of 20 cadaveric hips, Kalhor et al. found that the MFCA and LFCA give off branches that supply the distal and proximal capsule, while the IGA and SGA were the main arterial supply to the posterior capsule.

There are two significant anastomoses formed by combinations of these arteries. The first is the cruciate anastomosis, a circulatory anastomosis in the upper thigh comprised of the IGA, the MFCA and LFCA, and the first penetrating artery of the profunda femoris. The cruciate anastomosis allows blood to reach the popliteal artery indirectly from the internal iliac artery and IGA if there is an interruption of flow between the external iliac and the femoral arteries. The second major anastomosis is the trochanteric anastomosis which arises from circumferential connections involving the SGA and the MFCA and LFCA around the femoral neck. This anastomosis ensures that the femoral head has multiple alternate sources of blood flow if one or more arteries are injured or occluded.

The obturator artery also provides an important source of arterial blood flow to the hip via the artery of the ligamentum teres. This artery penetrates the hip joint through the acetabular notch and traverses inside the ligament of the head of the femur to send blood to the femoral head. This blood supply is mostly insignificant in adults relative to the vessels mentioned above, but in the pediatric population, it is a crucial component as the cartilage-composed epiphyseal line does not allow for substantial blood flow to the head of the femur. Thus, the artery of the ligamentum teres helps supply the head and neck of the femur on its own until the growth plate closes. Around 15 years of age, this branch loses patency and becomes a remnant in the adult hip, explaining why it does not prevent avascular necrosis in fractures of the femoral neck.

The lymphatic drainage from the anterior side of the hip drains to the deep inguinal nodes, while the posterior and medial aspects drain alongside the gluteal and obturator arteries respectively to the internal iliac nodes.