Histopathology of mycosis fungoides varies within stages of the disease. Superficial lymphoid infiltrate, epidermotropism with absent or rare spongiosis spongiosis, and lymphoid atypia are the predominant features.

- **Patch stage:**In the early patch stage. it may be difficult to diagnose as infiltrates may be very scant. In more established patches, a lymphocytic infiltrate may be seen around the basal cell layer. The cells are usually small, well-differentiated lymphocytes with rounded or cerebriform nuclei. The epidermis shows hyperkeratosis and acanthosis. Basal cell degeneration with melanin pigment incontinence may be seen. A dense, mixed perivascular infiltrate may be seen, along with fibrosis of dermal papillae.

- **Plaque stage:**In the plaque stage, the epidermis shows acanthosis with a psoriasiform hyperplasia and absent or rare spongiosis. The upper dermis may show a dense, band-like lymphocyte infiltrate with cerebriform nuclei and prominent epidermotropism. A third of cases may show Pautrier's abscesses.

- **Tumor stage:**A loss of epidermotropism may be noticed in the tumor stage. The infiltrate is a dense dermal infiltrate with large cerebriform lymphocytes, with a diminished number of T lymphocytes and dendritic cells.

**Immunohistochemistry**

Mycosis fungoides tumor cells are characterized by epidermotropic peripheral T lymphocytes whose phenotype is CD2+, CD3+, CD4+, and CD5+. In a minority of patients with mycosis fungoides, T lymphocytes may be CD4- and CD8+, CD4- and CD8-, or CD4+ and CD8+.

The immunohistochemical pattern of Sezary syndrome is CD3+, CD4+, CD7-, and CD8- cells, which is identical to mycosis fungoides. Immunostaining for MUM-1 (multiple myeloma oncogene) might be used to differentiate these as it is positive in Sezary syndrome and negative in mycosis fungoides.