Providing high-quality, diagnostic testing is the goal of all clinical laboratories. To attain this goal, several issues and problems are needed to be addressed, which ultimately underline the need for improving laboratory capacity. Addressing human and financial resources, training and supervision, planning and budgeting, quality assurance, logistics and supply, biosafety and equipment management, and other relevant laboratory aspects were found to be necessary to optimize laboratory services provided to patients.

In 2018, the World Health Organization developed and released the Essential Diagnostics List (EDL). This list was expected to align the health community in bridging the gap to the accessibility and availability of high-quality testing of clinical laboratories, especially in resource-limited settings.

Accreditation for clinical laboratories became common recently with the emergence of international laboratory standards. Several guidelines for laboratories have been developed to regulate laboratory test procedures and maintain its quality.

The need for risk management in clinical laboratories was highlighted to maintain the accuracy and reliability of laboratory tests. The Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) developed a guideline to introduce the principles of risk management specifically in the clinical laboratory.

A laboratory information system is valuable in the management of results and other pertinent information regarding patients and their samples. The development of a laboratory information system started in the 1960s concentrating on data reduction-analogue-digital conversion and radioimmunoassay analysis. Recently, the focus has evolved into the aspects of digital histopathology and genomics, and issues about patients’ access to data, and a lot more.