Practitioners should interpret laboratory evaluations in association with the patient's clinical history and physical examination findings. Although lab results may help to support the clinical diagnosis, it cannot replace a good history and physical examination.

**White Blood Cell Count (WBC)**

Although an increase in peripheral WBC with a left shift may be the earliest marker of inflammation, its presence or absence is not significant enough to diagnose or exclude acute appendicitis. Many patients with gastroenteritis, mesenteric adenitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, and many other conditions have an elevated WBC. A normal WBC is also not uncommon in patients with appendicitis.

**Urinalysis**

Urinalysis is usually normal but may not be due to the inflamed appendix sitting on the ureter or bladder.

**Diagnosis**

Appendicitis is a clinical diagnosis. Imaging may not be universally required and may be unnecessary when the diagnosis is clear. Imaging is particularly helpful in doubtful cases such as in female patients of child-bearing age. Consider obtaining a surgical consultation before imaging, particularly in patients with the typical presentation. Consultation should not be delayed for testing.

**Ultrasound (US)**

Use of ultrasound is increasing, particularly in children in whom the risks of ionizing radiation are greatest. The advantages include decreased cost relative to other imaging modalities and lack of ionizing radiation exposure. However, it is operator-dependent.

The visualization of a thickened, non-compressible appendix greater than 6 mm in diameter is diagnostic****.****If the US is non-diagnostic, further imaging with CT or MRI, particularly in pregnancy, is required. In practice, a positive ultrasound can be used to reduce CT scan utilization. However, a negative or non-diagnostic result is not sufficient to rule out appendicitis. During childbearing age, it can be helpful to exclude a tubo-ovarian abscess.

**CT Scan**

CT of the abdomen and pelvis is considered the modality of choice for definitive assessment of patients being evaluated for possible appendicitis. However, a major concern with CT scan is radiation exposure, particularly in children. Practitioners should, therefore, use these scans judiciously. Limited-range CT scans have been proposed in children to reduce the radiation dose. The following findings may be seen:

- Dilated appendix greater than 6 mm with a thickened wall (greater than 2 mm)

- Peri-appendiceal inflammation (peri-appendiceal fat stranding)

- Appendicolith

- Appendiceal or abscess

- Free fluid

If the practitioner does not visualize the appendix, appendicitis is not ruled out.

**MRI**

MRI is a reliable modality which is particularly useful for pregnant women and children when ultrasound is inconclusive. Since intravenous (IV) gadolinium can cross the placenta, it should not be used during pregnancy. Also, patients with renal insufficiency should not receive IV gadolinium.

The following factors limit MRI use:

- Higher cost

- More time required to acquire images

- Skilled radiologist required to interpret MRI

- Not widely available

Also, MRI is not a test of choice for unstable patients and young children in whom sedation may be required. In recent years, the utility of rapid MRI without contrast agents or sedation has been assessed for a diagnosis of pediatric appendicitis.