Diagnosis of Alagille syndrome can be challenging due to the variability of clinical manifestations, ranging from no symptoms to life-threatening conditions, even among individuals from the same family who share the same mutation. Most patients present with jaundice or cardiac-related symptoms.

The seven major clinical features include:

- Cardiac defects: reported in greater than 90% of patients and include peripheral pulmonic stenosis (67%), tetralogy of Fallot (16%), ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect, aortic stenosis, and coarctation of the aorta.

-  Hepatic manifestations: usually presenting with cholestasis caused by the paucity of biliary ducts, conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, pruritus, xanthomas, cirrhosis that can lead to end-stage liver disease in up to 15% of the cases.

-  Renal abnormalities: characterized by renal dysplasia, glomerular mesangiolipidosis, and renal tubular acidosis.

-  Skeletal abnormalities: identified include butterfly vertebrae, hemivertebrae, and/or pathological fractures of long bones.

-  Ophthalmologic manifestations: that can occur include posterior embryotoxon with a prominent Schwalbe line.

-  Dysmorphic facies: characterized by the prominent, broad forehead, deep-set eyes with moderate hypertelorism, prominent ears, triangular face with a pointed chin, and broad nasal bridge.

-  Vasculature abnormalities: when present, are often associated with neurovascular abnormalities such as aneurysms, Moyamoya syndrome, abnormalities in cerebral arteries, reno-vascular abnormalities, and middle aortic syndrome.

Other associated features are short stature, failure to thrive, immunodeficiency, and recurrent infections. Developmental delay, delayed puberty, supernumerary flexion creases, and pancreatic insufficiency cases also have been reported.