The main concerns of peripheral vascular resistance are when it is at its extremes, called hypertension (too high) and hypotension (too low).

Hypertension (elevated peripheral vascular resistance) can be diagnosed when blood pressure measurements are greater than 140/90 on two separate clinical encounters. The majority of patients with hypertension are said to have essential hypertension, meaning there is no underlying cause for the condition, and it is idiopathic. A minority of patients will have secondary hypertension, which is attributable to the underlying pathology. Examples of etiologies of secondary hypertension are renal disease (e.g., renal artery stenosis), endocrine conditions (e.g., Cushing’s disease), and drug-induced (e.g., oral contraceptives). Untreated hypertension can lead to chronic medical conditions consisting of coronary artery disease, renal disease, stroke, aneurysms, aortic dissection, congestive heart failure, peripheral vascular disease, and visual changes (e.g., retinal hemorrhages).

Medications to lower peripheral vascular resistance include beta-blockers, diuretics, ACE-inhibitors, calcium-channel blockers, and alpha-blockers.

Hypotension is commonly associated with shock to which there are four main types. Hypovolemic shock is due to an excessive loss of blood resulting in a decreased cardiac output and increased SVR, as the body tries to maintain blood pressure. Cardiogenic shock is from a malfunction of the heart which results in decreased cardiac output and increased SVR. Neurogenic shock is from alterations in the autonomic nervous system that also results in decreased cardiac output and a decrease in SVR from a loss of the sympathetic innervation. Distributive shock reduces systemic vascular resistance from anaphylaxis or septic mediators, with an increase in cardiac output.

Hypertensive urgency is a condition in which there is significantly elevated blood pressure (SBP greater than 180mmHg or DBP greater than 120mmHg) without evidence of any end-organ damage. A hypertensive emergency may correlate with end-organ damage (e.g., a headache, chest pain, focal neurologic deficits, altered mental status, SOB, pulmonary edema, renal failure, etc.).