The differential diagnosis of this tumor is histologic, as many neoplasms display intravascular proliferation. The differential should include intravascular papillary endothelial hyperplasia (Masson tumor), epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, angiosarcoma, lymphangioma-like Kaposi sarcoma, and retiform hemangioendothelioma.

The unique feature of EPA is the papillary structure lined by atypical columnar endothelial cells. A similar formation has been described extravascularly in the patch stage Kaposi sarcoma. Ordinary angiosarcomas may also show focal morphologic patterns of EPA, and in a study of 80 cases of angiosarcoma of soft tissue, 14% showed evidence papillary fronds.

Organized thrombi cause the Masson phenomenon, showing papillary processes of the fibrous cores covered with a layer of endothelial cells. Unlike EPA, the Masson phenomenon is contained within blood vessels, and there are often visible intravascular thrombi. It lacks the presence of columnar endothelial cells and has a single endothelial cell layer surrounding hyalinized stromal cores.

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma display endothelial cells with eosinophilic vacuolated cytoplasm. The tumor cells arrange as cords, trabeculae, or sheets with myxoid or hyalinized stroma, and often spread outside of the blood vessel.

Of note, there have been reports in the literature of benign acquired vascular proliferations displaying areas with Dabska features simulating malignancy. Therefore, the presence of atypical architectural features in an otherwise benign-looking acquired vascular proliferation should not lead to unnecessarily aggressive treatment.