History should ascertain when the mushrooms were eaten, as the time from ingestion to symptom onset can suggest clinical severity.  As with other mushroom poisonings, the classic 6-hour rule usually applies. Specifically, the onset of nausea and vomiting within 6 hours of ingestion suggests that the likelihood of systemic toxicity is low.  However, if vomiting begins after 6 hours, the risk is higher, and these patients often require intravenous (IV) fluid resuscitation and evaluation for signs of hepatic or renal injury.

Specifically concerning gyromitra, the onset of signs and symptoms of toxicity usually occur 5 to 12 hours after ingestion, generally adhering to the 6-hour rule. The most common presenting complaints are abdominal pain and nausea. Other historical features should focus on which mushrooms were being sought, the season of the year, and the amount consumed. Gyromitra mushrooms emerge in the Spring in temperate climate forest areas, often near pines and aspen trees. Some knowledgeable foragers may even know or recognize Gyromitra esculenta and have intentionally sought and consumed it. The number of mushrooms eaten is also significant as the severity of the patient’s toxicity is proportionally related to the quantity of the toxin ingested.

The physical exam should focus on signs of dehydration and the neurologic exam.  Physical exam findings are often non-specific but may include dry mucous membranes, decreased bowel sounds, generalized abdominal tenderness, and confusion. Patients may also experience vomiting and watery diarrhea. Jaundice is a late finding, typically in more severe cases occurring after 3 days post-ingestion. Large ingestions may exhibit signs of central nervous system involvement, including nervousness, vertigo, ataxia, delirium, seizures, and altered mentation. Death, although extremely rare, has been reported as early as 3 days post-ingestion. Toxicity may often go unrecognized due to the vague presenting complaints and requires a high index of suspicion to make the appropriate inquiries about mushroom ingestion to establish the diagnosis.