Three arteries supply each intercostal space; the posterior intercostal artery and two branches of anterior intercostal arteries. These intercostal blood vessels run along with the nerves between the internal intercostal muscle and innermost intercostal muscles in the costal groove. They are arranged in order from superior to inferior: vein, artery, and nerve.

The posterior intercostal artery for first two intercostal spaces is fed from the superior (supreme) intercostal artery. This artery arises from the costocervical trunk of the subclavian artery. The remaining pair of posterior intercostal arteries from 3rd - 11th intercostal spaces and a pair of subcostal arteries emerge directly descending thoracic aorta.

The anterior intercostal arteries of 1st–6th intercostal spaces are branches of the internal thoracic artery which derive from the first portion of the subclavian artery. The anterior intercostal arteries of 7th–9th intercostal spaces are branches of the musculophrenic artery which is a terminal tributary of the internal thoracic artery. The anterior and posterior intercostal arteries anastomose laterally in the costal groove.

The corresponding posterior intercostal vein drains into azygos or hemiazygos veins and the corresponding anterior intercostal veins drain into internal thoracic or musculophrenic veins. The lymphatics of the thoracic wall drains into parasternal lymph nodes and intercostal lymph nodes. The parasternal lymph nodes and intercostal lymph nodes from the upper thorax drain into the bronchomediastinal trunk, whereas, the intercostal nodes from the lower thorax drains into the thoracic duct.