Once bloating has been diagnosed, the treatment depends on the cause. For functional bloating, the treatment is supportive. The individual must keep a food diary and note all the symptoms. Any food that produces a bloating sensation must then be eliminated. One of the most common causes of flatulence is improper eating habits.

- Experts suggest that one should avoid overeating. Limit food intake to 4 to 7 small meals a day rather than 3 large meals. Next, avoid foods that are rich in fat and simple carbohydrates. Fats take a lot longer to digest, and since they remain in the abdomen a lot longer, the symptoms of bloating may continue for many hours. The low FODMAP diet has been shown to reduce bloating sensation in individuals.

- Avoid eating too fast as one may swallow air. Eating slowly is the key and also suppresses the desire to eat more. Foods should be chewed thoroughly.

- Drinking beverages while eating food or immediately after should be avoided as this will promote flatulence in some people. Beverages, vegetables, and fruits should be consumed at least 1 hour after food

- Adding ginger, cumin and some herbs such as dill, parsley, basil may be beneficial to reduce flatulence

To decrease the gassiness, the following is recommended:

- Do not chew gum

- Do not drink fluids through a straw

- Avoid consuming carbonated sodas

- Do not suck on candy

There are some individuals who tend to swallow air when they are anxious or nervous. The best way to avoid this is to relax and reduce stress. One should practice breathing exercises, yoga, or tai chi. According to a recent study, patients receiving vitamin D had improved quality of life from bloating compared with patients not receiving vitamin D

**Avoid the Following Foods**

There are certain foods that can worsen bloating and cause gassiness. These include the following:

- Lentils and beans contain indigestible sugars which are broken down by bacteria, resulting in the generation of gas

- Fruits and vegetables like carrots, cabbage, brussel sprouts,  prunes, and apricots also cause gassiness

- Artificial sweeteners like sorbitol are not easy to digest and hence are broken down by bacteria to produce gas.

- Patients with meteorism should avoid dairy products, as they can worsen the bloating sensation.

- Wheat contains a protein called gluten which may cause bloating

- Finally, people prone to meteorism should become physically active as this can also lead to increased peristalsis and emptying of gas from the intestine.