Management of COVID-19 depends on the severity of illness at presentation, and patients should be appropriately triaged based on clinical symptoms. Asymptomatic patients or patients with mild illness can be managed in the ambulatory setting with supportive management and recommendation to self-quarantine. However, patients with moderate to severe illness and patients at risk of developing severe illness should be clinically monitored in the hospital setting and managed as outlined in the updated National Institute of Health (NIH) guidelines. As with other viral enteric infections, the gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and vomiting should be conservative with IV fluids, antiemetic medications, and close monitoring of serum electrolytes.

Remdesivir is the first FDA approved drug that has been indicated for use in adults and pediatric patients (over age 12 years and weighing at least 40 kgs) for treatment of hospitalized patients with COVID-19. Liver biochemistries must be performed at baseline and regularly monitored when initiating the patient on remdesivir and during the course of treatment. Potential hepatotoxic agents must be identified early and, if possible, avoided in patients with elevated liver biochemistries. Patients with COVID-19 are associated with an unexplained hypercoagulable state, due to which they are at risk of developing prothrombotic complications such as arterial and venous thrombosis. Clinicians should maintain a high index for these complications and should consider initiating appropriate systemic anticoagulation, provided they are no other contraindications to starting the same.

During the initial stages of the pandemic, all ambulatory endoscopy centers across the country were informed by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to temporarily postpone elective procedures and other non-essential ambulatory clinical activities. However, in mid-April 2020, CMS allowed the reopening of endoscopy centers in a phased approach in accordance with COVID-19 protocols as outlined by the CDC, state, and local authorities. Given that SARS-CoV-2 is an airborne pathogen, the nature of endoscopy being an aerosol-generating procedure, and the potential of possible fecal-oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2, gastroenterologists, medical workers, and endoscopy staff are at increased risk of contracting this virus or transmitting it. Following certain precautions, as described below, that can prevent or reduce the transmission of the virus

**Precautions Against COVID-19 in the GI Office**

- Individuals should always maintain a distance of 6 feet or more between other individuals as much as possible, and chairs in the waiting room should be redistributed to reflect the same.

- Patients and staff members patient should be screened using a standard clinical questionnaire, which should include the typical manifestations of COVID-19. Patients and staff should also be screened for travel history within the last 14 days and exposure to people with COVID-19. Positive responses should be appropriately triaged, tested for SARS-CoV-2 if indicated, and followed up

- Temperature checks using non-contact infrared thermometers must be employed.

- It is recommended that patients and staff should be wearing a facemask covering the mouth and nose at all times.

- Telehealth services, if applicable, should be employed as much as possible to limit transmission.

- All patient contact surfaces and examination rooms must be adequately sanitized before rooming the next patient.

- Before and after examination, frequent handwashing must be performed for a minimum of 20 seconds with soap and water.

- Accompanying family members should be limited and advised to remain in the vehicle until the culmination of patients' office visits.

**Precautions Against COVID-19 in the GI Endoscopy Suite**

- Individuals should always maintain a distance of 6 feet or more between other individuals as much as possible, and chairs in the waiting room should be redistributed to reflect the same.

- Patients and staff members patient should be screened using a standard clinical questionnaire, which should include the typical manifestations of COVID-19. Patients and staff should also be screened for travel history within the last 14 days and exposure to people with COVID-19. Positive responses should be appropriately triaged, tested for SARS-CoV-2 if indicated, and followed up.

- Temperature checks using non-contact infrared thermometers must be employed.

- It is recommended that patient and staff should be wearing a facemask covering the mouth and nose at all times

- Endoscopic procedures must be appropriately triaged based on urgency, and procedures of patients with positive responses must be rescheduled based on clinical severity.

- Accompanying family members of patients undergoing endoscopic procedures should be advised to remain in the vehicle until the procedure is completed, and the patient is ready to be discharged.

- Considering endoscopy is an aerosol-generating procedure, all endoscopists, endoscopy staff, and anesthesia providers must wear full personal protective equipment (PPE): gowns, NIOSH-Approved N95 masks, and face shields for all endoscopies and preferably PAPR for positive COVID-19 cases.

- All endoscopies must be performed in negative pressure rooms if available.

- All endoscopy unit staff must be trained regarding PPE donning/doffing and correct storage of PPE equipment.

- If applicable detailed pictures regarding PPE donning/doffing must be placed in endoscopy suites

- Placement of NIOSH-Approved Air filters in endoscopy rooms should be considered if possible.

- Before and after examination, frequent handwashing must be performed for a minimum of 20 seconds with soap and water.