SSRIs, considered a newer class of antidepressants, are better tolerated than tricyclic antidepressants or monoamine oxidase inhibitors. The primary side effects of sertraline include syncope, lightheadedness, diarrhea, nausea, sweating, dizziness, xerostomia, confusion, hallucinations, tremor, somnolence, impotence, a disorder of ejaculation, fatigue, rhinitis, and female sexual disorder.

There is a bleeding risk associated with sertraline, as it may inhibit platelet aggregation.

Sertraline can prolong the QT interval; however, the prolongation is dose-dependent and is very modest. Furthermore, this risk is higher in citalopram rather than sertraline or other SSRIs.

Sertraline may rarely produce symptoms of serotonin syndrome, though this generally happens when combining it with another serotonergic medication. These symptoms include myoclonus, muscle rigidity, diaphoresis, tremor, hyperreflexia, agitated delirium, and hyperthermia.

Sertraline, like other antidepressants, may increase the risk of suicidal ideation and behavior in children, adolescents, and young adults with major depression.

Sertraline use requires caution in patients 65 years and older. It is identified in the Beers Criteria as a high-risk medication in geriatric patients, as it may induce a syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone or hyponatremia.

Sertraline use in the first trimester of pregnancy increases the risk of cardiovascular-related malformations such as atrial and/or ventricular septal defects in infants.

Neonates exposed to sertraline late in the third trimester have been reported with complications requiring prolonged hospitalization, tube feeding, and respiratory support.