Two main sets of dentition exist; a primary dentition (colloquially referred to as baby teeth) and an adult or permanent dentition. Under normal physiological conditions, a human will have 20 deciduous (baby) teeth and 32 permanent teeth.

The process of tooth development begins with the tissues of the first pharyngeal arch. It is a complex process resulting from interactions between the oral cavity ectoderm, which gives rise to cells that produce enamel. The neural crest ectomesenchyme gives rise to tooth structures other than enamel. Primary dentition begins to form in-utero between 6 and 8 weeks of gestation. Permanent teeth begin to form in utero at 20 weeks of gestation. If the structures do not start to develop at or near these times, they will not develop at all.

Eruption of primary teeth into the mouth begins between the ages of 6 months and two years. Typically, the bottom two front teeth, the bottom central incisors, are the first to erupt. All deciduous teeth should have erupted by the time the child is three years of age. At approximately six years of age, the first permanent tooth erupts, typically the central incisor. Except for the third molars, the wisdom teeth, the process finishes around the age of 13 years with the eruption of the second molar. The third molars typically erupt around ages 17 to 25 years. However, in some cases, they may never erupt due to either the absence of development or remaining impacted in the jaw.

The nerves that provide the sensations of pain, touch, and temperature changes to the teeth are branches of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). The second main branch of CN V is the maxillary nerve, which innervates the upper row of teeth with smaller branches, the superior alveolar nerves. The third branch of CN V is the mandibular nerve, which innervates the bottom row of teeth.

Both rows of teeth are supplied by small branches of the maxillary artery, a branch of the external carotid artery. The maxillary arch is supplied by a plexus of three arterial branches, which include the anterior superior alveolar artery (ASAA), the middle superior alveolar artery (MSAA), and the posterior superior alveolar artery (PSAA). The ASAA arises from the infraorbital artery, a branch of the maxillary artery, to supply the anterior maxillary teeth and gingiva.