While the age of onset for a lipoma varies, it is typically first seen in patients between the ages of 40 to 60, and no gender bias has been documented. Certain types of lipomas are more frequently seen in other age groups. For example, such as hibernomas clinically present around the age of 30, lipoblastomas, and diffuse lipomatosis are commonly found in children older than the age of 3. Approximately 5% of patients present with multiple lipomas.

The prevalence of lipomas has been cited as affecting 1% of the population, while its incidence, which is possibly underreported, is 2.1 per 1000 individuals per year.

A positive diagnosis of a lipoma typically involve the following:

- Physical exam performed by a medical doctor

- An ultrasound of the mass should show that the lipoma or adipose mass is deeper than the surrounding fatty tissue, as well as, exhibiting dissimilar features as compared to the healthy/normal adipose tissue present

- A biopsy (and subsequent analysis of a tissue sample) is not systematically done in routine practice as the diagnosis is generally made clinically, and since it may be difficult to distinguish lipomas from healthy adipose tissue, histologically speaking

**Surveillance**

If lipomas are not painful and harmless, there is no need for removal.

**Treatment**

The techniques used for such include intralesional transcutaneous sodium deoxycholate (associated or not to phosphatidylcholine) injections, intralesional steroids combined with isoproterenol (a beta-2 adrenergic agonist) injections, liposuction of the tumor, or surgical excision. This latter is likely the most effective method to prevent them from reoccurring, though the encapsulation must also be removed for the most effective treatment and to decrease the risk of reoccurrence.

**Prognosis**

The prognosis for benign lipomas is very good. These are benign entities and carry no risk for malignant transformation.