# Continuing Education Activity

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma (MAC) is a rare cutaneous neoplasm of follicular and sweat gland differentiation. The locally aggressive nature and deep infiltration make complete excision of the tumor with margin control a crucial part of management. In contrast, MAC is reported to have a relatively high recurrence rate with standard-wide local excision (60% in some case series). More favorable cure rates with lower recurrence rates are reported with Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS). This activity reviews the clinical diagnosis and treatment of microcystic adnexal carcinoma and highlights the critical role of early diagnosis and treatment.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the clinical presentation of a patient with microcystic adnexal carcinoma.
- Explain the common physical exam findings and histopathologic findings of microcystic adnexal carcinoma.
- Describe the importance of early diagnosis with an appropriate biopsy technique.
- Summarize Mohs micrographic surgery's role in the management of microcystic adnexal carcinoma.

# Introduction

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma (MAC) is a rare cutaneous neoplasm of follicular and sweat gland differentiation, first described by Goldstein and Barr in 1982.

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma is an indolent but locally aggressive and deeply infiltrative tumor with a predilection for the head and neck area. It is most notable for its perineural invasion (upwards of 80%) and infiltration beyond clinically apparent margins. Microcystic adnexal carcinoma spreads characteristically by local invasion with rare cases of spread to regional lymph nodes.

The locally aggressive nature and deep infiltration make complete excision of the tumor with margin control a crucial part of management. In contrast, MAC is reported to have a fairly high recurrence rate with standard-wide local excision (60% in some case series).

# Etiology

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma is a tumor that most commonly occurs on the head and neck, especially on the central facial skin of middle-aged and older adults.

- Ultraviolet (UV) radiation.

- Prior radiation therapy.

- Immunosuppression or immunosuppressive medications.

- Genetic predisposition.

MAC has been noted to occur at increased incidence after therapeutic radiation in 19% to 50% of studied patients with Fitzpatrick skin types I and II (in whom ultraviolet skin damage may also be a contributing factor) after an average latent period of 30 to 40 years.

Although the association between immunosuppression and the risk of other skin cancers, such as squamous cell and basal cell carcinoma, has been well studied--the association between immunosuppression and the risk of the development of MAC is less clear.

# Epidemiology

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma is a rare neoplasm most commonly seen in the fourth to sixth decade of life and occurs in near-equal distribution between sexes. However, a slight female preponderance has been noted in the literature.

Although it is most frequently reported in Caucasian patients, a few cases have also been reported in Japanese, Indian, and African-American patients.

# Pathophysiology

Clinically, microcystic adnexal carcinoma often presents as a slow-growing, firm, flesh-colored plaque, nodule, or cyst-like tumor on the head and neck of an elderly caucasian individual. It is most commonly confused clinically with basal cell carcinoma, which is often diagnosed with a simple shave biopsy. However, the definitive diagnostic pathology for MAC lies much deeper, and even a deep shave biopsy may be insufficient for adequate diagnosis. A deep punch or incisional biopsy should be considered if MAC is suspected or even in the differentia for diagnosis.

# Histopathology

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma often presents as a firm plaque on the upper lip or medial cheek. Histologically, MAC has a "paisley-tie" cellular pattern with a dense red sclerotic stroma. It must be histologically differentiated from the other common paisley-tie-pattern lesions: syringoma, morpheaform basal cell carcinoma, and desmoplastic trichoepithelioma. The MAC tumor can have both eccrine and follicular differentiation.

Superficially, it is composed of keratin horn cysts (support a follicular origin) and islands of cells with basaloid and squamous epithelium with ductal differentiation (support an eccrine origin). The deeper component of the tumor consists of nests and strands of cells embedded in the hyalinized stroma. Perineural invasion is frequently noted. Perivascular lymphoid aggregates are common in tumor stroma. Minimal atypia and mitoses are noted. Due to all these features, this tumor is thought to be derived from a pluripotent adnexal keratinocyte which can have both eccrine and follicular differentiation.

The histologic differential diagnosis includes:

- Trichoadenoma

- Syringoma

- Desmoplastic trichoepithelioma

- Morpheaform basal cell carcinoma

Superficially, MAC mimics syringoma, desmoplastic trichoepithelioma, or infiltrative BCC, making it challenging to diagnose MAC correctly without a good sample of the deep histologic architecture. And without a deeper biopsy enabling confirmation of the diagnosis early, MAC can progress and result in increased morbidity.

Immunohistochemical staining can be somewhat unreliable, with conflicting staining patterns reported in the literature.

- Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) has been reported in half the cases of MAC, which can help distinguish it from BCC and SCC. Numerous other stains have been investigated over the past decade--including Ki67, CK7, AE14, CK19, and CK20--in an attempt to accurately differentiate MAC from its histologic look likes, but none of these have so far been particularly reliable.

- Epithelial membrane antigen and cytokeratin are noted in MAC, which can, in some cases, help make the diagnosis.

# History and Physical

Clinically, microcystic adnexal carcinoma presents as a slow-growing, indurated white or pink nodule, plaque, or tumor located on the head and neck of a middle-aged to elderly Caucasian patient. In one retrospective analysis of MAC cases, 42 out of the 48 cases were reported to occur on the head and neck.

Clinically, MAC is somewhat indolent, often appears benign, and is often present for many years by the time of diagnosis. The morphology on inspection is often of an ill-defined, skin-colored, or yellow lesion with overlying telangiectasia.

The average size MAC at presentation is about 2cm based on existing literature, though larger lesions have also been reported.

# Evaluation

MAC is often clinically indistinguishable from other flesh-colored tumors on the head and neck. In contrast to many other tumors, MAC can be profoundly infiltrative and has a predilection for significant perineural spread. Therefore, early and definitive diagnosis is key to allowing for early and complete treatment and prevention of morbidity.

Definitive early diagnosis is best established by providing the dermatopathologist with a biopsy sample of adequate tissue depth since a large part of the correct diagnosis depends upon visualization of tumor extension into the deeper dermis and possible observation of perineural invasion as well. A superficial biopsy can lead to an incorrect diagnosis, so an incisional or deep punch biopsy is greatly preferred if MAC is suspected.

**Skin Examination**

- If a biopsy diagnosis reveals a MAC, a full-body-skin examination should be performed.

**Lymph Nodes**

- Although regional metastases are rare, a lymph node exam should be performed.

- A Sentinal lymph node biopsy can be performed if lymph nodes are detected on examination.

**Imaging**

Imaging is not necessary in most cases of MAC. CT, MRI, or a fat-suppression MRI protocol could be considered if there is a concern for possible perineural spread or local invasion.

**Dermoscopy**

Dermoscopic findings have been reported in a limited number of case reports, with one of the most characteristic findings being the presence of whitish "clods" of varying sizes. These white clods likely represent keratinous cysts.

# Treatment / Management

MAC is treated surgically with wide excision or Mohs micrographic surgery. However, MAC frequently extends beyond the clinical margins. For this reason, Mohs micrographic surgery is the treatment of choice as it offers a higher cure rate and is the most tissue-sparing. Several case series in the literature have demonstrated that the tissue defects remaining after Mohs surgery were four times larger than the prior clinical estimate.

This indicates that the preoperative estimate of margins is unreliable, and a complete histologic assessment of margins is recommended. Radiation is ineffective because the tumor is known to be radioresistant, and the literature suggests that surgical excision is the most effective and definitive treatment method.

**Wide Local Excision**

- Standard surgical margins should be more comprehensive than clinical margins because of the infiltrative growth of the tumor.

- With wide local excision, recurrence rates range from 40% to 60%.

- Significant soft tissue defects can be noted after tumor resection and may necessitate reconstruction with local flaps and skin grafts. Reconstruction after incomplete tumor excision, however, could require the later removal of a flap or graft, which has further obscured the area of tumor positivity. This can result in delayed detection of recurrence and significantly increased complexity of definitive treatment.

**MMS or Excision With Pathologic Margin Assessment**

- MMS uses horizontal en-face sections of the excised tissue, thereby examining 100% of the peripheral and deep margins. Several case series have been published showing much lower recurrence rates when MAC is treated with MMS.****Tumors exhibiting PNI are regarded to be more aggressive and have higher morbidity and mortality. The infiltrative nature of MAC and associated PNI emphasize the importance of excision with margin control.

**Lymph Node Sampling/Dissection**

- Nodal staging is not recommended initially for primary MAC.

- Nodal metastasis in MAC is rare.

- Lymph node dissection of the draining nodal basin is rarely performed. Most of the rare cases of distal spread have been gleaned from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database and the medical oncology literature.

**Radiotherapy**

The use of radiotherapy as monotherapy is not recommended. Although the role of radiation therapy is questionable, adjuvant radiotherapy has been used successfully and has sometimes been recommended if peripheral nerves are involved or if margins cannot be cleared surgically--based on recent evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Despite this, chemoradiation with a carboplatin/paclitaxel combination has been used in patients who refused surgical treatment and those who remained tumor-free for six years.

**Follow up**

The frequency of follow-up should be based on patient risk factors and the extent of local and systemic involvement. Education on photoprotection, periodic self-examination, post-operative care, and expectations regarding surgical scars and changes in sensation is advised.

# Differential Diagnosis

The clinical differential diagnosis of MAC includes morpheaform basal cell carcinoma, desmoplastic trichoepithelioma, metastatic adenocarcinoma, and syringoma.

**Morpheaform Basal Cell Carcinoma**

- Thin strands and nests of basaloid cells extending into the dermis

- Limited peripheral palisading

- Stroma is dense and sclerotic

- Perineural invasion can be seen

**Syringoma**histologic

- The superficial proliferation of cells with pale pink cytoplasm forming nests and tubules of uniform size embedded in a sclerotic stroma

- The nests of syringoma vary in size and shape and may assume a comma or tadpole shape

- Tubular areas show ductal differentiation with central lumina lined by the eosinophilic cuticle

- Horn cysts and milia can be noted

- Lacks deep infiltration and pleomorphism

- They can be difficult to distinguish from sclerosing BCC, desmoplastic trichoepithelioma, MAC on superficial biopsies, and metastatic carcinomas

**Metastatic Adenocarcinoma**

- Islands, clusters, or single files of large pleomorphic, atypical cells with or without ductal differentiation

- Pleomorphism and atypia are apparent on higher power

- Mitotic figures can be present

**Desmoplastic Trichoepithelioma**

- Histology on low power shows a dome-shaped papule with an infiltrative dermal basaloid proliferation, small tumor nests, cords, and fibrotic stroma

- Sweat ducts are not a part of the proliferation

- It tends not to invade the deep dermis and subcutaneous tissue

# Surgical Oncology

- According to current evidence-based clinical practice guidelines, sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is not recommended for staging MAC.

- Currently, no evidence supports neck dissection for detecting positive lymph nodes.

- The local disease should determine a treatment strategy for node-positive and metastatic disease.

# Radiation Oncology

As of now, radiation therapy is not known to be effective for microcystic adnexal carcinoma. Radiotherapy alone is not recommended. The latest evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for MAC state that adjuvant radiotherapy may be considered when MAC involves peripheral nerves, margins cannot be surgically cleared, or if the tumor is present at the margins.

A combination of carboplatin and paclitaxel has been used in chemoradiation to treat patients refusing surgical treatment, resulting in the possibility of a six-year tumor-free survival.

# Prognosis

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma is a locally aggressive, deeply infiltrative tumor with a propensity for perineural invasion. Although metastasis is uncommon, it has been reported. There is a high propensity for recurrence in the setting of perineural invasion, especially when removed without full margin control.

Histologic margins often extend beyond the clinical margins, and MMS provides the highest cure rate for these tumors. Several cases in the literature have demonstrated that MAC is not only radioresistant, but that radiation may indeed induce conversion to a more aggressive tumor clinically and histologically. Long-term follow-up is recommended for patients with MAC, as cases of local recurrence have been reported decades after initial treatment.

Untreated tumors are locally aggressive and result in local and regional invasion. Distant metastases and death have been reported, although this is rare. A few key statements that can be made based on prior literature are the following:

- Skin lesions suspicious for MAC require a deep biopsy that includes the deeper dermis and subcutis.

- MAC is best treated by surgery that examines the surrounding and deep margins of the removed tissue.

- The role of radiation therapy is debated. Use is limited to adjuvant therapy for MAC, cases of incomplete surgical treatment, or patients who are poor surgical candidates.

- Patients should be seen every 6 to 12 months for the first five years after treatment.

- Patient education on photoprotection, as well as periodic skin examinations, is advised.

# Complications

The most common complication of untreated MAC tumors is locally aggressive invasion, sometimes with widespread perineural invasion. However, it may rarely result in distant metastasis and death. The involvement of vital structures is a further concern.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

It is essential to inform patients that MAC is a slow-growing, relentless tumor that is often difficult to recognize early. It is imperative to educate patients treated for MAC that follow-up examinations are important and that recurrence can happen decades later in some cases. Education on photoprotection, periodic self-skin examination, postoperative wound healing, and expected changes in sensation should be considered to promote early detection of both primary tumors and recurrence.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma is a malignant tumor of sweat gland origin found primarily on the head and neck. Establishing the correct diagnosis requires using an appropriate (deep) biopsy technique. It is one of the "paisley-tie" pattern tumors histologically. Ohs micrographic surgery should be considered the first line of surgical treatment since it allows for intraoperative analysis of the entire surgical margin and can often allow for a more precise assessment and removal of peri-neural spread.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Microcystic adnexal carcinoma is a difficult diagnosis both clinically and histologically. The presenting plaque or papule has often been present for a long time before an accurate diagnosis is established with histopathologic confirmation. An accurate diagnosis depends on a proper (deep) biopsy technique prompted by a high index of suspicion.

It is sometimes critical for patients with microcystic adnexal carcinoma to be able to consult with an interprofessional team of specialists that may include a dermatologist, an otolaryngologist, and sometimes even a radiologist for appropriate imaging. Nurses play an essential role in the interprofessional group by assisting with patient care and education. A pharmacist may assist by ensuring the patient is on appropriate analgesics and antibiotics during any postoperative period or assist further if chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy is used. Radiology also may play a role in determining the extent of tissue involvement, including the occasional intraorbital spread and perineural invasion. This interprofessional paradigm with open communication will utilize the best expertise of each member and help drive better outcomes. [Level 5]

Therapeutic radiology may also play a role in chemoradiotherapy or treatment of perineural invasion when needed. Following an exhaustive review of medical literature from peer-reviewed journals, dermatology guidelines have been developed to determine appropriate management based on current evidence.