Oppositional and defiant behaviors can be seen in many conditions, and it is important for the clinician to differentiate ODD from other disorders. In addition to those listed below, other conditions, including OCD and autism, should be considered as well, as these may also present with oppositional behaviors in the face of disrupted routines or obsessive-compulsive rituals.

**Conduct Disorder**

While both CD and ODD deal with conflicts with authority figures, behaviors in ODD are less severe than in conduct disorder and tend to involve primarily angry or argumentative behavior or behaviors that are intentionally annoying. In contrast, conduct disorder tends to be more severe and involves problems related to physical aggression, fire-setting, animal cruelty, truancy from school, property damage, or stealing. It is important to note that while children diagnosed with ODD are often diagnosed with CD later in life, not all individuals with CD have a prior diagnosis of ODD.

**Attention-deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)**

The association between ODD and ADHD is well-studied in the literature. ADHD is a common childhood behavioral disorder that involves restless or fidgety behavior, inability to sustain focus on tasks or waiting for their turns, and problems with following rules in multiple settings. ADHD and ODD often co-exist, and the clinician needs to rule out ADHD as a primary reason for the oppositional/defiant behaviors. Furthermore, oppositionality is not uncommonly seen in ADHD as well as autism, in particular, when there is a change in routine or other sensory disruption.

**Mood Disorders**

Emotional dysregulation, negative affect, and irritability are commonly seen in mood disorders, including depression and bipolar disorders. Mood disorders are unsurprisingly common comorbidities alongside ODD, as oppositional individuals tend to exhibit problems with emotional regulation as well as a moody or irritable affect. In addition, ODD may represent a prodrome of mood disorders that may evolve later in life, and both disorders share similar risk factors (14). Concurrent mood disorders should, therefore, be identified early and treated appropriately during evaluation. Importantly a diagnosis of ODD should not be made if the symptoms are exclusively present during a mood disorder.

**Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD)**

DMDD is a childhood disorder characterized by frequent temper outbursts along with a persistently irritable mood in between outbursts. Criteria require that symptoms be present for at least twelve months, be present in multiple settings, and have an onset before the age of ten. While ODD and DMDD share symptoms of chronic irritable mood and temper outbursts, irritable mood in between outbursts persists in DMDD, and the severity of temper outbursts are more severe. According to the DSM-5, if an individual meets the criteria for both ODD and DMDD, a diagnosis of only DMDD should be given.