Microscopic evaluation of sputum for acid-fast bacilli begins with making a smear. A typical smear is 3 cm by 2 cm in size, however, depending on the individual laboratory guidelines, it can be as small as 2 cm by 1 cm as well. Smearing must be done by pressing and applying the sputum uniformly on the slide. Ideally, a smear of uniform thickness should be made at the center of the slide to facilitate visualization using a microscope. The smeared slides should also be properly heat-fixed before proceeding on to the staining process. Training staff to make good smears is pivotal for accurate and valid testing.

Acid-fast structures can be visualized under a microscope using two principal methods, the carbolfuchsin staining, and the fluorochrome procedure.

The **carbolfuchsin****staining**comprises of the Ziehl-Neelsen method and the Kinyoun method. In the Ziehl-Neelsen method, smeared slides are first stained with carbolfuchsin (CF).M. tuberculosis. The slides are then stained a second time with methylene blue that serves as a counterstain. The recommended time for stain to smear contact is 1 minute but is largely dependant on the quality of methylene blue. Counterstaining creates an effective visual contrast of red acid-fast bacilli during microscopy. The Ziehl-Neelsen method of staining is also called the hot method as it involves heating the carbolfuchsin stain. In contrast, the historic method of staining called the Kinyoun method does not involve heating and is hence known as the cold method. Currently, the cold method is already obsolete.

The **fluorochrome procedure**primarily utilizes one of two dyes, the auramine-O dye, or the auramine-rhodamine dye. Auramine-O is a hydrochloride dye that causes stained AFB to emit fluorescence (green or yellow) when viewed under a fluorescence microscope. Unlike the Ziehl-Neelsen method, heating is not required for the penetration of the stain into the bacteria. The stain to smear contact time, however, must be a minimum of 20 minutes for the acid-fast organisms to pick up the stain properly. After the auramine dye has fully stained the smear, a drop of acid alcohol is applied for one to two minutes to decolorize the smear. Methylene blue or potassium permanganate is used as a counterstain to provide background color. Potassium permanganate is preferred as it provides a darker background giving it a better contrast and sensitivity as compared to methylene blue.

Multiple studies have compared the Ziehl-Neelsen method with the fluorochrome procedure. The results obtained by both methods are considered highly reproducible. This means that both methods are equally capable of detecting acid-fast bacilli in a sputum sample. ****Although, it is interesting to note that a few studies suggest that fluorescence microscopy is more likely to positively detect a sputum sample with a fewer number of acid-fast bacilli. It also has the advantage of taking half as long as light-microscopy to declare a sample negative of acid-fast bacilli.