In the process of healing, the initial episode of acute pericarditis, obliteration of the pericardial cavity occurs by granulation tissue formation and subsequent fibrosis of the pericardium. This causes the heart to be encased in a contracted, non-elastic pericardium. This rigid pericardium prevents transmission of negative intrathoracic pressures during inspirations to the heart, limiting ventricular filling during late diastole when the pericardium has reached its elastic limit. In the case of a concomitant effusion, the ventricular filling is impeded during the entire diastolic cycle due to tamponading of the heart. In all, both disorders lead to decreased end-diastolic volume and, therefore, decreased cardiac output. In constrictive pericarditis, the dissociation between intrathoracic pressure and intracardiac pressures due to decreased pericardial elasticity decreases venous return with inspiration. However, stretching of pulmonary veins during inspiration still occurs, whereas left ventricular pressure remains constant, causing decreased left ventricular filling.

This decrease in left ventricular (LV) volume allows a septal shift to the left, permitting filling of the right ventricle (RV) but not due to increases in venous return. In tamponade, there still is a transmission of intrathoracic pressures to the heart, causing increased venous return during inspiration. This causes bowing of the interventricular septum into the LV during diastole, preventing complete filling of the left side of the heart. This is coupled with decreased LV return due to low pulmonary venous pressure compared to left ventricular pressure. Common to both disorders is the equalization of the diastolic pressures in all four chambers. This occurs due to a fixed pericardium or fluid volume exerting equal contact pressures on all chambers, causing elevation and equalization of the diastolic pressures. Additionally, the stiff pericardium limits the expansion of the ventricles beyond a point after which one can fill only by compression of the other. In tamponade, these pressures decrease in unison during inspiration, whereas in pericarditis, right atrial pressure may increase or remain constant during inspiration while left atrial/pulmonary capillary wedge pressure decreases. In patients with effusive-constrictive pericarditis, a pericardial effusion under compression of a fixed pericardium mimics tamponade.