**ABO Antigens and Antibodies**

People can be divided into four main groups (A, B, O, and AB) based on the agglutination patterns of their red blood cells. The ABO blood group system consists of A and B antigens on red blood cells and their corresponding antibodies in the sera of people who do not express those antigens.

The A and B blood group antigens are oligosaccharide antigens generated by reactions catalyzed by glycosyltransferases. The expression of these antigens determines the blood type of the patient. The human ABO gene is found on chromosome 9; it spans over 18 kilobases and is made up of 7 coding exons.  Functional A and B alleles encode the A and B glycosyltransferases, leading to the synthesis of A and B antigens. Due to nucleotide substitutions leading to amino acid substitutions, A and B genes encode the A and B transferases with different sugar specificities. The O genes are not active because they cannot produce functional enzymes.

Group O individuals have an H gene found on chromosome 19, forming the H-antigen. This antigen serves as a precursor oligosaccharide needed to form the A and B antigens. H antigens are abundantly noted in type O individuals. If the A and B genes are both present, then some of the H becomes A, and some become B, forming the AB group. If the H gene is defective or not present, then the H antigen cannot be formed, and therefore A or B cannot be formed. The consequence is a rare phenotype known as the Bombay phenotype. Patients with the Bombay phenotype have antibodies in the plasma similar to those present in the plasma of type O individuals, but they also have clinically significant anti-H antibodies.

Based on the pattern and degree of agglutination using reference antibodies and red blood cells, subgroups of ABO have also been identified. Subgroups are distinguished by decreased amounts of A, B, or O (H) antigens on the red blood cells. Blood type A has the most variation with different subgroups; type A1 has the standard amount of antigen A, with decreasing amounts of this antigen noted in the subsequent subtypes.