Obesity has become a major public health crisis, with hundreds of millions of people classified as overweight in recent decades.

Many biomedical, socioeconomic, cultural, and other factors contribute to the onset of obesity. Characteristic western lifestyle features, such as energy-intense diets, high meat consumption, and a sedentary lifestyle, contribute to this phenomenon.

One contributor to the pathophysiology of obesity that has garnered particular interest is the composition of gut microbiota, which may be simply defined as the microbes that live on us and within us.microbiome. Research into the role of gut microbiota affecting host metabolism and homeostasis and their effect on disease processes began with Élie Metchnikoff in the early 1900s. Trillions of gut microbes occupy the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), mainly in the colon. These exist in a complex ecosystem that interacts in tandem with human metabolic activity and a highly diverse microbiome.

Recent literature has shown how diet influences the composition of gut microbiota and how diet can cause obesity. Nevertheless, there is much controversy regarding the precise mechanisms by which gut microbiota contribute to obesity. This chapter will focus on the interactions between gut microbiota and enteroendocrine hormone regulation and their relation to excessive adipose accumulation. Three particular mechanisms will be emphasized: the permeation of the intestinal barrier, the influence of the gut-brain axis on eating behavior, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.