Ampicillin/sulbactam is not absorbed adequately after oral absorption. In intravenous formulations, penetration into tissue/fluids includes intraperitoneal fluid (60%), myometrium (64%), sputum (12% to 14%), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (11% to 14%).

**Dosage and Administration**

- Ampicillin/sulbactam administration can be through intramuscular or intravenous route.

- For IV administration, administer the dose by slow intravenous injection over at least 10 to 15 minutes.

- Administer ampicillin/sulbactam by deep intramuscular injection within one hour of preparation.

- The recommended adult dosage of ampicillin/sulbactam is 1.5 grams (1 gram ampicillin + 0.5 gram sulbactam) to 3 grams (2 grams ampicillin + 1 gram sulbactam) every six hours. The total dose of sulbactam should not exceed 4 grams per day.

- IDSA 2022 guidelines suggest that for infection caused by carbapenem-resistant acinetobacter baumannii(CRAB) infections, ampicillin/sulbactam 9 g IV q8h over 4 hours is recommended. For mild infections caused by CRAB organisms sensitive to ampicillin-sulbactam, 3g IV q4h is recommended.

**Pediatric Patients**

- One Year of age or older: The recommended daily dose of ampicillin/sulbactam in pediatric patients is 300 mg per kg of body weight administered via intravenous infusion in equally divided doses every 6 hours. Caution must be observed in the administration to neonates with age less than one week and premature infants due to an underdeveloped urinary system.

- Dosage recommendations for pediatric patients weighing 40 kg or more are the same as for adult patients.

- The course of intravenous therapy should not routinely exceed 14 days.

- The pharmacokinetics of ampicillin/sulbactam does not change in the pediatric population compared to adults.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustment is suggested.

**Patients with Renal Impairment**: Excretion of ampicillin/sulbactam is primarily by renal route; hence its half-life increases in patients with impaired renal function.

- If creatine clearance is>30 mL/minute, the recommended dose of ampicillin/sulbactam is 1.5 to 3 grams every six hours. (No dosage adjustment is necessary)

- If creatine clearance is between 15 to 29 mL/minute, the recommended dose of ampicillin/sulbactam is 1.5 to 3 grams every twelve hours.

- If creatine clearance is between 15 to 29 mL/minute, the recommended dose of ampicillin/sulbactam is 1.5 to 3 grams daily.

- It is important to note that in patients with impaired renal function, the elimination kinetics of ampicillin and sulbactam are similarly affected; hence the ratio of one to the other will remain constant at a given renal function.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**For patients With preterm pre-labor rupture of membranes < 34 weeks of gestation, treatment with intravenous ampicillin and erythromycin is suggested by the ACOG(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists) to prevent group B streptococcal perinatal infection.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Clinical data suggest that ampicillin-sulbactam is present in low levels in milk that are not expected to cause adverse effects in breastfed infants. Disruption of the infant's gastrointestinal flora can result in diarrhea or thrush. Ampicillin-sulbactam is acceptable in nursing mothers.