# Definition/Introduction

Xenon is an element with the symbol Xe and an atomic number of 54 (group 18 of the periodic table). It is an inert mono-atomic gas firstly identified in 1898 by the British chemists William Ramsay (1852-1916) and Morris Travers (1872-1961) in the residue obtained by partial evaporation of liquid air (krypton impurity).

Among the physical and chemical properties of xenon, the boiling point is 166.6 K, the melting point 161.7 K, density is 5.851 g/dm2 whereas the colour spectrum is blue-green. Because the oil-gas partition coefficient of xenon is 1.9, it is among the noble gases the most soluble gas in oil (lipids).

Even if xenon does not react with any chemical element, it is always able to form quite particular compounds with water, hydroquinone, and phenol. This noble gas can be oxidized by groups that are extremely electronegative, forming salts. For instance, the compound, called xenon hexafluoplatinate, was first synthesized in 1962 by the chemist Neil Bartlett (1932-2008) and it was the first example of a noble gas chemical compound reported in the chemical literature. Other Xenon fluorides are the Xenon difluoride (XeF2), Xenon tetrafluoride (XeF4), and Xenon hexafluoride (XeF6).

Xenon can be manufactured by the fractional distillation of liquefied air. The use of xenon in the industry is limited by high costs. Among these applications, there is the xenon lamp, a particular arc lamp that uses xenon gas to produce very intense and white light similar to sunlight. There are several types of xenon lamps, all consisting of a glass or quartz tube with two tungsten electrodes at the ends and filled with xenon gas after vacuuming them. These lamps are used for street lighting, photo flashes and projectors, car headlights, and marine lighting. It is also used for lasers, and x-ray tubes as well as in the food industry for killing microorganism, and in aerospace.

**Xenon in Medicine**

The main role of the element concerns its use as a radioactive diagnostic agent in clinical imaging, and inhaled anesthetic in general anesthesia. Other applications regard the organ protection, ophthalmology, and in dermatology.

Clinical Imaging

Xenon is indicated for cerebral flow assessment (xenon-enhanced computed tomography), pulmonary function evaluation, and lung imaging. Xenon has also found use in nuclear medicine with computed tomography as well as single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In summary, the gas can be useful for the measurement of cerebral blood flow, whole-brain scans, and ventilation studies of the lungs through MRI (131 Xe), SPECT (133 Xe), and CT (129 Xe).

General Anesthesia

The anesthetic proprieties of xenon were discovered in 1939 and applied in mice in 1940 (JH Lawrence) and subsequently in two humans volunteers (Cullen and Gross), in 1951.

Organ Protection

An important field of study concerns the xenon-induced organ protection. For example, xenon use has been proposed for preventing ischemia/reperfusion damage after Stanford Type-A acute aortic dissection surgery.

Other Clinical Uses

Apart from this research, there have been studies with the gas for pathologies including dementia, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, and obsessive-compulsive disorders.

# Issues of Concern

**Clinical Imaging**

In clinical imaging, as per the manufacturer’s labeling, there are no adverse reactions or contraindications to the use of Xe-133 gas. There are none known metabolism effects. There are no known significant drug-drug interactions. The drug is listed as pregnancy risk factor C in which animal reproduction studies have demonstrated an adverse effect on the fetus; however there are no adequate and well-controlled trials in humans, but the potential benefits may indicate the use of the drug in pregnant women in spite of potential risks. While the Xe-133 gas excretion in breast milk is not known, the manufacturer does recommend the substitution of formula feedings due to the potential for adverse reactions to breastfeeding infants.

**General Anesthesia**

When used for anesthetic purposes, xenon is associated with many advantages although disadvantages must be also reported.

**Advantages**

**Xenon anesthesia seems to be associated with:**

- a more stable intraoperative blood pressure, and lower heart rate through both the preservation of sympathetic tone and modulation of the autonomic heart balance. The result is an important cardioprotective effect due to an overall improvement of the myocardial oxygen supply-demand ratio

- neuroprotective properties under normal surgical conditions and also when brain tissue is injured and during ischemia and hemorrhage

- renal protection as xenon preconditioning protects against renal ischemic-reperfusion damage via hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF-1alpha) activation and via miR-21 target signaling pathway

- no effects on coagulation, platelet function, or the immune system

- no effects on hepatic function

- a safety profile in individuals with susceptibility for malignant hyperthermia

- fast anesthesia induction

- faster emergence from anesthesia than volatile agents. Of note, early studies suggested that there is no positive correlation between the anesthesia lasting and the emergence times

- no teratogenic or toxic effects to the fetus

- no detrimental ecological effects

**Disadvantages**

- The hypnotic effect of xenon requires a mixture with 30-37% oxygen.

- Xenon can provoke a higher incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting (up to 45% of cases).

- Poor efficacy in preventing postoperative delirium.

- Diffusion into closed spaces (caution in those with pneumothorax, or ileus).

- Increased pulmonary resistance (the gas in oxygen composes a high-density mixture increasing Reynold’s number), although the clinical consequences in those with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or morbid obesity is uncertain.

- High costs. probably, the development of newer ventilators that operates in a closed-circuit, rebreathing mode to minimize the loss of xenon can reduce costs favoring, in turn, the diffusion of the technique.

# Clinical Significance

**Xenon imaging**

Xenon, Xe-133 gas can serve as a contrast agent in nuclear medicine and modern laser technology. It is a beta emitter with a physical half-life of 5.2 days, a photopeak of 81 keV, and beta-decay.

**Xenon Anesthesia**

**Pharmacokinetics**

Xenon is absorbed by the pulmonary alveoli. The percentage of xenon flow into the brain correlates with the concentration available in the inspired air and with the patient's ventilation. Since the blood-gas solubility coefficient of xenon is the lowest of all inhaled anesthetics (xenon 0.115; other inhalation anesthetics 0.115-1.14), induction of anesthesia is very rapid. The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) is a measurement of anesthetic potency corresponding to the concentration of the inhaled anesthetic in the alveoli that is needed to prevent motor response in 50% of subjects in response to surgical painful stimuli. For xenon, the MAC is very high as it is approximately 63% in adults (previously indicated as 71%)

The saturation concentration at the effector site (brain) is reached in a few minutes whereas the washout phase at the end of anesthesia is very fast. As a consequence, during emergence from general anesthesia, eye-opening, orientation, and reaction on-demand account for about 4 minutes.

Xenon is an inert gas, so no metabolism occurs under normal conditions and it does not interfere with renal or hepatic systems. Therefore, it is eliminated unchanged from the lungs. Regarding the elimination half-life, due to the reduced solubility coefficient of xenon, the elimination of the anesthetic begins already during its administration.

**Pharmacodynamics**

The glutamatergic presynaptic responses are the major target of anesthesia-induced neuronal responses. In particular, xenon decreases glutamate (Glu) N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated whole-cell currents through noncompetitive inhibition. Probably, xenon binds to the glycine binding site on the NMDA receptor reducing the glutamate affinity.

Interestingly, the commonly used anesthetic agents work by enhancing the inhibitory transmission via the GABAA receptors and have no or nonessential effects on the glutamatergic NMDA-mediated activity. This aspect explains the greater neuroprotective effect of xenon and a potential reduced impact on memory and learning processes during anesthesia.

The glutamatergic effect of xenon, due to the inhibition of NMDA receptors in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, is responsible for analgesia that is about one and a half times higher than that of nitrous oxide.