Evaluating the use of polymyxin therapy in treating multidrug-resistant organism infections requires a team of healthcare professionals that includes a nurse, laboratory technologists, pharmacists, and several physician specialists to achieve excellent outcomes. Without proper management, the morbidity of polymyxin overdose is high. Clinicians have a vital role in determining the need for directed treatment with polymyxins. They need to determine which polymyxin is necessary, how to dose the medication correctly, and what the duration of therapy needs to be for thoroughly treating the patient without causing harm. Some of the points of care may involve the following:

- Ordering drug levels in the blood

- Monitor the patient for signs and symptoms of respiratory depression, hematuria, or acute renal failure.

- Consult with the pharmacist about the dosing of polymyxins

- Consult with a nephrologist on further management, which may include dialysis

Therapeutic drug monitoring should take place for patients to meet the target serum concentration with polymixins. The physician initiates polymyxin therapy, and the pharmacist will typically handle subsequent dosing adjustments. Nurses need to assess these patients for any potential toxicities, such as nephrotoxicity or neurotoxicity, that may develop for patients. The outcome of potential damage due to these toxicities depends on early identification, so the healthcare team needs to monitor patients for adverse effects closely and determine the next best step in treatment. Lastly, laboratory technicians are crucial for determining the BUN and creatinine in patients on intravenous polymyxins since there is a high risk of nephrotoxicity. All of these healthcare professionals working together have a vital role in managing patients on this systemic antibiotic therapy, so collaboration becomes essential to provide them with the best outcome possible.