The goal of chemotherapy is to inhibit cell proliferation and tumor multiplication, thus avoiding invasion and metastasis. But this results in toxic effects of chemotherapy due to the effect on normal cells as well. Inhibition of tumor growth can take place at several levels within the cell and its environment.

Traditional chemotherapy agents primarily affect either macromolecular synthesis and function of neoplastic cells by interfering with DNA, RNA, or proteins synthesis or affecting the appropriate functioning of the preformed molecule. When interference in macromolecular synthesis or function is sufficient, it leads to cell death due to the chemotherapeutic agent's direct effect or by triggering apoptosis. With traditional agents, cell death may be delayed as a proportion of the cells die due to a given treatment. So, the medicine may require repeating to achieve a response. The toxicity of cytotoxic drugs is most significant during the S phase, as it is the DNA synthetic phase of the cell cycle. Vinca alkaloids and Taxanes act in the M phase and block mitotic spindle formation.

Combination chemotherapy is a common choice to produce adequate responses as well. They appear to prevent the development of resistant clones by promoting cytotoxicity in resting and dividing cells.

Chemotherapy can be administered in neoadjuvant, adjuvant, combined, and metastatic settings. Neoadjuvant therapy is a treatment given before the primary treatment. Adjuvant therapy is the treatment given in addition to the initial therapy, which can suppress or eliminate the growth of occult cancer cells. Adjuvant therapy is now the standard for breast, lung, colorectal, and ovarian cancers. Combined modalities like chemotherapy and radiation are used to shrink the tumor before the surgery or curative intent in cancers like head and neck, lung, anal.

The combination of chemotherapeutic agents is delivered cyclically based on the three basic principles.

- Fraction kill hypothesis: A uniform drug dose kills a constant fraction of tumor cells rather than a constant number regardless of tumor burden.

- Neoplastic tumor cells have a linear response between the dose administered and the efficacy.

- Goldie-Coldman hypothesis: Cancer cells acquire spontaneous mutations that cause drug resistance.

Henceforth, multitargeted therapy or combination therapy is more superior to single-agent therapy in most cancer treatments. Additionally, combination chemotherapy agents with different mechanisms of action and also nonoverlapping toxicities can be chosen to decrease the resistance and toxicities. Curative regimen like bleomycin/vinblastine/cisplatin for testicular cancers is an example of combination chemotherapy. Combination chemotherapy is a common choice to produce adequate responses as well. They appear to prevent the development of resistant clones by promoting cytotoxicity in resting and dividing cells.

**Chemotherapeutic agents can classify according to the mechanism of action:**

**Alkylating Agents**

Examples of alkylating agents are as follows:

- Nitrogen mustard- bendamustine, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide

- Nitrosoureas – carmustine, lomustine

- Platinum analogs – carboplatin, cisplatin, oxaliplatin

- Triazenes- Dacarbazine, procarbazine, temozolamide

- Alkyl sulfonate- Busulfan

- Ethyleneimine- Thiotepa

Mechanism of action (MOA): These drugs yield an unstable alkyl group, R-CH2+, reacting with nucleophilic centers on proteins and nucleic acids. Inhibit DNA replication and transcription.

Toxicity: Dose-limiting toxicity: myelosuppression (neutropenia nadir: 6 to 10 days with recovery in 14 to 21 days). Mucositis, nausea and vomiting, neurotoxicity, alopeciaLong-term toxicities: pulmonary fibrosis, infertility, secondary malignancies

**Antimetabolites**

Mechanism of Action: Inhibit the replication of DNA

Examples of antimetabolites are as follows

A) Cytidine analogs – azacitidine, decitabine, cytarabine, gemcitabine

- MOA: Directly incorporate into DNA and inhibit DNA methyltransferase (azacitidine, decitabine) or DNA polymerase (cytarabine, gemcitabine)

- Indications: Azacitidine and decitabine for MDS, AML, cytarabine for MDS, AML, and gemcitabine for breast, NSCLC, ovarian, pancreatic, bladder, sarcoma, HL, NHL

- Toxicity: Myelosuppression in general. Cytarabine high dose causes neurotoxicity, conjunctivitis. Gemcitabine causes liver enzyme elevations, interstitial pneumonitis.

B) Folate antagonists – methotrexate, pemetrexed

- MOA: reduces folate, which is essential in the synthesis of purine nucleotides and thymidylate

- Indications: Methotrexate for ALL, NHL, CNS, sarcoma, and pemetrexed for malignant pleural mesothelioma, NSCLC (non-squamous)

- Toxicity: Myelosuppression, mucositis, hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, cutaneous reactions

- Toxicity prevention: Hydration and alkalization of the urine, leucovorin rescue

C) Purine analogs – cladribine, clofarabine, nelarabine

- MOA: structural analogs of guanine and act as false metabolites

- Indications: Cladribine for hairy cell leukemia, AML, CLL, NHL. Clofarabine for ALL, AML. fludarabine for CLL, AML, NHL, BMT conditioning agent. Nelarabine for T-ALL, lymphoma. Pentostatin for hairy cell leukemia, CTCL, CLL.

- Toxicities: Myelosuppression, immunosuppression (suppress CD4+ cells) put patients at risk for opportunistic infections

D) Pyrimidine analogs – fluorouracil (5-FU), capecitabine (prodrug of 5-FU).

- MOA: Active metabolite (F-dUMP) forms a stable covalent complex with thymidine synthetase in the presence of reduced folate, therefore, interfering with DNA synthesis and repair.

- Indications: 5-FU for colorectal cancer, anal cancer, pancreatic cancer, gastric cancer. Capecitabine for colorectal cancer, breast cancer.

- Toxicity: Dose-limiting hand-foot, mucositis, diarrhea. Dose-limiting myelosuppression.

- 
**Antimicrotubular Agents**

Examples of antimicrotubular agents are as follows:

A) Topoisomerase II inhibitors: Anthracyclines [doxorubicin, daunorubicin, idarubicin, mitoxantrone inhibit RNA and DNA synthesis. In addition, it inhibits topoisomerase II, causing inhibition of DNA repair resulting in blockade of DNA and RNA synthesis.

- Indications: Daunorubicin for ALL, AML, APL. Doxorubicin is used for ALL, AML, Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, sarcomas, breast, ovarian, bladder, thyroid, HL, and NHL. Liposomal doxorubicin has a longer half-life and is less cardiotoxic.

- Toxicity: Myelosuppression, cardiotoxicity (cumulative), mucositis. The lifetime cumulative dose of adriamycin is 550 mg/m^2. Secondary malignancies like treatment-related MDS/AML(t-MDS/t-AML) is a rare complication with poor prognosis have been reported often from alkylating agents and topoisomerase II inhibitors (-16. These patients usually present 5 to 7 years after the drug exposure.

- Epipodophyllotoxins (Etoposide and Teniposide). Indications: Testicular, SCLC, ALL, AML, Breast, CNS, Sarcoma, HL, NHL, Merkel cell, NSCLC, BMT conditioning agent. Dose-limiting myelosuppression – primary leukopenia

B) Topoisomerase I inhibitors: Irinotecan, Topotecan

- MOA: prevents relegation by blocking the release of Top I from the cleavable complex & forming a ternary complex

- Indications: Irinotecan for colorectal, cervical, esophageal, sarcoma, pancreatic, lung. topotecan for cervical, ovarian, SCLC

- Toxicity: Irinotecan causes dose-limiting diarrhea. Topotecan causes dose-limiting neutropenia, thrombocytopenia.

C) Taxanes – paclitaxel, docetaxel, cabazitaxel

- MOA: Disruption in the equilibrium of polymerization and depolymerization of microtubules causing abnormal cellular function and disruption of replication leading to apoptosis. Inhibit assembly of microtubules—M phase-specific.

- Indications: Docetaxel for breast, lung, prostate, ovarian, cervical, sarcoma. paclitaxel for breast, lung, and ovarian. Abraxane is protein bound paclitaxel. Cabazitaxel for prostate cancer.

- Toxicity: Hypersensitivity reactions, myelosuppression, peripheral neuropathy

D) Vinca alkaloids: vinblastine, vincristine, vinorelbine

- MOA: Bind to tubulin and inhibit microtubule formation arrests cell in metaphase. M-phase specific.

- Indication: Vincristine for ALL, HL, NHL, Neuroblastoma, SCLC

- Toxicity: Peripheral neuropathy (both motor and sensory function affected), myelosuppression

**Antibiotics**

Examples of antibiotics used as chemotherapy agents are as follows: actinomycin D, bleomycin, daunomycin:

- MOA: inhibit RNA and DNA synthesis

- Bleomycin binds to DNA, producing single and double-strand DNA breaks.

- Indications: Testicular, HL, Head, and neck cancers

- Toxicity: Cumulative pulmonary toxicity, hyperpigmentation

**Miscellaneous**

A) Hydroxyurea: MOA: inhibits ribonucleoside diphosphate reductase; S-phase specific

- Indications: AML, CML, sickle cell disease

- Toxicity: Myelosuppression, dermatologic reactions

B) Tretinoin:

- MOA: vitamin A derivative; targets RAR-α promoting cell differentiation

- Indication: APL

- Toxicity: APL differentiation syndrome – fevers, cardiopulmonary symptoms

C) Arsenic trioxide

- MOA: Induces cell differentiation

- Indication: APL

- Toxicity:  QT prolongation – baseline and serial EKG monitoring, replace K, Mg. APL differentiation syndrome

D) Proteasome inhibitors:

- Indication: bortezomib used in multiple myeloma.

- Toxicity: Peripheral neuropathy