The three types of medication are used for smoking cessation are as follows:

**Nicotine Replacement Products**

These include products such skin patches or gum. Often nicotine replacement products are not used correctly. It has been recommended that the bite and park technique is used rather than chewing the gum.

**Nicotine Replacement Medications**

Bupropion and, most recently, varenicline has been shown to be effective for smoking cessation. Nortriptyline and Clonidine are considered as the second-line drugs. Nicotine replacement medications are believed to facilitate smoking cessation in several ways: (1) Their primary action is by the relief of withdrawal symptoms when a person stops tobacco use. (2) The second mechanism of benefit is positive reinforcement particularly for the arousal and stress-relieving effect. (3) The third possible mechanism of benefit is related to the ability of nicotine medication to desensitize nicotine receptors.

**Bupropion: **initially marketed as an antidepressant; increases brain levels of dopamine and norepinephrine, simulating the effect of nicotine on these neurotransmitters.

**Varenicline:**an analog of cysteine, a naturally occurring plant alkaloid; has a strong binding affinity for nAChR.

**Rimonabant:
**a cannabinoid receptor antagonist which is effective as an aid for smoking cessation.It is believed to contribute to reinforcing effects of nicotine action.

Two other medications of interest:

**Mecamylamine:**a noncompetitive antagonist of nicotinic cholinergic receptors; blocks nicotinic effect as well as reinforcement

**lobeline:
**an alkaloid which is a nicotine receptor agonist; satisfies the nicotine receptor.

Phase 1 and phase 2 clinical trials are studying the effect of a nicotine vaccine that produces antibodies that bind to nicotine to prevent it from acting on nicotine receptors.

Genome-wide association studies that are exploring the possibility of using gene clusters such as the CHNRA5 and CYP2A6 genes that are involved with nicotine metabolism and its conversion continue as a surrogate marker for response to therapy of nicotine replacement.