Common side effects of tranylcypromine include dry mouth, headaches, diarrhea, urinary hesitancy, insomnia, agitation, anxiety, nausea, and sexual dysfunction. Postural hypotension, sometimes leading to syncope, is another common side effect, which warrants special attention for elderly patients on this medication. This side effect is dose-related and may require splitting the dose into 3 to 4 doses each day. More serious side effects include hepatotoxicity, seizures, and induction of mania. Additionally, in the United States, there is a black-box warning stating that this medication may lead to the activation of suicidal ideation and behavior in children, adolescents, and young adults aged 18 to 24 years of age with major depressive disorder and other psychiatric disorders.

It is important to monitor these patients during the first 1 to 2 months of treatment and when adjusting the dosage of this medication. A transient rise in blood pressure can also occur after dosing but usually resolves within 3 to 4 hours. This medication is less likely to cause weight gain in patients, and some patients may even experience weight loss. This MAOI runs the risk of hypertensive crisis, especially if it interacts with other sympathomimetics. Hypertensive crisis, severe increases in diastolic blood pressure more than 120 mmHg, will present with an occipital headache first followed by confusion, chest pain, blurred vision, nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath, palpitations, anxiety, or seizures. A special diet limited in tyramine is an absolute necessity for patients taking an MAOI to avoid a hypertensive crisis. When the MAOIs inactivate the MAO enzymes, the norepinephrine release by tyramine is not able to be properly broken down either, potentially resulting in high circulating levels of norepinephrine in the blood. High blood levels of norepinephrine released by tyramine can lead to dangerous levels of increased blood pressure. Dietary tyramine as low as 10 mg can cause an increase in blood pressure in the presence of an MAOI. Some of the most important food and drink items that patients are not allowed to consume include all aged cheeses, all aged/smoked/pickled/cured meats/fish/poultry, sourdough bread, soy products, fava beans, over-ripened avocado, soy sauce, and tap/draft beers.

There is also the risk of serotonin syndrome due to the interaction of this medication with other serotonergic medications. Serotonin syndrome results from the build-up of too much serotonin. The Sternbach criteria for assessing serotonin toxicity include the recent addition of or increase in a serotonergic agent, absence of other etiologies, no recent addition of or increase of a neuroleptic agent, and at least three of the following:

- Agitation

- Myoclonus

- Hyperreflexia

- Diaphoresis

- Shivering

- Tremor

- Diarrhea

- Ataxia or incoordination

- Fever.

If the patient decides to switch from a serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) to MAOI, the SSRI should be stopped at least five half-lives depending on each drug, usually 10 to 14 days before starting the MAOI. If the patient is switching from fluoxetine specifically, they should wait at least five weeks due to fluoxetine’s long half-life, preventing hypertensive crisis and serotonin syndrome from occurring. If the patient is switching from an MAOI to an SSRI, they must wait at least two weeks.