When presenting for surgery, determining whether a patient's asthma is well-controlled or poorly controlled is key to mitigating perioperative complications. Elective surgery should be postponed until asthma is well controlled.

During the preoperative interview, a history of recent asthma exacerbations, recent hospitalizations, as well as any prior history of tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation due to asthma is important information to obtain. During the review of systems, the patient should provide a history of any recent wheezing, chest tightness, cough, or shortness of breath.

In addition to a diagnosis of asthma, the following factors have been shown to increase the risk of PRAE in children and should be reviewed before administration of anesthesia

- Wheezing with exercise

- Wheezing > three times in last 12 months

- Nocturnal dry cough

- Recent upper respiratory tract infection (< 2 weeks) (Also a risk factor for intraoperative airway complications)

- Hayfever

- Eczema

- Second-hand smoking

- Family history of asthma, hay fever, or eczema

- Young age (age < 6 years also a risk factor for intraoperative airway complications

- Higher ASA classification

- History of congenital heart disease

- Prematurity

- Low birth weight

- Obesity

- Obstructive sleep apnea

Some of the prophylactic and abortive medications that patients with asthma may take include inhaled beta-2 agonists (e.g., albuterol, inhaled corticosteroids (e.g., budesonide), oral leukotriene antagonists (e.g., montelukast), oral or intravenous (IV) corticosteroids, and IV magnesium. Upon verification that the patient is using routine asthma medications as prescribed, it is at the discretion of the anesthesia provider as to whether to administer prophylactic therapy such as inhaled beta-2 agonists (e.g., albuterol) or systemic corticosteroids (e.g., methylprednisolone) before proceeding to the OR. Preoperative steroids have shown little benefit unless started 2 or 3 days in advance of surgery. In one study, systemic corticosteroids plus inhaled beta-2 agonists for five days before surgery was shown to markedly decrease the incidence of bronchospasm following intubation.