The mechanism of injury involved varies according to the underlying etiology. It usually involves the deposition of immune-complexes (antigen-antibody complex), which activates the classic pathway of the complement system.C1q undergoes conformational change resulting in C3 convertase being formed which breaks C3 into C3a and C3b. The activated complement system and chemotactic factors like C3a, C5a, and IL-8 recruit polymorphonuclear cells and leukocytes. These release interleukins like IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and interferon-gamma that bring about cellular injury. Activated platelets cause mesangial proliferation. Immune-complexes are a combination of DNA, anti-dsDNA ubiquitin, and other proteins in DPGN associated with lupus nephritis. Elsewhere deposition of complements like C3 and C4 are associated with auto-immune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, polymyositis, and dermatomyositis. Another mechanism of injury involves direct antibodies being formed against the alpha-3 chain of collagen-IV as seen in anti-GBM disease and their deposition in the subepithelial spaces. This damages the basement membrane leading to loss of negative charge resulting in proteinuria. The location of deposits also depends on the size and the charge of these. Anionic deposits fail to cross the membrane and get deposited in the mesangium and endothelial spaces, while cationic deposits can cross and are usually present in sub-epithelial spaces. In a more advanced form of the disease, crescents are formed (a combination of epithelial cells, activated macrophages, and fibrin); they cause obliteration of small blood vessels leading to necrosis and sclerosis. Vasculitis is associated with the presence of fibrinoid necrosis within the vessel walls of the glomeruli.