All of the lesions causing foot drop involve compression of various neurological structures by the baby, by the mother's or the attending's hand on the patient's thighs during delivery, by use of the dorsolateral lithotomy position, as a result of herniation of a lumbar disc (especially L4/L5), by the use of forceps during delivery, or similar compressive factors.

**Radiculopathy**

One of the least common but relevant causes of foot drop in parous women involves damage to the roots of the lumbosacral plexus. Such radiculopathies occur secondary to compression by a herniated disc. These injuries are rare in the obstetric literature and are limited to the postpartum period.

L5 radiculopathy can manifest as neuropathic pain corresponding to the L5 dermatome. This dermatome is located on the lateral aspect of the leg, the dorsum of the foot, the medial half of the dorsum of the big toe, and the middle three toes. Weakness is present involving the tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, and extensor digitorum longus. Patients with radiculopathy may exhibit a diminished or absent ankle jerk, which demonstrates the involvement of the S1 nerve root.[7]  Thus, the presentation with an absent ankle jerk reflex in a patient with foot drop would suggest the involvement of S1. Therefore, the presence or absence of a deep tendon reflex may be used as part of a differential diagnosis.

Radicular pain can be elicited by the hyper flexibility and relaxation of joints occurring secondary to hormonal changes in pregnancy. Lumbosacral joints may loosen substantially during pregnancy, increasing the likelihood of developing a bulging or herniated lumbar disc. It should also be noted that the onset of all neurologic symptoms in these cases occurred days to months after giving birth.

Currently, the standard of care dictates that to confirm the presence of radiculopathy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showing radicular compression and electromyography (EMG) showing nerve conduction abnormalities should be performed in addition to examining the patient's motor and sensory functions.

**Lumbosacral Plexopathy**

The lumbosacral trunk is affected by the baby's head as it moves down into the pelvis during delivery. Typically the head compresses the L5 lumbar root to cause a foot drop. Lesions of the lumbosacral plexus will often involve L2, L3, and L4 as well, giving rise to symptoms that resemble a lesion of the femoral or obturator nerves in addition to the foot drop from L5. The presence of such a constellation of symptoms is characteristic of a lesion of the lumbosacral trunk.

**Lesions of the Lumbosacral Trunk (Part of the Lumbosacral Plexus)**

The lumbosacral trunk is formed primarily from L5, with a contributing branch from L4. It appears at the medial margin of the psoas major and descends over the pelvic brim, anterior to the sacroiliac joint. Here it is vulnerable to injury by the head of the baby as it descends into the pelvis.

It may be difficult to confirm the involvement of the L5 nerve root since the L5 ventral ramus is present in the lumbosacral trunk, in the sciatic nerve, and in its derivative, the common fibular nerve. Electromyography helps make the diagnosis of a lesion of the lumbosacral trunk. Voluntary motor unit action potentials (MUAPs) of obstetric patients exhibiting foot droop have been shown to be significantly reduced in all the muscles below the knee that contain the L5 segment:  tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum brevis, fibularis longus, tibialis posterior, and flexor digitorum longus.

Note that the tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum brevis and fibularis longus are all supplied by the common fibular nerve, whereas the tibialis posterior and flexor digitorum longus are supplied by the tibial nerve. Thus, patients who have involvement of the tibialis posterior and flexor digitorum longus could not be suffering from a common fibular neuropathy, an important diagnostic distinction.

**Common Fibular Neuropathy**

The common fibular nerve (L4-S2) arises from the sciatic nerve above the popliteal fossa. It then passes over the head of the fibula to curve around the posterior aspect of the neck of the fibula. It then divides into the superficial fibular nerve, which innervates the lateral compartment of the leg, and the deep fibular nerve, which passes through the anterior compartment of the leg to supply the tibialis anterior and the extensor digitorum longus and the extensor digitorum brevis.

These muscles are the dorsiflexors and are innervated by the deep fibular nerve (L4-L5). The tibialis anterior is the most powerful dorsiflexor of the foot at the ankle. It can be tested by asking the patient to dorsiflex the foot against resistance and compare the results with the other foot.

As the common fibular nerve wraps around the neck of the fibula, it is susceptible to compression. Lesion of the common fibular nerve can lead to peripheral neuropathy with motor and sensory deficits. The superficial fibular nerve (L4-S1) and deep fibular nerve (L4-L5) are branches of the common fibular nerve at risk of damage in common fibular neuropathy.

The superficial fibular nerve provides motor function to fibularis longus and fibularis brevis, allowing for foot eversion and weak plantar flexion. Sensory innervation of the distal portion of the leg and dorsum of the foot, excluding the webbing between the first and second digits, is supplied by the superficial fibular nerve.

The deep fibular nerve provides motor function to the tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum longus, extensor hallucis longus, and fibularis tertius, allowing for dorsiflexion of the ankle and extension of the toes. Sensory innervation to the webbing between the first and second toes is supplied by the deep fibular nerve, which is particularly useful in diagnosing fibular neuropathies because this space is innervated entirely by the deep fibular nerve. Moreover, the L5 dermatome serves the medial aspect of the first digit, second, third, and fourth toes allowing one to distinguish this from a deep or common fibular neuropathy.

The main source of common fibular neuropathy cited in the obstetrics literature is nerve compression. Lateral manual compression of the common fibular nerve by the patient's hand at the knee during prolonged labor may be a cause of neuropathy. For instance, when the patient is lying on a gurney holding her legs to her chest, this position compresses the common fibular nerve. The patient could also be in a semi-sitting position with the legs being forcefully compressed by the patient or birth attendants.

It has also been suggested that the deep fibular nerve can be stretched due to its anchored position as it branches from the common fibular nerve and travels through the fibular tunnel deep to a fibrous sheath, resulting in neuropathy.

As giving birth in this position is uncommon in hospitals, it has not been seen frequently in the medical literature. Other cited causes include the use of forceps during delivery and cephalopelvic disproportion. A particularly unusual case of bilateral fibular neuropathy was noted involving a patient who had an uncomplicated cesarean section following a prolonged second stage of labor.

All cases of common fibular neuropathy in the literature presented with weakness in the anterior and lateral compartment muscles of the leg, including tibialis anterior, fibularis longus, and brevis.

Although most plantar flexion is due to innervation from the tibial nerve, the mild weakness in plantar flexion seen in common fibular neuropathy is due to the weak activity of the fibularis longus in plantar flexion. Foot drop was also seen in several of the patients in the literature.

The sensory deficits experienced by patients with a common fibular neuropathy varied, but paresthesia on the dorsum of the foot and loss of fine touch and pinprick sensation along the distribution of the deep and superficial fibular nerves on the lateral leg were the most common deficits.

Most diagnoses for a common fibular neuropathy were made based on clinical presentation.

Prolonged squatting, as in some forms of natural childbirth, can cause traction on the common fibular nerve at the neck of the fibula. Lithotomy positioning can cause a similar effect, as can direct pressure on the nerve by the patient's or an assistant's hands to keep the knees forcibly flexed. Hence the name "pushing palsy."