# Continuing Education Activity

Lisch nodules, traditionally described as iris hamartomas are one of the pathognomic markers of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and are rarely seen in individuals without NF1 like segmental neurofibromatosis and Watson syndrome. Lisch nodules as such do not cause any visual disturbances, but the associated life-threatening as well as vision-threatening conditions, merits discussion. Lisch nodules are not seen in normal individuals and are present in almost 90% to 100% of adult patients with NF1 over the age of 20 years. These nodules are more likely to occur in younger patients than are neurofibromas and are therefore helpful in clinching the diagnosis in younger patients. This activity discusses the etiology, morphology, pathophysiology, genetic disorder, ocular and systemic associations of Lisch nodules in detail as well as associated vision-threatening and life-threatening complications of neurofibromatosis type 1. It highlights the role of the interprofessional team in improving outcomes of patients with Lisch nodules.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Lisch nodules.
- Outline the appropriate evaluation of Lisch nodules.
- Review the management options available for Lisch nodules.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the management of patients with Lisch nodules.

# Introduction

Waardenburg, in 1918 first described the pigmented iris hamartomas. Karl Lisch, an Austrian ophthalmologist, reported the association of these iris hamartomas with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) in 1937.

# Etiology

Lisch nodules, traditionally described as iris hamartomas, are major pathognomic markers of NF1 and are rarely seen in individuals without NF1 like segmental neurofibromatosis, and Watson syndrome. LNs may rarely be seen in neurofibromatosis type 2.

# Epidemiology

Worldwide, the prevalence of NF1 is one in 2500 to 3500 live births.

# Pathophysiology

NF-1, also known as von Recklinghausen disease, is an autosomal dominant disorder with complete penetrance but has variable phenotypic expression. NF1 is caused by the germline mutation in the NF1 gene on chromosome 17q11.2.

# Histopathology

There exists considerable controversy regarding the histopathology of LN. Few reports suggest that they are melanocytic hamartomas of neural crest origin, whereas few reports suggest that they are similar to other cutaneous neurofibromas consisting of neural crest-derived neurons, Schwann cells, fibroblasts, vascular endothelial cells, and mast cells.

# History and Physical

Lisch nodules are 1 to 2 mm yellowish-brown dome-shaped solid lesions over the iris surface. They are usually multiple, bilateral, and found in all zones of the iris surface. Few of them may not be elevated from the surface.

NF1 is clinically defined by its neural and cutaneous clinical features. The diagnostic criteria for NF1 developed by the National Institutes of Health are a useful tool for diagnosing NF1 clinically.

Two or more of the following clinical features signify the presence of NF1 in a patient.********

- More than 6 cafe au lait macules over 0.5 cm in greatest diameter in prepubertal individuals and over 1.5 cm in greatest diameter in postpubertal individuals

- Two or more neurofibromas of any type or one plexiform neurofibroma

- Freckling in the axillary or inguinal regions

- Optic glioma

- Two or more Lisch nodules (iris hamartomas)

- A distinctive osseous lesion such as sphenoid dysplasia or tibial pseudoarthrosis

- A first-degree relative (parent, sibling, or offspring) with NF1 as defined by the above criteria

Neurocutaneous manifestations of NF1 are highly variable among affected individuals. Cafe au lait spots manifest due to the pathogenic melanocytes carrying a somatic or second hit mutation in the NF1 gene, and it occurs in all affected individuals.

Other rare ocular manifestations include eyelid neurofibroma (nodular or plexiform), prominent corneal nerves, congenital ectropion uveae,

# Evaluation

The diagnosis of NF1 is made based on characteristic clinical features like cafe au lait spots and neurofibromas. Molecular genetic testing is rarely indicated in diagnosing NF1. Exploring the genotype-phenotype correlation in NF1 is still inconclusive due to the extensive mutational heterogeneity of the gene.

LNs have been reported in patients with segmental neurofibromatosis, which is due to a somatic mutation of the neurofibromin gene.

# Treatment / Management

Prompt referral to specialists for the treatment of complications involving the eye, cardiovascular system, central or peripheral nervous system, endocrine system, spine, or long bones is mandatory. Surgical removal of uncomfortable and disfiguring neurofibromas or plexiform neurofibromas is rarely indicated.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of LN includes iris mammillations, multiple iris nevi, Cogan-Reese syndrome, granulomatous iritis (Busacca, Koeppe, and Berlin nodules), iris cysts, Brushfield spots, iris melanoma, leiomyoma, xanthogranuloma, and rarely secondary metastatic nodules.

Iris mammillations are frequently confused with LN and are characterized by regularly spaced, deep brown, and smooth conical iris elevations.

Iris nevi manifest as flat or minimally elevated, densely pigmented lesions with blurred margins.

Cogan-Reese syndrome is a subtype of ICE (iridocorneal endothelial syndrome) syndrome characterized by pedunculated nodules or pigmented diffuse lesions at the anterior surface of the iris.

Koeppe's nodules are seen near the pupillary area, and Busacca's nodules are seen over the iris surface in granulomatous uveitis.

Iris pigment epithelial cysts can be seen on the anterior or posterior surface of the iris. They have a brownish-black velvety appearance, whereas the iris stromal cysts appear as clear masses on the anterior surface of the iris.

Brushfield spots characteristic of Down syndrome, appear as small white grayish spots on the iris periphery.

In juvenile xanthogranuloma, the iris lesions appear as localized, yellowish, vascularised elevated masses on the iris surface. These patients are prone to develop spontaneous hyphema and secondary glaucoma.

Iris melanomas clinically appear as densely pigmented lesions over the iris with ectropion uveae, hyphema, trans-scleral involvement, angle involvement, and secondary glaucoma.

Metastatic tumors of the iris from systemic malignancies like breast carcinoma, lung carcinoma, skin carcinoma, oesophageal carcinoma, and renal carcinoma are relatively uncommon, and they appear as stromal nodules or ill-defined iris thickening.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

The role of ultraviolet (UV) radiation in the pathogenesis of LN is controversial.

# Prognosis

Patients with NF1 are at high risk of developing both benign and malignant tumors. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) occur in about 2% to 5% of NF1 patients.

# Complications

About 25% of patients with NF develop complications like plexiform neurofibromas, spinal neurofibromas, malignancies like neurofibrosarcoma and embryonic childhood tumors, scoliosis, aqueductal stenosis, pheochromocytoma, vascular dysplasia, congenital bone defects, tumors of the central nervous system, learning disabilities, attention deficits, and behavioral problems.

Ophthalmological complications are optic gliomas, plexiform neurofibromas, and congenital glaucomas. The overall risk of malignancy in patients with NF1 is 5% to 15% greater when compared to the general population.********Plexiform neurofibromas are a frequent complication of NF1 and may lead to the site of development of malignant nerve sheath tumors. The most commonly affected regions are the paraspinal, sacral plexus, sciatic notch, and perirectal regions. Optic nerve gliomas can result in vision loss and even morbidity in young children. Symptomatic gliomas usually manifest before 6 yrs of age with loss of visual acuity or proptosis. Diagnosis of this entity will be challenging in preverbal children, and hence screening in early childhood is crucial to early detection and intervention.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Genetic counseling is quite complicated in NF1 due to marked interfamilial and intrafamilial phenotypic variation in NF1 expression. The offspring of the affected individual are at a 50% risk of inheriting the NF1 allele, but the clinical manifestations may be extremely variable.

# Pearls and Other Issues

LNs are not seen in normal individuals and are present in almost 90% to 100% of adult patients with NF1 over the age of 20 years. These nodules are more likely to occur in younger patients than are neurofibromas and are therefore helpful in clinching the diagnosis in younger patients. Multiple, bilateral LNs are specific for NF1. There is no association between LN and the overall clinical severity of NF1 in these patients.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The interprofessional approach requires a team including primary care, ophthalmologists, and geneticists, to effectively screen and design management protocol promptly to reduce both morbidities as well as mortality. These patients need annual systemic evaluation by a physician, annual ophthalmologic examination in children and less frequently in adults, and periodical developmental assessment in children. Regular blood pressure monitoring and MRI for follow-up of clinically suspected intracranial tumors and other internal tumors should be done.