Astigmatism refers to a blurring of vision due to the irregular curvature of the cornea or the lens. Compensation for such abnormalities is generally made through the use of extraocular lenses such as glasses or contact lenses, or refractive surgery. Myopia or nearsightedness is the result of an excessively long eyeball or thick lens. Hyperopia or farsightedness typically is due to an abnormally short globe or thin lens. Both types of visual disturbance are corrected using intra- or extraocular lenses and/or refractive surgery.

Glaucoma refers to a group of diseases that cause optic nerve damage due to increased intraocular pressure. Open-angle glaucoma is the most common type and is characterized by a normal angle between the iris and cornea (iridocorneal angle). Other types of glaucoma include closed-angle and normal-tension glaucoma. While some cases of glaucoma result from mutations of certain genes, the cause of primary glaucoma remain largely unknown. Glaucoma is usually associated with either an overproduction of aqueous humor or impairment in the drainage of aqueous.

Achromatopsia describes a partial or total absence of color vision. Usually, it is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Genetic mutations, most commonly in CNGA3, CNGB3, GNAT2, PDE6C, or PDE6H, cause inappropriate responses of cones to light exposure. This can mean a complete lack of functionality or a significant deficit.

Some of the most common retinal diseases include diabetic retinopathy (DR), and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). AMD exits in two forms: dry (atrophic) and wet (exudative or neovascular). In the majority of people, AMD starts as the dry form and in some individuals, it progresses to the wet type (15% to 20%). AMD is always bilateral, but not always the same form in both eyes. Also, the disease does not necessarily progress at the same rate in both eyes. Both AMD and DR involve degeneration of retinal structure which leads to disruption of the phototransduction pathway discussed. In diabetic retinopathy, blood vessels and neurons are damaged by an overaccumulation of glucose, and in severe disease, the proliferation of new blood vessels can further exacerbate visual impairments. In AMD, there is a buildup of damaged cellular components such as lipofuscin (intracellular) and drusen (extracellular). This leads to damage to the macula which causes dysfunctional central vision and can ultimately lead to complete blindness. Choroidal neovascularization can also exacerbate AMD. Many different genes have been implicated in the development and progression of AMD.

In contrast to achromatopsia, retinitis pigmentosa (RP) affects the rod cells of the retina. Rods are progressively lost as the disease advances, leading to difficulty seeing at night, and decreased peripheral vision which has been described as "tunnel vision". Symptoms often begin in childhood and progressively worsen with age. Mutations in many genes have been shown to cause RP, with possible inheritance patterns including autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked, and mitochondrial inheritance.