**Prevention Strategies**

Clinician intervention to prevent fatal accidents includes addressing the pain control needs of the chronic pain patient and specifically the use of opioids. One study of 816 Colorado overdose cases found that risk of opioid overdose was positively correlated with multiple prescribers and multiple pharmacies and negatively correlated with the prescription of naltrexone. This same study cited an increased risk of overdose correlated with the prescription associated with prescribing methadone as a first-line opioid and ever more so if another opioid was discontinued and replaced with methadone. Conflicting reports in the international literature exist at the time of this writing as regards this latter finding as other studies show a decrease in overdose death overall associated with the prescription of methadone. Physician knowledge of and liberal referral to treatment programs for those patients suffering from opioid dependence is also an important strategy in preventing potential opioid overdose death.

In pediatrics, education on safe sleeping practices for newborns has shown itself effective with the most profound change in the rate of SUID deaths from encouraging sleeping of newborns in the supine position. Counseling for expectant mothers regarding tobacco use is also another preventative measure in which physicians may engage to prevent the future accidental deaths of newborns.

Screening for and encouragement of basic safety practices such as the use of bicycle helmets and seat belts as well as appropriate child restraints in automobiles is encouraged as a regular part of medical practice.

**Pregnancy**

A recent review of deaths of pregnant women in Clark County, Nevada found in 1 year that 38% of all of what the authors described as unnatural deaths of pregnant women were deemed accidental death.  The most common cause in this series was motor vehicle trauma followed by overdose and drowning. An examination of pregnant or recently pregnant (within the last year) women in North Carolina found that between 1996 through 2007 an increase in prescription opiate-related deaths was noted over the period; although, this trend was not observed in this population for cocaine or heroin.

**Autoerotic Activity**

Numerous case reports and series have been reported in those engaging in autoerotica, mostly the result of asphyxiation in the context of autoerotic asphyxiation. These cases are all essentially entirely comprised of cases of males. Other causes of accidental death in this circumstance have included subarachnoid hemorrhage, left heart failure, hypothermia, and drowning. Less typical mechanisms included death from air embolism traveling to the central circulation via the penile circulation from the use of an air compressor to insufflate the urethra under pressure.

The majority of fatal injuries can be prevented by the education of the public, thus an interprofessional team approach is necessary. The public should be educated on prescription medications and their safe use, avoidance of illicit drugs, wearing seat belts and storing firearms safely in the home. Unfortunately, compliance with such matters is low among the public and that is one reason why fatal accidents continue to occur at an alarming rate.