There are no absolute contraindications to screening mammography, but relative contraindications do exist. First, any woman with signs or symptoms that are concerning for breast cancer, such as the presence of a palpable or enlarging breast mass, should undergo diagnostic mammographic and sonographic imaging rather than screening imaging alone. The distinction between screening and diagnostic mammography is made by the ability to utilize additional imaging techniques, which may include spot compression, supplementary angles, or magnification views. Diagnostic breast ultrasound adds complementary information, particularly when concerning lesions are identified through palpation.

As described above, for asymptomatic patients with an average risk of developing breast cancer, screening mammography is not recommended before the age of 40. Patients of this age group generally have increased breast density and mammography has decreased sensitivity for detecting breast cancer in this setting. There is also a risk of false-positive mammographic findings, potentially necessitating follow-up imaging, and possibly a tissue biopsy.

Mammography utilizes X-ray radiation to generate diagnostic images, a form of ionizing radiation. The X-rays used in mammography are lower energy than those used in CT or plain radiography, but there are at least theoretical risks with any degree of ionizing radiation exposure.

Patients that are lactating deserve additional considerations, as the milk-producing lobules attenuate more X-rays, increasing the breast tissue density and potentially obscuring premalignant or malignant lesions. However, breastfeeding or pumping before the study may decrease breast parenchymal density and increase the sensitivity of mammography.