Axial cervical dislocations can occur from traumatic or atraumatic etiologies. Atraumatic or acquired occipitocervical instability is typically seen in patients with Down syndrome and is rarely symptomatic. Traumatic occipitocervical dislocation is a severe injury in which patients rarely survive because of brainstem destruction. Atlantoaxial dislocation typically occurs from degenerative conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, Down syndrome, or via trauma from odontoid fractures (C2), atlas fractures (C1), or transverse ligament injury.

In the setting of trauma, cervical dislocations may lead to compression and injury to the spinal cord. The primary injury to the cord occurs by damaging the neural tissue from direct trauma. The secondary injury to the spinal cord can be as important or more important than the initial injury. The secondary trauma comes from injury to the adjacent tissue/structures, leading to an abundant inflammatory response causing decreased local perfusion, cytokine release, apoptosis, lipid peroxidation, and hematoma formation. Steroids are used to try and prevent this secondary injury by improving perfusion and decrease free radical formation leading to decreased inflammation. Two common associated conditions with acute spinal cord injury that one should always be cognizant of are spinal shock and neurogenic shock. Neurogenic shock can lead to bradycardia and hypotension due to decreased sympathetic outflow, which can further potentiate spinal cord injury due to hypoperfusion.