The goal of the electrocardiogram interpretation is to determine whether the ECG waves and intervals are normal or pathological. Electrical signal interpretation gives a good approximation of heart pathology. A standard 12 lead ECG is shown in [Figure 1]. The best way to interpret an ECG is to read it systematically:

**Rate**

For the calculation of rate, the number of either small or large squares between an R-R interval should be calculated. The rate can be calculated by either dividing 300 by the number of big squares or 1500 by the number of small squares between two R waves. For an irregular rhythm, count the number of beats in a 10-second strip and multiply it by 6.

**Rhythm**

The leads I, II, aVF, and V1, require inspection for an accurate interpretation of rhythm. It involves looking for five points: the presence or absence of regular P waves, the duration of QRS complexes (narrow or wide), the correlation between P waves and QRS complexes, whether the rhythm is regular or irregular, and the morphology of P waves. A regular rhythm ECG has regular P waves preceding a QRS complex in a regular rhythm. Also, normal sinus rhythm demonstrates positive P waves in leads I, II, and aVF, suggesting a downward propagation of atrial activation from the SA node. These features also help identify if the arrhythmia originates in the atria or ventricles.

**Cardiac Axis**

It refers to the direction of the heart's depolarization wavefront in the frontal plane. The cardiac axis is related to the area of significant muscle bulk within the healthy conducting system. A typical cardiac axis is between -30 to +90 degrees. A quick way to estimate the axis is by looking at leads I and aVF. It can be defined as a normal axis when the QRS complex is positive in leads I and aVF. A left axis deviation (between 0 and -90 degrees) is defined by the presence of positive QRS in the lead I and negative in lead aVF, and a right axis deviation (+90 and 180 degrees) by the presence of negative QRS in the lead I and positive in the lead aVF. If both QRS complexes are negative in leads I and aVF, it is an extreme right-axis deviation or indeterminate axis (-90 to 180 degrees).

There are several disorders in which the cardiac axis deviates. Examples include old inferior myocardial infarction, left ventricular hypertrophy, and left bundle branch block where left axis deviation occurs while noting right axis deviation in conditions including right ventricular hypertrophy, pulmonary hypertension, hyperkalemia, and wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome, etc. The specific criteria on ECG for atrial and ventricular hypertrophy are devised from examining various leads and wave morphologies: for atrial abnormality (enlargement or hypertrophy), leads II and V1 are usually assessed. Right atrial hypertrophy increases the amplitude in the first half of the P waves by 2.5 mm in inferior leads and a possible right axis deviation.

The diagnosis of ventricular hypertrophy requires looking at several leads on the ECG. The right ventricular hypertrophy characteristically shows by right axis deviation along with the presence of a more significant R wave than the S wave in lead V1, whereas in lead V6, a more significant S wave than the R wave.

**P-wave**

It represents atrial depolarization on the ECG. As atrial depolarization initiates by the SA node located in the right atrium, the right atrium gets depolarized first, followed by left atrial depolarization. So the first half of the P wave represents right atrial depolarization and the second half shows left atrial depolarization. Its duration is three small squares wide and 2.5 small squares high. It is always positive in the lead I and II and consistently negative in lead aVR in normal sinus rhythm. It is commonly biphasic in lead V1. An abnormal P wave may indicate atrial enlargement.

**PR Interval**

It represents the time from the beginning of atrial depolarization to the start of ventricular depolarization and includes the delay at the AV node. The average interval is 3 to 5 small squares (120 to 200 ms).

**Heart Block**

A conduction block can occur due to any obstruction in the normal pathway of electrical conduction. Their anatomical location can be categorized as sinus node, atrioventricular node, or bundle branch blocks.

- Sinus node or sinoatrial exit block occurs due to failed propagation of the impulses beyond the SA node resulting in dropped P waves on the ECG. Common causes include sick sinus syndrome, increased vagal tone, inferior wall MI, vagal stimulation, myocarditis, drugs including digoxin, beta-blockers, etc.

- Atrioventricular or AV block is a conduction block that can occur anywhere between the SA node and Purkinje fibers. There are three variants of AV blocks: first-degree, second-degree, and third-degree. Clinically significant points in diagnosing the AV blocks include careful measurement of the PR interval and examining the relationship of the P waves to QRS complexes.

- First-degree heart block is defined as prolonging the PR interval by more than 200 milliseconds.

- Second-degree heart block is of two types, i.e., Mobitz type I (also known as Wenkebach block) and Mobitz type II. In type I, the block across the AV node or bundle of His is variable and increases with each ensuing impulse, ultimately resulting in a drop of the impulse (usually every third or fourth impulse). On ECG, it shows a progressive prolongation of the PR interval, and then suddenly, a P wave is not followed by the QRS complex.

- Third-degree heart block is characterized by a complete electrical dissociation between the atria and ventricles, resulting in the atria and the ventricles beating at their intrinsic rates. Degenerative disease of the conduction system is the leading cause of third-degree heart block. A complete heart block may present in acute myocardial infarction.

- Bundle branch block results from the conduction block of either left or right bundle branches. It gets diagnosed by examining the width and configuration of the QRS complexes. The right bundle branch block is represented on the ECG by the presence of a widened QRS complex greater than 0.12 seconds, along with an RSR pattern in V1 and V2. Also, there may be ST-segment depression and T wave inversions and reciprocal changes in leads V5, V6, I, and aVL. Conduction system disorders can cause the right bundle branch block, but it may be present as a standard variant in specific individuals. The left bundle branch block is represented on the ECG by a widened QRS complex greater than 0.12 seconds, broad or notched R wave with prolonged upstroke in the leads V5, V6, I, and aVL, along with ST-segment depression and T wave inversion, and reciprocal changes in leads V1 and V2. Usually, a left-axis deviation is also present. The left bundle branch usually signifies an underlying pathology, such as degenerative disease of the conduction system or ischemic heart disease.

**QRS Complex**

It represents ventricular depolarization as current passes down the AV node. A standard QRS complex has a duration of less than three small squares (under 120 ms, usually 60 to 100 ms). A prolonged QRS may indicate hyperkalemia or bundle branch block. Conversely, a premature ventricular contraction or a ventricular rhythm can be associated with a wide QRS.

**Septal Q-Wave**

Q-wave often appears as a tiny negative deflection in leads I, aVL, V5, and V6. It represents the depolarization of the interventricular septum. Its amplitude is not bigger than 0.1 mV, so septal depolarization is not always visible on the ECG. Pathological Q-waves on ECG can signify an old infarct. A Q-wave duration greater than 40 milliseconds (one small box), depth greater than 1 mm, or a size greater than 25% of the QRS complex amplitude is pathologic.

**R-Wave**

It is the tallest wave of the QRS complex, representing the electrical stimulus as it passes down the ventricles during depolarization. The R-wave progressively increases in amplitude, moving right to the left in the precordial leads, and is called R-wave progression. Lead V1 has the smallest R wave, and lead V5 has the largest. A reduced R-wave progression has several causes, including prior anteroseptal MI, left ventricular hypertrophy, inaccurate lead placement, etc.

**S-Wave**

It represents the final depolarization of the Purkinje fibers. It is any downward deflection after R-wave. It may not be present in all ECG leads. S-wave is most significant in V1 and progressively becomes smaller to no S-wave in the lead V6.

**T-Wave**

It represents ventricular repolarization. Its morphology is highly susceptible to cardiac and noncardiac influences like (hormonal and neurological). It is usually positive in leads with tall R-waves (upward deflection). The suggested criteria for the typical T wave include the size of one-eighth or less than two-thirds of the size of the R wave and a height of less than 10 mm.

Abnormalities in the T-wave morphology include inverted, flat, biphasic, or tall tented T-waves. T waves can be helpful in a variety of pathologies; tall T waves in anterior chest lead III, aVR, and V1 with a negative QRS complex may suggest acute myocardial ischemia.

**ST-Segment**

It depicts the end of ventricular depolarization and the beginning of ventricular repolarization. The average duration of the ST segment is less than 2 to 3 small squares (80-120 ms). ST-segment is an isoelectric line and lies at the same level as PR-interval. Elevation or depression of the ST segment by 1 mm or more, measured at J point, is abnormal. A J point is a region between the QRS complex and the ST segment. ST-elevation is highly specific if present in two or more contiguous leads in the setting of acute myocardial infarction. If the vertical distance on the ECG trace and the baseline after the J-point is at least 1 mm in a limb lead or 2 mm in a precordial lead, it is clinically significant for diagnosing acute myocardial infarction.

Correct ST segment interpretation is crucial as a type of ST-segment elevation is present in healthy individuals due to early repolarization, called J-point elevation. It is distinguished by the fact that the T wave does not merge with the ST segment and remains an independent wave. Several other disorders are also associated with ST-elevation, i.e., Prinzmetal angina, acute pericarditis, acute myocarditis, hyperkalemia, blunt trauma, pulmonary embolism, subarachnoid hemorrhage, Brugada syndrome, ventricular aneurysm, and left bundle branch block.

ST-elevations are diffuse in acute pericarditis and associated with PR-depression about TP-segments (except for leads V1 and aVR).

ST depression greater than 1 mm is often a sign of myocardial ischemia or angina. It can appear as a downsloping, upsloping, or horizontal segment on the ECG. A horizontal or downsloping ST depression greater than 0.5 mm at the J-point in two contiguous leads indicates myocardial ischemia. An upsloping ST depression in the precordial leads with prominent De Winter T waves is highly indicative of MI caused by occlusion of the left anterior descending artery.

ST depression can represent a reciprocal change with a morphology that resembles "upside-down" ST elevation and is typically seen in leads electrically opposite to the site of infarction. For example, posterior wall MI manifests as horizontal ST depression in leads V1-3 and is associated with tall R waves and upright T waves. Likewise, inferior wall STEMI produces reciprocal ST depression in leads I and aVL, and there is often a reciprocal ST depression in leads III and aVF in lateral wall MI.

**QT Interval**

It represents the start of depolarization to the end of the repolarization of ventricles. The normal QT interval duration is somewhat controversial, and various normal durations have been previously suggested. Generally, the normal QT interval is less than 400 to 440 milliseconds (ms), or 0.4 to 0.44 seconds. Women usually have a slightly longer QT interval than men. A QT interval has an inverse relation to the heart rate. A prolonged QT interval presents an imminent risk for serious ventricular arrhythmias, including Torsades de Pointes, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation. A common cause of QT prolongation includes medications, electrolyte abnormalities such as hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia, and congenital long QT syndrome.

A short QT interval ( less than 360 milliseconds) may be associated with hypercalcemia, acidosis, hyperkalemia, hyperthermia, or short QT syndrome.

**U Wave**

It is a small wave that follows the T wave. It represents the delayed repolarization of the papillary muscles or Purkinje fibers. It is commonly associated with hypokalemia.

**J Wave**

Also known as the Osborn wave, it is an abnormal ECG finding in hypothermia. It appears as an extra deflection on ECG at the QRS complex and ST-segment junction.

**Epsilon Wave**

It is a small positive deflection usually found buried at the end of the QRS complex as a characteristic finding in arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia.