Albumin is the most abundant protein in the blood and accounts for about 50% of all plasma proteins. It gets synthesized by the liver and secreted immediately without storage. The physiological regulators of albumin are the colloid osmotic pressure and nutritional status. The metabolism of albumin depends on the synthesis, distribution over interstitium and intravascular compartment, and excretion. Normal blood plasma concentration is between 3.5 to 5 g/dL, and 60% of the total albumin is in the interstitial space.

The chief medical uses are pharmacological therapy, serum marker to monitor diseases, biomaterials, and vaccines.

**FDA-Approved Indications**

- Hypovolemia with or without shock: During fluid resuscitation in patients with hypovolemia, intravenous albumin is suggested as a second-line therapy if there is an inadequate response to crystalloids. In critical-ill patients, the survival rate at 90 days showed no significant difference when treated with albumin or crystalloids as first-line therapy (RR 0.98; 95% CI, 0.92-1.04).

- Prevention of central volume depletion after paracentesis due to cirrhotic ascites: In a study by Runyon et al., albumin infusion has been shown to improve cardiovascular function after large-volume paracentesis (over 5 liters) in patients with cirrhosis and tense ascites.

- Hypoalbuminemia is a common clinical finding in critically ill patients, malnutrition, and other diseases. The mainstay of therapy is to treat the underlying cause. Data are insufficient to recommend albumin in hypoalbuminemia patients. In a few cases, albumin 25% can relieve symptoms due to hypoalbuminemia, but there is a high risk of fluid overload. One meta-analysis evaluated mortality as an outcome in hypoalbuminemia patients receiving Albumin infusions. They concluded no significant effect on mortality if hypoalbuminemia was corrected, relative risk 1.59 (0.91–2.78).

- Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome is a serious complication of assisted reproduction technologies, leading to increased vascular permeability and a shift of intravascular volume into the third space. It can cause thromboembolic events or ischemia. Albumin 25% is indicated as a plasma volume expansion in addition to crystalloids (Grade C recommendation). Studies have not shown strong evidence of its efficacy.

- Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS): It is used with loop diuretics in ARDS treatment when pulmonary overload and hypoalbuminemia are present. A small clinical trial demonstrated improvement in oxygenation, total fluid balance, and hemodynamic function in patients who received albumin plus furosemide versus those with furosemide only, resulting in reduced organ failure.

- Acute nephrosis: This recommendation has, as its basis, a review article from 1977. Indicated to treat edema in patients with nephrotic syndrome refractory to cyclophosphamide and corticosteroids. Such cases may respond with loop diuretics and 100 mL of albumin 25% solution daily for 7 to 10 days.

- Hemolytic disease of the newborn: Albumin is indicated as an adjunct therapy to treat neonatal hyperbilirubinemia during exchange transfusions. The efficacy is believed due to its ability to bind unconjugated bilirubin. The recommended dose is 1 g/kg per dose of albumin 25% during the exchange transfusion.

- Burn hypovolemia: Previously, albumin infusion was recommended in conjunction with crystalloids 24 hours after thermal injury if burns had covered more than 50% of the body surface or crystalloid therapy has failed.

- Extensive hemodialysis: About 20% to 55% of patients on hemodialysis develop hypotension during their hemodialysis session. High rate or excessive volume ultrafiltration are the main causes. Albumin 5% is used as second-line therapy when hypotension does not respond to crystalloids.

- Cardiopulmonary bypass: Albumin is useful as a colloid for priming extracorporeal circuits and volume expansion in cardiopulmonary bypass. These recommendations have their basis in a study by Wilkes that showed a reduction of acute postoperative mediastinal hemorrhage after cardiopulmonary bypass in patients exposed to albumin solutions compared to another colloid.

**Non-FDA-Approved Indications**

- Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is a significant cause of mortality in cirrhotic patients. Administration of albumin 1.5 g/kg within 6 hours and 1 g/kg on day three and antibiotics have a better effect on preventing renal impairment and reducing mortality from 29% to 10% in cirrhotic patients with SBP compared to those receiving antibiotics only.

- Albumin as Marker of Preoperative nutrition status and postoperative outcome in elderly general surgery patients-Serum albumin is the most used preoperative nutrition parameter. Low serum albumin was a significant preoperative predictor of postoperative complications and postoperative mortality. Low serum albumin predicted the prolonged length of stay in the hospital. Serum albumin can be a reliable predictor of postoperative outcomes in elderly general surgery patients. It is questionable whether serum albumin is a good representative of nutrition status. In general, it is advocated that serum albumin should not be seen as a nutrition parameter but rather as a "marker of inflammatory metabolism." Serum albumin might be used to identify the sickest patients, who, as a consequence, are also at risk for nutrition deterioration. Weight loss in the previous 6 months might indicate postoperative outcome, but the current evidence is not very strong.

- Albumin Dialysis (Molecular adsorbent recirculating system also called MARS) has been used as an extracorporeal liver replacement device to treat acute liver failure secondary to toxin ingestion, trauma, or as a bridge to transplantation for massive hepatic necrosis.

The regular price of intravenous albumin solution is around $0.5 to $6 per milliliter. Compared to saline solutions $0.01 to $0.1 per milliliter, albumin solutions are 60-times more expensive. Price takes place when saline solutions and albumin infusions have the same efficacy in treating a disease.