# Continuing Education Activity

Emicizumab is a medication used in the management and treatment of hemophilia A. It belongs to the bispecific monoclonal antibody class of drugs. Managing patients with HA is complex and requires replacing FVIII for bleeding prophylaxis and treating acute bleeding episodes. Emicizumab was created to circumvent challenges associated with frequent intravenous administration of FVIII and offer a standardized treatment option for Hemophilia A patients with and without inhibitors. This activity reviews the indications, mechanism of action, and adverse events associated with emicizumab administration in treating hemophilia A. This activity also highlights drug monitoring and relevant interferences with coagulation assays, which are pertinent for interprofessional team members in managing patients with hemophilia A.

**Objectives:**
- Describe some benefits of emicizumab in comparison to prior treatments for hemophilia A.
- Identify the mechanism of action of emicizumab and how it may affect laboratory testing.
- Review the rationale behind proper assay ordering practices in patients receiving emicizumab prophylaxis.
- Summarize how the interprofessional team can coordinate care to reduce complications associated with emicizumab to obtain better patient outcomes.

# Indications

Inherited and acquired hemophilia A (HA) causes significant morbidity resulting from deficiency of factor VIII (FVIII), which is critical to normal coagulation. Managing patients with HA is complex and requires replacing FVIII for bleeding prophylaxis and treating acute bleeding episodes.

Emicizumab was created to circumvent challenges associated with frequent intravenous administration of FVIII and offer a standardized treatment option for Hemophilia A patients with and without inhibitors.

# Mechanism of Action

The drug emicizumab is a humanized bispecific monoclonal antibody that restores the function of missing activated FVIII by bridging FIXa and FX, mimicking activated Factor VIIIa independently of Factor VIII levels. Consequently, emicizumab promotes effective hemostasis in patients with hemophilia A.

**Pharmacokinetics****Absorption:**After subcutaneous administration, the absorption half-life is 1.6±1 days. The bioavailability following subcutaneous injection of 1 mg/kg ranged between 80.4% and 93.1%. Similar pharmacokinetic profiles are noted following SC administration in the abdomen, thigh, and upper arm. Following subcutaneous administrations of a loading dose of 3 mg/kg emicizumab once weekly for the first four weeks,  trough plasma concentrations of 52.6 ± 13.6 μg/mL(mean (± SD)) are achieved at week 5. Steady-state concentrations with the recommended maintenance doses vary according to the regimen. (Ctrough = trough concentration at steady state)

- 1.5 mg/kg once every week: Ctrough 51.2+/- 15.2(µg/mL)

- 3 mg/kg once every two weeks: Ctrough 46.9 +/- 14.8(µg/mL)

- 6 mg/kg once every four weeks: Ctrough 38.5 +/- 14.2(µg/mL)

**Distribution:**The mean apparent volume of distribution is 10.4 L.

**Elimination:**The mean apparent clearance is 0.27 L/day, and the mean elimination apparent half-life is 26.9 +/- 9.1 days.

# Administration

In many countries, subcutaneous emicizumab has been cleared to be used in the prophylaxis of bleeding episodes in individuals diagnosed with hemophilia A, regardless of FVIII inhibitor status.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustment is necessary for mild or moderate hepatic impairment. However, emicizumab has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment is required for patients with mild or moderate renal impairment. However, emicizumab has not been studied in patients with severe renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Animal reproductive studies have not been conducted with emicizumab. There is a lack of data on emicizumab use in pregnant women to report a drug-associated risk of congenital disabilities and miscarriage. According to product labeling, using emicizumab in pregnancy is advised only if the potential benefit to the mother outweighs the risk to the fetus. Females of childbearing age should consider using contraception while receiving emicizumab.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**No data is available on the clinical use of emicizumab during breastfeeding. Emicizumab is a large protein molecule with high molecular weight; hence the concentration in milk is probably low. Hypothetically absorption of emicizumab is unlikely because it is probably destroyed in the infant's gastrointestinal tract.

# Adverse Effects

Injection-site reactions are the most common treatment-related adverse drug reactions. Other common adverse drug reactions reported are headache (15%), arthralgia (15%), pyrexia (6%), and diarrhea (6%).

Similar to FVIII replacement therapy, emicizumab has the potential for immunogenicity. Per the emicizumab prescribing information, 3.5% of patients in the HAVEN clinical trials tested positive for anti-emicizumab antibodies, though less than 1% developed antibodies with neutralizing potential.

# Contraindications

A boxed warning cautions that thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) and other thrombotic complications have been reported with concurrent administration of aPCC greater than 100 U/kg within 24 hours in patients taking emicizumab.

In emergent cases of bleeding, when the benefit of aPCC exceeds the risk of inducing a pro-coagulable state, clinicians should monitor patients for thrombotic microangiopathy and thromboembolism and discontinue aPCC if symptoms occur. Using both rFVIIa and emicizumab hypothetically should increase the risk for thrombotic complications. However, several pharmaceutical manufacturers have analyzed the data from the HAVEN study, which concluded that rFVIIa use in the context of emicizumab prophylaxis did not change the rFVIIa safety profile as described in the product information.

# Monitoring

Measuring plasma emicizumab levels is not required for therapy. However, a drug level may be helpful in specific medical incidences, such as confirmation of compliance. Monitoring can also be beneficial in breakthrough bleeding, situations that require an on-demand coagulation factor, or antibody monitoring.

A noteworthy consideration while treating patients on emicizumab is the drug’s effect on laboratory testing.

Clinicians need to be aware of assay interference when ordering FVIII activity or inhibitor titers in a patient taking emicizumab

Clinicians can use the Haemophilia Quality of Life Questionnaire for Adults (Haem-A-QoL) to evaluate health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients with hemophilia who are on treatment with emicizumab.

# Toxicity

Using previous trials like HAVEN, an efficacious range for emicizumab is 30 to 70 microgram/milliliter.

Management of breakthrough bleeding is a potent concern.

**Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:**Studies in animals investigating the carcinogenic effects of emicizumab have not been conducted. However, emicizumab did not cause any toxicological changes in the reproductive organs in preclinical studies, with the dose of 30 mg/kg/week in subcutaneous toxicity studies of twenty-six weeks duration and a dose of 100 mg/kg/week for four-week intravenous toxicity study.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Researchers performed the HAVEN 2 trial on children with hemophilia with inhibitor development. Typically they develop inhibitors within 50 days of Factor VIII therapy. Children with hemophilia require high-volume infusions requiring a central venous access device (CVAD), which can lead to increased possibilities of infection/thrombosis.

An open study was conducted in children with one treatment arm receiving emicizumab and the other with no inhibitors. Results supported a decrease in bleeding events throughout the year. It also supported decreased anxiety associated with possible bleed causes, including activity levels. Subjects reported increased physical activity during the trial. Patients received either 2-week dosing or 4-week dosing. Both regimens showed an appropriate decrease in bleeding and disruption in daily living.

Regarding adults with hemophilia A and no inhibitors, dosing once every four weeks is adequate for bleeding control and well tolerated by patients. [Level 3].

Typically emicizumab will be prescribed by a hematologist, but it still requires the efforts of an entire interprofessional team. Management of hemophilia requires comprehensive diagnostic and treatment services, pain control, patient education, and genetic, psychosocial, and vocational counseling. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC) operates in collaboration with the U.S. Hemophilia Treatment Center Network (USHTCN), a federally funded, specialized health care center called hemophilia treatment centers or HTCs. HTC are specialized, multidisciplinary healthcare centers with expertise in providing care for Patients with Hemophilia(PWH). To achieve this goal, a core interprofessional team consisting of a hematologist, certified pediatric hematology-oncology nurse, physical therapist, social worker, and a comprehensive multidisciplinary team including pediatricians, internists, orthopedic surgeons, dentists, genetic counselors, pharmacists, nutritionists, vocational rehabilitation counselors, and other healthcare providers all play a vital role in the care of the patient with hemophilia. This interprofessional care provided by HTCs optimizes patient outcomes and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients with hemophilia by decreasing the probability of serious adverse events.