**Surgical Management**

Currently, there is no “cure” for LP. The standard of care consists of surgical removal of the papillomas with preservation of normal mucosa. Clinicians should be prudent to accept some residual papillomas rather than damage normal tissue since adjacent tissue may have latent virus not clinically visible. Suspension microlaryngoscopy with laser removal is the gold standard, preferably with a CO2 laser (10,600 nm), but a potassium titanium phosphate (KTP) laser, a 585-nm pulsed-dye laser or an argon laser can also be used. Other modalities, such as microdebriders, cold instruments, and phonomicrosurgery, may be implemented as well. The operating room has been the standard of care until the emergence of the flexible laryngoscope, which has been improved with high-definition distal chip endoscopes. Nowadays, office-based laser surgery has helped with the control of the disease and decreased the need for general anesthesia.

During the procedure, care must be taken to minimize damage to normal tissue since it may lead to an iatrogenic squamociliary junction, creating additional foci of possible papillomatous growth. Airway compromise is a serious concern when dealing with distant or large clusters of laryngeal papilloma. Nevertheless, during situations of airway compromise, endotracheal intubation with flexible bronchoscope or video laryngoscope should be attempted first to try and avoiding tracheostomy. Most laryngeal papillomas are easily displaced and manipulated since they do not invade deep tissues. Tracheostomy should be avoided unless completely necessary to secure the airway since it creates a transition zone and predisposes further spread of the disease.

**Adjuvant Management**

The gold standard for therapy is still surgical intervention. Nevertheless, the criteria for implementing adjuvant therapy consists of more than 4 surgical procedures in 1 year, rapid regrowth of papilloma, airway compromise, and/or distal multisite spread of disease. The options include the use of cidofovir, photodynamic therapy, bevacizumab, interferon, indole-3 carbinol, and proton pump inhibitors. Many of these adjuvant therapies are mostly off label use and have a wide range of responses to therapy. The most commonly utilized interferon was peginterferon alpha 2a, but it has been replaced due to its high side-effects and emergence of cidofovir. Intralesional injection of cidofovir is a prodrug that becomes incorporated into the DNA and leads to toxicity against the virus. Many case series and case reports have demonstrated excellent response to cidofovir, but no clinical trial has been developed about the efficacy of cidofovir. The RRP task force recommends the use of cidofovir for patients with extra-laryngeal spread or those with more than six surgeries per year.

Even though it is a preventive therapy, the human papillomavirus 9-valent vaccine has been studied as adjuvant therapy. Yin Yiu et al. reported a retrospective study of patients with existent laryngeal papilloma who had a significant decrease in surgical intervals, the number of procedures per year, and disease burden.