Unlike TMS, the safety data regarding peripheral magnetic stimulation remain insufficient. Since both peripheral magnetic stimulation and TMS have similar physics properties, safety data of TMS is referenced.

**Safety Considerations**

**Heating**

The temperature increase is affected by the coil type, its cooling system, target tissue positions relative to the coil, and stimulation parameters. Different tissues have different thresholds to thermal damage, depending on exposure time and temperature. Most tissues can tolerate minutes of heat up to 43 degrees Celsius. Concerning excessive heat, the manufactured coils always have heat sensors that will automatically stop the coils when the temperature reaches around 40 degrees Celsius. Implants can heat as well and might cause thermal damage to surrounding tissues. No specific data has been provided on how peripheral magnetic stimulation heats certain kinds of implants. It is advisable to first measure the heating with planned parameters outside the body if it is still uncertain.  Furthermore, applying peripheral magnetic stimulation over tumors is contraindicated.

**Force and Magnetization**

The magnetic field emitted from the coil exerts an attractive force on ferromagnetic objects, meaning that the object can be moved by the magnetic force. A study indicated that stainless steel aneurysm clips in the brain were barely moved by TMS less than 0.0003 mm. Thus, this shift has no clinical significance. There are no safety data of peripheral magnetic stimulation applying over these kinds of ferromagnetic objects. Some experts suggest that principles of MRI safety for patients with implants can be adapted as a guide for peripheral magnetic stimulation.

**Induced Voltage**

The magnetic field pulse can potentially damage the circuits of electronic implants such as deep brain stimulation and cochlear implant. Based on previous TMS studies, it appears safe to apply TMS to patients with implanted stimulators with some distance between the coil and the internal pulse generator. However, there is no comprehensive information about safe distance, even for TMS. Some TMS guidelines even suggest that life-sustaining implants anywhere in the body, like prosthetic cardiac valves, are absolute contraindications. Any electronic devices carried by both operators and patients should be removed to prevent possible damage.

**Adverse Effects**

Peripheral magnetic stimulation is considered a painless approach. Some pain and discomfort were reported in studies that used triple stimulation techniques deploying suprathreshold peripheral magnetic stimulation. These adverse effects are likely associated with the intensity of peripheral magnetic stimulation.

**Considerations on Patient Selection**

**Pediatric Patients**

TMS safety guidelines concluded that single-pulse and paired-pulse TMS is safe for children aged 2 years and older, although there are few studies of peripheral magnetic stimulation conducted in children. One study deployed peripheral magnetic stimulation to five cerebral palsy patients with a mean age of 8 years old to evaluate spasticity reduction. The study did not state any adverse effect after stimulation of tibial and common peroneal nerves by peripheral magnetic stimulation.

**Pregnancy**

It is suggested that direct magnetic stimulation on the lumbar spine should be avoided. Women who are pregnant should stay at least 70 cm away from the coil.