St John's Wort is a xenobiotic or a plant-derived compound composed of five various forms of hypericin and other flavonoids. Many mechanisms of action have been proposed. One of the main mechanisms used in health care is the report that St. John's Wort acts as a serotonin reuptake inhibitor. This works to reduce the uptake of serotonin at neuronal synapses, as well as dopamine and norepinephrine. Elevated levels of neurotransmitters are believed to be helpful when treating depression. The supplement works by activating pregnane-X-receptor (PXR) cytochromes, which induces the cytochrome P450 system, specifically the CYP3A4 enzyme and P-glycoprotein. P450s or monooxygenase enzymes act through hydroxylation reactions onto the xenobiotic or St. John's Wort to make it more polar and thus increase its reactivity for conjugation into various polar groups.

In the monooxygenase reaction, molecular oxygen (O2) is broken into water and alcohol (R-OH); because of this, only one oxygen of the pair is given to the xenobiotic substrate. To prepare for the monooxygenase reaction, other reactions occur in xenobiotic metabolisms such as hydrolysis, deamination, epoxidation, preoxygenation, reduction, desulfurization, and dehalogenation. St. John's Wort's ability to inhibit monoamine oxidase allows an increase in the formation of norepinephrine. Hyperforin, a St. John's wort component, is believed to be the factor responsible for inducing CYP3A4 by activating a xenobiotic receptor and nuclear steroid/pregnane. Hyperforin itself could be the P-glycoprotein activating compound. This hyperforin content is generally more prevalent in commercially manufactured products, but St. John's Wort is presently regarded in the medical community generally as having significant CYP3A4 and PGP activity, and medical practitioners are not in a position to evaluate individual products or tinctures. Of note, a review showed that hyperforin content was unrelated to clinically desirable activity.

Another mechanism that leads to antidepressant activity is the capability of binding to GABA receptors to decrease the binding of GABA, which results in lowered CNS depression. Although St. John's Wort is not yet FDA approved, it is worth noting that some of its proposed mechanisms are in FDA-approved drugs used for the same variety of health complications.