B-ALL arises in either a hematopoietic stem cell or a B-cell progenitor. B-ALL shows various chromosomal abnormalities. Chromosomal abnormalities are thought to be an early initiating event in leukemogenesis and usually involve genes regulating cell signaling, tumor-suppressor functions, and/or lymphoid differentiation. Chromosomal abnormalities encountered include aneuploidy (changes in chromosome number), chromosomal rearrangements/translocations, genetic deletions/gains, and genetic mutations.

Generally, translocations are classified into 2 main classes. The first class involves the translocation of oncogenes to regulatory gene regions. The second class of translocations involves 2 genes and result in a chimeric protein. ALL show many distinct translocations showing both functional classes of translocations.

B-ALL is classified into 2 distinct entities:

- B-ALL not otherwise specified (NOS)

- B-ALL with recurrent genetic abnormalities

The B-ALL/LBL (NOS) should only be rendered when all other entities have been excluded. B-ALL is classified into multiple entities based on distinct chromosomal abnormalities as follows

**B-Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma (NOS)**

Should only be rendered after the exclusion of all ALL with recurrent genetic abnormalities and Burkitt lymphoma/leukemia.

**B-Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma with Recurrent Genetic Abnormalities**

This entity is classified into 9 different entities based on distinct chromosomal abnormalities as follows:

B-ALL/LBL with t(9;22)(q34;q 112); BCR;ABL1: This entity is relatively more common in adults than children. The translocation can lead to a p190 BCR-ABL1 fusion protein (common in children) or a p210 BCR-ABL1 fusion protein (common in adults). Overall, t(9;22) B-ALL cases have an unfavorable outcome compared to other ALL entities. Patients who are responsive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors tend to have a more favorable outcome than others.

B-ALL/LBL with t(v;11q23.3); KMT2A rearrangement: This entity shows a translocation between the KMT2A (MLL) gene at band 11q23 and up to 100 different fusion partners. This entity usually presents with a pro-B immunophenotype. ALL with KMT2A rearrangements is by far more common in infants younger than 1 year and tends to present more often with leukocytosis and central nervous system (CNS) involvement compared to other entities. The most common fusion partner gene is AF4 on chromosome 4q21. Overall, B-ALL with KMT2A rearrangements cases has an unfavorable outcome compared to other ALL entities.

B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with t(12;21)(p13.2;q22.1); ETV6-RUNX1: This entity is common and accounts for up to 25% of childhood B-ALL. The entity has a unique immunophenotype that includes positive CD19, CD10, and CD34 and negative CD9, CD20, and CD66c. The ETV6-RUNX1 translocation results in a fusion protein that inhibits RUNX1 function. B-ALL/LBL with t(12;21) also shows a unique genetic signature and overall shows a favorable overall prognosis.

B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with hyperdiploidy: Hyperdiploidy in B-ALL/LBL is characterized by more than 50 and fewer than 66 chromosomes without other structural abnormalities. Common chromosomes include 21, X, 14, and 4. This entity is common and accounts for to up to 25% of childhood B-ALL. Lymphoblasts show the following immunophenotype: CD19+, CD10-, CD34+, and CD45-. B-ALL/LBL with hyperdiploidy shows a favorable overall prognosis, although the outcome may vary based on certain trisomies present. For instance, the most favorable outcome is identified in patients with simultaneous trisomies 4, 10, and 17.

B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with hypodiploidy: Hypodiploidy with B-ALL/LBL includes the following subtypes: near-haploid ALL (23 to 29 chromosomes), low haploid ALL (33 to 39 chromosomes), high hypodiploid (40 to 43 chromosomes), near-diploid (44 to 45 chromosomes). In addition to the chromosome loss, structural abnormalities can also be identified in B-ALL with hypodiploidy. The entity usually demonstrates a B-cell precursor immunophenotype. Low haploid ALL usually shows a distinctive genetic signature that includes loss of function mutation of TP53 or RB1. Overall, B-ALL with hypodiploidy cases has an unfavorable outcome, with near-haploid ALL having the worst prognosis of the 4 subtypes.

B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with t(5;14)(q31.1;q32.3) IL3-IGH: This entity is a relatively rare ALL entity. The translocation between the IL3 gene and IGH gene results in constitutive overexpression of IL3. Patients can present similar to other patients with ALL; however, presenting with asymptomatic eosinophilia is possible. The unusual increase in eosinophils in ALL with t(5;14) is characteristic of this entity; however, it is not related to the leukemic clone and has no clear cause. The prognosis of ALL with t(5;14) is usually favorable.

B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with t(1;19)(q23;p13.3);TCF3-PBX1: This entity is relatively common in children. There is no unique clinical presentation in these patients. The immunophenotype of lymphoblasts in these patients shows a pre-B with CD19, CD10, and cytoplasmic mu positivity. Although this disease entity shows a distinct genetic and immunophenotypic signature, the management of this entity is not different from other ALL (NOS) patients. Therefore, the identification of this entity is not mandatory.

B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with BCR-ABL1-like

- The entity is more common in patients with Down syndrome and uniquely shows CRLF2 translocation. It is a diagnosis of exclusion after exclusion of distinct entities. Gene expression profiling is the “gold standard” for the diagnosis of BCR-ABL1-like B-ALL. FISH and karyotyping may be helpful in ruling out other entities.

- Some specialized labs currently offer multiplex FISH testing for some of the common genes.
- Similar to other ALL with recurrent genetic abnormalities, this entity shows no unique presentation, microscopic presentation, or immunophenotypic profile.

- This entity is characterized by a pattern of gene expression similar to that of B-ALL with the BCR-ABL1 translocation but lacks the BCR-ABL1 fusion protein.

- This entity harbors a large number of kinase-activating gene rearrangements primarily involving the ABL class, JAK/STAT, and/or Ras pathway-associated signaling pathways.

- Common genes involved include ABL1, ABL2, CRLF2, CSF1R, EPOR, JAK2, NTRK3 PDGFRb, JAK1/2/3, FLT3, IL7R, and SH2B3, IKZF1.

- Many cases of B-ALL with BCR-ABL1-like may additionally show other deletions or mutations that have a clear role in leukemogeneses, such as IKZFA and CDKN2A/B.
- The prognosis of ALL with BCR-ABL1-like is unfavorable.
- Identifying patients with B-ALL with BCR-ABL1-like can influence the management of the patient. For instance, patients with PDGFFB translocation can benefit from TKI inhibitors, while patients with JAK translocations may benefit from JAK inhibitors. Adult patients tend to have a poor outcome even with high-intensity chemotherapy regimens.

B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with iamp21

- Similar to the majority of B-ALL with recurrent genetic abnormalities, this entity shows no unique presentation, immunophenotypic profile, or microscopic finding. Diagnosis can only be rendered through genetic studies.

- B-ALL with iAMP21 can show variable cytogenetic features that include gains of an X chromosome, abnormalities of chromosome 7, deletions of RB1 and/or ETV6, and rearrangements of CRLF2 gene.
- The prognosis of ALL with iAMP21 is unfavorable.
- Identifying patients with B-ALL