The synthesis of serotonin begins with the essential amino acid tryptophan, which is utilized by tryptophan hydroxylase yielding 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan, which is then processed through Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase forming 5-HT. Although it was thought to be mainly in the CNS raphe nuclei maintaining cortical functions, it is also found in other systems (e.g., enterochromaffin cells, platelets and the coagulation cascade, blood vessels), in which 5-HT has a different mechanism of action, type of receptors' predominance and resultants.

The release of 5-HT in the synaptic cleft, which has a receptor-dependent effect, will cause an adrenergic-like response that is physical (e.g., mydriasis, increased heart, respiratory rate, and blood pressure) and neuropsychiatric (e.g., agitation, hallucinations, delirium). However, different therapies that target serotonergic and adrenergic receptor subtypes independently might show a distinctive molecular affinity to various subtypes, which is receptor and site-dependent (i.e., demonstrating experimentally that there might be cross-reactivity between the two families of receptors).

In the post-synaptic membrane, metabotropic G-protein receptors with high 5-HT affinity initiate second messenger cascades. The cascades' visceral effect differs based on the receptor subtype. The metabotropic receptors (HTR1/2), alongside its different subtypes, decreases cyclic-adenosine monophosphate (CAMP) through the coupling of Gi/o protein alpha subunit (GNAI) in which the activity of adenylate cyclase (ADCY) will be inhibited.

The mechanism of 5-HT, increasing CAMP concentration, can work on downregulation of the innate immune system, which correlates with psychological wellbeing (5-HT levels dependent) and several disorders' pathophysiology (e.g., asthma exacerbations, atopic dermatitis), that has an element of hypersensitivity with possible emotional triggers.