AN interprofessional healthcare team approach to prescribing and administering hydrocodone is the optimal strategy and includes the following:

- Healthcare professionals should comprehend the appropriate indications, adverse drug reactions, and toxicity management to ensure excellent patient outcomes related to hydrocodone therapy.

- In September 2018, to reduce the abuse and misuse of opioid analgesics, including hydrocodone, the FDA mandated the training program risk evaluation and mitigation strategy (REMS) for all drug company personnel with approved opioid analgesics. This program necessitates training in the fundamentals of acute and chronic pain management and the risks and safe use of opioids by all healthcare providers, including physicians, nurses, and pharmacists who manage patients with pain. The REMS program aims to promote education about safe opioid prescribing recommendations and reduce unnecessary exposure to and misuse of opioids.

- The American Geriatrics Society (AGS) beer criteria inform about potentially inappropriate medication in geriatric patients. According to a study, hydrocodone/acetaminophen was one of the most frequently prescribed medications resulting in emergency room visits.

- Ideally, clinicians should prescribe hydrocodone for appropriate indication considering the risks and benefits associated with therapy. Moreover, monitor at each visits the requirement of hydrocodone and aberrant behavior. Whenever prescribing hydrocodone for cough, the clinician should rule out GERD and other disorders.

- The prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) is an electronic database that tracks controlled substance prescriptions. Clinicians should check the database before prescribing hydrocodone to prevent multiple refills. It is important to note that data regarding methadone from opiate treatment programs are not available in the PDMP.

- The pharmacist should counsel the patient on the adverse drug reactions associated with hydrocodone therapy and ensure proper dosing considering hepatic and renal function. In case of any doubt, such as early refills, the pharmacist should verify with the prescriber. Likewise, nurses should monitor the pain levels at each visit and the effectiveness of treatment and watch for signs of adverse events or misuse.

- In case of an overdose of hydrocodone, triage nurses should admit the patient and inform the emergency department physician. The clinician should order the drug levels in urine and analyze arterial blood gas. Monitor the patient for respiratory depression. Consult the pharmacist about the use of activated charcoal and naloxone. Consult with the intensivist for intensive care unit (ICU) care in severe respiratory depression and paralytic ileus. Once the patient is stable, refer to a psychiatrist and mental health counselor if the overdose is deliberate.

- The clinician should refer the patient for detoxification if the patient is diagnosed with opioid use disorder. Consequent referral for medication-assisted treatment(MAT) and psychosocial treatment is required to prevent relapse.

- Multiple healthcare providers are involved in patient care, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, pharmacists, mental health counselors, and other healthcare providers. Hence it is necessary to work collaboratively to achieve optimal outcomes. An interprofessional team approach would maximize efficacy and minimize adverse drug reactions associated with hydrocodone therapy, improving patient outcomes. [Level 5]