Epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) are part of a signaling pathway that plays a pivotal part in the progression of many cancers, such as squamous cell carcinoma, pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and non-small cell lung cancer. The receptor is also found in ectodermal ocular and periocular tissues consisting of the eyelid skin, lash follicles, meibomian glands, and the epithelial cells found in the conjunctiva and cornea. The ocular surface depends on the EGFR receptor to undergo epithelial cell proliferation, which assists in essential processes like wound healing. The EGFR acts as an optimal drug target to decrease the proliferation of malignant cells but also leads to ocular toxicity.

EGFR-TKIs are hypothesized to result in corneal thinning and erosion due to the EGFR-mediated processes being affected. One of the initial steps in developing keratitis is the erosion of the epithelial cells in the corneal surface. The decreased proliferation in the epithelial cells results in decreased corneal surface hydration, impaired healing, and corneal inflammation. It is also hypothesized that given the EGFR cascade downregulates the growth cycle in hair follicles, the inhibition of this pathway leads to trichomegaly. The trichomegaly seen in these patients can worsen the inflammation through local mechanical irritation, further worsening the patient’s condition. Meibomian glands function to secrete meibum, a substance that protects the eye tear film layer by preventing evaporation. EGFR-TKI also prevents the proliferation of these glands, acting as another contributing factor to TKI keratitis.

The JAK inhibitor, ruxolitinib, is theorized to cause keratitis by impairing neutrophils from producing IL-17. IL-17 assists the cell in creating reactive oxygen species (ROS) for fungal killing. Without the ROS, patients become susceptible to fungal infections, which may lead to keratitis.

The pathological mechanism for tyrosine kinase inhibitor keratitis in the specific PDGFR, BRAF, BRC-ABL, VEGFR, and c-kit protooncogene TKIs is unclear.