In early childhood, the management includes optimal refractive correction, amblyopia therapy, and correction of squint.

Painted contact lenses may reduce photophobia, improve cosmesis, and improve vision. Tinted contact lenses may also be an option. Such contact lenses also reduce nystagmus. Photochromatic or tinted glasses may be helpful.

The food and drug administration has approved an artificial iris implant. It may improve the disabling glare, light sensitivity during day or night, improve cosmesis, and vision-related quality of life. However, there is a risk of development or worsening of glaucoma and limbal stem cell deficiency. An artificial iris may be used to treat

- Aniridia (congenital or traumatic)

- Iris defects due to various causes, including albinism, or after excision of iris mass.

**Glaucoma-**The medications usually fail to control glaucoma, and surgical intervention is needed. Glaucoma presenting before 1 year of age, is very difficult to treat. Surgery is often necessary for glaucoma by 20 years of age in patients with congenital aniridia. The options for surgical therapy include:

- Goniotomy

- Trabeculotomy

- Trabeculectomy with mitomycin C

- Combined trabeculectomy and trabeculotomy

- Glaucoma drainage devices may be implanted as a primary modality in aniridic glaucoma.

The success of surgical intervention may not be significant. In a study, success rates for various interventions were:

- 9% for trabeculectomy

- 25% for cyclocryotherapy; however side effects of phthisis and cataract was noted

- 83% for Molteno implant

Okada and colleagues noted that 'mean good intraocular pressure control period after the filtering surgery was 14.6 months'.

The cataract in aniridia may need extraction. Surgery is difficult due to zonular weakness and fragility of the lens capsule. The eye may be left aphakic, and postoperatively contact lens or aphakic glasses may be prescribed. A special intraocular lens (IOL) for aniridia is available, which has a peripheral colored region like iris of different pigmentation. Tinted IOLs are also available, which can reduce photophobia. In extreme subluxation, scleral-fixated IOL may be necessary. Surgical trauma may increase the chances of glaucoma, corneal decompensation, and limbal stem cell deficiency.

**Aniridia-associated keratopathy:**

Phase 0 (subclinical limbal stem cell deficiency and phase 1 (slight limbal stem cell deficiency, less than 2 corneal epithelial erosion or ulcer in last 6months, corneal pannus less than 1mm from limbus, mild watering and photophobia, and fluorescein staining abnormality)

Phase 2 (Moderate limbal insufficiency, constant redness, watering, and photophobia, more than three corneal erosions or ulcers in the last six months, constant tear film instability, vascular pannus)

Phase 3 (severe limba insufficiency, corneal vascularization, loss of vision)- Autologous transplant of limbal epithelial cells is not possible due to bilateral involvement. Management options include:

- 2 stage surgery involving initial replenishment of the limbal stem cells followed by surgery for visual rehabilitation

- Options for replenishing limbal stem cells include:

- Keratolimbal allografts
- Cultured limbal stem cell transplant
- Cultured oral mucosal epithelial transplantation 


- Options for visual rehabilitation include

- Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty
- Penetrating keratoplasty

- Simultaneous surgeries for both replenishment of the limbal stem cells and restoration of media clarity by keratoplasty have also been successful.

- Boston keratoprosthesis may be helpful in the visual rehabilitation of patients with severe aniridia-associated keratopathy.

However, the survival of corneal graft is often poor due to multiple causes, including corneal vascularization, limbal stem cell deficiency, severe dry eye, and glaucoma.

The associated squint and ptosis may need correction.

Aniridic fibrosis syndrome needs early surgical intervention to remove the membranes.

Systemic diseases need a collaborative approach of specialists of different subspecialties.