Numerous potential etiologies may contribute to the development of DED, and many cases may be multifactorial.

**Potential Causes and/or Factors Associated with DED**

- Systemic medications such as antihistamines, antihypertensives, anxiolytics/benzodiazepines, diuretics, systemic hormones, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, systemic or inhaled corticosteroids, anticholinergic medications, isotretinoin (causes meibomian gland atrophy), and antidepressants.

- Topical medications include glaucoma drops or preservative toxicity from eye drops containing preservatives.

- Skin diseases on or around the eyelids, such as rosacea or eczema.

- Meibomian gland dysfunction is a common co-morbidity with thickening and erythema of the eyelids and inadequate or altered secretions of meibomian glands.

- Ophthalmic surgery, including refractive surgery, cataract surgery, keratoplasty, and lid surgery.

- Chemical or thermal burns that scar the conjunctiva.

- Ocular allergies.

- Computer or device usage as this may lead to decreased blinking when looking at the screen.

- Excess or insufficient dosages of vitamins, particularly vitamin A deficiency, can lead to xerophthalmia and the appearance of Bitot spots on the conjunctiva in severe cases.

- Decreased sensation in the cornea from long-term contact lens wear, herpes virus infections, or other causes of a neurotrophic cornea.

- Graft-versus-host disease.

- Systemic diseases, which include Sjogren syndrome and other autoimmune or connective tissue disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus, and thyroid disease.

- Environmental factors include exposure to irritants like chemical fumes, cigarette smoke, pollution, or low humidity.