**Tissue Expanders and Implants**

Expanders and implants are common breast restoration options because of the simple nature of the procedure. Their use adds minimal time to the oncologic procedure and has a shorter recovery period. As there is no flap donor site, there are no complications from donor-site surgery. However, there can be significant pain associated with tissue expanders, and close follow-up is needed as the expanders are typically inflated weekly. This particular option is a good choice for patients who will not need radiation therapy. Using tissue expanders is also a good alternative for patients undergoing a unilateral mastectomy with little to no ptosis of the remaining breast and decreased subcutaneous adiposity, as implants reduce the natural fall of the breast.

Significant disadvantages of this option include implant infection, capsular contracture, and frequent tissue expansion visits. In addition, the radiated breast is a relative contraindication to tissue expansion, as radiation causes capsular contractures and infections, and it increases the risk of skin necrosis.

Several implant types are available, including saline or silicone gel, round or anatomically shaped, and smooth or textured. The risks and benefits of each implant should be thoroughly addressed with the patient, and the specifics of this choice are beyond the scope of this article.

This procedure can be performed as an immediate adjunct after the initial mastectomy, using the skin flap left by the breast surgeon. If this approach is chosen for delayed reconstruction, most surgeons will access the flap through the initial scar. This procedure can also be performed via previous scars, an inframammary incision, or circumareolar incisions.

The pectoralis major muscle is incised and lifted from the chest wall. Some plastic surgeons will then augment the muscle by adding an acellular dermal matrix to create a larger pocket or to reinforce the soft tissue, particularly to reinforce the inferior aspect of the breast. After creating the pocket, a tissue expander is inserted, and the muscle is reapproximated. The expanders have a port implanted to be easily accessible through the skin to perform subsequent expansion in the clinic. After the skin envelope is expanded appropriately, which will take several weeks, the patient returns to the operating room later to exchange the expander for the final implant. Issues such as capsular contracture and contralateral asymmetry can be addressed during the exchange procedure.

**TRAM Flaps**

The transverse rectus abdominis musculocutaneous (TRAM) flap is an excellent option for healthy candidates with the anatomy required for the procedure; the TRAM flap is a workhorse for breast reconstruction. The required anatomy includes a sufficient but not excessive amount of abdominal fat and otherwise fair core musculature. This flap isolates an island of skin, fat, and a portion of the rectus muscle and transposes it to the mastectomy site. Ideal candidates for this surgery are patients without significant comorbidities, such as uncontrolled hypertension or diabetes, as these may compromise the blood supply to the flap. Cigarette smoking is a relative contraindication to the procedure as it compromises the microcirculation of the flap and impairs overall wound healing; many plastic surgeons will require patients to refrain from any nicotine-containing products for at least two weeks before surgery if they cannot entirely quit.

This surgical option has the bonus of creating a natural fall appearance to the new breast mound and simultaneously performing a lipectomy of the abdomen. The drawbacks of this procedure are similar to those in most flaps, with vascular compromise resulting in partial or complete flap failure being the most severe. Since this is a musculocutaneous flap, the patient will have a defect in the anterior abdominal wall that increases the risk of future hernia formation. Similar postoperative care and positioning are adopted as with an abdominoplasty.

The blood supply to the flap classifies TRAM flaps. The most conventional TRAM flap is the pedicled TRAM which uses a pedicled arterial supply from the deep superior epigastric artery and rotates the flap island superiorly to create the new breast mound. This is the most straightforward TRAM flap, as the artery is not dissected, and the flap is merely rotated into its new position.

The muscle-sparing free TRAM flap was developed to minimize the amount of muscle taken from the abdomen. This option dissects the deep inferior epigastric artery perforator and a small muscle area, leaving most of the rectus behind in situ in the abdomen. The deep inferior epigastric perforator (DIEP) and superior epigastric inferior perforator (SIEP) TRAM flap variants are perforator flaps based on the deep inferior epigastric perforator and superficial inferior epigastric vessels, respectively, and have gained prominence in autologous breast reconstruction. The benefits of these procedures are that they take little muscle from the anterior abdominal wall and do not violate the rectus fascia. However, using these flaps requires specialized training to anastomose these fine vessels, typically performed under a microscope, and adds to the operative time. Despite this, these procedures are performed safely and routinely at most breast reconstruction centers.

**Latissimus Dorsi Flap**

The latissimus dorsi is a broad muscle that extends across a significant portion of the back, creating a flap with many clinical uses. This approach may be an option for patients who wish to have autologous tissue but have too little or too much subcutaneous adiposity or have a history of failed abdominal flap procedures.

**Nipple-Areolar Complex Reconstruction**

Although unnecessary, creating the nipple-areolar complex (NAC) completes breast reconstruction. This step is psychologically important for patients with breast cancer. Many techniques are used to create a NAC; the basis of all methods is to create a symmetric projection and appearance to its counterpart, whether a unilateral or bilateral mastectomy is performed. If the NAC cannot be spared and subsequently incorporated into the final reconstruction, medical tattooing is a common and highly effective technique to recreate the previous pigmentation of the areola and nipple.