The most common toxicity discussed in contrast agent usage is contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN). CIN is an iatrogenic acute kidney injury characterized by a sudden compromise in renal function within 24 to 48 hours of exposure to a contrast agent. Although there are no quantitative diagnostic criteria for CIN currently, the diagnosis is strongly suggested if a patient demonstrates one of the following within 48 hours of exposure to an iodinated contrast agent:

- Serum creatinine increased more than 25% from baseline

- Serum creatinine increased 0.3 to 0.5 mg/dL

- Urine output decreased to less than 0.5 mL/kg per hour for more than 6 hours

Rates of CIN have been estimated to be as high as 10% of all hospital-acquired renal failure and contrast is accepted to be the third most common cause of new acute kidney failure in hospitalized patients. However, a recent meta-analysis of 54,000 matched patients found no difference in the prevalence of acute kidney injury between patients who received imaging with or without contrast.

Interestingly, all cases of CIN have been detected following the administration of radiography contrast agents. Gadolinium-based contrast agents for MRI have been extensively studied and found to cause no such impairment in renal function, even in patients with baseline renal insufficiency. Instead, gadolinium agents have been loosely associated with nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF), a chronic disease characterized by severe skin induration. There are currently no mechanisms proposed for NSF, but exposure to gadolinium in a patient with advanced renal disease has become an accepted risk factor for NSF development.

Many studies group together adverse reactions other than CIN as allergic-like reactions and physiologic reactions. In the past, the use of high osmolar agents resulted in an adverse reaction in up to 15% of patients. The use of newer low osmolar agents has significantly decreased the number of adverse reactions to a range of 0.2% to 0.7%.

Gadolinium contrast material has even lower adverse effects compared to low osmolar agents used for CT. One study showed an adverse effect for 0.04% of the doses.