Hypothyroidism is majorly divided into two categories, primary and secondary (central) hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism is termed primary when the thyroid gland itself is not able to produce adequate amounts of thyroid hormone. The less common, secondary, or central hypothyroidism is labeled when the thyroid gland itself is normal, and the pathology is related to the pituitary gland or hypothalamus.

The most prevalent etiology of primary hypothyroidism is an iodine deficiency in iodine-deficient geographic areas worldwide. Autoimmune thyroid diseases are the leading causes of hypothyroidism in the United States and the iodine-sufficient regions. Hashimoto thyroiditis is the most common etiology in the United States, and it has a strong association with lymphoma. Etiology can be influenced locally by iodine fortification and the emergence of new iodine-deficient areas.

Other common causes of hypothyroidism include:

- Drugs such as amiodarone, thalidomide, oral tyrosine kinase inhibitors (sunitinib, imatinib) stavudine, interferon, bexarotene, perchlorate, rifampin, ethionamide, phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, interleukin-2, and lithium,

- Thyroid radioactive iodine therapy

- Thyroid surgery

- Radiotherapy to head or neck area

- Central hypothyroidism from neoplastic, infiltrative, inflammatory, genetic, or iatrogenic disorders of the pituitary or hypothalamus.

- A new class of cancer medications such as anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-L1/PD-1 therapy has been associated with both primary and/or secondary hypothyroidism.

Postpartum thyroiditis affects nearly 10% of women and often presents 8-20 weeks after the delivery of the infant. Only a few women require treatment with thyroid hormone. However, some women are at high risk for permanent hypothyroidism or recurrent postpartum thyroiditis in future pregnancies.

The use of radioactive iodine to manage Grave disease usually results in permanent hypothyroidism in about 80-90% of the patients within 8-20 weeks after treatment. Radiation treatment to the head and neck area can also result in hypothyroidism.

A relatively uncommon cause of primary hypothyroidism is subacute granulomatous thyroiditis, also known as de Quervain disease. It commonly occurs in middle-aged women and is usually a self-limiting disease.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy type-1 results from a mutation in the AIRE gene and is a constellation of Addison disease, hypoparathyroidism, and mucocutaneous candidiasis.

Secondary and tertiary hypothyroidism, also known as central hypothyroidism is caused by a defect in the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Its causes include the following:

- Pituitary tumors

- Tumors compressing hypothalamus

- Sheehan syndrome

- Thyroid releasing hormone (TRH) resistance

- TRH deficiency

- Lymphocytic hypophysitis

- Radiation therapy to the brain

- Drugs such as dopamine, prednisone, or opioids