Medical management of CAH due to 17-hydroxylase deficiency focuses on glucocorticoid and sex steroid hormone replacement.

Glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone (0.25 to 1.0 mg/day) or prednisone (2 to 5 mg/day) are given to suppress excess ACTH and 11-deoxycorticosterone production; this will reduce the mineralocorticoid excess and lead to improved blood pressure and serum electrolyte levels. Glucocorticoid replacement should continue throughout life at the lowest possible dose that suppresses ACTH levels. If blood pressure control is not achievable by glucocorticoids alone, then appropriate antihypertensives should also be administered. Spironolactone or other mineralocorticoid antagonists are often the antihypertensives of choice as the underlying cause is the mineralocorticoid excess; however, other antihypertensives may be options.

46XY patients who are phenotypically male require testosterone replacement at the onset of puberty to promote secondary sex characteristics.

46XY patients who are phenotypically female require estrogen/progesterone therapy to induce secondary sex characteristics

46XX patients require estrogen/progesterone replacement to induce secondary sex characteristics and for uterus development. Cyclic therapy in patients with amenorrhea is necessary to induce cyclic withdrawal bleeding and prevent endometrial hyperplasia.

Appropriate sex hormone replacement does not typically include DHEA but instead relies on testosterone and estrogen/progesterone therapy.

Surgical management in patients who are 46XY but phenotypically female may be required to remove undescended testes, which present a risk for neoplasia and vaginoplasty to create typical female sexual anatomy.

Additional treatment may be considered by reproductive medicine for fertility as these patients often are unable to conceive.