The diagnosis of HCV infection is based principally on the detection of antibodies to recombinant HCV polypeptides and by assays for HCV RNA. These are enzyme immunoassays that measure antibodies directed against NS4, core, NS3, and NS5 sequences. These cannot differentiate between past or current HCV infection. Direct testing for HCV RNA is necessary to distinguish between ongoing or prior infection in persons with HCV antibodies. HCV Rapid Antibody Test with rapid turnover can be an essential public health tool in nontraditional settings. There are three scenarios in which the HCV RNA test should be considered upfront: (1) exposure within the past six months, (2) an immunocompromised host, and (3) suspicion for reinfection.

Further evaluation consists of checking the viral genotype, which is still important in choosing the most optimal regimen and also for predicting the response to therapy. Other baseline evaluations include testing for HIV, hepatitis B surface antigen, susceptibility to hepatitis A and hepatitis B virus infections, and screening for other underlying causes of liver disease such as autoimmune liver disease, hemochromatosis, and Wilson disease. Before determining the HCV treatment strategy, the next step is to stage the disease, utilizing liver biopsy (gold standard) or approved imaging modalities with or without noninvasive biomarkers. Lastly, all of these patients should also undergo variceal screening and screening for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Other studies include:

- INR, prothrombin time

- Complete blood count

- Liver function tests

- GFR

- Serology for other hepatic viruses

- Thyroid function

- Screening for drug abuse and alcohol

- Mental health assessment

A liver biopsy is not routine, but it may help determine the severity of the disease. Other indications for a liver biopsy include 1) uncertain diagnosis, 2) presence of another liver disorder, and 3) immunocompromised patient.