Laser scar revision utilizes photothermal energy to target intra- and extra-cellular structures within scar tissue to stimulate eventual remodeling of dermal collagen and elastin.

Various types of lasers have been utilized in the treatment of scars since the 1980s, beginning with continuous-wave argon, CO2, and Nd:YAG 1064 lasers, followed by the application of PDL and Er:YAG lasers for scar revision.

For hypertrophic scars and keloids, the most common non-ablative laser has been the pulsed dye laser (PDL: 585 to 595 nm).

For atrophic facial scars, the most commonly used non-ablative lasers are Nd: YAG and 1450-nm diode laser. One study reported an improvement of 40 to 45% with 1320-nm Nd: YAG or 1450-nm diode laser treatment after an average of three consecutive monthly treatment sessions, as assessed by patient satisfaction surveys, histologic evaluations, and skin texture measurements.

Non-ablative fractional lasers (NAFL) have been shown to significantly improve the pigmentation and thickness of surgical scars, atrophic scars, hypertrophic scars, and hypopigmented scars.

Ablative laser resurfacing, with CO2 or Er: YAG lasers, has been shown to be effective for traumatic and surgical scars, especially when resurfaced within 6 to 10 weeks after trauma or surgery or even immediately after surgery.

For acne scars, previous head-to-head studies have suggested that CO2 laser produces superior results while Er: YAG is better tolerated with less downtime.

More recently, fractional ablative laser resurfacing has emerged as a popular treatment modality for atrophic and surgical scars. In fractional ablative resurfacing, columns of thermal damage, called microscopic thermal treatment zones, are separated by surrounding untreated skin, resulting in rapid re-epithelialization and reduced downtime as only a fraction of skin is altered.