**Internal Approach with Tarsal Strip for Involutional Entropion Repair**

The patient is prepped and draped in the usual sterile, full-face preparation. A corneal shield is placed in the affected eye.

A No. 15 Bard-Parker blade is used to make a 3-mm to 4-mm incision in the lateral canthal angle. The lateral canthal tendon and inferior crus are then disinserted. A tarsal strip is then created using Westcott scissors and 0.5 forceps. Hemostasis is maintained with cautery. A 4-0 silk traction suture is placed through the lash line or grey line of the lower lid. The lid is then everted. An incision in the conjunctiva below the inferior tarsal border from the lateral canthus immediately lateral to the punctum is made. Dissection is continued toward the inferior orbital rim with the 0.5-mm forceps and Westcott scissors. The orbital fat is dissected to expose the lower lid retractors while maintaining meticulous hemostasis.

The retractors are then dissected free from the conjunctiva. A 6-0 Vicryl suture is passed through the inferior, anterior portion of the tarsus. It is then passed through the lower lid retractors beneath the conjunctiva toward the globe, advancing them onto the anterior, inferior tarsus. Sutures are then placed across the lower lid. The sutures induce appropriate eversion of the eyelid without displacing the puncta. Additionally, a 5-0 Vicryl suture is passed in a whipstitch fashion through the anterior and posterior tarsus of the lid. The suture is then passed through the periosteum at the lateral orbital rim. The suture is temporally tightened to assess the lid position.

Once the appropriate lid position is achieved, a buried, interrupted 6-0 Vicryl suture is passed from gray line to gray line, upper to lower lid, to reform the lateral canthal angle. The 5-0 Vicryl suture is tied down. The orbicularis is closed with a 6-0 Vicryl in a buried, interrupted method. The skin incision is closed using simple, interrupted 6-0 plain gut sutures. Antibiotic ophthalmic ointment should be applied to the eye and all suture sites.

**External Approach for Involutional Entropion Repair**

The patient is prepped and draped in the usual sterile, full-face preparation. A corneal shield is placed in the affected eye.

Attention is turned to the affected lower lid. A 4-0 silk traction suture is placed through the lash line or grey line of the affected lid. A surgical marking pen is used to mark an incision at the inferior border of the tarsus from the puncta to the lateral canthus. A No. 15 Bard-Parker blade is used to make a skin incision at the marking. The assistant then elevates the inferior portion of the incision with a lacrimal rake while caudally tractioning the cheek tissue. Dissection is continued toward the inferior orbital rim using 0.5 forceps and Westcott scissors.

The orbital septum is opened, and the preaponeurotic fat is identified. The fat is dissected to expose the lower lid retractors. Hemostasis is maintained with cautery. The retractors are dissected free from the conjunctiva for 5 mm to 10 mm. A 6-0 Vicryl suture is passed through the inferior, anterior portion of the tarsus. It is then passed in a buried fashion through the lower lid retractors advancing them onto the inferior tarsus. Three or four such sutures are placed at an equidistance across the affected lower eyelid. This should cause appropriate eversion of the eyelid without displacing the puncta from the proper position. The skin incision is closed using simple, interrupted 6-0 plain gut sutures. The corneal shield is then removed from the affected eye. Finally, the antibiotic ophthalmic ointment is instilled into the eye and on all suture sites.