Important concepts pertaining to the regulation of mitochondrial beta-oxidation, cellular handling, and transport of fatty acids will be discussed here. As the other forms of fatty acid oxidation are substrate-dependent and are not regulated by feedback or substrate concentrations, they will not receive the same level of discussion as mitochondrial beta-oxidation.

Fatty acid beta-oxidation is regulated by the cell’s energy requirements. These molecules become more available in times of increased energy demand of prolonged fasting due to stimulation of hormone-sensitive lipase in adipose tissue epinephrine and glucagon. Serum-free fatty acids increase under the influence of these molecules and enter target cells. Other factors that regulate beta-oxidation include adequate oxygen supply for the continued electron acceptance from carrier substrates produced, namely FAD(H2) and NADH, to maintain a pool of electron acceptors available. Expression of enzymes involved in fatty acid oxidation becomes upregulated through fatty acids behaving as ligands that bind to peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs); these transcription factors form homo-/heterodimers and translocate to the nucleus, where they alter gene expression involved in the production of proteins required for beta-oxidation and mitochondrial biogenesis.

First, free fatty acids must be taken up in cells by a transporter-mediated mechanism involving the membrane fatty acid-binding protein (FABPpm).

Activation of fatty acids requires the formation of a thioester bond with Coenzyme A, an ATP-dependent process carried out by acyl-CoA synthetases.

Transportation of long-chain fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix requires three enzymes, in addition to acyl-CoA synthetase. The transport of fatty acyl-CoA across the outer mitochondrial membrane occurs by carnitine:palmitoyltransferase I (CPT I); this enzyme simultaneously converts fatty acylcarnitine. This step is heavily regulated by the energy status of the cell; malonyl-CoA levels rise during the synthesis of fatty acids and function to inhibit mitochondrial beta-oxidation at this point in the pathway. The enzymatic transportation and conversion completed by CPT I is the rate-limiting step of fatty acid oxidation in the mitochondria. Fatty acyl-carnitine molecules are then transported into the mitochondrial matrix in exchange for carnitine by carnitine:acylcarnitine translocase through an antiport mechanism. The pool of carnitine available to this transporter depends on the functioning of carnitine:palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II), which serves to convert acylcarnitine to fatty acyl CoA, trapping the molecules within the mitochondrial matrix.

In contrast to this involved, regulated transport mechanism, VLCFAs are not dependent on carnitine for transport into peroxisomes; the transport of branched-chain fatty acids destined for alpha-oxidation is similar to this process, and as previously mentioned, is substrate-dependent. VLCFAs and phytanic acid are transported into peroxisomes by the ABCD1-3 transporters by an ATP-dependent process; deficiencies of these transporters have demonstrated to have severe implications and are discussed below in “Clinical Significance.”