Erectile dysfunction (ED), the inability to get or maintain an erection, is the most common penile disorder. This can be due to either psychological stress, organic disease, or a combination of both. Risk factors associated with erectile dysfunction include obesity, smoking, atherosclerotic disease, decreased activity, obstructive sleep apnea, diabetes, drugs as well as many other causes. Antidepressants and antihypertensive drugs are common drugs which lead to erectile dysfunction. The most common cause of erectile dysfunction is vascular issues. Thus the first line therapy is usually phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, such as sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil. They work by increasing nitric oxide-induced vasodilation by increasing the cyclic guanosine monophosphate (GMP) levels. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors are contraindicated in patients taking nitrates due to vasodilatory effects of both drugs, which can lead to severe hypotension. Lifestyle modifications are usually indicated for the treatment of erectile dysfunction also. Weight loss, physical activity, and smoking cessation can improve erectile function. If initial therapy fails, there are second-line therapies such as vacuum-assisted mechanical devices, penile injections with alprostadil, or penile prosthesis.

Peyronie disease is an abnormal curvature of the penis that is normally a benign condition but may be associated with painful erections or erectile dysfunction. The condition can resolve spontaneously, become stable, or worse. The underlying pathogenesis of Peyronie disease is not known. However, it is believed that repeated microtrauma to the penis leads to fibrin deposition due to microvascular injury.  The fibrous plaques contain excessive collagen that causes focal inelasticity leading to the curvature of the penis. Several conditions have been associated with Peyronie disease such as Paget disease and Dupuytren contracture. The diagnosis of Peyronie disease is usually a clinical diagnosis, but imaging may be helpful. Current medical management of oral therapy for Peyronie disease include pentoxifylline, vitamin E, potassium para-aminobenzoate, colchicine, tamoxifen, and carnitine. Pentoxifylline is usually the first-line therapy. Intralesional drug therapy includes verapamil, interferon alfa-2b, and collagenase. Other treatments include penile traction therapy, iontophoresis, extracorporeal shockwave therapy, surgical straightening procedures, penile prosthesis placement, and radiation.