Abscess, metastasis from a distant primary lesion, metastatic melanoma, renal cyst, renal infarction, sarcoma, renal angiomyolipoma, renal oncocytoma, and lymphoma form close differentials of a renal mass.

Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, oncocytoma, clear cell tubulopapillary carcinoma, multilocular cystic renal cell carcinoma, adenoma, and MIT family transitional renal cell carcinomas are close histopathological differentials.

**Renal Angiomyolipoma**

The most common benign renal tumor, mostly sporadic, may be associated with tuberous sclerosis and lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Those with tuberous sclerosis have a larger size, are bilateral, multicentric, and symptomatic. These are mostly seen in females in the middle age. Usually asymptomatic, though, larger tumors may be associated with an increased propensity to cause hemorrhage. The presence of macroscopic fat is pathognomonic, though 15 -30 percent of tumors associated with tuberous sclerosis may be lipid deficient. On MRI, low T2 intensity is shared by lipid poor AML and clear cell renal carcinoma. Compared to hypovascular clear cell tumors, AML’s are usually hypervascular. Larger tumor size, calcification, and intratumoral necrosis favor a diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma.

Another clear cell mimic seen in these patients with tuberous sclerosis is AML with epithelioid features.

**Renal Oncocytomas**

It is the second most common renal benign tumor after AML. There remains a strong body of opinion that oncocytoma cannot be reliably distinguished from renal cell carcinoma based on radiological features alone, although parameters such as corticomedullary phase TCR, nephrogenic phase TCR higher than a corticomedullary phase TCR, CT de-enhancement characteristics have been proposed as features capable of characterizing this tumor.

**Renal Lymphomas**

The presence of a cystic component, vascular extension into the renal vein or inferior vena cava, and calcification are features considered to be atypical for lymphoma and point towards a diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma.