Potassium is an essential mineral constituent of the human body and is the chief cation found within the intracellular fluid of all cells. Multiple potassium salts exist and can be useful as a medication for a wide range of indications. Since potassium is an essential electrolyte usually sourced through our diet, any condition in which a patient is unable to maintain their dietary intake is an indication for exogenous replenishment of potassium. Hence, the recommendation is to include potassium in electrolyte replacement regimens and form a part of intravenous maintenance fluids in adult and pediatric patients or as routine prophylaxis following surgery.

The chief indication for potassium administration is potassium deficiency or hypokalemia, a condition in which serum potassium level falls below a critical range. Hypokalemia can occur due to multiple reasons, mainly inadequate intake of potassium such as in the condition of malnutrition, malabsorption, debilitation, prolonged parenteral nutrition without potassium, or excessive losses of potassium such as vomiting, diarrhea, excessive drainage of gastrointestinal fluids, dialysis, renal diseases, diabetic ketoacidosis, hyperadrenalism, use of diuretics, corticosteroids and amphotericin B. Hyperactivity of adrenal cortex called as Cushing syndrome is another important cause of hypokalemia. Metabolic alkalosis can also cause hypokalemia by shifting potassium from the extracellular to the intracellular compartment.

Other recommended indications for potassium salts include:

Hypertension: Adequate intake of potassium is recommended to prevent the development of hypertension. Prescribers also give potassium supplements to improve blood pressure control in patients with known hypertension.

Arrhythmia: It is recommended when cardiac glycoside toxicity occurs due to a loss of potassium or in certain tachyarrhythmias following cardiac surgery.

Thallium toxicity: Used intravenously in a limited fashion.

Hyperthyroidism: Potassium iodide is prescribed as an oral adjunctive medication in the immediate preoperative period for patients with hyperthyroidism undergoing thyroidectomy.

Radiation protection: Oral potassium iodide can help protect the thyroid gland by blocking thyroid hormone uptake of radioactive iodine isotopes either from environmental hazards or during treatment with radiopharmaceuticals.

Sporotrichosis: Oral potassium iodide is considered the drug of choice for fixed cutaneous or lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis in resource-constrained countries because of its low cost.

Cough: Historically, clinicians have used potassium iodide to treat symptoms of chronic cough as an expectorant of tenacious mucus. However, its efficacy in this role is not well supported.

Alkalinization: Potassium citrate is useful to alkalinize urine in case of certain kinds of urinary tract calculi and management of conditions associated with chronic metabolic acidosis (chronic renal insufficiency and renal tubular acidosis). In these conditions, potassium citrate serves as an alternative to sodium citrate or sodium bicarbonate when a high quantity of sodium administration is undesirable.

Antibiotics: Potassium is also used as a vehicle or compounding chemical for some antibiotic preparations (e.g., potassium benzylpenicillin, potassium penicillin V and amoxicillin-clavulanate potassium).