- MFS and GBS are thought to result from an aberrant acute autoimmune response to a preceding infection (e.g. Campylobacter jejuni, Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, or Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) through a molecular mimicry mechanism that leads to the destruction of myelinating components of the central and peripheral nervous system.

- MFS variant represents 1 to 2 in 1,000,000, with average occurrence during mid-adulthood, affecting more men than women 2:1, and disproportionate incidence in Asian communities.

- The clinical hallmark of MFS is a triad presentation of acute ophthalmoplegia, areflexia, and ataxia in the setting of a preceding bacterial or viral illness. Associated symptoms also include diplopia or blurred vision, dysarthria, dizziness, and extremity tingling with or without cranial nerve involvement.

- Physical exam findings include facial paresis, distal hyporeflexia without signs of upper motor neuron dysfunction, and loss of light and vibratory sensation in the distal extremities. Autonomic dysfunction although possible is less likely to occur in MFS.

- Although the diagnosis of MFS is mostly clinical, supportive testing can help differentiate from other diseases or variants of GBS, including a lumbar puncture with CSF studies, anti-ganglioside antibody testing, nerve conduction studies, electromyography, CT/MRI imaging, among other ancillary testing.

- Differential diagnoses include brainstem (Bickerstaff) encephalitis, pharyngeal-cervical-brachial weakness GBS variant, and other neuromuscular autoimmune disorders. MFS and these 2 variants have in common the presence of anti-ganglioside antibodies in CSF.

- MFS is mainly treated with adequate supportive care, pain control, and respiratory support as needed, and immunotherapy. IVIG or plasmapheresis are the mainstays of therapy. Corticosteroids are no longer recommended and are ineffective in the majority of cases.

- The prognosis of MFS is usually good with a case fatality of less than 5%. The mean recovery times range between 8 to 12 weeks. Although recurrence may occur, it is uncommon.

- The most common complication is generalized fatigue. About one-third of all patients still experience pain one year after onset. Severe complications are more likely in patients with an extended ICU course.

- ICU transfer from the emergency department is reserved for the sickest patients who meet certain criteria including impending respiratory failure. Major criteria include hypercapnia PaCO2 greater than 48 mm Hg, hypoxemia PaO2 less than 56 mm Hg at room air, vital capacity less than 15 mL/kg of body weight, and negative inspiratory force less than -30 cm H2O. Minor criteria include an inefficient/weak cough, dysphagia, and atelectasis as evidenced in a chest x-ray.

- Early physical and occupational therapy can lead to a faster recovery in patients with any form of GBS, including MFS. The goals of therapy should be individualized according to the patient's wishes, it includes achieving optimal muscle use as tolerated by pain, and use supportive equipment to help the patient resume functional activity as close to the pre-hospitalization baseline as possible.