There are multiple contraindications to giving mannitol, including:

- Established anuria due to renal disease

- Pulmonary edema or severe pulmonary congestion

- Active intracranial bleeding except for during a current craniotomy

- Severe dehydration

- Progressive heart failure

- Known mannitol hypersensitivity

- Renal damage caused by mannitol

- Patients with impaired renal function: If the patient has impaired renal function, a small test dose should be given, and the patient observed for a response. If there is no response, a small test dose is repeatable, but the clinician should administer no more than two test doses.

- Electrolyte abnormalities. As mannitol works, it first increases the intravascular free water content, which can worsen electrolyte abnormalities, including hyponatremia. In the second phase of action, mannitol gets excreted in the urine with excess free water, potentially causing hypernatremia due to the induced diuresis. Electrolytes should be monitored carefully with mannitol use.

- Mannitol may worsen intracranial hypertension in patients, especially children with hyperemia, which can be fatal.

- Repeated frequent doses of mannitol can leach into the brain and worsen cerebral edema in the long term. Thus, mannitol is frequently recommended as a bolus spaced apart every 6 to 8 hours, limiting the number of boluses given.

- Mannitol can worsen renal function and precipitate renal failure.

- Mannitol should only be given intravenously and never given intramuscularly or subcutaneously.

- Mannitol should not be administered with whole blood.