- Measure the appropriate length of plaster, 8 to 12 sheets thick for posterior slab and stirrup.

- Measure and cut stockinet for the leg.

- Perform reduction of the ankle, if necessary. Have assistant hold leg and ankle to maintain reduction during splinting.

- Place stockinette on the leg.

- Wrap leg with cotton rap beginning at the metatarsal heads and ending at the tibial tubercle, ensuring 50% overlap of padding with a minimum of two layers. Ensure that the medial and lateral malleoli and heel are well padded. Attempt to avoid bunching or wrinkles in padding.

- Dip plaster into the water to thoroughly wet.

- Wring wet plaster and bond together between fingers.

- Apply posterior slab over cotton wrap on the leg, ensuring that the plaster begins at the plantar aspect of the metatarsal heads and ends below the popliteal fossa.

- Apply stirrup over cotton rap on the leg, ensuring that the plaster begins around the proximal third of the tibia medially, wrapping around the heel, and up the lateral aspect of the leg ending below the fibular head.

- Overwrap plaster with one layer of cotton wrap to keep the plaster from sticking to the elastic bandage.

- Fold excess stockinette over plaster and wrap so that there is a cuff at each end of the splint.

- Loosely wrap the entire splint with an elastic bandage.

- Apply appropriate mold while the plaster is hardening. Ensure that the ankle is in neutral dorsiflexion.

- Avoid placing the splint on pillows or a blanket as this has an insulating effect.

- Once the splint is hard, re-assess the neurovascular status of the foot and toes.