Leucovorin is a 5-formyl derivative of folic acid, used in biochemical reactions without having to undergo reduction. Leucovorin is FDA indicated after high dose methotrexate therapy in osteosarcoma to decrease the toxic effects of methotrexate or counter the toxic effects of folate antagonists. Leucovorin is also occasionally an alternative agent used in the treatment of megaloblastic anemia when oral intake of folic acid is not possible. Leucovorin can prolong survival in patients when used in combination with 5-fluorouracil for the palliative treatment of colon cancer.

Off-label uses include neoadjuvant treatment in bladder cancer, as a cofactor in methanol toxicity, in the treatment of advanced esophageal cancer, advanced gastric cancer, advanced pancreatic cancer, prevention of hematological toxicity of pyrimethamine in patients with AIDS, and the treatment of ectopic pregnancy (along with methotrexate).

Leucovorin was initially known as the "citrovorum factor" when researchers discovered it in 1948; they found it to be an essential cofactor for the growth of Leuconostoc citrovorum, a lactic acid bacterium. The FDA approved leucovorin in 2002, and the levo isomer leucovorin received approval in the year 2008 during a shortage of leucovorin.

Clinical manifestations of methotrexate toxicity include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomatitis, mucositis, esophagitis, elevated hepatic enzymes, rash, renal failure, myelosuppression, acute lung injury, hypotension, tachycardia, and neurologic dysfunction. Toxic effects may occur hours to days to weeks after methotrexate overdose or administration.