All the patients with suspicion of pelvic abscess and diagnosis should be admitted to the hospital regardless of the size of the pelvic abscess. All patients should be monitored closely for sepsis and rupture. The initial approach to the treatment is Broad-spectrum antibiotics. A multilocular abscess usually represents tubo-ovarian abscess and substantially respond well to Antibiotic treatment alone.

**Conservative Management**

The ideal candidates for conservative management alone are women with no sign of sepsis and rupture, hemodynamically stable and, pelvic abscess greater than 8 cm on imaging. In a study by Granberg et al. in 2009 stated that 25% of the patient fails to respond to conservative treatment.

Once diagnosed, a combination of parental antibiotics should be started to treat the mixed aerobic and anaerobic microbes. The gold standard antibiotics regimen is the combination of clindamycin or metronidazole with an aminoglycoside, penicillin, or third-generation cephalosporins. Aztreonam is a substitute for aminoglycoside in patients with renal impairment. Other antibiotics with high therapeutic efficacy that may be options as a single agent include extended-spectrum antibiotics (cefoxitin, cefotetan, cefotaxime, ceftizoxime), beta-lactamase inhibitors (ticarcillin-clavulanate and carbapenems, meropenem, ertapenem,)extended-spectrum penicillin (piperacillin-tazobactam).

**Surgical Management and Drainage of a Pelvic Abscess**

Recent evidence suggests that it is acceptable and beneficial for the patient to perform primary surgical drainage along with appropriate antibiotic coverage. It decreases the length of stay of hospitalization and improves fertility outcomes. A study by Perez and medina reported that surgical drainage is needed if the size of the abscess is over 8 cm or failure to respond to adequate antibiotic treatment in 2 to 3 days.

Different techniques are available for surgical drainage of the pelvic abscess, but in the past, the preferred approach was laparotomy. Many gynecologists still prefer this surgical route for the removal and drainage of the surgical abscess. Most of the gynecologist employs vertical incision in need for the proper visualization of abdomen and pelvis. Following steps should be done in the removal and surgical drainage of the abscess:

- Always confirm the diagnosis first with the appropriate backup.

- Cultures are obtained upon entering into the peritoneal cavity and abscess itself.

- Surgically remove the abscess as much as possible if the abscess is in the ovary, an adnexectomy is likely necessary.

- Always irrigate the peritoneal cavity with normal saline to lessen the burden of infection.

- All the tissues removed sent for culture and histopathology.

- Leave in the closed suction drain until the output from the drain is minimal, and the patient improves clinically.

Now the laparoscopic approach is being used for the drainage. The laparoscopic approach is being used more successfully in a patient with no exhibition of the rupture of an abscess. The choice between laparotomy and laparoscopy depends upon the determination and skill of the surgeon.  However, the CT, MRI, or U/S guided drainage with antibiotics is the procedure of choice and has a success rate of 80% to 90%.