Adverse effects of quinapril include dry cough (as is typical among all ACE inhibitor class members), hyperkalemia, angioedema, dizziness, hypotension, and renal dysfunction.

Angioedema is a rare but well-documented side effect of ACE inhibitors, which often presents as facial, tongue, and lip swelling. However, there may be unique instances when patients present with isolated swelling of the small bowel. This presentation, also called intestinal-type angioedema, may manifest in patients taking ACE inhibitors presenting with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and/or diarrhea.

Although there was one report of agranulocytosis in a neutropenic patient using quinapril, there are no other reports of agranulocytosis noted in the literature, as found in rare cases of captopril use, one of the original ACE inhibitors.

**Drug Interactions**

- **Diuretic agents:**Coadministration of quinapril with other diuretics may occasionally lead to reduce blood pressure after initiation of therapy. To minimize the hypotensive effects, either discontinue the diuretic or cautiously increase the salt intake before initiation of quinapril therapy. The reduced initial dose of quinapril may be used for the patients where the discontinuation of the diuretic is not feasible.

- **Agents increasing serum potassium:**Coadministration of quinapril with other agents that raise the level of serum potassium may lead to cause hyperkalemia. It is recommended to monitor the level of serum potassium in such patients.

- **Tetracycline and other agents that interact with magnesium:**Coadministration of quinapril with tetracycline may lead to reducing the absorption of tetracycline by 28% to 37% due to the high magnesium content in quinapril tablets.

- **Lithium:**Coadministration of quinapril with lithium may lead to an increase in serum lithium levels and this might cause symptoms of lithium toxicity.

- **Gold:**Coadministration of quinapril with injectable gold may lead to nitritoid reactions which lead to cause symptoms like facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, and hypotension.

- **Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents including selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors:**Coadministration of quinapril with NSAIDs or selective COX-2 inhibitors in geriatric patients may result in deterioration of renal function or acute renal failure.

- **Agents that inhibit mTOR:**Coadministration of quinapril with mTOR inhibitor (temsirolimus) may lead to an increase in the risk for angioedema.