**Maintain Accurate Medical Records Regarding Opiate Prescriptions**

All clinicians should maintain accurate, complete, and current medical records, including:

- Records of prescriptions for controlled substances

- Record instructions provided

- Detailed history, physical, monitoring, and reasons prescribed

**Federal and State Laws**

Several regulations and programs at the federal and state level to reduce prescription opioid abuse, diversion, and overdose. These laws require:

- Immunity from prosecution for individuals seeking assistance during an overdose

- Pain clinic oversight

- Patient identification prior to dispencing

- Physical examination prior to prescribing opioids

- Prescription limits

- Prohibition from obtaining controlled substance prescriptions

- Tamper-resistant prescriptions

**Federal Laws**

The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) sets national standards for controlled substances. Drug scheduling was mandated under The Federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. The law addresses controlled substances within Title II. The DEA maintains a list of controlled medications and illicit substances that are categorized from scheduled I to V. The five categories have their basis on the medication’s proper and beneficial medical use and the medication’s potential for dependency and abuse. The purpose of the law is to provide government oversight over the manufacturing and distribution of these types of substances. Prescribers and dispensers are required to have a DEA license to supply these drugs. The licensing provides links to users, prescribers, and distributors.

The schedules range from Schedule I to V. Schedule I drugs are considered to have the highest risk of abuse, while Schedule V drugs have the lowest potential for abuse. Other factors considered by the DEA include pharmacological effect, evidenced-based knowledge of the drug, risk to public health, trends in the use of the drug, and whether or not the drug has the potential to be made more dangerous with minor chemical modifications.

- "High abuse potential with no accepted medical use; medications within this schedule may not be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include marijuana (cannabis), heroin, mescaline (peyote), lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), and methaqualone.

- "High abuse potential with severe psychological or physical dependence; however, these medications have an accepted medical use and may be prescribed, dispensed, or administered"

-  Examples include fentanyl, oxycodone, morphine, methylphenidate, hydromorphone, amphetamine, methamphetamine (meth), pentobarbital, and secobarbital.

- Schedule II drugs may not receive a refill

- "Intermediate abuse potential (i.e., less than Schedule II but more than Schedule IV medications)"

- Examples include anabolic steroids, testosterone, and ketamine

- "Abuse potential less than Schedule II but more than Schedule V medications"

- Examples include diazepam, alprazolam, and tramadol

- "Medications with the least potential for abuse among the controlled substances."

- Examples include pregabalin, Diphenoxylate/atropine, dextromethorphan.

It is essential to understand the DEA controlled-substance scheduling both to ensure adequate caution when prescribing medications with high abuse potential and also to ensure against prescribing outside of one's authority.

The Controlled Substances Act has great potential to improve patient safety by providing federal oversight for drugs with a high potential for abuse. Providers of scheduled substances (physicians, dentists, podiatrists, advanced practitioners) may have links to the distribution of these substances. They are required to have a DEA license and record prescription of scheduled drugs. This licensing prevents overprescribing and obligates providers to be wary of potential drug-seeking patients. The dispenser must also be aware of a patient's medication history and be mindful of the potential for polypharmacy if a patient seeks multiple providers. The current opioid epidemic is a time where federal oversight and interdisciplinary coordination have the potential to reduce harm to patients prescribed scheduled drugs drastically. It will, however, take further time and evaluation to know if drug scheduling actually reduces abuse, addiction, and overdose.

See Table 1 for information regarding registration, records, prescriptions, refills, distribution, security, and theft or significant loss of controlled substances.

See Table 2 for information regarding DEA forms 106, 222, 224, and 224a.

**West Virginia State Laws**

The prescribing, dispensing, reporting, and consumption of controlled substances are governed by West Virginia Code Chapter 60A (Appendix). A brief summary of Virginia State Laws is provided in the following table. Please review the entire law prior to prescribing controlled substances.

- Establish rule implementing a statewide tamper-resistant prescription paper program

**The Opioid Reduction Act**

- Establishes a voluntary nonopioid advance directive form

- Patient education requirements before prescribing a Schedule II opioid and the following:

- Limit to a 3-day supply if (1) Adult patient in ER for outpatient use, (2) A minor under age 18, (3) Prescription by a dentist or optometrist
- Limits physician prescribers to a 7-day supply at the lowest effective dose. After the initial prescription, after consultation with the patient, subsequent prescription only if deemed necessary and appropriate and documents the rationale, and the practitioner determines that issuance does not present an undue risk of abuse, addiction, or diversion and documents that determination.
- The third prescription requires referral to a chronic pain clinic or a 3-month review of the treatment course, pain etiology, progress, and documentation.
- Periodic attempts to stop, decrease the dosage, or try other treatment modalities
- Review the Controlled Substance Monitoring Database

- The act does not apply to the following:

- Patients with active cancer, those under licensed provider hospice care, residents of a long-term care facility, or if prescribed to treat substance abuse or opioid dependence
- The existing provider-patient relationship was established before 1.1.2018, and there is a current opioid treatment plan in the record.
- In-patients
- Non-opioid Schedule II controlled substances

- Allows prescription of opioid antagonists by licensed healthcare professionals to persons who may intervene, such as a relative, friend, or caregiver; includes education requirement

- Unlawful to provide misleading or false information to a medical practitioner in order to obtain a prescription for a controlled substance

- Increases penalties for "doctor shopping."

- Requires all prescribers and dispensers of controlled substances to have electronic access to the Controlled Substances Monitoring Program database.

- Establishes limits on the dispensing of controlled substances in pain management clinics, establishes CME training on drug diversion and best practices

- Expands the requirement to report the dispensing of Schedule II, III, and IV drugs

-  Amends professional code to allow clinicians prescribing controlled substances to legally decline to prescribe if they believe the patient is misusing or unlawfully diverting the controlled substance

-  Requires law or medical personal to report: overdoses, medical treatment of an overdose, the dispensation of an opioid antagonist, and any death attributed to an overdose

**West Virginia Controlled Substance Monitoring Program**

West Virginia has enacted controlled substance monitoring programs to facilitate the collection, analysis, and reporting of controlled substances prescribing and dispensing. The WV program requires:

- All clinicians who prescribe/dispense pain-relieving substances to register with the West Virginia Controlled Substances Monitoring Program database within 30 days of licensure at https://www.csappwv.com

- At least annually accessing the system for specific patients for whom they are providing controlled substances for chronic, nonmalignant pain not due to terminal illness

- Controlled Substances Monitoring Program may be queried prior to accepting a new patient in order to determine whether or not to accept the patient and provide treatment

- If relevant, practitioners may obtain information regarding a breastfeeding mother of a child patient

Health professionals who dispense Schedule II, III, and IV controlled substances must provide the dispensing information to the West Virginia Board of Pharmacy each 24-hour period through the Controlled Substances Automated Prescription Program (CSAPP). Pharmacists and approved officers of law enforcement agencies who enforce prescription drug laws can also register for a CSAPP account. All patient information is kept confidential in compliance with HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules. User access is limited to seeking information only in the care of current patients.

The West Virginia Uniform Controlled Substances Act provides the basis for the rules and regulations concerning opioids. The following summarizes all the key laws. As they are frequently updated, providers should review each law before they start prescribing controlled substances.

**West Virginia Senate Bill 273 (****Opioid Reduction Act)**

- Establishes a voluntary nonopioid advance directive form and patient education requirements before prescribing a Schedule II opioid.

- Sets opioid prescriptions limited to a three-day supply in all of the following cases

- Any prescription to a minor (>18 years of age)
- Adult patients seeking treatment in an ER setting for outpatient use
- A prescription issued by a dentist or an optometrist
- Limit all other Schedule II opioid prescriptions to a maximum 7-day supply at the lowest effective dose

- After issuing the initial prescription, after consultation with the patient, the prescriber may issue a subsequent prescription for an opioid if:

- the practitioner determines the prescription is necessary and appropriate to the patient's treatment needs
- Documents the rationale for the issuance of the subsequent prescription
- Determines that issuance of the subsequent prescription does not present an undue risk of abuse, addiction, or diversion and documents that determination
- If a third prescription for a Schedule II opioid is necessary, the patient should be referred to a chronic pain clinic
- If the patient remains a patient and the practitioner continues to prescribe an opioid for pain, the following steps are required:

- Review every three months the course of treatment, the etiology of the pain, the patient's progress toward treatment objectives, and document the results of that review
- Assess prior to every renewal to determine whether the patient is experiencing problems associated with physical and psychologic dependence and document the results of that assessment
- Periodically make reasonable efforts to either stop the use of the controlled substance, decrease the dosage, and/or try other drugs or treatment modalities and document with specificity the efforts undertaken
- Review the Controlled Substance Monitoring Database as required






- Exceptions

- Prescriptions for patients in active treatment for cancer, hospice care from a licensed hospice provider or palliative care provider, or residents of a long-term care facility, or to any medications that are being prescribed for use in the treatment of substance abuse or opioid dependence
- Patients being prescribed or ordered any medication in an inpatient setting at a hospital.
- The prescribing of non-opioid Schedule II controlled substances and opioid medications not classified as Schedule II controlled substances
- An existing provider-patient relationship established before January 1, 2018, where there is an established and current opioid treatment plan reflected in the patient's medical record

**West Virginia Senate Bill 335**

- Allows the legal prescription of opioid antagonists by licensed healthcare professionals to persons who may intervene to prevent a fatality as a result of opioid overdose

- Healthcare professionals who prescribe opioid antagonists are required to provide educational materials to the person or entity receiving the prescription.

- Limits the liability of healthcare professionals and administrators if adequate education and is given in good faith

**West Virginia Senate Bill 436**

- Regulates opioid treatment programs

- Requires healthcare physicians, dentists, and nurses that prescribe controlled substances to complete continuing education in best practices and in drug diversion

- **Chronic Pain Clinic Licensing Act**
- Establishes limits on dispensing controlled substances in pain management clinics
- Establishes licensing requirements for chronic pain management facilities (advertise pain management services, employs a physician who is primarily engaged in the pharmacologic treatment of pain, pain or chronic pain is the primary component of its practice, or the majority of patients are provided treatment for pain or chronic pain)
- Establishes one owner must be a who is a physician actively licensed to practice medicine, surgery, or osteopathic medicine/surgery in West Virginia, is responsible for the operation of the clinic, and is board-certified in pain management or has completed a pain medicine fellowship.
- Employees must not have been convicted of a felony; had their DEA prescribing license revoked; had their application to prescribe denied in any jurisdiction; or been convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to an offense that constitutes a felony for receipt of illicit and diverted drugs, including controlled substances.
- Only physicians and pharmacists licensed may dispense any medication on the premises of a licensed pain management clinic.
- Licensed nursing homes and licensed hospice programs are exempt from the requirements of this Act.

**West Virginia Senate Bill 627**

- Permits prescribers to decline without liability prescribing controlled substances when they reasonably believe the patient is misusing or unlawfully diverting the controlled substance.

**West Virginia House Bill 2620**

- Establishes a central repository of drug overdose information, referred to as the Office of Drug Control Policy, that collects and reports:

- An emergency medical or law-enforcement response to an overdose
- Treatment for an overdose
- Dispensation of an opioid antagonist
- Death attributed to overdose

**West Virginia Controlled Substance Monitoring Program**

- WV has enacted PDMPs to facilitate the collection, analysis, and reporting of controlled substances prescribing and dispensing.

- Clinicians may register and monitor prescriptions online at https://www.csappwv.com.

- All clinicians who prescribe or dispense pain-relieving substances are required to register with the West Virginia Controlled Substances Monitoring Program database within 30 days of licensure.

- All clinicians who prescribe or dispense pain-relieving substances are required to access the system for information regarding specific patients for whom they are providing controlled substances as part of a course of treatment for chronic, nonmalignant pain not due to terminal illness at least annually for every patient who continues to be prescribed medications for pain.

- The Controlled Substances Monitoring Program may be queried prior to accepting a new patient in order to determine whether or not to accept the patient and provide treatment.

- If relevant practitioners may also obtain information regarding a breastfeeding mother of a child patient

- All licensees who dispense Schedule II, III, and IV controlled substances to residents of West Virginia must provide the dispensing information to the West Virginia Board of Pharmacy each 24-hour period through the Controlled Substances Automated Prescription Program (CSAPP). This includes:

- Physicians
- Dentists
- Veterinarians
- Physician assistants
- Advanced practice nurses
- Other prescribers and dispensers

- Pharmacists and approved officers of law enforcement agencies whose primary mission involves enforcing prescription drug laws can register for a CSAPP account to access patient prescription reports.

- All patient information is kept confidential in compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules.

- Prescribers and pharmacists authorized to access the patient information must certify before each search that they are seeking data solely for the purpose of providing health care to current patients.

- Authorized users agree that they will not provide access to any other individuals, including members of their staff, unless and until they are authorized as designates.

- Pharmacy Board Review

- Any individual who violates this agreement is subject to civil penalties and disciplinary action by their professional licensing board.
- The Board of Pharmacy is required to review records in the Controlled Substances Monitoring Program to identify abnormal or unusual practices of patients who exceed defined parameters.
- Prescribers and dispensers of the patients who exceed the parameters are contacted to inform them of the Board's findings.
- The Board of Pharmacy may also query the Controlled Substances Monitoring Program to identify abnormal prescribing and/or dispensing patterns of practitioners or for any relevant prescribing or dispensing records of involved patients or practitioners as it carries out its duty to review notices provided by the chief medical examiner and determine whether a practitioner who prescribed or dispensed a controlled substance may have resulted in or contributed to the drug overdose, and, if so, if the practitioner may have breached professional or occupational standards or committed a criminal act when prescribing to the decedent.