The history of any patient presenting with exposure should include what they were exposed to and the route. For hydrogen peroxide, the concentration, route of exposure, and location should be determined. This can help guide the physical exam and further evaluation. Ask about their symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, difficulty breathing, or pain. It is also essential to ask about the timing of the exposure and potential co-ingestions or other exposures.

The physical exam should begin with a close examination for soft tissue injury at the exposure site. This would include erythema of the skin, a whitish discoloration, and ulcers in the mouth. This would also include any evidence of airway compromise, including stridor, drooling, abnormal breath sounds, or swelling of the oropharynx or nasopharynx. A physical exam must also include searching for evidence of gas formation, such as subcutaneous emphysema or abdominal distention. A thorough neurologic exam should be performed due to the risk of air emboli.

No specific levels are indicated for hydrogen peroxide toxicity itself. However, clinicians should consider obtaining lab work related to potential complications, such as a complete blood count for significant hematemesis, a metabolic panel, and cardiac enzymes to evaluate for e ischemia. You must also consider co-ingestions as accidental and intentional exposures may be at higher risk for exposure to other potentially toxic chemicals.

Imaging should be performed if there is any concern for air embolization and should focus on the area of concern. CT scans or MRIs should be performed for neurological changes. This would include CT or MRI of the head and/or spine as any of these areas may be affected.

Imaging the chest with either X-ray or CT should also be performed for any concerns for mediastinal air or other air emboli, including air in the cardiac ventricles. Consider imaging of the abdomen or pelvis to evaluate inappropriate amounts of air in the GI tract or other potential air emboli, such as air in the portal system.