Periodontal diseases are disease processes involving the periodontium, a term used to describe the supportive apparatus surrounding a tooth, which includes the gingival tissue, alveolar bone, cementum, and periodontal ligament. Gingivitis is the mildest form of periodontal disease and can be found in up to 90% of the population. It is a reactive condition that is reversible upon the improvement of oral hygiene. Periodontitis is when the periodontal condition has progressed beyond gingivitis into a chronic, destructive, irreversible inflammatory disease state. The bacteria then can penetrate deeper into the tissues and surrounding periodontium. This triggers a host response in an attempt to defend against the invading bacteria. However, during the process of protecting against the bacteria, the host defenses also lead to the destruction of the periodontium. Periodontitis leads to loss of attachment of the periodontium, which subsequently progresses to alveolar bone loss, potentially resulting in loss of the affected tooth. This activity describes the evaluation and management of periodontal diseases and highlights the role of the interprofessional healthcare team in identifying and treating patients with these conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of periodontal diseases.
- Describe and summarize the pathophysiology of periodontal diseases.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for periodontal diseases.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance the treatment of periodontal diseases and improve outcomes.