Cilostazol is available in 50 mg and 100 mg tablets. It can be dosed and administered for the following conditions. Cilostazol should be administered orally with water 30 minutes before or 2 hours after meals (breakfast and dinner). Do not take cilostazol with grapefruit juice, which may impair drug metabolism.

**Intermittent Claudication**

- 100 mg orally twice daily.

- 50 mg orally twice daily should be considered during the coadministration of CYP3A4 inhibitors such as diltiazem, erythromycin, ketoconazole, and itraconazole, and during coadministration of CYP2C19 inhibitors such as omeprazole.

**Thrombotic Complications of Coronary Angioplasty**

- 100 mg orally twice daily can be substituted for either aspirin or clopidogrel as part of a dual antiplatelet regimen in patients with coronary artery stents who have an allergy or intolerance to aspirin or clopidogrel.

**Secondary Prevention of Non-cardioembolic Stroke or TIA(off-label use)**

- 100 mg orally twice daily (first-line drugs are aspirin and clopidogrel).

**Use in Special Population**

**Hepatic Impairment:**The pharmacokinetic parameters of cilostazol and its metabolites are similar in healthy subjects compared to subjects with mild hepatic diseases. The use of cilostazol in patients with moderate/severe hepatic impairment is not analyzed.

**Renal Impairment:**The pharmacologic activity of cilostazol and its metabolites was similar in healthy subjects compared to subjects with mild to moderate renal impairment. In patients with severe renal impairment, metabolite levels are increased, altering the protein binding. However, the expected pharmacologic activity based on plasma concentrations and relative PDE III inhibiting potency of parent drug and metabolites appeared little changed.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Teratogenic Effects: Pregnancy Category C. Cilostazol is teratogenic in rats at doses fivefold the human maximum recommended human dose on a body surface area basis. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies on pregnant women.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Because there is no information on using cilostazol during breastfeeding, an alternate drug may be preferred, especially while nursing a preterm infant or newborn. If a nursing mother uses it, monitor the infant for bruising and bleeding.