**Brain Death**

Brain death is defined as the irreversible cessation of all functions of the brain activities, including the brain stem. Traditionally, the concept of death has always been historically linked to the cessation of heartbeat, but with advances in technology, including mechanical ventilation and inotropic support therapy, an individual might have a beating heart but an irreversible loss of brain functions.

Brain death declaration is a wholly clinical diagnosis. Practitioners are not required to perform another test if 2 tests for brain stem function and an apnea test are conclusive for brain death.

**Determination of Brain Death**

History and physical examination that point to a clear-cut etiology of brain death includes anoxic brain injury, fulminant hepatic encephalopathy, or severe head injury.

Exclusion of other causes of coma:

- Severe electrolyte abnormalities

- Ingestion of drug or toxins that are potential central nervous system depressant, for example, neuromuscular blocking agents, benzodiazepines

- Hypothermia with core body temperature less than 32 C

- Encephalopathy associated with hepatic, renal failure, or hyperosmolar coma

- Severe hypophosphatemia

A detailed neurological examination that includes:

- Examination for spontaneous movement, decerebrate and decorticate posturing

- Stimulation with noxious stimuli

- Absence of pupillary response to consensual light

- Absent oculocephalic, corneal, cough, and gag reflexes on stimulation

- Absence of oculovestibular reflex on instillation of water

**Apnea Test**

An apnea test can then be performed once the neurological assessment is complete.

The patient must meet the following criteria prior to the initiation of the apnea test:

- The core body temperature should be greater than 36.5 C or 97 F

- Euvolemic status with normal blood pressure

- The partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood PC02 be equal to or greater than 45 mm Hg.

- The normal partial pressure of oxygen; clinician will preoxygenate the patient to 200 mm Hg.

After satisfaction of the above prerequisite, the apnea test can then be conducted in the following manner:

- Connect the patient to 100% via a T tube or a cannula after disconnecting the patient from mechanical ventilation.

- Watch the patient closely for any spontaneous breaths.

- Take blood samples for blood gas analysis at 4 to 5 minutes intervals twice (8 to 10 minutes).

In the absence of spontaneous respiratory and the PC02 is greater than 60 mm Hg or has risen about 20 mm Hg above baseline, the apnea test is positive.

If the patient develops spontaneous breaths during the test, the test is considered negative.

The patient should be connected back to mechanical ventilation if:

- Systolic blood pressure falls below 90 mm Hg. In children, if the systolic blood pressure is below the threshold for age

- Significant desaturation on pulse oximetry

- Presence of arrhythmia or dysrhythmia

The healthcare provider should draw and analyze an arterial blood gas sample.

- If PCO2 is greater than 60 mm Hg or PCO increase is by more than 20 mm Hg over baseline normal PCO2, the apnea test result is considered to be positive, meaning it supports the clinical diagnosis of brain death.

- If PCO2 is less than 60 mm Hg and PCO increase is less than 20 mm Hg over baseline normal PCO2, the result is considered to be indeterminate.

- In this case, a confirmatory test can be considered.

**Confirmatory Test**

Confirmatory test for brain death includes:

- Angiography might be conventional, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or computed tomography (CT); brain death is demonstrated by an absence of intracerebral filling at the level of the circle of Willis and or the level of the carotid bifurcation.

- Electroencephalography: Brain death can be confirmed by demonstrating the absence of electrical activities

- 
Nuclear brain scanning

**Cerebral Scintigraphy (Technetium Tc 9m Exametazime)**

Brain death is demonstrated by the absence of uptake of radioscope by brain parenchyma.

Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography flow studies will show small peaks during the systolic phase and no flow during the diastolic phase. This is indicative of a high vascular resistance to blow flow from increased intracranial pressure associated with brain death.

**Brain Death in Children**

Brain death determination in pediatrics is a clinical diagnosis. There is not enough data on brain death on an infant less than 37 weeks of age. Therefore, the recommendations listed below do not apply to infants less than 37 weeks of age.

Prior to the initiation of brain death protocol, hypothermia, hypotension, and electrolyte abnormalities should be treated as in adults. Medication that will interfere with the apnea test or neurological examination should be discontinued. The physical examination should be performed by 2 physicians. The apnea test can be performed by one physician.

**Observation Period**

The 2 examinations are separated by an observation period of:

- Twenty-four hours; for newborn up to 30 days

- Twelve hours for infants and children older than 30 days to 18 years

The first examination determines if the child has met all the required criteria for brain death. The second examination is to confirm brain death based on the fact that the condition is irreversible.

The assessment of neurological status after cardiopulmonary resuscitation or other severe injuries to the brain should be deferred for about 24 hours or longer if there are inconsistencies in the neurological examination.

The protocol for the apnea test is the same as in adults.

**Certification of Brain Death**

A single physician with institutional privileges can certify brain death. If the question of organ donation arises, the state of New York requires that the brain death certification be done by the physician who attended to the patient at the time of death and another physician. Both physicians should confirm that the clinical evaluation meets an accepted medical standard.

All the processes and phases involved in the brain death determination should be properly documented:

- The cause of irreversibility of coma and unresponsiveness

- The absence of motor response to noxious stimuli

- The absence of brainstem reflexes in 2 separate examinations separated by at least 6 hours.

- The absence of respiration with pCO greater than 60 mm Hg

- The rationale and justification for ancillary studies and confirmatory test

A death certificate can be issued after the test is completed. Once a patient is declared brain dead, mechanical ventilation can be discontinued. However, the family should be treated with sensitivity and respect. Reasonable accommodation should be made for the families to come to terms with brain death. Institutional policies are usually put in place to address the issues and concerns family members might have during the process of certification of death based on brain death criteria.