The CPR algorithm in prone and supine positions is similar. The significant differences are the position of the hands for compressions and the placement of defibrillation pads in the prone position. Most available evidence guiding the CPR technique in the prone position is from case reports.

The patient is positioned with the chest, and anterior abdominal wall laying on a solid surface and arms under the forearm with the elbows flexed at 90 degrees. The provider performing chest compressions will place the hypothenar region of one hand above the patient's thoracic vertebrae, and the other is placed over the first in an interlocking position (Figure 1a). External counterpressure on the chest is generally recommended for effective chest compressions. Sternal counter pressure may be achieved with sandbags and 1-liter fluid bags under the patient's chest or by a second provider placing a hand on the patient's chest (Figure 1b).

Effective chest compression is an essential component of CPR algorithms. Thoracic compressions should be focused on the area located 0-2 vertebra segments below the inferior angle of the scapula corresponding to T8-T9 (figure 1b). A 2017 study of 100 people in the prone position using a computerized tomography scan showed that this region ensured direct access to the largest left ventricular cross-sectional area in more than 80% of people.

It is important to note that prone-position CPR should be similar to conventional CPR, with a compression rate of 100 to 120 per minute and a depth of at least 2 inches in adults and at least one-third of the anteroposterior dimension of the chest in infants.

In the absence of an advanced airway, two breaths should be delivered via face masks or bag valve devices after every cycle of 30 compressions if one person is performing the CPR and every 15 compressions if there are two or more rescuers.

Defibrillation is recommended in patients with shockable rhythms (pulseless ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation).