Evaluation of renal mass is diverse, depending on the patient's presentation, demographic, and symptomatology. Patients with symptoms and signs such as hematuria, palpable flank mass, or flank pain should be further evaluated. Patients should undergo laboratory tests and advanced imaging such as CT, MRI, and ultrasound. The decision to use CT or MRI depends on the tumor and the patient's clinical characteristics. It is better to use CT when fast imaging acquisition is preferred, or there is a contraindication to MRI, such as with patients with metallic implants. In contrast, MRI is preferred for smaller renal lesions' characterization with the benefits of no radiation exposure.

It is essential to evaluate asymptomatic patients with incidental findings of renal mass. Most renal masses are benign, but there is a significant concern for carcinoma. Some signs are notable on advanced imaging to differentiate benign from malignancy. For instance, on a CT scan, fat is less dense than water and soft tissues. Therefore, Hounsfield units of less than -10 to - 20 have more fat content and likely indicate an angiolipoma, a benign tumor.

If there is a suspicion for renal cell carcinoma, metastasis needs to be evaluated. The most common sites for metastatic RCC are the lung (75%), followed by soft tissues, bone, liver, and brain. It is helpful to evaluate such patients with advanced imaging such as CT chest, CT brain, and bones scan. Laboratory workup includes UA, CBC, LFTs, calcium, CMP are helpful in the examination. A para-neoplastic syndrome is frequently found in RCC; therefore, hyperkalemia and elevated ESR are useful markers in this setting.

Also, tumor size is an essential consideration in the evaluation. In general, less than 3-4cm tumor size has lower malignant potential than larger tumors. Up to 40% of 2cm renal masses are benign and only a small percentage, 10%, are high-grade RCC.