-  The diagnosis of gastritis has its basis in histopathological examination of gastric biopsy tissues. While medical history and laboratory tests are helpful, endoscopy and biopsy are the gold standard in diagnosing and identifying its distribution, severity, and cause.

- The tests used for the diagnosis of H. pylori-associated gastritis fall into two main groups: (1) Invasive methods (requiring gastroscopy and biopsies): These include histological staining (hematoxylin and eosin, the Alcian blue stain and a modified silver stain), cultures, rapid urease test, and molecular detection (PCR DNA). (2) Non-invasive methods (not requiring gastroscopy and biopsies): These include urease breath test (13C-UBT), fecal antigen test, and serology. However, simultaneous treatment with proton-pump inhibitors leads to false-negative results in both invasive and non-invasive tests.H. pylori. Staining of gastric mucosal biopsies by immunohistochemistry is recommended to detect H. pylori.

- Serological tests for detecting antibodies against H. pylori cannot differentiate between active and past infection.

- The diagnosis of autoimmune gastritis centers on laboratory and histological examination. These include: (1) atrophic gastritis of gastric corpus (body) and fundus of the stomach, (2) autoantibodies against the intrinsic factor and the parietal cells, (3) raised serum gastrin levels, (4) serum pepsinogen 1 level and (5) pepsinogen 1 to pepsinogen 2 ratios.

- The most sensitive serum biomarker in autoimmune gastritis is parietal cell antibodies (compared to intrinsic factor antibodies).

- The determination of the risk of gastric cancer in autoimmune gastritis is by (1) low levels of pepsinogen 1, (2) low pepsinogen 1/pepsinogen 2 ratios, (3) high fasting serum gastrin, (4) atrophic gastritis of the corpus and fundus. In these patients, the risk of cancer is high irrespective of whether they have or do not have ongoing H. pylori infection.

- Pernicious anemia is a condition of macrocytic anemia associated with low cobalamin levels and atrophic corpus-fundus gastritis associated with parietal cell antibodies or intrinsic factor autoantibodies.

- Other tests that may be necessary for autoimmune gastritis are gastrin-17, IgG, and anti-H. pylori antibodies, cytokines (such as IL-8), and ghrelin (a growth hormone-releasing peptide produced mainly by the gastric fundus mucosa).