Complications from using a pulse oximeter are rare. However, it is necessary to be aware of the probe site as blisters or nail damage may occur with extended use. Tissue injury may also occur in the setting of incompatible probes or during a substitution in the form of electrical shock or burns. It is also essential to know how to improve the measurements of pulse oximeters.

Possible ways to improve pulse oximeter signals include:

- Warm and rub the skin

- Apply a topical vasodilator

- Try a different probe site, especially the ear

- Try a different probe

- Use a different machine

Factors that may reduce the accuracy of pulse oximeter signals include:

- Nail polish

- Pigmentation of the skin

- High-intensity ambient lighting

- Excessive patient movement or motion artifacts

- Decreased perfusion

- Presence of abnormal hemoglobin, carboxyhemoglobin

- Intravascular dyes

- Reduced accuracy with saturations below 83%

One significant risk of using a pulse oximeter is the possibility of treating an incorrect reading as accurate. False-negative results for hypoxemia and false-positive results for normoxemia or hypoxemia can occur. In these situations, a patient may receive inappropriate treatment, leading to harm.

False normal or high readings can occur in multiple different settings. Carboxyhemoglobin absorbs light at 660 nanometers, which is roughly the same as oxyhemoglobin. Thus, in situations where carboxyhemoglobin is high, a false normal reading may occur.

False low readings can also occur in multiple settings. Below are some situations that may cause falsely low readings to occur.

- Methemoglobinemia

- Sulfhemoglobinemia

- Sickle hemoglobin

- Abnormal inherited forms of hemoglobin

- Severe anemia

- Venous congestion