Gastrulation is the formation of the three embryonic germ layers or gastrula through the migration of epiblast cells. The gastrulation is initiated by primitive streak, by secreting fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8), which downregulates the E-cadherin, a protein that ties epiblast cell together. Now the epiblast cells are free to migrate through the primitive streak between the epiblast and hypoblast layers and form an intermediate cell layer called the intraembryonic mesoderm. The hypoblast is replaced by epiblast cells and form the endoderm. The remaining epiblast becomes the ectoderm.

Pre-notochordal cells inserting in the primitive node move cranially along the midline until they reach the prechordal plate. These pre-notochordal cells interspersed in the endoderm form the notochordal plate. Cells of the notochordal plate proliferate and get separated from the endoderm and a rod-like structure forms, which is called the notochord.

Notochord induces the neuroectoderm to become the neural plate by increasing the fibroblast growth factor(FGF) and inhibiting the bone morphogenic protein (BMP4) by the chordin, noggin, and follistatin in the cranial region and by WNT3a and FGF in the hindbrain and spinal cord region. These molecules are secreted by the primitive node, notochord, and prechordal mesoderm. The notochord itself forms the nucleus pulposus of the adult intervertebral disk.

**Primary neuralation**: The lateral edges of the neural plate raise to form neural folds. The central area of the neural plate invaginates and becomes the neural groove. The neural folds converge and convert the neural groove into the neural tube. The fusion of the neural folds to form a neural tube requires a cadherin molecule; the neural plate changes E-cadherin expression to N-cadherin and increases N-cam formation to identify each cell as self and close the tube. This change in expression helps in separating the neural tube from the epidermis.  During the folding of the neural tube, some cells which lie in the junction of the neural plate and ectoderm give raises to neural crest cells. Neural crest cells begin to appear due to the intermediate level of BMP4. The neural crest cells travel to a different location and form many cell types within the embryo. The neural tube is open anteriorly and posteriorly through which the lumen of the neural tube connects with the amniotic cavity. Anterior neuropore closes on day 25, which is the 18 to 20 somite stage. Posterior neuropore closes on day 28, which is the 25 somite stage.

**Secondary neuralation**: Mesenchyme cells coalesce into a solid cord that subsequently forms cavities that combine to form the hollow tube at the caudal end of the neural tube. This process creates filum terminale and conus medullaris.

The upper part of the neural tube becomes the adult brain, and the lower part of the neural tube becomes the adult spinal cord. The lumen of the neural tube forms the ventricular system and central canal of the brain and spinal cord, respectively. This process occurs during the seventeenth and twenty-first days of development. All components of the neural tube derive from the neural ectoderm.