Evaluation of intestinal fistula should be performed according to the acuity and complexity of the fistula. Chronic or subacute fistulae like colo-vesical, recto-vaginal or entero-enteric fistulae can be evaluated in an outpatient sequential setting. The aim of the evaluation would be to:

- Confirm the diagnosis

- Characterize further the site, size, and complexity of the fistula

- Identify the underlying pathology if it is unknown

- Plan for management

- Re-evaluate and follow up progression

A severe or acute intestinal fistula, as in a postsurgical complication, should be evaluated promptly when suspected to verify the suspicion and assess the extent of the complication.

**Evaluation Modalities**

In addition to the clinical evaluation that includes a comprehensive history review and appropriate physical exam, the following modalities are available:

**Imaging
**

Imaging with GI contrast that traverses through the fistula from the intestinal lumen to the other end of the fistula confirms the presence and extent of the fistula. On occasions, the contrast is not seen in the fistula itself but is seen in the end organ (bladder, vagina, extra-abdominally)

CT is often done first, especially with an acute intestinal fistula, for the high accuracy and details it provides about the fistulous organs and the entire abdominopelvic cavities. CT provides details essential for planning for surgical treatment. MRI may be needed in subtle or difficult to diagnose fistulae. It has the advantage of better soft tissue characterization. It is also useful in complex fistulas like in complicated Crohn's disease.

**Endoscopy
**

Colposcopy, cystoscopy, gastroduodenostomy or colonoscopy are used to identify the site of the fistula at the mucosa of the scoped organ. A small area of inflamed, red and possibly elevated mucosa is a sign of possible fistulous tract. Unless the fistula is very wide, it is usually difficult to visualize its lumen endoscopically. Endoscopy can provide further information about the underlying disease like in malignancy or Crohn's. Fistulas might be an incidental finding of endoscopy performed for other reasons. In this situation, further investigations are required.