Many issues or special circumstances may arise when determining the capacity of a patient to refuse care, and there are several special populations of patients with unique rules and exceptions.

**Intoxicated Patients**

Patients under the influence of alcohol or drugs may lack the capacity to make their own medical decisions. This can vary depending on the degree of intoxication, and if there is uncertainty about a patient's level of intoxication, the typical assessment of capacity can be performed.

**Psychiatric Patients**

Another unique patient population to consider is the psychiatric patient. Psychiatric patients' medical conditions often impede their capacity to refuse medical care. However, some research has shown that simply carrying the diagnosis of psychiatric diseases, such as schizophrenia, does not preclude patients from having capacity.

**Hospice and End of Life**

Another notable population of patients who refuse care includes patients on hospice, or with advanced directives such as a Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) or Do Not Intubate (DNI) order. Research shows that at least 42% of adults greater than 60 years of age needed to make decisions about treatment in the final days of life, but 70% of those adults were found to have impaired capacity.

Ideally, patients with these advanced directives should have no difficulties fulfilling their preferred medical decisions; however, there are multiple situations where this may present a problem. Sometimes these advanced directives are not readily available, or the provider may not know if a patient has a directive, especially if the patient is unable to relay the information themselves. In these cases, it is prudent to provide appropriate medical care whenever there is doubt regarding a patient's medical directive. Another potential issue is when family members of a patient with an advanced directive are not aware of a patient's wishes, or perhaps do not agree with them, and may attempt to intervene in the medical decision making. All health care providers need to keep the patient and the patient's wishes as their primary focus, and the medical decision making in these scenarios should be guided by the information that is readily available. In the setting of an impaired elderly patient, healthcare professionals should first defer medical decision making to any individual legally appointed as the patient's medical decision-maker, such as medical power of attorney.

If the patient does not have such a legally appointed individual,  medical professionals should determine if a living will or other documented medical directive is available. If no directive or medical power of attorney exists, and the patient is unable to communicate their directive, referring to family members is appropriate and expected for decision making. Ideally, shared decision making between family members and the healthcare provider team is preferred, as it may prevent conflict between the medical team and the family members of the patient. This shared decision making should focus on what the patient would want to be done for them in this particular circumstance. Keep in mind that a patient with any advanced directive, even an individual enrolled in hospice care, always retains the right to change their mind and accept further care.

**Minors**

While it is important pediatric and adolescent patients are included in their healthcare decision making, patients under the age of eighteen in the United States do not have the legal right to make medical decisions for themselves and require parental consent for medical care, apart from three major exceptions.

There is also a mature minor doctrine, which states that minors who present the intelligence and maturity to make healthcare decisions for themselves can be deemed legally responsible to make their own medical decisions.