Without any treatment, yolk sac tumors can be very dangerous and finally lead to death. The present-day treatment for yolk sac tumors is surgery and chemotherapy. Treatment with cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin has shown a good response in most of the patients.

The treatment regimen of testicular yolk sac tumors depends on the stage of cancer and age of the patient at the presentation; most children with yolk sac tumors present with stage 1 disease. Orchiectomy and chemotherapy +/- dissection of retroperitoneal lymph nodes with the careful post-orchiectomy measuring of serum AFP values is indicated in most cases. Most pediatric patients with metastasis or recurrence can be treated with a chemotherapy regimen successfully.

Ovarian yolk sac tumors, specifically in post-menopausal patients, need more intensive treatment, and surgical resection of cancer with chemotherapy is indicated in the early stages of the disease.

**Testicular Yolk Sac Tumors Treatment by Stage:**

**Stage 1**

Stage 1 disease can be cured in almost all the cases, and radical inguinal orchiectomy is performed in all patients.

**Choices for Stage 1A**

- Careful observation (surveillance): this management includes visits every two months during the first year, with computed tomography scans (CT scan) every four to six months, then in the second year, the appointments will be every three months, with computed tomography scans (CT scan) every six to twelve months. If cancer relapses, chemotherapy is indicated to treat the patient.

- Nerve-sparing retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND)

- Chemotherapy: giving the BEP regimen (bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin) for one cycle. Chemotherapy decreases the rate of relapse.

**Stage 1S**

- Chemotherapy with three cycles of BEP or four cycles of EP (etoposide and cisplatin) is indicated if the alpha-fetoprotein is still elevated after the surgery with no evidence of mass on CT scan.

**Stage 2**

Surgery must be done first for all the cases.

**Stage 2A**

Tumor marker values after performing the surgery and the involvement of the retroperitoneal lymph nodes will decide the next step of management in those patients.

Normal tumor marker levels:

- Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND): If the lymph nodes contain cancer, then give two cycles of chemotherapy (BEP or EP). If no lymph nodes are involved, then watch and monitor closely for signs of relapse.

- Chemotherapy: 4 cycles of EP (etoposide and cisplatin) or three cycles of BEP (bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin).

High tumor markers after the surgery should be treated using chemotherapy (EP or BEP). The number of cycles is determined after the risk stratification (good, intermediate, or poor).

**Stage 2B**

Normal tumor marker levels:

- Chemotherapy: Four cycles of EP or three cycles of BEP should be given to treat the patients.

- Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND)

High tumor markers after the surgery should be treated using chemotherapy (EP or BEP). The number of cycles is determined on the risk stratification (good, intermediate, or poor).

**Stage 3**

Patients with stage 3 disease should be treated with radical inguinal orchiectomy, followed by 3 to 4 cycles of the following chemotherapy regimens:

- EP 4 cycles

- BEP 3 or 4 cycles

- VIP (etoposide, ifosfamide, and cisplatin) 4 cycles

High-dose chemotherapy and bone marrow transplant might be indicated in cancer resistance to usual dose chemotherapy.

**Ovarian Yolk Sac Tumors Treatment**

Usually, treating ovarian cancer is the same for all stages and types, surgery should be performed, and a chemotherapy regimen must be given after the surgery.

Surgery: deciding between radical surgery or conservative surgery depends on the patients' wish to have more children and the involvement of one side or both sides of the ovaries.

Debulking surgery is indicated in patients with cancer metastasis to other orangs.

Chemotherapy: most patients will need at least three cycles of chemotherapy. BEP regimen is the best choice.

Reduction in tumor marker levels after chemotherapy is an indication of an excellent response to chemotherapy.