A patient with a Trendelenburg gait often complains of a limp. The limp can be painful or painless depending on the etiology. If the limp is severe, there is compensatory bending or lurching to the side of pathology to balance the center of gravity of the body. This limp is called the lurching gait. When the pathology is bilateral, the pelvis droops to the unsupported side alternating with each step and is called a waddling type of gait. This gait, when present, provides clues regarding certain possible etiologies, such as non-union of the neck of femur and developmental dysplasia of the hip.

On physical examination of gait, the lurching or waddling type of gait patterns should alert the physician to examine the abductor mechanism of the hip more closely.

Mild Trendelenburg gait may be difficult to appreciate while examining the patient with full clothing. It is necessary to perform a Trendelenburg test to evaluate further.

To perform the test, the examiner sits or stands behind the patient. The patient is then asked to lift each foot off the ground, and the opposite side pelvis is elevated as high as possible alternately for at least 30 seconds.

The prerequisites for doing the test are as follows:

- The patient should have a painless hip pathology. In case of a painful hip condition, the patient will not be able to balance leading to spurious results.

- The must not have abduction or adduction (coronal plane) deformities of the hip. Presence of adductor deformity at the hip leads to elevation of the pelvis leading to the false negative result. Presence of abductor deformity at the hip leads to drooping of the pelvis on the contralateral side leading to the false positive result.

Limitations of the Trendelenburg test:

- Kendall et al. have shown that hip abductor weakness induced by superior gluteal nerve block does not correlate with the pelvis drop mainly in athletes and in patients who are asymptomatic but have hip pathology.

- In a patient with early stages of osteonecrosis, in spite of having an abductor mechanism defect Trendelenburg sign and therefore gait remain masked.

- Pelvis drop can occur even in healthy individuals with normal abductor mechanism when the abductor muscle is not working adequately.