In general, testing for an individual exocrine gland function is not performed. However, dysfunction of exocrine glands can create a wide range of clinical manifestations.

Imaging may be performed to confirm a diagnosis of blocked glands. Sialolithiasis refers to instances where a stone becomes lodged within the salivary gland or duct, and sialoadenitis refers to inflammation of the gland. CT and ultrasound are effective methods of identifying and localizing stones

The liver itself acts as an exocrine gland when creating and excreting bile to be stored in the gallbladder, awaiting expulsion and release through the pancreatic duct into the duodenum. Obstruction, at any point in this pathway, can cause cholecystitis due to inflammation and dysfunction of the gallbladder. Ultrasound is the initial diagnostic test to diagnose cholecystitis

In cystic fibrosis, sodium and chloride are not reabsorbed within the sweat duct due to a dysfunctional CFTR protein, resulting in abnormally salty skin. The sweat chloride test is the primary test for the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis

Pancreatic insufficiency occurs when the exocrine glands of the pancreas are no longer able to produce the digestive enzymes necessary for food breakdown in the small intestine. Common etiologies include chronic pancreatitis, cystic fibrosis, and hereditary hemochromatosis. Several methods can be used to evaluate the function of the exocrine pancreas. Fat malabsorption can lead to deficiencies in fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. Thus, vitamin levels can be used to estimate pancreatic function