# Introduction

Simulation-based education is an essential instructional modality to facilitate learning for nearly every healthcare professional. There are various reasons simulation may be incorporated into the curriculum, including the teaching of procedural skills, and assessment of communication skills, teamwork, and clinical decision making. This modality is implementable just in time education, formative, and summative evaluation, along with implementation in reviewing clinical competence.

# Issues of Concern

**Learning Theories**

There are a few major learning theories that require consideration when developing and executing simulation scenarios; social cognitive, behavioral, constructivist, and cognitive load. Social cognitive posits that the learner learns best in the real or simulated environment to develop self-efficacy and self-regulation. In doing so, learners will develop the confidence to execute the skills needed for their job, while concurrently setting goals to improve and maintain those skills.

Adult learning theory operates under the assumption that learners are self-motivated and self-directed; simulation offers a suitable method for adults to accomplish their learning goals. The ability to practice a variety of procedural skills for deliberate practice and participating in simulated patient scenarios with a well-run debrief offers adult learners the opportunity to identify and reflect upon performance, readjust goals, and work towards mastery learning of any number of concepts.

Behavioral learning theory surrounds the principle that deliberate practice and reflection support performance improvement. By adding simulation to curricular activities, competence, along with the acquisition of memory and patterns, occurs.

Constructivist learning theory is supported by using instructors as facilitators instead of as coaches. The principles of this theory realize that learners need to self-reflect and formulate their particular patterns of learning to support decision making.

Cognitive load theory is arguably one of the most important to consider. Much of the literature points to finite working memory capacity, especially when presenting new educational material.

**Feedback**

Several items should be considered concerning feedback; the type, by whom, and timing. Performance-oriented feedback provides learners with their individual results, while learning-oriented feedback provides results and explanations. Feedback can be self-assessed or provided by a subject matter expert. The self-assessment, while a component of adult education and self-directed motivation, should be weighed carefully as a sole method; literature is mixed on the accuracy. Timing of feedback can be in the moment, immediately afterward, or delayed.

# Curriculum Development

Building a curriculum that utilizes simulation can be a daunting task. Several factors must be taken into account; using a framework that takes into consideration instructional design, learning theories, and methods of feedback and assessment are crucial.

Instructional design is the process of developing the actual curriculum and includes a step-wise approach once the simulation has been determined to be the instructional medium. The simulation modality is the next item chosen. Modalities include computer-generated simulation, procedural skills (i.e., suturing, chest tube thoracostomy, thoracentesis), the environment in which the simulation will actually occur, either a designated simulation space or in the actual clinical environment, and lastly, the use of standardized patients, individuals who are trained to portray patients/family members/colleagues. Following modality, the curriculum builder decides on the instructional method. This method can either be self-directed or instructor-led. It is important to note that the simulation literature demonstrates mixed results on the effectiveness of self-directed learner assessment. Finally, the presentation phase incorporates decisions about fidelity (i.e., realism) during the simulation.

# Procedural Skills Assessment

A typical framework with which to develop objectives lies within one or more of the following domains: knowledge, skills, clinical decision making, and communication.

Outcomes are based on a number of factors and are a direct extension of the learning goals and objectives that are decided upon during the curriculum development process. One must consider accreditation standards, clinical competency measures, and are generally a direct extension back to course objectives. Simulation has also been utilized by a variety of healthcare professions to supplement clinical rotations, given the growing need for placements and reduction of sites and preceptors.

Assessment methods have their basis in Miller’s pyramid. Following instructional delivery methods, instructors should be able to assess what learners are capable of doing and what needs improvement. By reviewing what a learner knows, knows how, shows how, and does, can inform levels of competency.

# Clinical Significance

Simulation offers a unique opportunity for learners to practice a variety of skills confidently before working with patients, family members, and colleagues. Healthcare providers can utilize the opportunity to hone clinical decision-making skills, psychomotor skills, and synthesize theory into practice, thus facilitating skills transfer.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Simulation is also a well-known mechanism to test interprofessional and an interprofessional collaboration for various reasons; rapid response and code blue scenarios are commonly tested in simulation settings to review team dynamics and roles.