If the patient is clinically asymptomatic, there is no need for treatment and reassurance can be provided to the family as well as education on proper hygiene. The first line in management is reassurance since most of the labial adhesions resolve spontaneously within one year. It is reported that up to 80% resolve without any treatment.

When treatment is indicated, it consists of applying estrogen cream to the labial area. One of the major indications for treatment is a urinary tract infection. Some studies have demonstrated a success rate of up to 90% with the use of topical estrogen cream. Another common topical management is a topical steroid, such as beclomethasone. Even though topical estrogen is the most commonly used, studies have not shown a statistically significant difference between topical estrogen and beclomethasone.

After application of the estrogen cream on the vulvar area, side effects may include tenderness to the breast and changes to pigmentation on the area applied. Because there have been no studies on adverse effects with long-term use of topical estrogen in the pediatric population, the recommendation is to use topical estrogen cream for the shortest duration as possible that will provide effective treatment.

Other forms of management include topical betamethasone and surgical removal. With the use of betamethasone, there may be thinning of the skin as well increased the risk for infection of the hair follicle, redness, thinning of hair growth, and itchiness on the area applied.

There is not a precise length of treatment currently recommended for any form of topical treatment; therefore, the shortest duration that resolves the adhesion is recommended. Topical treatment is usually done so once or twice a day for up to six weeks. Some authors have recommended topical management for up to three months. When topical management fails, then adhesion may be managed surgically.

A few weeks of topical management is recommended before surgical management is considered. Surgical lysis of the fusion is recommended if topical management is unsuccessful. The surgical management is usually performed under general anesthesia and consists of gentle traction.

Recurrences are common in labial adhesions, regardless of the mode of treatment used. Labial adhesions may keep reforming until the female patient goes through puberty. Some studies report a rate of recurrence from 11% to 14% with either topical or surgical management. Recurrences may be managed with topical treatment or with surgical lysis of the fusion. Another treatment modality includes manual separation with a continuation of proper hygiene and cleanliness.