The most important part of the evaluation of any patient with neurological symptoms is the history of the presenting complaint. Cerebral ischemia results in negative symptoms related to loss of function of the ischemic tissue. Global cerebral ischemia typically presents as an alteration in consciousness. Transient alteration in consciousness, such as syncope or pre-syncope, may be precipitated by maneuvers such as standing, which may result in a drop in cerebral perfusion pressure. Often the symptoms are relieved by lowering the patient's head. Severe or persistent global cerebral ischemia may result in a patient who presents with a coma.

The symptoms of focal cerebral ischemia will depend upon the specific portions of the brain, which are ischemic. The time of onset and the time course of the presenting complaint is important to ascertain because this can have a significant impact on treatment decisions. Determining the time of symptom onset is ideal, but this may not be possible. In cases where the precise onset cannot be determined, clinical decision-making is determined by the last known time that the patient was normal.

Skilled clinicians learn to recognize specific stroke syndromes, which are patterns of neurological dysfunction related to blockages in particular blood vessels. For example, lesions in the cerebral hemispheres may result in contralateral weakness and/or sensory loss. Signs of cortical dysfunction raise the concern for a large artery obstruction, such as a middle cerebral artery occlusion. Cortical dysfunction in the dominant hemisphere--typically the left--often results in aphasia. Nondominant cortical dysfunction typically presents hemineglect, though this can also be seen with dominant hemisphere infarctions. Other potential signs of cortical involvement may include visual field defects, acalculia, and hemiagnosia. Strokes related to posterior circulation pathology, e.g., the vertebrobasilar system, may present with ataxia, diplopia or ophthalmoparesis, or crossed findings. Early recognition of stroke syndromes consistent with large vessel occlusion is critical because these patients may be candidates for endovascular thrombectomy, which is discussed in more detail below.

Because stroke outcomes depend heavily on time to treatment, the neurological community has engaged in multiple efforts to educate the public about the signs and symptoms of acute stroke. One common mnemonic is BE FAST: Balance - loss of balance, Eyes - change in vision, Facial droop, Arms- asymmetry in upper extremity strength, Speech - difficulty with speech or slurring, and Time - to alert the public that expediting time to a hospital is essential for treatment.

In addition to eliciting determining the time of symptom onset, a focused medical history should be obtained. The presence of vascular risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation, hyperlipidemia, and tobacco abuse should be ascertained, as this information could provide clues as to the stroke etiology. A current medication list is also important, because intravenous thrombolytics, which are often used to treat ischemic stroke, are contraindicated in patients taking anticoagulants.

The physical assessment should be focused on identifying the signs of neurological dysfunction in order to identify the location of the brain lesion. One tool commonly used by physicians to assess strokes is the NIH Stroke Scale.