# Continuing Education Activity

Vemurafenib is FDA-approved for metastatic and unresectable melanoma with V600 mutation and Erdheim- Chester disease (non-Langerhans histiocytic disorder). Non-FDA-labeled Indications include metastatic and unresecctable melanoma with BRAF V600K and refractory non-small cell lung carcinoma BRAF V600 mutation. This activity provides an overview of the indications, mechanism of action, methods and timing of administration, important adverse effects, contraindications, toxicity, and monitoring for vemurafenib as chemotherapy for indicated cancers.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the mechanism of action of vemurafenib, including the genetic mutations it specifically addresses.
- Identify the most clinically significant adverse events associated with vemurafenib.
- Review the approved and off-label cancers for which vemurafenib is indicated.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and coordination among the interprofessional team and how it can enhance patient care with vemurafenib to improve patient outcomes for patients in cancer treatment where it has therapeutic value.

# Indications

The kinase protein family that includes MAP, RAS, RAF, MEK, and ERK play an important role in regulating intracellular and extracellular signaling pathways which control cellular growth, differentiation, transformation, and programmed death (apoptosis).  In a normal cell line, these kinases work accordingly in a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation when stimulated by growth factors and eventually leading to regulation of cellular growth and proliferation in an organized manner. However, if the genes coding for these kinases has mutations, this can lead to uninhibited continuous growth of the cell, which is manifested clinically by cancer formation.

Rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma (RAF) family was first described in 1983 and was named as such due to its role in inducing fibrosarcoma in certain mice models.

The most common activating mutation in BRAF is the substitution of glutamic acid for valine at amino acid codon 600 (V600E mutation), and less commonly is the V600K which is the substitution of lysine for valine. In clinical practice, several medications which inhibit BRAF have been approved for the treatment of malignant melanoma with positive BRAF mutations. These medications did not show similar efficacy in other cancers harboring the BRAF mutation other than malignant melanoma. The first BRAF inhibitor that came into clinical use was Vemurafenib.

**Indications**

Vemurafenib has been approved through BRIM trials (phase I, II, III) after showing increased overall survival and progression-free survival in studied patients with malignant melanoma with BRAF V600E positive mutation. The phase I BRIM established the optimal dose of the medication, which was found to be 960 mg twice a day taken orally.

**FDA-labeled Indications**

- Metastatic and unresectable melanoma with V600 mutation

- Erdheim- Chester disease (Non-Langerhans histiocytic disorder)

**Non-FDA-labeled Indications**

- Metastatic and unresectable melanoma with BRAF V600K

- Refractory non-small cell lung carcinoma BRAF V600 mutation

# Mechanism of Action

Vemurafenib is a potent, highly selective inhibitor of mutated BRAF V600E. Inhibiting the kinase activity of BRAF prevents signaling from the mitogen-activated pathway (MAP) kinase pathway and blocks the proliferation of malignant cells that harbor this specific mutation. The medication does not have activity in wild-type BRAF cells, unlike other drugs like sorafenib which can block both wild-type and mutated BRAF.

# Administration

BRIM II trial established the effective, nontoxic dose of Vemurafenib to be 960 mg taken twice a day. When taken orally, the medication reaches its peak concentration in plasma within 3 hours. The half-life ranges between 30-120 hours and achieves a plasma steady state within 15 to 22 days. The medication is started twice daily with a 12-hour interval between the two doses and should be stopped if there is a progression of melanoma or high-grade toxicity.

# Adverse Effects

The most common adverse events noticed with the use of vemurafenib are cutaneous manifestations which include but are not limited to nonspecific maculopapular eruptions, hyperkeratosis, and photosensitivity, especially with radiation therapy.

One of the most significant cutaneous adverse events with the use of vemurafenib is skin cancers, including squamous cell carcinoma and keratoacanthoma in approximately up to 30% of cases and, less commonly, the development of new primary melanoma.

Other adverse events include hepatotoxicity, particularly when used when immunotherapy, QT prolongation, arthralgia, and diarrhea are present.

There are some anecdotal reports of Dupuytren’s contracture and acute pancreatitis developing after the use of vemurafenib.

# Contraindications

No absolute contraindications exist regarding the use of vemurafenib, and the only mentioned contraindication is hypersensitivity to vemurafenib, which rarely occurs during treatment.

# Monitoring

Perform careful skin examination after initiation of therapy to look for any development of skin tumors, including (squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma, and melanoma).

**Testing**

- Liver function testing (baseline and regularly during treatment)

- Kidney function testing (baseline and regularly during treatment)

- Electrocardiogram (baseline and regularly during treatment)

# Toxicity

Medication dose adjustments according to the severity of toxic reactions may be necessary.

The standard dose is 960 mg twice daily and could be reduced to 720 mg twice daily if toxicity occurs for the first time. Further dose reduction is required if toxicity recurs for the second time and with high-grade toxicity, with recommendations to reduce the dose to 480 mg twice daily and doses less than that are therapeutically inactive.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Vemurafenib is the first BRAF inhibitor that is used to treat advanced malignant melanoma. Early results show that it may prolong life for several months, but the drug is also prohibitively expensive and has several severe adverse effects. The oncology nurse and the pharmacist must educate the patient on the importance of monitoring their skin for new skin cancers. Additionally, these patients need regular monitoring of their liver and renal function.