Patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome benefit most from an interprofessional healthcare team approach to their care. Care begins with clinical practitioners (MDs, DOs, NPs, or PAs) having a high index of suspicion to ensure an accurate diagnosis based on personal and family histories and a physical exam followed by appropriate genetic testing.

Arming the patient with the knowledge needed to identify worrisome symptoms and seek immediate medical care is invaluable. Universal recommendations for wearing a medical alert bracelet or another device should be given to any EDS patient with vascular pathology as these devices can help facilitate emergent medical care if necessary.

It’s also important for the patient to understand that there is no cure for the disease, and as of now, no medical treatment can completely resolve their symptoms. This fact may be problematic for many patients to internalize and accept, which is why psychosocial support, including expectation management, for patients suffering from EDS is paramount in their care.

Specific guidance is necessary for patients regarding the genetic inheritance of the disease. Genetic testing can help delineate a patient’s specific subtype and inheritance pattern. With the help of this information, patients will understand when making decisions regarding risks associated with their children.

Psychosocial support is paramount for EDS patients, who experience many psychosocial challenges related to the variety of symptoms they suffer and the activity restrictions imposed by both their symptoms and as recommendations by clinicians. Open communication between interprofessional team members is vital if one wants to improve outcomes.