Packaging of pharmaceutical medications may vary depending on the use and type of substance packaged: prescription drugs, non-prescription (over-the-counter) drugs, and herbals and dietary supplements. Variations of pharmaceutical packaging include blister packs, alternative tamper-evident packaging, bottles, vials, ampules, intravenous bags, and calendar packs.

Child-resistant packaging of oral prescription drugs began with the Poison Prevention Packaging Act in the 1970s.

Optimal drug packaging maximizes the physical and chemical stability of the medication, which may be affected by environmental factors such as light, temperature, and humidity. Blister package material may be chosen based on its barrier properties. Common materials include polyvinyl chloride, polyvinyl dichloride, polychlorotrifluoroethylene (Aclar), aluminum foil, and cyclin olefin copolymer. Though aluminum foil offers the least moisture penetrance, polyvinyl chloride is often the preferred blister material due to its low cost and ease of production; however, polyvinyl chloride has many disadvantages. Polyvinyl chloride is a minimal moisture barrier linked to environmental issues associated with its disposal. Aclar provides better moisture protection than polyvinyl chloride but does not offer as much protection as an aluminum foil.

A pharmacy insert is a written piece intended to inform the reader about various aspects of the medication. In the United States, there are three forms of written informational material associated with medicines: medication guides, patient package inserts, and consumer medication information packages. The Food and Drug Administration regulates medication guides and patient package inserts. On the other hand, consumer medication information packages are developed by commercial providers with the intent of distribution within pharmacies.

Medication packaging inserts provide unbiased prescribing and safety information for the health care provider. In June 2006, the FDA officially instated a new format of package inserts. The new format has three sections—the highlights of prescribing information, a table of contents for prescribing information, and the complete prescribing information.

Highlights of Prescribing: This section is a bulleted list style summary of pertinent clinical information and is able to be cross-referenced to the third section, the prescribing information. In this section of every medication package insert, there must be a universal disclaimer written verbatim except for the medication name. The section also contains the drug name bolded, followed by the year of approval in the United States. Other sub-sections of this first section includes the black box warning, recent significant changes, indications and usage, dosage forms and strengths, dosage and administration, drug interactions, contraindications, warnings, adverse drug reactions, and use in specific populations.

Full Prescribing Information Table of Contents: this section references all the sub-sections and sections in the full prescribing information.

Full Prescribing Information: The final section begins with pertinent dosing information and warnings. This section also details all risks associated with taking the drug. Additional sub-sections include drug abuse and dependence, toxicity, clinical pharmacology, nonclinical toxicology, clinical studies, patient counseling information, how the drug is supplied, stored, and handled, and references.