**Glucose Meters**

Portable meters for measurement of blood glucose concentrations are used in three major settings: in acute and chronic care facilities (at the patient’s bedside and in clinics or hospitals), in physicians’ offices, and by patients or their caregivers at home, work, and school.

These meters use reflectance photometry or electrochemistry to measure the rate of the reaction or the final concentration of the products. Reflectance photometry measures the amount of light reflected from a test pad containing a reagent. In electrochemical systems, the enzymatic reaction in an electrode incorporated on the test strip produces a flow of electrons.

Calibration is automatic on some devices, whereas others use lot-specific code chips or strips. All manufacturers supply control solutions. Recent advances in technology facilitate data analysis and sharing.

Strict adherence to the instructions is necessary to obtain accurate results.

**Laboratory Assessment of Glucose**

Current laboratory recommendations for plasma glucose measurement are to draw fasting blood samples in the morning rather than later in the day, as glucose levels tend to be higher in the morning than in the afternoon.

**Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT)**

Serial measurement of plasma glucose before and after a specific amount of glucose given orally should provide a standard method by which to evaluate individuals and establish values for healthy and diseased subjects.

The following conditions should be met before an OGTT is performed: discontinue, when possible, medications known to affect glucose tolerance; perform in the morning after three days of unrestricted diet (containing at least 150 g of carbohydrate per day) and activity; and perform the test after a 10 to 16-hour fast only in ambulatory outpatients (bed rest impairs glucose tolerance), who should remain seated during the test without smoking cigarettes.

**Intravenous Glucose Tolerance Test**

Some patients are unable to tolerate a large oral carbohydrate load or may have altered gastric physiology (e.g., after gastric resection). In these patients, an intravenous glucose tolerance test may be performed to eliminate factors related to the rate of glucose absorption.

The preparation of patients is the same as for the OGTT. The dose of glucose is 0.5 g/kg of body weight (maximum 35 g), given as a 25 g/dL solution. The dose is administered intravenously over 3 minutes ± 15 seconds, and blood is collected every 10 minutes after the mid-injection time for 1 hour.