Gastroparesis (gastric stasis) is derived from Greek words gastro/gaster or stomach, and paresis or partial paralysis. It is a clinical condition resulting from delayed gastric emptying in the absence of mechanical obstruction and is associated with upper gastrointestinal symptoms. Most common symptoms include nausea, vomiting, early satiety, postprandial fullness, upper abdominal pain, bloating, and weight loss. These symptoms can be severely disabling and can adversely impact the quality of life in patients suffering from this disorder. Several etiologies can lead to this clinical entity; the most common of these are idiopathic, diabetic and postsurgical. Pathophysiology of gastroparesis is poorly understood, but important mechanisms associated are the loss of interstitial cells of Cajal and inability to express neuronal nitric oxide synthase. Gastric emptying scintigraphy (gold standard), 13C-octanoate breath testing, and a wireless motility capsule are the diagnostic tests used to diagnose this condition. This activity reviews the etiology, presentation, evaluation, and management of gastric stasis, and reviews the role of the interprofessional team in evaluating, diagnosing, and managing the condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify some of the underlying conditions that can lead to the development of gastroparesis.
- Summarize the examination and evaluation procedure for a patient presenting with gastric stasis.
- Describe the treatment and management options available for gastroparesis, with consideration of the underlying etiology.
- Review interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to improve outcomes with management and treatment of gastric stasis.