Phenothiazines are a group of nitrogen and sulfur-containing heterocyclic compounds, labeled as the first-generation typical antipsychotic medications used for the treatment of schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, control nausea and vomiting, and other psychotic disorders with delusional manifestations. Phenothiazines were synthesized in 1883 and served as the first commercial antipsychotic therapy in the USA during the 1950s.

In cases of schizophrenia that are resistant to therapy, clinicians can use phenothiazines in combination along with second-generation antipsychotics such as clozapine. However, this combination therapy exposes the patient to multiple antipsychotic medications and may increase the risk of serious side effects, so this approach is preferable in later stages of treatment. Patients who undertook pharmacological therapy as an avenue of treatment showcased an 18% to 32% relapse, while patients that did not elect to incorporate pharmacological therapy showcased 60% to 80% relapse in their symptoms. Phenothiazines produce the most optimal results when combined with non-pharmacological psychotherapeutic therapy, such as narrative, meta-cognitive, and mindfulness therapy.

Also, recent studies have investigated the anti-cancer properties of phenothiazines in glioblastoma as it produced an arrest in the G1 cycle of cancer cells, pointing to a reduction in cyclins stimulating DNA replication along with an increase in Cycline inhibiting compounds.

Furthermore, phenothiazines have shown anti-helminths properties such as Trypanosoma brucei by inhibiting trypanothione reductase and causing cell cycle abnormalities. Specifically, a decrease in the S phase, an accumulation of the parasite in the G2 phase, and a lack of nucleus creation in the parasite.

This review will primarily focus on phenothiazines as antipsychotic medications.