**Incontinence**

The anal canal and its muscles maintain fecal continence; consequently, any failure of the anal canal musculature may result in fecal incontinence. The current guideline for patients with fecal incontinence is to suggest anal manometry to assess sphincter tone. Positive manometry revealing a dysfunction of sphincter tone is usually followed by anorectal imaging to evaluate structural integrity.

**Hemorrhoids**

Hemorrhoids are a common anal disorder that involves the engorgement and potential prolapse of veins in the lower part of the anus and rectum. A variety of factors predispose individuals to develop hemorrhoids, such as pregnancy, age, diarrhea, chronic constipation, sitting for too long (especially on the toilet), heavy lifting, anal intercourse, obesity, and genetics.

There are two main types of hemorrhoids: internal hemorrhoids and external hemorrhoids. Internal hemorrhoids are deep within the anal canal, superior to the pectinate line, and are usually painless because of the visceral sensations from that region. These hemorrhoids often present with painless bleeding and, upon straining, may prolapse out of the anus. External hemorrhoids exist below the pectinate line and are in close proximity to the anal opening. Given that external hemorrhoids occur in the inferior anal canal, served by somatosensory signals, they are often painful and itchy.

Hemorrhoids often resolve spontaneously, but patients may relieve the discomfort using dietary fiber, stool softeners, and daily sitz baths. It is also important to advise these patients about adequate fiber intake, decreased straining in the washroom, and decreased time spent sitting on the toilet. Large or bothersome hemorrhoids may be treated with banding or surgical hemorrhoidectomy in the office.

**Anal Cancer**

Anal cancer is a disease in which the normal cells of the anus become malignant. Most cases are related to the human papillomavirus virus (HPV). Factors that enhance the risk of anal cancer include smoking and immunodeficiency. The prognosis of anal cancer is mostly dependent on the size of the tumor and whether the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes. Following the identification of anal cancer, it is staged from 0 to 5 based on size and spread, with stage 5 carrying the worst prognosis. Treatment of anal cancer often includes surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or some combination of these methods.