Myocardial perfusion scanning plays a significant role in diagnostic and therapeutic decision making in cardiac disease. These refer to a group of non-invasive imaging tests that can be performed to help clinicians assess blood flow to areas of myocardium. Obtaining information on perfusion and metabolite uptake from myocardium plays a vital role in determining the appropriate medical treatment or intervention for optimizing one's cardiac health. These tests are useful for diagnostic and prognostic purposes throughout a variety of clinical settings, including evaluating symptoms concerning for angina, to rule out acute coronary syndrome as a cause of chest pain, assessing therapeutic outcome after interventions, as well as for assessing for viable or scarred myocardium. With such information, clinicians can appropriately understand a patient's coronary health, perform risk stratification for future cardiovascular events, assess for therapeutic response to interventions correcting perfusion defects, and allow for prognostication.

Perfusion scanning utilizes various radiotracers, which are administered to the patient and allowed to distribute to multiple tissues. These radiotracers emit photons, which are detectable with a gamma camera which typically contains a single sodium iodide crystal (Single photon emission computed tomography, or SPECT) or multiple crystals (typically used in positron emission tomography, or PET) to interact with captured photons. These cameras contain a collimator, which helps eliminate background, and a photomultiplier, which translate the interactions between the photon and crystals into electrical energy to produce images.

SPECT, which is more commonly used and available in clinical practice today, uses planar images to reconstruct a three-dimensional representation of myocardial perfusion. Unlike planar imaging, SPECT can obtain sequential slices without overlap of normal and abnormal areas with improved resolution over planar imaging

PET imaging, although less available than SPECT, can help overcome some of these limitations. PET images have better spatial resolution and allow for attenuation correction more accuracy than SPECT.

To obtain stress images, exercise or pharmacologic testing can is an option. Common pharmacologic agents used include regadenoson, adenosine, and dipyridamole. All three medications work by causing coronary vasodilatation, with subsequent blood flow differences. Adenosine and dipyridamole are A-2A as well as A-1, A-2B, and A-3 receptor agonists, which can also cause bronchospasm, AV nodal block, chest tightness, and flushing. Regadenoson is a selective A-2A agonist which can be a choice in patients with known bronchospasms.