Although the abovementioned method of calculating sample SD will always result in the correct value, as the data set increases in quantity, this method becomes increasingly burdensome. This is mainly due to having to calculate the difference from the mean of every value. This step can be bypassed through the following method:

- List the observed values of the data set in a column which we shall call 'x.'

- Find the 'sum of x' by adding all of the values in the column together.

- Square the value of the 'sum of x.'

- Divide this result by the 'total number of observations.' Call the result of this division 'y'.

- Square each value within the column 'x.'

- Find the sum of the above squares.

- Subtract the value 'y' from this sum.

- Divide this result by the 'total number of observations minus one' if calculating the sample SD. Divide this result by the 'total number of observations' if calculating the population SD.

- Finally, the result is square rooted to calculate the SD.

This method can quickly calculate the sample SD of a large data set, especially with a calculator with a memory function or an electronic data analysis program.

A mistake sometimes seen in research papers is whether the SD or the standard error of the mean (SEM) should be reported alongside the mean. The distinction between the SD and SEM is crucial but often overlooked. This results in authors reporting the incorrect one alongside their data. While the SD refers to the scatter of values around the sample mean, the SEM refers to the accuracy of the sample mean itself. This means the role of the SEM is to provide a measurement of the precision of the sample mean compared to the total population mean. Consequently, in contrast to the SD, the SEM does not provide information on the scatter of the sample.

Despite this difference, the SEM is still often used in places where the SD should be stated. There have been many reasons hypothesized for this, such as a lack of full understanding of the meaning of these statistical concepts, leading authors to report what they have seen other authors report in their studies. This leads to multiple articles all publishing the SEM in an improper context. Another reason is that the SEM will be smaller than the SD and hence if presented alongside the mean, can give the impression that the data is more precise.

This incorrect impression would also be seen in the figures, as using the SEM will shorten the error bars. This can confuse even with experienced readers as the reader is expecting the SD to be paired with the mean and hence may incorrectly believe that the quoted SEM refers to the scatter of values around the mean (the SD).