**Pregnancy Management**

Infants with gastroschisis should be monitoring for fetal growth. Growth restriction can be seen in up to 60% of cases. If there is a concern or risk of intrauterine demise, then antenatal testing can be considered. The prevalence of chromosomal anomalies in infants with isolated gastroschisis is that of the baseline population risk. However, in the setting of extraintestinal structural abnormalities, then the risk of chromosomal anomalies increases, and amniocentesis for parental decision-making and management of the newborn may be warranted.

**Delivery**

Infants with gastroschisis have no contraindication to vaginal delivery based on gastroschisis alone. The timing of delivery is based on gestation age (lung maturity), ultrasound findings (fetal growth profile, bowel appearance), and fetal testing results. Care for the infant is usually managed by a group of specialists, including a maternal-fetal medicine specialist, neonatologist, and pediatric surgery, to discuss patient-specific factors before delivery. The mean gestational age for spontaneous delivery in women carrying infants with gastroschisis is the 36th week of gestation.

**Management of the Neonate**

Management of the neonate begins with delivery room care. Evaporative fluid losses through the exposed bowel are 2.5 times the amount of that of a healthy newborn.

**Surgical Management of Gastroschisis**

The primary goal of gastroschisis repair to return the exposed bowel and new organs to the abdominal cavity while minimizing intestinal injury or increased intra-abdominal pressure. Two treatment options are present for gastroschisis. The first is primary repair, and the second is delayed closure (usually utilizing a temporary silo and performing serial reduction of bowel contents). Primary closure near birth is performed either operatively or following successful bowel reduction back into the abdominal cavity and performing sutureless gastroschisis repair. A randomized control trial evaluated primary closure versus delayed primary closure following silo reduction in which there were no differences seen between two groups in length of stay, time to enteral feeds, or ventilator times.

The umbilicus is now preserved during the closure as it leads to excellent cosmetic results. A prospective randomized study comparing sutureless closure to sutured repair noted that the time to full feeds and length of stay was significantly longer in the sutureless group, despite no additional complications.

The bowel is inspected at the time of reduction for obstructing bands, perforation, or atresia. However, bowel anastomosis in the setting of possible atresia is usually not commenced in the setting of edematous bowel. At the initial assessment of the gastroschisis, obvious bowel atresia can be turned into an end ostomy to allow an earlier resumption of feeding while waiting for the intestines to normalize. Care is exercised during the reduction of bowel contents. Perfusion of the bowel is monitored frequently as the mesentery can be compromised based on the pressure of the silo, the bowel at the fascia as it is being reduced, as well as once the bowel is reduced into the abdominal cavity. Abdominal compartment syndrome with pressures higher than 10 to 15 mmHg is often associated with decreased renal and intestinal perfusion, whereas above 20 mmHg, they correlate with organ dysfunction and complications.