Since Wilson disease is a heritable disorder, patients may have a positive family history. Patients may complain of abdominal pain, jaundice, weakness, personality changes, depression, migraine headaches, insomnia, seizure, and movement disorder chorea. Hemiballismus may also be present in history.

About 30-50% of patients will have neuropsychiatric symptoms including asymmetrical tremor. Other symptoms may include drooling, ataxia, personality changes, mask-like facies, and clumsiness.

On physical exam, the patient may have features of hepatosplenomegaly, isolated splenomegaly, or if the disease has progressed to cirrhosis, then stigmata of chronic liver disease may also be prominent. An eye exam may reveal icterus of sclerae and slit-lamp examination for Kayser-Fleischer (KF) rings on the cornea (note that the only other disorder with KF rings is Primary biliary cirrhosis). Other features of Wilson disease may include the presence of movement disorders, difficulty speaking, mask-like faces, spasticity, muscle rigidity, and skin findings of lunulae ceruleae (bluish discoloration at the base of fingernails).

Skeletal involvement is very common in Wilson disease and resembles premature osteoarthritis. The arthropathy usually involves the axial skeleton and spine.

Hemolytic anemia is seen in 10-15% of patients and is due to red cell lysis by the high copper concentration. When clinicians are faced with a young patient with impaired liver function, hemolytic anemia, and normal alkaline phosphatase levels, Wilson disease should be suspected.

Renal symptoms are similar to Fanconi syndrome and urolithiasis.