Most healthcare professionals are generally unaware of the existence of pudendal neuralgia, nor its diagnosis and treatment. For many, chronic pelvic pain remains a morass of differing opinions, multiple tests, and various interventions. A reasonable, progressive approach incorporating local healthcare professionals in multiple specialties greatly improves patient outcomes.

End-organ specialists need to be more aware of pudendal neuralgia and consider the diagnosis in patients seen for bowel, bladder, and sexual dysfunctions as well as dyspareunia and vulvodynia. For example, pain specialists often focus on interventional spinal pain control without considering other treatment modalities available from adjunctive specialties. Patients would benefit enormously if primary care physicians, urologists, OB-GYNs, and internists developed an increased awareness and understanding of pudendal neuralgia. Neurologists also need to play a role. An integrated team, including a psychologist, physical therapist, pain specialist, interventional radiologist, OB-GYN, and urologist, in addition to the original treating primary care physician, is valuable and results in better patient outcomes. One designated member should ideally take primary control and integrate the various specialties into a coordinated multidisciplinary team.

Academic institutions and clinical centers of excellence need to show true leadership in organizing such a team approach. More formalized diagnostic techniques with uniform protocols improved monitoring, and standardization of therapeutic interventions should be developed and utilized. There is a critical need for larger, high-quality, randomized, prospective clinical trials for virtually all pudendal neuralgia treatments. Available studies currently lack sufficient numbers of patients, uniform diagnostic and outcome criteria, procedural standardization, adequate control groups, and long-term efficacy validation. Even a single, standardized symptom score to measure outcomes would greatly aid the analysis and evaluation of pre and post-treatment studies and allow better therapeutic comparisons. Pelvic pain clinical research projects should evaluate for pudendal neuralgia and specifically consider it part of their inclusion or exclusion criteria.