Before discussing the mechanism of labor in the face or brow presentation, it is crucial to highlight some anatomical landmarks and their measurements.

**Planes and Diameters of the Pelvis**

The three most important planes in the female pelvis are the pelvic inlet, mid pelvis, and pelvic outlet.

Four diameters can describe the pelvic inlet: anteroposterior, transverse, and two obliques. Furthermore, based on the different landmarks on the pelvic inlet, there are three different anteroposterior diameters, named conjugates: true conjugate, obstetrical conjugate, and diagonal conjugate. Only the latter can be measured directly during the obstetric examination. The shortest of these three diameters is obstetrical conjugate, which measures approximately 10.5 cm and is a distance between the sacral promontory and 1 cm below the upper border of the symphysis pubis. This measurement is clinically significant as the fetal head must pass through this diameter during the engagement phase. The transverse diameter measures about 13.5cm and is the widest distance between the innominate line on both sides.

The shortest distance in the mid pelvis is the interspinous diameter and usually is only about 10 cm.

**Fetal Skull Diameters**

There are six distinguished longitudinal fetal skull diameters:

- Suboccipito-bregmatic: from the center of anterior fontanelle (bregma) to the occipital protuberance, measuring 9.5 cm. This is the presenting diameter in vertex presentation.

- Suboccipito-frontal: from the anterior part of bregma to the occipital protuberance, measuring 10 cm

- Occipito-frontal: from the root of the nose to the most prominent part of the occiput, measuring 11.5cm

- Submento-bregmatic: from the center of the bregma to the angle of the mandible, measuring 9.5 cm. This is the presenting diameter in face presentation where the neck is hyperextended.

- Submento-vertical: from the midpoint between fontanelles and the angle of the mandible, measuring 11.5cm

- Occipito-mental: from the midpoint between fontanelles and the tip of the chin, measuring 13.5 cm. It is the presenting diameter in brow presentation.

**Cardinal Movements of Normal Labor**

- Engagement

- Decent

- Neck flexion

- Internal rotation

- Extension (delivers head)

- External rotation (Restitution)

- Expulsion (delivery of anterior and posterior shoulders)

Some of the key movements are not possible in the face or brow presentations.

Based on the information provided above, it is obvious that labor will be arrested in brow presentation unless it spontaneously changes to face or vertex, as the occipito-mental diameter of the fetal head is significantly wider than the smallest diameter of the female pelvis. Face presentation can, however, be delivered vaginally, and further mechanisms of face delivery will be explained in later sections.