Mucoceles and ranulas tend to resolve spontaneously. But if they are symptomatic, persistent, and are not self-resolving, multiple treatment approaches can be considered, which are discussed below.

- **Mucoceles**** 1. Surgical Excision:**Surgical excision of the mucocele along with the associated minor salivary gland, is preferred when the lesion is persistent, recurrent, or symptomatic. After adequate removal, the chances of recurrence are reasonably low.**2. Aspiration: **It is not considered as an appropriate therapy for mucoceles as the recurrence rate is quite higher. Instead, it is preferred to eliminate other entities before surgical excision.**3. Marsupialization: **It is performed when the lesion is more extensive as it prevents the significant loss of the tissue and also decreases the risk of complications occurring as a result of surgical excision. However, if it fails, then surgical removal of the lesion is performed. Micromarsupialization of lesions smaller than 1 cm in diameter has been reported in pediatric patients with variable success in which a suture is taken through the dome of the lesion, allowing re-epithelialization of the injured duct and improving the secretory flow of the minor salivary gland.**4. Laser Ablation, Cryosurgery, and Electrocautery:**They are mostly performed for the superficial mucoceles.

- **Ranulas1. Surgical Excision: **Both oral and cervical ranulas can be treated effectively with this approach involving the removal of the lesion along with the associated major salivary gland with insignificant recurrence rates.**2. Marsupialization:**Some providers prefer it before embarking on surgical removal. The whole pseudocyst is packed with gauze for 7-10 days. This allows re-epithelialization of the cavity and also seals off the leakage site. Besides, it also provokes a foreign body reaction causing fibrosis and atrophy of the offending acini. If marsupialization fails to eliminate the disease, then surgical excision is the next treatment of choice. **3. Laser Ablation, Cryosurgery, and Electrocautery**: These have also been employed for the treatment of smaller ranulas either alone or before the marsupialization.**4. Intralesional Injection of a Sclerosant Agent:** Although considered experimental, intracystic injection of the streptococcal preparation, OK-432, has been reported to treat the disease with variable success rates.