The most important measure to prevent ventilator-induced lung injury is to select appropriate ventilatory settings that prevent overdistension of alveoli, causing volutrauma and biotrauma, and atelectrauma.

The concept of “baby lung’ in ARDS represents the relatively small areas of aerated normal lung (which is just the size of a baby’s lung), which needs to be protected from injury during mechanical ventilation. Since most of the remaining alveoli are non-aerated and collapsed, delivery of a large tidal volume could overinflate the baby lung areas inciting lung injury. The baby lung is not a fixed anatomic structure since redistribution of dependent atelectasis occurs in prone positioning. The ideal tidal volume might have been the tidal volume required to ventilate the baby's lung, which has been evaluated only in physiologic studies at this stage.

In ARDS patients, a low tidal volume strategy of 6 ml /Kg of predicted body weight(PBW) has been shown to prevent overdistension of the alveoli and improved mortality when compared with a higher tidal volume (i.e., 12 ml/Kg of predicted body weight) as shown in the ARDS Nett trial.

PEEP is an important aspect of the ARDS ventilatory strategy, offering protection from atelectrauma apart from improving alveolar recruitment & oxygenation. PEEP needs to be carefully titrated since an inappropriately high PEEP can cause overdistension injury, and a lower PEEP could be insufficient to stabilize and keep the alveoli open. The PEEP is most commonly selected at the bedside for a given FiO2 based on the PEEP selection criteria adopted at the landmark ARDS Nett trial. Optimal PEEP titration based on pressure-volume curve analysis, transpulmonary pressure measurements, CT, and ultrasound pictures have been tried in various studies though proved clinical benefits with such strategies are lacking. Closed suction catheters should be preferred in mechanically ventilated ARDS patients to avoid abrupt disconnection and PEEP derecruitment, which could cause hypoxemia as well as lung deflation injury.

Recruitment maneuvers should reduce ventilator-associated injury in theory.

The use of neuromuscular agent has been known to reduce the cytokine levels in previous studies.

Prone position ventilation has been known to increase the homogeneity of ventilation in animal studies, thus protecting from lung injury.

Partial or total extracorporeal support (ECMO/ECCO2-R) have been conceptually promising in the prevention of ventilator related lung injury. However, data supporting clinical benefits prompting the routine initiation of extracorporeal support are scanty at this stage.

Anti-inflammatory strategies and the use of mesenchymal stem cells have been employed in animal studies to prevent the consequences of ventilator-induced lung injury.