ARBs are known for their relatively mild side-effect profile compared to other antihypertensive medications.

The most commonly affected organ systems are

- Nervous system: Studies show the most common side effect is headache, which up to 7% of patients may experience, and 3% may have associated with dizziness.

- Respiratory system: Respiratory complaints from the medication include upper respiratory infections(up to 5%), influenza (up to 3.5%), and sinusitis (up to 1%).

- Endocrine system: Endocrine abnormalities may also result from olmesartan, including hyperglycemia (greater than 1%) and hypertriglyceridemia (more than 1%).

- Gastrointestinal system: The gastrointestinal system may also exhibit side effects, including abdominal pain, diarrhea (over 1%), increased ALT (1%), and increased GGT (approximately 2.5%). Of note, long-term olmesartan use can result in sprue enteropathy-like symptoms. This condition includes significant weight loss and osmotic diarrhea resulting from induced villous atrophy.

- Genitourinary system: Genitourinary complaints include hematuria (approximately 2.5%) and urinary tract infections(less than 2%).

- Musculoskeletal systems: Musculoskeletal complaints include back pain (more than 1%), arthralgia(greater than 1%), and bone pain (1%).

- Hepatobiliary System: Olmesartan has been associated with a low rate of serum aminotransferase elevations (<2%) that was not higher than placebo therapy in controlled trials. These elevations were transient and seldom required dose modification. Patients who develop severe enteropathy due to olmesartan may have fatty liver disease and steatohepatitis with serum aminotransferase elevations which, like diarrhea, resolve with discontinuing therapy. In patients with olmesartan-induced liver injury, clinicians should avoid using other ARBs, although cross sensitivity to liver injury among the members of this class of agents has not been shown. Likelihood score: D (possible rare cause of clinically apparent liver injury).

- Rare potential side effects include acute renal failure, alopecia, anaphylaxis, anxiety, chest pain, dyspepsia, eczema, erectile dysfunction, hyperbilirubinemia, hyperkalemia, hypotension, insomnia, and syncope. Olmesartan also has rare, life-threatening side effects, including anaphylaxis, angioedema, and severe renal failure.