Any mental health illness requires targeting the biological, psychological, and social aspects of the patient to have the most favorable outcome.

- Creating more awareness about individuals with gender dysphoria and validating the concerns of this vulnerable population requires more active parental and peer support. Understanding gender as a scale and not as binary forms can help reduce the stigma in seeking timely help to improve prognosis and outcome. Open discussions and mass-level education in school and work environments can help achieve this.

- To create more awareness for gender dysphoria among physicians and other health providers and to encourage providers to be more forthcoming and liberal in providing care and treating for this population. To emphasize an interprofessional team approach that is already in effect. This gives our patients the opportunity to get treatment within the same loop of providers. Also, understand that this population has a higher incidence of psychiatric illnesses, concomitant substance use, and personality disorders that can be challenging.

- Along with this innate sense of rejection and desire to be the opposite sex, these patients need treatment with hormones and therapy. These patients should also be screened for mental health problems like depression, anxiety, safety risk assessments, and substance use during all office visits, including those to primary care providers, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, and endocrinologists to make necessary referrals in case the patient screens positive.

- By understanding gender dysphoria as an organic pathology, as suggested by available data and not entirely behavioral, as it was previously thought to be, we can try to maximize care and improve outcomes.

- As discussed above, the plan should always be individualized, even after having protocols written to provide care for these patients.