The suprahyoid muscles form boundaries for the triangles of the neck present in the suprahyoid area. Between the digastric muscles' two anterior bellies is the submental triangle. Between the anterior and posterior bellies of the digastric muscle is the submandibular (digastric triangle). These triangles are essential for locating of particular structures within these triangles and hence knowledge of the boundaries of triangles, and their contents are vital for surgeons.

The posterior belly of digastric is a significant landmark for surgeons as three cranial nerves, i.e., hypoglossal, accessory, and vagus pass deep to the posterior belly of digastric along with three great vessels, i.e., external and internal carotid arteries, and internal jugular vein.

The anterior belly of the digastric muscle is of great importance in some aesthetic surgical procedures, such as rhytidectomy, submental lipectomy, displacement of suprahyoid muscles, submental artery flap, change of cervicomental angle and in the revitalization procedures of the facial muscles after neurological injury.

Stylohyoid muscle transfer may be a surgical option when the digastric muscle is unusable for any of various reasons. The transfer is performed to improve the aesthetic and functional effect after a lesion of the marginal mandibular nerve, which lesion makes the lips asymmetrical.

In some surgical procedures, the addition of mylohyoid muscle transfer after a total parotidectomy facilitates better healing and adds volume.