**Quality Control of 99m-Tc Eluate with Clinical Implications**

Before administering radiopharmaceuticals to patients, it is mandatory to perform quality check steps with every elution. This additional step results in minimal radiation exposure with maximum clinical benefit. The chances of having impurities in an eluate increase when elution is not carried out daily.

Mo-99 Breakthrough/Radionuclide Impurity

This usually happens near the generator's expiry date, when Mo-99 contamination may be eluted with 99m-Tc. However, the determination of Moly's breakthrough is inescapable with every elution. USP's standard limit is less than 0.15 microCi 99-Mo/ mCi 99m-Tc at the administration time, which can be easily calculated by placing a generator equate in the lead container designed only to detect energetic 740-KeV and 780-KeV gamma rays of 99-Mo.

The manufacturer usually performs other radionuclides contamination tests.

Radionuclide contaminants

Safe permissible limit (per mCi 99m-Tc)

I-131

0.05

Ru-103

0.05

Sr-89

0.0006

Sr-90

0.00006

Table 1 shows some important critical contaminants with safe permissible limits.

**Aluminum Breakthrough/Chemical Impurity**

The alumina column in the generator bed contributes to its contamination, especially when preparing 99m-Tc labeled sulfur colloid for lymph nodes study.

**Radiochemical Impurity**

The pertechnetate exhibits a varied range of valency, between -1 to +7, depending upon pH, presence of a reducing, or an oxidizing agent. Sodium pertechnetate (TcO4-) is the desired form with a valency of +7. Other reduced oxidation states such as +4, +5, or +6 are called radiochemical impurities detected by thin-layer chromatography. Although infrequent, the determination of these radiochemical impurities is often considered if labeling has a low yield. More than or equal to 95% of 99m-Tc activity should be in the +7 oxidation state for ideal labeling with a pharmaceutical.