Patients with significant pulmonary involvement may progress to respiratory failure, requiring mechanical ventilation. Sepsis and coagulopathy also may occur. Treatment of glanders with imipenem and doxycycline for 2 weeks, followed by azithromycin and doxycycline for six months, was successful in a laboratory worker that became infected with the disease. A CT scan after this therapy showed improvement of splenic and hepatic abscesses.

Glanders is fatal in 95% of cases without treatment, and death occurs within 7 to 10 days of onset. Mortality is 50% with appropriate antibiotic treatment. Mortality of the septicemic form of melioidosis exceeds 90%, but mortality may decrease to as low as 10% in uncomplicated cases managed with appropriate antibiotic therapy.

Surgical management of prostatic abscesses and septic arthritis caused by melioidosis is indicated; however, surgical intervention often is not indicated for hepatic and splenic abscesses. The treatment of choice for acute melioidosis is intravenous ceftazidime. Meropenem and imipenem also have been shown to be effective. In the acute phase of the disease, patients are treated with intravenous antibiotics for at least 2 weeks. Following the conclusion of intravenous antibiotic administration, patients are treated with doxycycline and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole for up to 20 weeks to eradicate the disease. Abscesses in most organ systems of patients with melioidosis often resolve after antibiotic therapy; however, prostatic abscesses usually require surgical debridement.Burkholderia pseudomallei had a 100% survival rate.