Ear size increases with age. Ear cartilage continues to grow throughout a person's lifetime, while the pendulous lobule elongates under the influence of gravity.

The external ear is often adorned with jewelry, particularly the cartilage-free lobule. Piercings involving the cartilaginous parts of the ear may display poor healing because of the relatively avascular nature of cartilage. Ear piercings are among the most common sites of **keloid scar**development in susceptible individuals. The patient may present with pain, itching, and a shiny and/or dark/pink mass at the site of the piercing, which represents the scar. African-Americans are 15 times more likely than whites to develop keloids. Susceptible individuals should avoid any further piercings and skin trauma elsewhere on their body, which may result in further keloid scar formation.

**Cauliflower ear**is seen in boxers and individuals who experience frequent physical trauma to the pinna. The deformity develops over time as hematomas form between the cartilage and its perichondrium, resulting in the death of the cartilage as it is cut off from its supply of nutrients. Fibrosis sets in, deforming the ear.

**Otitis externa**is the inflammation of the external auditory canal. A notorious cause of otitis externa is**swimmer’s ear**, which is an infection acquired in contaminated swimming pools or lakes. The pathogens typically includePseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. Otitis externa is diagnosed via otoscopic examination, which reveals an erythematous and swollen auditory canal. In some cases, the first otoscopic finding in a patient with ear canal pain from otitis externa may be a lack of cerumen, as the infection impedes its production. Treatment is topical and rarely requires oral antibiotics. Swimmer’s ear must be differentiated from **surfer’s ear**, which is abnormal growth of bone to form an exostosis in the external auditory canal. It occurs as a result of frequent exposure to cold and wet conditions and is seen in surfers, divers, and other water sports enthusiasts.**Ear myiasis**is maggot infestation of the ear. Children may insert small objects into their auditory canals, which may lead to conductive hearing loss and otitis externa secondary to**foreign body insertion**.

As cerumen continuously is secreted in the healthy ear, it may collect in the external auditory canal even to the point of complete or partial obstruction. The misuse of cotton swabs is associated with **wax impaction**, as cotton swabs that are inserted beyond the external acoustic meatus may push the cerumen further into the ear canal, rather than clearing it out. The patient may present with conductive hearing loss and possibly otalgia if there is infection beyond the obstruction. Intra-otic drops may help to soften the impacted wax overnight, and the patient should return on the following day for irrigation to dislodge the solid wax. Instrumentation of the ear canal should be done with caution as its vagal innervation may cause bradycardia or coughing.

The ear is relatively exposed and thus merits special attention with regards to sun damage. The pinna is a frequent site of actinic keratosis, cutaneous horns, and **skin cancer**.**frostbite**.

Abnormalities in the shape of the external ear, such as microtia, anotia, auricular dysplasia, external auditory canal atresia, etc. may be associated with **genetic syndromes**. Examples include the autosomal-dominant Treacher Collins syndrome and Crouzon syndrome.

The area immediately anterior to the tragus should be observed for **preauricular pits**or**tags**, which may be associated with genetic syndromes like branchio-oto-renal syndrome, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Neonates with preauricular pits or tags should undergo a renal ultrasound to verify for renal abnormalities. Pits are believed to originate from hillock fusion abnormalities, while tags may represent supernumerary hillocks.