The clinical presentation varies depending on the type of rodenticide ingested. Following is a brief outline with specific pathophysiology and symptoms of common rodenticides:

**Thallium**

- This substance is a tasteless, odorless powder absorbed via inhalation or through the skin. It works by displacing potassium in sodium-potassium-adenosine triphosphatase and the sulfhydryl or thiol group of mitochondrial membranes, disrupting the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, depleting energy production. For additional information, please see the Statpearls article on thallium toxicity.

- Acute Exposure:
            
              
- Acute gastroenteritis (within 48 hours)
              
              
- Cranial nerve dysfunction, peripheral neuropathy, seizure
              
              
- Alopecia that spares the inner third of eyebrows and axilla
              
              
- Hyperpigmentation

- Chronic Exposure:
            
              
- Tremor, ataxia, distal motor weakness
              
              
- Diplopia, nystagmus
              
              
- Cranial nerve 7 palsy
              
              
- Ocular lens opacities

**Fluoroacetamide (Compound 1080), Sodium Monofluoroacetate (SMFA)**

- SMFA is an odorless, tasteless white powder. In the United States, collars are infused with SMFA and placed on livestock to protect against other wildlife. Both fluoroacetamide and SMFA mimic acetate and irreversibly inhibit the Krebs cycle by converting coenzyme A (CoA) to fluoroacetyl CoA, subsequently causing an accumulation of citrate. This complexes with calcium.

- Symptom Onset: 30 minutes to 20 hours
            
              
- Seizures
              
              
- Hypocalcemia
              
              
- Worsening metabolic acidosis
              
              
- Dysrhythmias
              
              
- Shock refractory to resuscitation

- Late Complications
            
              
- Kidney injury
              
              
- Hepatic dysfunction
              
              
- Cerebral or cerebellar atrophy

**Strychnine**

- This agent is an odorless, colorless powder that becomes bitter when dissolved in water—often seen as pink tablets. Strychnine toxicity presents as involuntary muscle contraction resulting from competitive inhibition of glycine receptors at the postsynaptic and motor neuron level. For further information, please see the Statpearls article on strychnine toxicity.

- Symptom Onset: 10 to 20 minutes
            
              
- Uncontrollable muscle spasms
              
              
- Trismus
              
              
- Risus sardonicus
              
              
- Opisthotonos
              
              
- Rhabdomyolysis
              
              
- Lactic acidosis
              
              
- Hyperthermia

**Zinc and Aluminum Phosphide**

- When this compound is exposed to water, phosphine gas is released that characteristically has a rotten fish odor. Poisoning is more common in northern India and Iran. When the toxin is ingested, gastric acid converts the element to phosphine gas, which is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract into the bloodstream; however, this toxin can also spread via inhalation or be absorbed through the skin. The toxin inhibits the cytochrome C oxidase system.

- Symptom Onset: 30 minutes
            
              
- Acute gastritis
              
              
- Cardiac arrhythmias
              
              
- Hemorrhagic pulmonary edema
              
              
- Respiratory failure
              
              
- Intravascular hemolysis with methemoglobinemia
              
              
- Hepatotoxicity
              
              
- Metabolic acidosis
              
              
- Respiratory alkalosis
              
              
- Renal failure

**Elemental Phosphorus**

- This element has a faint garlic odor and may glow when exposed to oxygen. It exists in two forms: red and white (yellow) phosphorus. The former is utilized for matches. The latter is used in rodenticides. White phosphorus is very toxic, causing damage locally and systemically. When ingested, it directly causes tissue damage with local phosphoric acid and phosphorus pentoxide. In circulation, phosphorous also binds to calcium leading to severe hypocalcemia.

- 

- Acute gastroenteritis
- Skin or mucosal burns
- Phosphorescent emesis or feces (smoking stool)
- Dysrhythmias
- Hepatotoxicity
- Renal failure

**Arsenic**

- Arsenic is a highly toxic inorganic compound whose exact mechanism of action is unknown. Postulations include inhibition of hexokinase in glycolysis, inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase in the Krebs cycle leading to impaired cell respiration and depletion of ATP, and formation of sulfhydryl compounds leading to extensive vasodilation. If there has been significant ingestion, a garlic odor is potentially detectable on the patient's breath. For more information, please see the StatPearls article on arsenic toxicity.

- Symptom onset: 1 to 3 hours
            
              
- Vomiting
              
              
- Bloody diarrhea
              
              
- Garlic taste in the mouth
              
              
- Hypotension
              
              
- Prolonged QT segment
              
              
- Delirium, seizures, coma
              
              
- Renal injury

**Barium Carbonate**

- This compound easily dissolves in water and is highly toxic, unlike the insoluble counterpart, barium sulfate, which serves as radiographic contrast media. The barium ion inhibits potassium diffusion out of cells resulting in hypokalemia.

- Symptoms:
            
              
- Gastroenteritis
              
              
- Hypertension
              
              
- Cardiac arrhythmias
              
              
- Shortness of breath
              
              
- Muscle paralysis

**Tetramethylene Disulfotetramine (TETS, Tetramine)**

- Originating from China, this rodenticide works by irreversibly antagonizing the GABA receptor.

- Symptom onset: 10 minutes to 13 hours
            
              
- Convulsions
              
              
- Coma
              
              
- Respiratory failure
              
              
- Arrhythmias

**Aldicarb**

- Originating from Latin America, this compound is also known as "tres pasitos," which refers to the three little steps mice take before the poison causes almost immediate death. It works as a potent cholinesterase inhibitor resulting in a cholinergic toxidrome.

- Symptoms:
            
              
- Excess salivation
              
              
- Lacrimation
              
              
- Urination
              
              
- Diarrhea
              
              
- Gastrointestinal upset
              
              
- Emesis (SLUDGE)

**Alpha-chloralose**:

- Originating from Europe, this compound is used as a veterinarian anesthetic but also is present in rodenticides. The mechanism of action is not clearly defined but similar to barbiturates as a central nervous system depressant.

- Symptoms:

- Convulsions
- Hypothermia
- Respiratory depression

**Pyriminil, Pyriminil, N-3-pyridylmethyl-N-p-nitrophenyl Urea, PNU**

- Pyriminil works as a nicotinamide antagonist and impairs the synthesis of NAD and NADH, which acutely destroys pancreatic beta cells within two hours.

- Symptoms:
            
              
- Kussmaul breathing
              
              
- Hypotension
              
              
- Encephalopathy
              
              
- Lethargy

**Cholecalciferol (Vitamin D3)**

- Although it takes a large ingestion to bring about toxicity, cholecalciferol may cause significant symptoms via a hypercalcemic state. Vitamin D3 mobilizes calcium from the bones and increases intestinal calcium absorption, which ultimately causes hypercalcemia.

- Symptoms:

- Polyuria
- Polydipsia
- Vomiting
- Renal failure
- Encephalopathy

**Anticoagulants (Superwarfarin, Warfarin)**

- Superwarfarins (brodifacoum, difenacoum, bromadiolone, and chlorophacinone) are anticoagulant rodenticides similar to warfarin but contain various phenyl groups that replace the terminal methyl group. This group substitution makes superwarfarin 100-fold stronger than warfarin.

- Symptoms:
            
              
- Hematuria (earliest symptom) 
              
              
- Hemoptysis
              
              
- Epistaxis
              
              
- Flank pain
              
              
- Easy bruising
              
              
- Intracranial hemorrhage

**Norbormide**

- This rat poison is essentially non-toxic to humans and works through extreme peripheral vasoconstriction that causes ischemia leading to organ death followed by animal expiration.

- Symptoms may include a drop in blood pressure and/or temperature. This is based on a few human case reports.

**Bromethalin**

- It is rarely toxic to humans because it takes significant ingestion to exert a toxic effect. Bromethalin uncouples oxidative phosphorylation leading to decreased ATP. It acts as a neurotoxin affecting both central and peripheral nervous systems as a lack of ATP causes increased fluid around neuron sheaths.

- Symptom onset is within 4 hours to 7 days and may include altered mental status and delirium that is secondary to severe cerebral edema. This is based on one human case report.

**Red Squill (Urginea maritima)**

- It is a glycoside (scillaren A and B) that causes cardiotoxicity and convulsant effects.

- Symptoms:
            
              
- Abdominal pain
              
              
- Vomiting
              
              
- Seizures
              
              
- Hyperkalemia
              
              
- Cardiac arrhythmias (resembles digitalis toxicity)