**X-ray**

Plain radiographs are an appropriate initial imaging study for neck and upper extremity pain in the absence of “red flag” symptoms. However, degenerative changes seen on imaging often poorly correlate with the presence of neck pain.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)**

MRI is the imaging modality of choice to evaluate neural structures and soft tissues. It allows for proper visualization of the entire cervical spine without subjecting the patient to radiation. Sagittal and axial cuts can help quantify the extent of nerve and cord compression, as well as reveal offending pathological changes (e.g., herniated discs, bony spurs, ligamenta flava hypertrophy, or facet joint arthropathy). Hyperintense spinal cord signal on T2-weighted images can be representative of edema, inflammation, ischemia, myelomalacia, or gliosis.

**Computed Tomography (CT)**

CT provides a good definition of bony structures and is more sensitive than plain radiographs in assessing intervertebral foraminal stenosis in the setting of uncovertebral or facet hypertrophy. However, it is less sensitive than MRI for the evaluation of soft tissues and nerve root compression.

**CT Myelogram**

CT is most useful when combined with the injection of intrathecal contrast (myelography) to better evaluate the location and amount of neural compression. It is more invasive than an MRI but can be a consideration in patients who have a contraindication to MRI (e.g., pacemaker) or have an artifact from the hardware.

**Discogram**

Provocative discography is rarely necessary for cervical spondylosis. It is useful for the evaluation of patients who are experiencing cervical discogenic pain or have multiple herniations in which surgery is a strong possibility. However, the diagnostic procedure remains controversial as it may accelerate the degeneration of normal discs.

**Electromyogram (EMG)**

EMG can be useful in supplementing neuroimaging findings in the diagnosis of cervical radiculopathy. It is especially valuable in differentiating nerve root compression from other possible concomitant neurologic conditions, including peripheral neuropathies, entrapment neuropathies, brachial plexopathies, myopathies, and motor neuron diseases.