The most important part of the evaluation is a careful and thorough physical examination. Obtain essential information about the mechanism of injury, is vital. This should include responses to the following considerations:

**When:**Timing of the injury

**Where:**Location of both the injury and number of wound sites (suspected entry and exit wounds), as well as their nearness to vital structures.

**How:**The type of wounding agent used, such as a knife, handgun, motor vehicle, etc.

**Events surrounding the timing of the injury:**This information can be obtained from the emergency management report and the law enforcement report.

**Any other existing or underlying medical condition(s)**.

It is important to determine the extent of the injury and identify any associated injuries. Beware that are uncommonly isolated injuries, particularly in cases involving blunt trauma. Always attempt to identify any associated injuries.

Evaluate the neck for hemorrhage, hematoma, ecchymosis, edema, or any anatomic distortion. Auscultate for carotid bruits, stridor. Examine the neck for any tenderness or subcutaneous emphysema. The presence of certain findings provides clues for clinically significant vascular and aerodigestive injuries. Beware that signs and symptoms may be delayed. Bubbling or air emanating from a wound may suggest a tracheal injury. Crepitus may indicate that air has moved into the soft tissue space and should suggest prompt evaluation for injury to the trachea, esophagus, or pulmonary tree. A careful evaluation of the wound to determine the extent of the injury is required. Assess for penetration of the platysma. However, wounds should never be probed blindly, as this may cause uncontrolled bleeding. A full neurologic examination should also be performed.