Desflurane administration is via the inhalational route. It has a pungent odor, making it difficult to use for the induction of general anesthesia. It is used most commonly for maintaining general anesthesia after induction with an IV or another inhalational agent. Minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) of desflurane is 6.0% in the 31 to 65 year age group and 7.25% in the 18 to 30 year age group. The blood/gas partition coefficient of desflurane is 0.42, making it even less soluble than nitrous oxide, which has a blood/gas partition coefficient of 0.47. Desflurane can cause very rapid induction and emergence from anesthesia, given its low blood solubility. This quality allows the alveolar concentration to approach the inspired concentration of desflurane much more quickly, permitting rapid titration of anesthetic levels. Emergence from desflurane after an hour-long case can take around six minutes, in contrast to sevoflurane which can take up to 18 minutes. Desflurane's vapor pressure, 681 mm Hg at sea level, is significantly higher than the other inhalational anesthetics and leads to a boiling point near room temperature. Its high vapor pressure and low boiling point led to the creation of a special desflurane vaporizer. This vaporizer pressurizes desflurane to 1500 mm Hg, which is roughly two atmospheres of pressure, and warms it to 40 degrees Celsius, allowing optimal control of the concentration of anesthetic delivered to the patient. Desflurane vaporizers are electrically powered heat devices.