The initial imaging modality of choice is radiographs in virtually all cases of knee pain, whether traumatic or atraumatic. Standard views include anterior-posterior (AP), lateral, and oblique. A sunrise view can be obtained to evaluate the patella better.  Fractures can be distinguished from a bipartite patella, an anatomical variant, by the orientation of the fracture lines and irregular fractures pieces. In the case of tendon ruptures, plain films may show avulsion fractures where the ligament has torn, a knee effusion, patella alta, or baja, or they may be completely normal. Patellar dislocations appear on plain film most commonly as a laterally displaced patella with an associated effusion.

Point-of-care ultrasound can be used as an initial imaging modality in the right clinical context, especially if a tendon injury is suspected and should be used as an adjunct to radiographs when available. Partial tears may show incomplete disruption of the tendon fibers along with a hypoechoic area near the site of injury. Complete tears will demonstrate an obvious hypoechoic area with tendon visible proximally and distally depending on the degree of retraction. Color Doppler may show increased vascularity as a result of the injury.

In select cases, computed tomography (CT) may be the imaging modality of choice. In patients with extensor mechanism injuries, CT is most useful when a fracture is suspected, as this can help delineate the fracture pattern and allow for surgical planning. In most cases, CT is not required. MRI also has a role in evaluating extensor mechanism injuries. In cases of suspected tendon rupture, the surgical team can use this information to evaluate for partial vs. complete tears and plan their surgical approach. If the patient is effused, an intra-articular injury has also occurred, and this can help identify any pathology in the joint.