The classic clinical presentation of a patient with a vesicovaginal fistula is continuous urinary incontinence after recent pelvic surgery. The severity of symptomology and timing of presentation is variable.

Postoperative patients with a vesicovaginal fistula are usually easily diagnosed by the complaint of urine leaking through the vagina 7 to 12 days after gynecological or pelvic surgery. The timing of symptomology is likely related to tissue necrosis following obstructed prolonged labor or tissue strangulated by sutures placed during pelvic surgery.

The diagnosis can be confirmed by completing a tampon dye test. This test involves inserting a regular tampon or gauze in the vagina, then back-filling the bladder with dilute methylene blue and having the patient ambulate - this can be performed shortly after filling the bladder, and a prolonged period of ambulation is not required as long as the bladder was sufficiently full with 200-300 mL of fluid. It is preferable to place the gauze or tampon prior to back-filling the bladder to avoid contaminating the gauze with dye during insertion. The tampon or gauze is then removed and inspected; if there is blue dye noted on the gauze near the apex, a vesicovaginal fistula is confirmed. If the dye is only noted on the distal tampon, this may represent spillage of the dye during filling or other forms of urinary incontinence.

The diagnosis of a vesicovaginal fistula can be made in an outpatient clinical setting. A thorough evaluation of the size, number, and location of the fistula is important before curative surgery is undertaken. Physical examination, to include lighted speculum exam, of the fistula and surrounding structures, is extremely important to evaluate for acute inflammation, infection, edema, necrosis, or other bladder or vaginal pathology. Surgical correction of the defect should be postponed for up to 2 to 3 months if needed to allow for recovery and optimal tissue health. However, if there is no evidence of inflammation, and the tissue appears healthy, the surgical correction does not need to be postponed.

Office cystoscopy and contrast studies, such as computed tomography (CT) urogram, are generally used to aid in the diagnosis or additional injuries (such as a concomitant ureteral injury or fistula) and for surgical planning.