The management of diaphragm eventration mostly dependent on the etiology and severity of the disease. In asymptomatic or mild cases, supportive care is recommended. In cases of hypoxemia, oxygen supplementation should be provided to maintain appropriate oxygen saturation. When supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula is inadequate, patients may require nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nasal CPAP). As infants commonly present with gastrointestinal symptoms and failure to thrive, nutritional support should be optimized. Infants in significant respiratory distress may require gavage feeding or parenteral nutrition to maximize calorie intake, fluid intake, and electrolyte replenishment to meet metabolic demands. Conservative management may also include physical therapy and pulmonary rehabilitation.

In severe cases requiring mechanical ventilation or when patients fail to respond to medical management, surgical plication may be indicated. Diaphragmatic plication is a known surgical treatment for eventration. The procedure involves creating pleats with U-stitches in the weakened hemidiaphragm and then anchored down. This results in a flattened and lowered hemidiaphragm allowing for increased intrathoracic volume and lung expansion. Diaphragm plication can be done via open thoracotomy, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS), laparoscopic, or robotic-assisted surgery. After the surgery, a thoracostomy tube is placed for 24 to 48 hours for pleural drainage until the output is less than 200 mL/day. It should be noted that surgical plication does not improve the function of the hemidiaphragm.

The indications for surgical plication are outlined below:

- Respiratory distress unresponsive to conservative treatment

- Dyspnea that is not due to another process (i.e., heart failure or primary lung diseases)

- Infants with inadequate nutritional intake or failure to thrive

- Life-threatening or recurrent pneumonia

- Inability to be removed from mechanical ventilation

Patients should be monitored postoperatively, and the frequency of follow-up is variable depending on symptoms or complications. Follow-up tests may include PA/LAT chest X-rays and pulmonary function testing. A patient’s quality of life, activity level, and the psycho-social impact can be monitored using the St. George’s Respiratory Questionnaire.