The accurate diagnosis of prosthetic joint infection often involves the combination of multiple factors including symptoms, signs, synovial fluid cell count, serum inflammatory markers, and culture.

The threshold for diagnosing a prosthetic joint infection using some of these parameters is much lower compared to the septic arthritis of a native joint. For example, unlike septic arthritis, when synovial fluid cell counts are typically tens of thousands, a synovial fluid white blood cell count (WBC) of more than 4200 cells/microliter supports hip prosthetic joint infection, while a WBC count of more than 1700 cells/microliter supports knee prosthetic joint infection. Neutrophil predominance is typically a common feature.

Culture is an important tool for the diagnosis of prosthetic joint infection. Aspirated joint fluid culture should be sent in multiple sets of culture media. Also, obtaining multiple intraoperative culture samples is encouraged. This is especially important for the recovery and accurate diagnosis of prosthetic joint infection caused by low virulence organisms because having just one positive culture is not enough to make a diagnosis. The sensitivity of synovial fluid culture is only 85%, so a negative culture does not rule out infection. However, the specificity of synovial fluid culture is approximately 95%, and positive cultures often imply the presence of prosthetic joint infection.

**Imaging**may have some role in diagnosis, but it is mostly complimentary.

**Plain Radiographs**are the most important study. Even though overall sensitivity and specificity are low, plain imaging may provide useful clues about joint effusion, joint alignment, bone-cement or metal bone interface lucencies, periosteal reactions, and patchy osteolysis.

Physicians seldom order **CT and MRI scans**, but when requested, the scans may show bony erosion, abscess, sinus tract, or loosening of the prosthesis.

**Technetium bone scans**there are variable modalities that are indicated when an infection is suspected clinically but can not be confirmed by arthrocentesis or lab analysis. Although it has low specificity of 30-40 %, it is highly sensitive to up to 99%. The modalities available are Tc-99m (technetium) which can reveal inflammation and In-111 (indium) that reveal leukocyte. In addition, a triple scan can differentiate infection from fracture or bone remodeling.

**Positron Emission Tomography (PET):**FDG-PET scan (using fluorinated glucose to detect areas of high metabolic activity). This is a highly sensitive and specific modality

The updated version of the Musculoskeletal Infection Society (MSIS) 2018 criteria for prosthetic joint infections are evidence-based and validated criteria

Diagnosis can be made if **one major criterion**is present. Either a sinus tract or two positive cultures with phenotypically identical organisms.

With regards to **minor criteria**, a combined score of 6 or more is diagnostic of infection. Whilst a score between 2 and 5 requires additional**intraoperative findings**to confirm the diagnosis. The following is a list of the minor criteria and intraoperative findings along with their allocated points for the scoring system.

**Minor criteria (preoperative diagnosis):**

**Serum**

- Elevated CRP (>10mg/L) or D-dimer (>860ng/mL) ... 2 points

- Elevated ESR (>30mm/h) ... 1 point

**Synovial**

- Elevated synovial WBC (>3,000 cells/µl) or LE ... 3 points

- Positive alpha-defensin ... 3 points

- Elevated synovial PMN (>80%) ... 2 points

- Elevated synovial CRP (>6.9mg/L) ... 1 point

**Intraoperative findings suggestive of infection:**

- Positive histology ... 3 points

- Purulence in affected joint ... 3 points

- Single positive culture ... 2 points

Cobmined with the preoperative score a combined score of 6 or more was considered infected, whilst a score between 4 and 5 was inconclusive, and a score of 3 or less was not infected