Melanomas are malignant tumors of melanocytes, which are derived from neural crest cells. Melanoma can be sporadic or due to a transformation of a premalignant lesion. Upward of 80% of melanomas arise from preexisting lesions. A melanoma that develops in healthy skin is said to arise de novo (without evidence of a precursor lesion). These are often attributed to solar radiation. However, melanoma can occur in areas such as the palms, soles, and perineum.

Precursor lesions of melanoma include the following nevi:

- Congenital nevi: Large congenital nevi (greater than 20 cm) have approximately a 10% lifetime risk of developing melanoma

- Dysplastic nevi: Usually larger than normal moles, with irregular/indistinct borders. Dysplastic nevi should be watched closely or removed if there is a high suspicion of melanoma or if malignant characteristics of the lesion evolve.

In sporadic melanoma, a number of pathways have been identified which are targets of therapy. Pathways of great interest are the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, PI3K/PTEN, and c-Kit pathways.

In the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, roughly up to 80% of melanomas have activating mutations affecting the structure of the b-type rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma (BRAF) protein. Activating nuclear receptors are the most common RAS family mutations. This results in signaling through the RAF to MAP kinase pathway. BRAF inhibits being studied in the treatment of melanoma. Inhibition of BRAF/MEK in patients with BRAF V600 (Most often a valine to glutamic acid)-mutated melanoma has resulted in improved survival. This is the most common mutation in melanoma. However, it should be noted that having the BRAF mutation alone is not sufficient to develop melanoma; it requires p53 inactivation as well.

The PI3K/PTEN is an important pathway. Activation is associated with cell proliferation and malignant transformation.  Most commonly observed changes include activating mutations in PI3K, silencing of PTEN, and amplification of AKT.   The PI3K-AKT pathway may be a crucial target for combination therapy as it plays a significant role in BRAF-/MEK-inhibitor resistance in patients with melanoma.

The c-KIT pathway is another targeted area. Mutations in this area are more commonly found in acral and mucosal melanoma, melanomas unrelated to sun exposure. KIT is a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor that is expressed on hematopoietic progenitor cells, mast cells, melanocytes, primordial germ cells, and interstitial cells of Cajal. Activating mutations and amplifications cause activation of growth and proliferation pathways. Drugs such as imatinib focus on this pathway.

**Major Types of Melanoma**

There are 4 subtypes of melanoma: superficial spreading melanoma, nodular melanoma, lentigo maligna melanoma, and acral lentiginous melanoma.

- Superficial spreading melanoma is the most common, comprising approximately 70% of melanomas. These have an initial radial growth phase with progression to a vertical growth phase. Often, ulceration or bleeding is accompanying the lesion. The lesions average 2 cm in diameter when diagnosed.

- Nodular melanoma is the second most common melanoma, but most commonly on the head and neck. It accounts for 15 to 30% of all melanoma. There is a very aggressive (rapid vertical phase), which may present on non-sun-exposed areas (de novo). These tumors are blue-black but may lack pigment. They often have a poor prognosis.

- Lentigo maligna melanomas represent 4 to 10% of melanomas.  Lentigo maligna becomes lentigo maligna melanoma once it invades into the papillary dermis. There is often a prolonged radial growth of years to decades.

- Acral lentiginous melanoma constitutes 2 to 8% of melanomas in whites and 35% to 60% of them in dark-skinned individuals.   Most common among African Americans, Latin Americans, Native Americans, and Japanese.

**Additional Subtypes**

- Desmoplastic is a rarer variant, but it is often found in the head and neck compared to the rest of the body. There is a high affinity for a perineural spread and a low rate of lymphatic metastases. It is often non-pigmented (amelanotic). Treatment is generally with wide excision and adjuvant radiotherapy.

- Mucosal melanoma accounts for less than 1% of melanomas. However, approximately 10% of head and neck melanomas are mucosal. This subtype has a poor prognosis. The most common sites in order are nasal, paranasal sinuses, oral cavity, and nasopharynx. The best prognostic locations are nasal and oral cavity, with paranasal sinus having the worst prognosis.