Omeprazole is a proton pump inhibitor. It is a substituted benzimidazole that belongs to the antisecretory class of compounds. It inhibits the parietal cell H+ / K+ ATP pump, the final step of acid production. In turn, omeprazole suppresses gastric basal and stimulates acid secretion. The inhibitory effects of omeprazole occur rapidly within 1 hour of administration, with the maximum effect occurring in 2 hours. The inhibitory effects last for approximately 72 hours after administration, followed by a return to baseline activity in 3 to 5 days. The effects will plateau on the fourth day with daily use of the medication.

Omeprazole is extensively metabolized by the hepatic cytochrome P450 enzyme system, mainly via CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 isozymes. Urinary excretion is a primary route for the excretion of omeprazole metabolites. Omeprazole has a short half-life of a half-hour to an hour in healthy subjects and about three hours half-life for patients with hepatic impairment. However, the pharmacological effect of omeprazole lasts much longer as the drug preferentially concentrates in parietal cells, where it forms a covalent linkage with H+/K+ ATPase, which it irreversibly inhibits.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**Delayed-release Omeprazole capsules contain enteric-coated granules that only release omeprazole once the drug leaves the stomach. Once the drug is released, it is rapidly absorbed. It has an absolute bioavailability of 30 to 40 % (20 to 40 mg oral dose), and the peak plasma concentration is attained in 0.5 to 3.5 hours; peak plasma concentration and AUC are increased proportionally up to 40 mg. However, due to saturation of the first-pass effect above a 40 mg dose, those increase greater than linear at a dose above 40 mg.

**Distribution:**Plasma protein binding is approximately 95%.

**Metabolism:**It is metabolized mainly via the cytochrome P450 system.

**Elimination:**It is eliminated mainly in urine as an unchanged drug and its metabolites. Its plasma half-life is 0.5 to 1 hour after oral administration in healthy subjects.