The general public widely uses NSAIDs because of their wide range of commonly encountered indications. Patient education on the use of NSAIDs is an important piece of care that providers need to pay attention to because of the many possible adverse effects on multiple different organ systems. Because these adverse effects occur at a much higher rate in patients with specific comorbidities, it is crucial for physicians, nurses, and pharmacists to pay close attention to a patient's history and to educate the patient accordingly on risks and dosing. The treating clinician will initiate therapy, whether for a short or long-term regimen. The pharmacist will need to verify the dosing and administration and check for potential drug-drug interactions. Pharmacists should also offer patient counseling on how to best use their NSAID and minimize adverse events; this is particularly the case when the patient uses NSAIDs as an OTC agent. Nursing must also take a careful medication history and include OTC NSAID use, so the clinician can make an informed choice for prescribing NSAID therapy. MUrses, pharmacists, and clinicians all need to be cognizant of the signs and symptoms of NSAID toxicity or adverse effects to make changes to the patient's regimen as needed.

The healthcare team should communicate and work together to ensure that each patient receives the proper dose for their specific condition and comorbidities, high enough for efficacy but as low as possible to reduce the incidence of adverse effects. Through collaborative interprofessional teamwork, NSAID therapy can confer maximum benefit with minimal downside. [Level 5]