The triangle of Calot is of surgical importance and has the following boundaries: 1) cystic duct on the right, 2) common hepatic duct on the left, and 3) the undersurface of the liver superiorly. The original definition of this triangle from 1891 listed the cystic duct, common hepatic duct and the cystic artery as boundaries. This has since been modified to allow better identification of landmarks for locating the cystic artery. Of surgical importance is that within the modern definition of the triangle of Calot runs the cystic artery and lymph node. Sometimes, the gallbladder neck is connected to the first part of the duodenum with loose fibrous bands known as the peritoneal cholecystoduodenal fold.

The left and right hepatic ducts join on the outside of the liver to form the common hepatic duct. The cystic duct joins the common hepatic duct after exiting the gallbladder to form the common bile duct. The short common bile duct travels inferiorly in the hepatoduodenal ligament along with the hepatic artery on the right and the portal vein posteriorly. The normal common bile duct diameter varies from 4 mm to 7 mm. Dilation of this duct usually indicates a distal obstruction from a common bile duct stone, benign stricture or neoplasm of the bile duct, pancreatic head, or ampulla Vater.

The distal end of the common bile duct is formed by the union of the pancreatic duct to form the common channel known as the ampulla of Vater. The ampulla of Vater is surrounded by a smooth muscle called the sphincter of Oddi, which prevents the reflux of duodenal secretions into the bile duct.

**Microanatomy**

The gallbladder wall is composed of several layers. The innermost layer is made up of columnar epithelium arranged in a microvillous formation, somewhat like the lining of the intestine. The other layers are the lamina propria, smooth muscularis, and serosa. Rotitansky-Aschoff sinuses are deep inclusions from the mucosal layer extending into the muscularis layer.