Tizanidine is a centrally acting alpha-2 agonist prescribed to manage spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis, stroke, and spinal cord injury. Tizanidine is also used off-label for managing patients suffering from chronic neck and back pain and chronic migraines. However, this drug can cause hypotension, bradycardia, and hepatotoxicity. Hence all healthcare providers need to understand indications, mechanisms, adverse effects, and their management.

The clinician prescribes tizanidine for appropriate indication and should assess liver function tests at baseline and one month. In addition, the neurologist should evaluate the improvement in spasticity related to neurological disorders such as multiple sclerosis, stroke, and spinal cord injury. Nurses can check compliance, monitor for adverse events, and counsel patients for adherence to therapy. The pharmacist should verify the dosing regimen, perform medication reconciliation for drug interactions, and counsel the patient on adverse drug reactions. In addition, patients need to be warned not to combine it with antihypertensive medications. In the overdose of tizanidine, triage nurses should admit the patient, and the emergency department physicians should monitor blood pressure and heart rate and obtain 12 lead EKG. Additionally, a liver function test is required to assess for hepatotoxicity. The critical care physician should manage severe overdose, which requires vasopressors and fluids during the ICU stay.

As depicted above, there are multiple healthcare providers, including clinicians (MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, pharmacists, and nurses, involved in taking care of the patient. Tizanidine can be an effective therapeutic agent, but it requires the entire interprofessional healthcare team to collaborate and communicate for therapy to be successful. In addition, a recent study noted that interprofessional care between clinicians, neurologists, pharmacists, nurses, physical therapists, speech and language therapists, and occupational therapists is crucial for providing patient-centered care in patients with multiple sclerosis.