The hemodynamic effects of this syndrome are the result of the interplay between the relative effects of ASD and MS. The hemodynamic features and the natural history of the patients depend upon the size of the ASD, severity of MS, compliance of the right ventricle and the degree of pulmonary vascular resistance. When MS is severe, and ASD is non-restrictive, left atrium (LA) finds another exit through the septum in addition to the mitral valve (LA decompression). Therefore, LA pressure does not rise in proportion to the severity of MS. For this reason, pulmonary venous hypertension takes a long time to develop. However, this results in an increased left to right shunt across the ASD and progressive dilatation of right atrium (RA) and right ventricle (RV) with increased pulmonary blood flow. In untreated cases, the pulmonary vascular resistance continues to increase which eventually leads to right ventricular failure. The pulmonary artery hypertension (PAH) in these patients is usually hyperkinetic (because of increased left to right shunt) in comparison to patients with isolated severe MS where it develops due to direct back pressure transmission, reactive pulmonary vasoconstriction and obliterative changes in pulmonary arterioles. There occurs a reciprocal decrease in the left ventricular filling and stroke volume. In contrast, if the ASD is restrictive, the shunt across the defect will be less, and hence, the patient will follow the course of isolated MS.

In contrast to an isolated ASD, the susceptibility to infective endocarditis is increased by the presence of MS. However, the calcification of mitral valve is less common in LS, as there occurs decompression of LA, resulting in less turbulent flow across the mitral valve. Atrial dilatation in LS predisposes the patients to develop atrial fibrillation.