The geniculate ganglion is a mass of cell bodies of pseudounipolar neurons comprising a diameter of about 1mm.geniculum, “joint” or “knee”).

Topographically, the geniculate ganglion sits between the cochlea and the tympanic cavity. It stands at the level of the uppermost portion of the cochlea and just below the floor of the middle cranial fossa. Posteriorly are the semicircular canals of the vestibule, while at the medial side occurs the cochlea and lateral to it the tympanic cavity. The internal auditory canal is situated inferiorly to it.

Fibers that have their cell bodies located at the geniculate ganglion transmit impulses from sensory receptors at various organ sites to multiple nuclei in the brainstem. **Notice that these fibers, as sensory fibers, course through the ganglion without synapsing.**

They can be functionally classified as follows:

**Special Visceral Afferent (SVA)**

These neurons are responsible for delivering taste sensation, particularly from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. Apart from this, a small amount of these fibers innervate taste buds located at the hard and soft palates.

The fibers that come from the tongue travel through the lingual branch of the trigeminal nerve and then the chorda tympani nerve. The chorda tympani nerve merges with the facial nerve at the distal third of the mastoid segment inside the facial canal. Fibers then run through the facial nerve, pass next to the geniculate ganglion and enter the nerve intermedius proceeding to the brainstem. **At the brainstem, they synapse at the gustatory nucleus, within the pontine tegmentum.**

The fibers coming from the palate travel through the lesser palatine and greater palatine nerves. They reach the pterygopalatine ganglion but do not synapse. They then run through the pterygopalatine canal nerve, reaching the greater petrosal nerve and pass next to the geniculate ganglion. The remaining course occurs just as described early for the fibers coming from the tongue.

**General Visceral Afferent (GVA)**

These fibers contribute to the innervation of the nasal cavity, part of the palate, and the sinus cavities.

They ascend via the greater petrosal nerve, join the facial nerve in front of the geniculate ganglion, and course to the brainstem through the nerve intermedius. Next, these fibers synapse in the nucleus of the solitary tract.

**General Somatic Afferent (GSA)**

The GSA fibers contribute to the cutaneous innervation of the external ear, including the central portion of the auricle (concha) and the ear canal. At these sites, the sensory distribution of the facial nerve intermingles with the distribution of other nerves, such as the glossopharyngeal, vagus, and trigeminal nerves. Besides that, the observation of patients diagnosed with Ramsay-Hunt syndrome suggested that these fibers also contribute to the innervation of the eardrum and the skin over the neighboring mastoid process.

These fibers travel through the sensory branch of the facial nerve, merging with the facial nerve at the mastoid segment, in a point distal to the facial nerve second genu.**connecting to second-order neurons at the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve.**