A proper history and physical exam are key to the evaluation of digital nail clubbing especially given the numerous etiologies of this physical exam finding. While conducting the patient interview, it is crucial to identify the symptoms the patient has which will guide and narrow your differential diagnosis. It is important to remember that not all patients with clubbing have an underlying pathological disease and not all with a disease will have the manifestation of digital clubbing.

Equally, it is just as important to note that clubbing itself has a large degree of variation. The assessment of clubbing by physical exam is subjective and is not always reliable, especially if the clubbing is minimal and not severe.

The most widely known physical exam sign of clubbing is the profile sign also known as Lovibond angle. The Lovibond angle is the angle found between the proximal nail fold and the nail at the location at the exit of the nail from the nail fold. Usually, this angle is less than 180 degrees in normal individuals. True digit clubbing usually can be therefore differentiated from simple nail curving when the angle is greater than 180 degrees.

The hyponychial angle is also used as an objective criterion to assess clubbing. It is where a line is drawn from the cuticle the distal digital crease and the second line is drawn from the hyponychium to the cuticle.

The phalangeal depth ratio, which is the ratio of digit’s depth measured at the nail and the distal interphalangeal joint, is another objective criterion used to assess clubbing. The depth at the DIP joint is normally greater than that of the nail. A ratio of greater than 1, therefore, supports clubbing.

In 1976, Schamroth reported a clinical sign associated with clubbing demonstrating obliteration in clubbed fingers of the diamond-shaped window normally produced when the dorsal surfaces of the corresponding finger of each hand are opposed and now called Schamroth sign.

Of these features, the nail cuticle angle straightening appears to be the most sensitive measurement.

A noteworthy feature of clubbing is the speed with which it can develop, about 2 weeks in patients with new-onset empyema, and how quickly it can reverse, also about 2 weeks in patients after corrective cardiac surgery.