CMV retinitis is primarily a disease of immunocompromised hosts, occurring in neonates, persons with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) from the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), or renal and solid organ transplant recipients as a result of long term immunosuppressive therapy. It is the most common opportunistic ocular infection in patients with AIDS typically occurring when CD4 T lymphocyte counts fall below 50 cells/microliter.

Recent reports indicate that acquired toxoplasma infections account for a larger portion of ocular involvement than congenital toxoplasmosis, contrary to the popular belief that ocular toxoplasmosis in adults is secondary to the recurrence of the congenitally acquired infection.T. gondii endemic regions of the U.S. and European nations.

ARN is a syndrome of acute panuveitis that can affect immunocompetent or immunosuppressed patients of either gender at any age.

Behcet disease is more common in men than in women and typically affects young adults.

The prevalence of Behcet disease varies geographically, with the disease being more common in countries along the old Silk route, including China, Japan, Mideast, and the Mediterranean basin.

Rocky Mountain spotted fever caused by R. rickettsii, is endemic in parts of North, Central, and South America.

Lyme disease is endemic in North America and Europe.

POHS is usually seen in patients who live in areas endemic to H. capsulatum, which include states that contain the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys.

Human infection in toxocariasis is acquired by contact with cats or dogs which are likely to carry the infection. Although it can affect adults, the primarily affected age group is young children and infants.