BEB is an underdiagnosed entity. A study performed in Japan reported that 60% of patients see at least five physicians before they receive a definitive diagnosis. One-third of patients are diagnosed within the first year of symptom onset, one-third in a period between one and five years, and in one-third of patients, it takes more than five years before they are diagnosed with BEB.

**Precipitating Factors**

Lee et al. have shown that 42.6% of patients experienced some sort of stressful life event before the onset of symptoms. This included major life events such as divorce (19.8%), problems at work (13.9%), illness of a family member (2%), death of a parent (1%), moving house (1%), head trauma (1%), traffic accident (1%) and cerebral infarction (1%). In a study performed in Tokyo that involved 1,116 participants, 9.7% reported symptoms to occur following surgery: the most common surgery performed was cataract surgery.

**Motor Manifestations**

The spasm associated with blepharospasm tends to be synchronous, bilateral, and affects the orbicularis oculi muscle.

Symptom severity is highly variable, and it can range from mild symptoms with increased blinking rate, to functional blindness due to persistent muscle contraction. In many cases, the course of the disease is progressive, initially presenting with contractions limited to the orbicularis oculi muscles and later extending to the musculature of the lower face and neck, which is known as Meige syndrome.

**Apraxia of Eyelid Opening**

Some patients suffering from blepharospasm may also present with apraxia of eyelid opening (AEO). This presents with an inability to reopen the eyes in the absence of orbicularis oculi muscle spasm. This occurs as a result of spasm of the pretarsal orbicularis oculi muscle, which acts against the opening of the eyelid.

**Non-motor Manifestations**

It is important to keep in mind that depression and anxiety are commonly present in patients with BEB. These occur either before the disease or as a consequence of it. This should be sought during evaluation and psychiatric consultation considered.

Half of the patients with BEB have accompanying ocular symptoms, most reporting eye dryness and photophobia.

**Relieving Factors**

There are particular things some patients can do to help relieve their blepharospasm. This includes resting (35.6%), concentrating on work (12.9%), and various other things such as singing, talking, eating, sleep, and exercise, which were all reported at a rate of 2%. However, 31.7% of patients could not identify a relieving factor.

**Aggravating Factors**

Things which have been shown to aggravate the symptoms of blepharospasm include fatigue (55.4%), stressful events (46.5%), watching television (27.7%), bright lights (18.9%), dry eye symptoms (14.9%), feeling sick (10.9%) or reading a book (8.9%).