The majority of patients are diagnosed during pregnancy. Several techniques can be used to make the diagnosis. A regular ultrasound can be used to make a preliminary diagnosis of hydranencephaly. To confirm the diagnosis, a level 2 or higher ultrasound needs to be used.

- Ultrasound: Performed during the 21 to 23 weeks of gestation. Absence of cerebral hemispheres, replaced with homogeneous echoic material. Preservation of thalami, brainstem, and cerebellum. Although most commonly used during pregnancy, this test can be also used during the postnatal period to obtain a diagnosis.

- Brain MRI (gold standard): Absence of supratentorial brain parenchyma that is replaced with CSF. It can contain remnants of parenchyma, especially of the occipital and orbitofrontal areas. The falx, cerebellar hemispheres, and brainstem are usually present.

- Head computed tomographic scan: Very similar findings as described in MRI, although MRI is more accurate and precise.

- Transillumination: Place a flashlight at the base of the head, and if hydranencephaly is present, the light will be reflected and seen throughout all the scalp/head since it is filled with CSF. It can be used for diagnosis if no neuro-radiological imaging is available and if by physical examination, it is highly suspected.

Other ancillary tests performed:

- Electroencephalogram: Shows an absence of electrical activity in all electrodes and a diffusely flattened tracing, or very low amplitude, no background, and slow-wave with poor modulation.

- Brainstem auditory evoked response test: Used to confirm the loss of cortical function but with preserved brainstem function.

- 
              
- Auditory: Used to confirm the loss of cortical activity with the preservation of brainstem functions (auditory middle latency responses and cortical auditory evoked responses).
              
              
- Ocular: Used to confirm the loss of cortical activity with preserved brainstem function (strobe electroretinograms, strobe-flash visual evoked responses). In some cases, a total absence of visual evoked potential can be present.

- Digital subtraction angiography: Used in some cases to evaluate the patency of the internal carotid arteries.

- Brain magnetic resonance angiography: Used in some cases to visualize the internal carotid arteries.