Percutaneous coronary intervention is performed during an angiogram in the angiography suite. Other than standard equipment, the following supplies may be used on a case-to-case basis.

- Introducer needle

- Sheath introducer

- Guide catheters

- Radioopaque dye (IV contrast)

- Guidewire

- Balloon catheter

- Stents

- Bare metal stents (BMS)

- Preferred if the patient is not able to take a longer duration of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT). A minimum of 1 month of DAPT is required.


- Drug-eluting stents (DES)

- Found to have reduced restenosis and revascularization rates compared with BMS.


- Bioresorbable vascular scaffold (BVS)
- Drug-eluting balloons (DEB)

- Thrombus aspiration:

- Not recommended routinely

- Guidelines

- Atherectomy devices

- Rotational
- Laser

- Cutting balloons

- Radiation beads

- Lithoplasty/lithotripsy systems

**Door to Balloon Time**

The door-to-balloon time (D2B time) is used as a measure to improve the timing of PCI in patients with STEMI.  It defines a time taken between a patient's arrival to balloon inflation during the angiogram.  Studies have shown improved in-hospital mortality, which showed a shorter door to balloon times. ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) patients in the NRMI-3 and 4 registries (1999 to 2002) who were treated with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) within six hours of presentation, longer D2B times were significantly associated with increased in-hospital mortality (3.0, 4.2, 5.7, and 7.4 percent for D2B time of less than or equal to 90 minutes, 91 to 120 minutes, 121 to 150 minutes, and greater than 150 minutes, respectively).

**Access Type: Femoral vs. Radial Access**

Coronary arteries can be accessed for angiogram through a radial or femoral approach. In general, the radial artery approach is preferred to reduce the risk of access site bleeding because the radial artery can be easily compressed against the radial bone compared to the femoral artery. However, access to the radial artery requires more experience and expertise because of its small size.

Before access through the radial artery, palmar arch circulation should be assessed to avoid ischemia of the hand from complications during the procedure.

A meta-analysis was done in 2016, based on 24 trials for acute coronary syndrome patients: RIVAL, MATRIX, RIFLE-STEACS, and STEMI RADIAL: Showed a reduction in following endpoints in patients who had the procedure done through the radial approach.

- Major bleeding

- All-cause mortality

- Major adverse cardiovascular events