Treatment of minor centipede bites is straightforward and includes:

- Irrigating the site to reduce the risk of infection.

- Apply ice packs as the cold elevates the pain threshold, impedes nerve conduction, and vasoconstricts vessels to prevent tissue edema.

- Some patients report pain improvement with submersion of the extremity in hot water, as it is thought to denature any heat-labile toxins in the venom. However, some patients have also reported increased pain with hot water exposure.

- Also recommended is systemic and local analgesia. In particular, local anesthesia with lidocaine at the bite site should provide significant relief.

- If the patient has no tetanus vaccination within the past 5 years, update tetanus vaccination.

- Though not universally recommended, select patients may benefit from antihistamines, corticosteroids, and anxiolytics.

- Antibiotics are not typically warranted for prophylaxis, as infections are rare with proper wound care.

There is no specific antidote for centipede venom. If systemic symptoms occur, treatment is mainly supportive or related to the specific symptom. For example, anaphylaxis treatment will be the same as anaphylaxis related to any other allergen with epinephrine. In the case of myocardial ischemia, therapy will be similar to cardiac ischemia of any etiology (i.e., aspirin and percutaneous coronary intervention). In the case of delayed effects such as cellulitis or localized necrosis, antibiotics and wound debridement will be necessary.