**Transdermal vs. Oral**

The preferred method for administering scopolamine is via a transdermal therapeutic system (TTS-patch) due to increased bioavailability and decreased adverse effects. There is a 1.5 mg patch commercially available, and it is generally the specific patch used. As previously mentioned, oral scopolamine has demonstrated effectiveness when combined with the transdermal patch; however, this mode of administration is uncommon.

**Placement Location and Timing**

The 1.5 mg patch should be placed behind the patient’s ear on an area of skin without hair. Placement should occur several hours before the patient’s surgery. Reports range from 4 hours before the anticipated end of the procedure to the night before surgery. If used for the prophylaxis of motion sickness, placement should occur 6 to 8 hours before the nausea-inducing event. Due to the timing requirement, patients presenting for surgery should be evaluated for PONV risk as early as possible to properly formulate an anesthetic plan with enough time to permit the ideal usage of scopolamine if indicated.

The patch is designed to release an initial priming dose to achieve steady-state concentrations in an acceptable amount of time. It then continues to release medication slowly, a topic discussed in greater detail in the Mechanism of Action section of this article. Due to its mechanism of release, if the continual antiemetic effect is required, the patch can be replaced every 72 hours. If scopolamine is used preoperatively for the prophylaxis of PONV, the patch can be removed the day following surgery.

**Importance of Hand Hygiene**

A crucial element of the administration of scopolamine is the counseling of the patient and/or their family. In addition to remaining vigilant about adverse effects, anyone removing the patch needs to understand the importance of hand hygiene. After removal of the scopolamine patch, the skin location where the patch was, and the operator’s hands, require thorough washing with soap and water. After touching a scopolamine patch, patients should also be instructed to avoid touching their faces, especially their eyes. A significant number of adverse effects related to the scopolamine patch are due to contamination by the patient or by an individual changing or touching the patch.

**Note**: Although the following administration methods appear in the published literature, every patient should receive a specific plan based on their medical team’s assessment and clinical expertise. Prior to administering scopolamine, a thorough history and physical exam are necessary to rule out contraindications and to anticipate adverse effects accurately.