As mentioned before, the conducting portion is up to the terminal bronchiole. Beyond that with the beginning of respiratory bronchiole is the respiratory part of the respiratory system. The respiratory portion of the lung consists of respiratory bronchiole, alveolar duct, alveolar sac, and finally alveoli where actual respiration takes place.

In the conducting zone, the air is moistened, warmed, and filtered before it reaches the start of the respiratory region at the respiratory bronchioles. The respiratory zone is where gas exchange occurs, and blood is oxygenated in exchange for carbon dioxide. As the respiratory tree transitions from the conducting zone at the terminal bronchioles, goblet cells diminish as club cells increase, and the cartilage present in the conducting region is absent once it reaches the respiratory bronchioles.

The acinus is directly distal to the terminal bronchioles and which signals the beginning of the respiratory part. The acinus is composed of respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveolar sacs. It is roughly spherical, resembling a bunch of grapes. Each respiratory bronchiole gives rise to several alveolar ducts and alveolar sacs, giving it the characteristic grape bunch appearance. The alveolar sacs are the ends of the respiratory tree and the site of gaseous exchange.

Alveolar epithelium is composed of type I pneumocytes, type II pneumocytes, and the occasional brush cells. Also present in the alveolar walls are the club cells and alveolar macrophages. The alveolar walls contain the pores of Kohn

Type I pneumocytes make up roughly 90% to 95% of the alveolar epithelium. They are flat, squamous epithelia that resemble plate-like structures that allow gas exchange. Their fragile membrane allows for easier gas permeability between the alveoli and the blood vessels. Despite being the primary structures of respiration, they cannot replicate and are very susceptible to toxic injury.

Type II pneumocytes make up much of the remaining cell type in the alveoli, accounting for nearly 5-10%. Despite their low number, they are vital as they secrete pulmonary surfactant. The surfactant is necessary to maintain an open airway. It lowers the surface tension and prevents the alveoli from collapsing upon themselves during exhalation. By histology, these cells have foamy cytoplasm, which results from the surfactant that is stored as lamellar bodies. Type II pneumocytes are also mitotically active and can replace the easily damaged type I pneumocytes. Type II pneumocyte cells can be recognized by their rounded shapes that bulge into the alveolar space.

Alveolar macrophages (or dust cells) may be free within the alveolar space or sometimes connected to the alveolar wall. If particles make it down to the acinus, the macrophages are the last defense and janitors of the respiratory epithelium. The black staining seen in the lungs of smokers results from macrophages cleaning and sequestering particles that make their way inside.

The lungs are covered by the serous membrane, the pleural membrane, which has two layers - the parietal and the visceral layer. The visceral pleura of the lung is lined by a mesothelial layer with underlying connective tissue and elastic fibers. An elastin stain may be used to identify the elastic layer.