The greatest challenge for the success of transdermal drug delivery is diffusing active substances through the barrier function of the many layers of the skin. The outermost layer of the skin, the stratum corneum, is the thickest layer containing numerous layers of keratin-heavy corneocytes. Additionally, the stratum corneum consists of two chemically different regions that need to be accounted for when creating transdermal drugs. There is an aqueous region at the outer surface of the keratin filaments and a lipid matrix between the filaments that active medications need to have the ability to diffuse through both to be successful.

However, there have been recent advancements in the development of enhancement delivery methods for active drugs through the transdermal route. These methods are listed below:

- Microneedles: These are very small, painless needles that are either hollow or solid and filled with the desired drug. The microneedles pierce through the stratum corneum without causing a painful sensation. The advantages of this method are its painless nature and the ability to deliver compounds that have a higher molecular weight.

- Iontophoresis: The main force used to drive substances across the stratum corneum is the electrical driving force, where there is charged particle movement via electrophoresis. This way, a persistent low-voltage current enables the diffusion of substances across the stratum corneum. An electrical current can control drug delivery rate under the control of either a microprocessor or the patient.

- Thermal poration: The application of heat to the skin creates small pores in the skin for the easy diffusion of molecular substances across the stratum corneum.

- Electroporation: The application of a high electrical voltage to the stratum corneum also creates small pores for molecular substances to diffuse through the stratum corneum.

- Conventional enhancers: A chemical substance applied first to the skin to increase the permeability of the stratum corneum or change the thermodynamics of the active drug itself.

- Ultrasound: The application of sound waves to disrupt the stratum corneum and increase its permeability.