Management of amniotic band syndrome begins with early fetal diagnosis and early collaboration between obstetrics, neonatal-perinatal specialist, and maternal-fetal medicine specialist; this may help achieve the best outcome for individual patients. Management of newborns affected by amniotic band syndrome requires careful examination and interprofessional team involvement. There is a lack of strong evidence for any particular approach. Depending on the anatomical structure involved, consult with a pediatric general surgeon, orthopedic surgeon, and/or craniofacial surgeon may be needed. Nurses monitoring these infants have to constantly monitor for pulses, warmth, and cyanosis and report any deviation from normal to the attending physician and specialists on the team. The specialized neonatal inpatient nurses should assist the clinician in educating the parents in the patient's care. While extremity constriction may be easy to visualize, if the bands involve the chest, abdomen, or neck, one may require imaging studies, which would then include a radiologist as well.

Lastly, parents should receive counseling from the nursing and clinical interprofessional team that most ABS cases are sporadic with no known re-occurrence risk unless in cases of familial ABS. In instances of cosmetic deformity, psychological counseling may also be necessary for the patients and/or their families.

ABS requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and counselors, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]