Metolazone works by inhibiting sodium transport across the epithelium of the renal tubules (mostly in the distal tubules), decreasing sodium reabsorption, and increasing sodium, chloride, and water excretion. The shift in water and electrolytes results in hypovolemia, keeping the peripheral vascular resistance low and returning the cardiac output to normal. This production of diuresis resolves edema and contributes to the antihypertensive effect. While metolazone is similar to thiazide diuretics in its mechanism of action, it does differ in its use in patients with impaired renal function. Thiazide diuretics decrease glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and are, therefore, less effective in patients with renal impairment. Because metolazone works primarily in the distal convoluted tubule rather than the proximal convoluted tubule, it has little effect on GFR. It can be used in patients with a reduced GFR.

Moreover, unlike loop diuretics, metolazone does not prompt renin secretion at the macula densa due to the stimulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. The use of thiazide-like diuretic (e.g., metolazone) in combination with a loop diuretic interferes with compensatory distal tubular sodium reabsorption, leading to increased natriuresis.

**Pharmacokinetics**

The data extrapolated from the recent study regarding the pharmacokinetics of metolazone is as follows.

Absorption: Oral Metolazone is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. Food delays the absorption of metolazone. The time to maximum plasma concentration is approximately 1.5 hours.

Distribution: Volume of distribution ranges from 108.7± 21.3 Liters to 126.3 ± 53.4 Liters(Dose range 0.5 mg to 2 mg). Metolazone exhibits high plasma protein binding- PPB is 95%.

Metabolism: Metolazone undergoes enterohepatic circulation. A study also indicates that metolazone affects the hPXR-mediated expression of CYP3A4 and MDR1 in human hepatocytes and increases CYP3A4 activity in various cell lines.

Elimination: The mean elimination half-life of metolazone is between 6 to 8 hours. Metolazone is primarily excreted in the urine.