Any patient presenting with anemia and reticulocytopenia requires evaluation for PRCA. The low reticulocyte count helps differentiate PRCA from hemolytic anemia (which can also have isolated anemia, albeit with reticulocytosis).

Within PRCA, a differentiation should be made between inherited, acquired, and transient PRCA.

- Inherited PRCA is usually present since birth, but can present in older age as well.
- Diamond Blackfan syndrome is associated with craniofacial and thumb abnormalities in the majority of patients; however, it is not a universal presentation. Elevated fetal hemoglobin (HgF) levels, elevated erythrocyte adenosine deaminase (very difficult to obtain), and ribosomal mutation analysis helps in establishing a diagnosis. 
- Fanconi anemia must be ruled out with the use of cytogenetic analysis and clastogenic stress.
- Transient PRCA of infancy demonstrates self-recovery 
- It is hard to differentiate inherited PRCA from acquired PRCA when the patient presents in adulthood. A thorough history, including family history, physical exam to look for anomalies, bone marrow examination, and cytogenetic analysis, would aid in establishing a diagnosis.

- Transient PRCA

- It is hard to distinguish transient PRCA from inherited PRCA. Spontaneous recovery gives a clue towards the diagnosis.
- When concomitant neutropenia is present, then aplastic anemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia should be ruled out. A bone marrow exam will help in ruling this out. 
- A thorough medication and drug exposure history is a must. Treatment with the offending medication must stop. 
- Evaluate for parvovirus infection, which is treatable.

- Acquired PRCA

- Look for secondary causes, as listed in the etiology section above. 
- Bone marrow should be examined thoroughly to rule out MDS, which can present with isolated anemia and reticulocytopenia. 
- It is crucial to establish whether the PRCA is inherited or acquired, using the same tests listed.