The EAC in most adults tends to follow a posterosuperior to an anteroinferior trajectory, laterally to medially. In children less than 3 years of age, the EAC is largely directed posterosuperiorly. The lateral one-third of the EAC is made up of fibrocartilage whereas the medial two-thirds is the osseous or bony portion of the canal that contains skin which is tightly adherent to the periosteum without any subcutaneous tissue. The TM is the most medial portion of the EAC, separating it from the middle ear. Approximately 6mm lateral to the TM there is a narrowing of the bony canal known as the isthmus. This may play an important role in a foreign body and cerumen removal alike, as material medial to this point proves to be quite difficult to remove.

Two tracts or canals exist in the external auditory canal which extend to surrounding structures. More laterally, there are the Fissures of Santorini. These fissures are lymphatic channels that traverse between the incomplete cartilaginous coverings of the lateral one-third of the canal and connect this portion of the canal to the parotid gland, the glenoid fossa, and the infratemporal fossa. More medially, there may be an embryologic defect at the inferior tympanic ring known as the Foramen of Huschke that will connect the medial EAC to the parotid gland and glenoid fossa region. Both of these channels may permit extension of infection or malignant tumors to these surrounding structures, thus special consideration of these possibilities should be kept in mind while performing irrigation of cerumen.

If irrigation was successful in removing the cerumen impaction, one should be able to evaluate the tympanic membrane anatomy. The normal coloring of a tympanic membrane is pearly gray and translucent. There is a cone of light in the anterior, inferior quadrant of the tympanic membrane, and it points towards the nose. One should also be able to observe the umbo and the handle of the malleus. The tympanic membrane is somewhat conical in shape, with a concavity noted at the umbo. A normal tympanic membrane has no perforation. If the provider observes a bulging tympanic membrane, with a distortion of the cone of light, and little to no visibility of the umbo and the handle of the malleus, this may be indicative of an infection or fluid in the middle ear space -- a serous or purulent otitis media. The presence of a eustachian tube dysfunction may result in a retraction of the TM or a serous otitis media.

The provider should be mindful of the temperature of the water while irrigating the EAC, attempting to keep the water temperature close to the patient's natural body temperature. Water that is too cold or hot may cause a sensation of dizziness due to the proximity of the lateral semicircular canal to the EAC. The vestibulocochlear nerve has two parts: the vestibular nerve and the cochlear nerve. The semicircular canals of the inner ear are innervated by the vestibular nerve, which is responsible for orientation in space, balance, and coordination. The cochlear nerve is responsible for hearing