Anything that raises capillary pressures, reduces oncotic pressure, increases endothelial permeability, or impairs lymphatic drainage will result in edema. Raised capillary pressure is a common cause of edema including cardiac failure such as right ventricular failure, left ventricular failure leading from pulmonary edema, or congestive cardiac failure. Capillary hydraulic pressure has autoregulatory capacity allowing changes in resistance at the precapillary sphincter and thus determines the arterial pressure forced onto the capillary. In contrast, the venous end of the capillary has poor regulation, and, as a result, venous pressure changes lead to parallel changes in capillary hydraulic pressure. Venous pressure can increase in two settings. First, when blood volume is expanded, and second, when there obstruction at the venous end. Heart failure and renal disease lead to volume expansion, while cirrhosis or right heart failure leads to venous obstruction, both instances ultimately resulting in edema.

Reduced oncotic pressure, typically due to hypoalbuminemia, occurs in several diseases such as renal disease where the loss of albumin occurs across the glomerulus (nephrotic syndrome), and common causes may include diabetic nephropathy, lupus nephropathy, amyloidosis, minimal change disease, membranous glomerulonephritis, HIV-associated nephropathy, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, IgA nephropathy, light chain associated renal disorders, chronic glomerulonephritis, and radiation nephropathy. Hepatic disease, such as cirrhosis and chronic liver disease, from inadequate albumin synthesis, as well as malabsorption/malnutrition, such as kwashiorkor, from inadequate albumin intake and synthesis, can also lead to reduced oncotic pressure and ultimately edema.

Increased capillary permeability, typically due to vascular injury, results in edema for several reasons. When vessels become injured, the porosity of the capillary walls increases, and, consequently, net filtration increases. Furthermore, the coefficient of proteins across the capillary wall decreases, thus narrowing the difference between the oncotic pressure of the capillary and the oncotic pressure below the endothelial glycocalyx. The oncotic pressure gradient reduces and edema results. Typically, capillary permeability increases in the setting of burn patients where both histamine and oxygen free radicals induce microvascular and direct physical injury.

Eating after three or more days of fasting leads to edema, which is speculated to be due to increased insulin levels after re-feeding with carbohydrates and thus resulting in enhanced reabsorption of sodium.

Additionally, lymphatic obstruction is a well-known cause of edema, and common causes include lymphedema, tumors, fibrosis, inflammation, infection such as Filariasis due to Wuchereria bancrofti, surgery, and congenital abnormalities. Myxedema, typically due to thyroid abnormalities, leads to accumulation of interstitial albumin and other proteins, thus leading to excessive interstitial protein and fluid without increased lymphatic flow. Some suggest that this is due to filtered proteins binding to interstitial mucopolysaccharides and preventing removal by the lymphatics.