Evidence of a lesion in a radiologic study is not definitive enough to diagnose an enchondroma. Diagnostic confirmation requires histopathologic examination of the specimen sample. Differentiation between benign and malignant lesions poses an even greater challenge. One must examine all available tissue; even then, the diagnosis may remain in question and based on clinical evidence and suspicion. Microscopically enchondromas appear as gray-blue, translucent, hypocellular, non-vascular tumors with abundant hyaline cartilage. The nuclei of these cells are fairly regular, with few mitotic figures. Juxtacortical chondromas and enchondromas in regions such as the hands, however, may be hypercellular with atypia and still maintain a benign nature.

Conversely, long bone enchondromas often appear benign microscopically but can recur after removal. As with many tumors, staging classifications are used to classify the tumor further. The staging of bone sarcomas follows the tumor, node, and metastasis (TNM) guidelines.

Histopathologically, punctate calcifications of the chondroid matrix define the appearance of enchondromas. On examination, the typical enchondroma is smaller than 3 centimeters. The enchondroma is composed of well-circumscribed nodules of benign hyaline cartilage. There is limited engulfment seen of the adjacent lamellar and cortical bone. The nuclei of the chondrocytes are small and uniformly round with condensed chromatin. Rarely binucleate forms are present. Foci of endochondral ossification may be present in heavily calcified enchondromas. Syndromes characterized by multiple enchondromas, Ollier’s disease, and Maffucci syndrome exhibit more cellularity and atypia than classic, single enchondromas.

The increased cellularity and atypia make distinguishing enchondroma from chondrosarcoma more difficult. The distinction between benign cartilaginous lesions and atypical cartilaginous tumor/chondrosarcoma grade 1 (ACT/CS1) is difficult. The cartilaginous lesions are typically hypocellular, while ACT/CS1 has a hypercellular appearance. The chondrosarcomas have a higher number of binucleated chondrocytes. Also, they exhibit pleomorphism, cortical destruction, engulfment of the host bone, and irregular cellular distribution.