There are commonly considered to be three components of needs assessment: organizational analysis, job or task analysis, and person analysis. Below, we discuss the description of each component, stakeholders involved, and methods to conduct the analysis.

**Organizational Analysis**

Organizational analysis is the process of assessing the broader contexts, groups, and organizations (e.g., hospital, specialty program, and medical school) in which the curriculum is to be integrated.

Furthermore, the organizational analysis assesses whether the organization has the resources necessary for curriculum development and sustainability. For instance, virtual reality (VR) simulations have been increasingly used to train healthcare professionals, both technical and non-technical skills.

Finally, organizational analysis entails assessing the work environment by determining aspects of the organization that might facilitate or interfere with the implementation and sustainability (e.g., support from supervisors and peers) of the curriculum, as well as the transfer of learning to the job environment. Take, for example, a surgery resident who has completed robotic surgery simulation training. A supervisor (e.g., attending surgeon) who is open to providing sufficient opportunities for the resident to perform robotic surgery in the operating room will facilitate the resident’s transfer of learning from the simulation-based robotic training to the job environment. However, if an attending is hesitant to allow residents to perform the robotic operations regardless of the number of hours practiced on the simulator, less transfer of training will occur, and the simulation will not be as value-added in the curriculum. In other words, supervisor support, which is assessed through organizational analysis, facilitates the transfer of learning and, ultimately, the success of the curriculum.

To conduct an organizational analysis, one-on-one semi-structured interviews and/or focus groups can be conducted with parties such as organizational leaders, faculty, managers/supervisors, curriculum directors/coordinators, peers, and patients. Through guided conversations with these stakeholders, the issues mentioned above (i.e., the broader context of the curriculum, available resources, and barriers and facilitators) can be uncovered. However, some training may be required to collect and analyze the interview and focus group data appropriately, and multiple individuals are involved in these processes. Thus, sufficient time and resources should be allocated to conduct an effective organizational analysis. An alternative, less resource-intensive source of data that can help discover the goals, needs, and issues of the organization includes a review of documents (e.g., reports, newsletters, and websites). However, document review provides a more limited view and thus should serve as a supplementary method rather than the sole method of organizational analysis.

**Task Analysis**

Results from an organizational analysis can serve as a benchmark in the beginning to identify what learners need to learn (informing curriculum development). More specifics of the knowledge, skills, attitudes, and other characteristics (KSAOs) required to perform job tasks can then be assessed through task analysis. Task analysis is the process of studying activities or tasks performed in a given job, the conditions under which the tasks are performed, and the KSAOs required to perform these tasks.

To conduct a useful task analysis, a preliminary list of tasks and KSAOs specific to the learner group of interest (e.g., intensive care nurses, orthopedic surgeons, outpatient pharmacists) is prepared by working with subject-matter experts (i.e., incumbents [current employees on the job and targeted learners of the curriculum], their supervisors and/or expert panels comprised of representatives of the learner group). Below we describe these methods for working with incumbents and supervisors and then for working with experts.

**Task Analysis with Job Incumbents**

First, incumbents can be interviewed and/or observed to develop a preliminary list of tasks and KSAOs. Then, the list should be confirmed with incumbents and their supervisors in one-on-one meetings, focus groups, or surveys. During this process, both incumbents and supervisors are asked to rate the tasks performed on the job in terms of (a) how frequently they are performed, (b) their importance, (c) how much time is spent performing them, and (d) their difficulty. Based on these ratings, the list of tasks and KSAOs are refined. KSAOs can be prioritized, and as it is likely, there will be more KSAOs than what can be feasibly learned and practiced in a given curriculum.

Further, not all of the KSAOs will be amenable to learning via simulation. For example, positive personality traits (e.g., conscientiousness) and individual characteristics (e.g., strong work ethic), although important and desirable, cannot be trained in simulations. Thus, decisions should be made to prioritize those KSAOs that can be best learned in simulations, as well as based on results from the organizational analysis on resource availability and work environment. Finally, if the curriculum intent is to span across an extended period (e.g., over four years of medical school or three years of residency), tasks and KSAOs targeted in the curriculum can be ordered based on specific periods wherein they are most appropriate (e.g., year one vs. year two) by considering the difficulty and required prerequisite KSAOs for each.

**Task Analysis with Expert Panels**

An alternative (or supplementary) approach to conducting task analysis is via working with a panel of expert stakeholders in the specific learner group (e.g., stakeholders who have extensive experience and/or are national leaders, such as department chairs, program directors, residency directors, and professors of the given content area). In this method, the expert group can follow the Delphi method using surveys to identify and refine tasks learners need to perform on the job.

As task analysis takes place through interviews, observations, and surveys, curriculum developers need to be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of these methods. Similar to the advantages and disadvantages of using interviews mentioned in conducting organizational analysis, observation methods allow for collecting rich data in a natural job environment without interrupting the flow of work. However, it can require trained personnel and intensive resources to collect and analyze such data. Compared to interview and observation methods, survey methods are easier to administer, can require fewer resources, and can facilitate the collection of data from a large sample. However, surveys can be subject to bias, and particularly in conducting task analysis, incumbents might provide inflated ratings so that their tasks and KSAOs seem essential to make their job seem more vital and desirable.

**Person Analysis**

Person analysis is the process of assessing (a) who needs training and (b) if learners are ready for training.

To conduct a person analysis, interviews or surveys can be used to collect data from incumbents, supervisors, and peers. These stakeholders can be asked their assessment of incumbents’ current performance, as well as proficiency and confidence in KASOs required to perform their job. As incumbents might provide inflated self-ratings, it is important to include multiple perspectives from their supervisors and peers on incumbents’ current performance and developmental goals.