Childhood vaccinations are indicated for the prevention of a multitude of viral and bacterial infections and their sequelae. Specific vaccination recommendations for children vary by region, as exposure to diseases varies by region.

Current recommendations for adult vaccination include a yearly influenza vaccine and tetanus-diphtheria every ten years, with tetanus-diphtheria-acellular-pertussis at least once in adulthood. The addition of acellular pertussis once during adulthood is intended to prevent the transmission of whooping cough to young children or those unable to be vaccinated. For those adults born after 1956 who didn't receive measles, mumps, rubella vaccinations, or varicella vaccination as children, these vaccinations are recommended in adulthood. Human papillomavirus, hepatitis A, and hepatitis B vaccines are also recommended in adulthood. The meningococcal vaccine is recommended for adults at high-risk, such as those living in close quarters (college students living in dorms, military personnel living in barracks). Pneumococcal vaccination is also recommended for high-risk adults, such as those with pre-existing pulmonary diseases like chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

Passive immunization is indicated in patients who cannot form antibodies, such as those immunocompromised. It is also indicated when the disease may develop before active immunity can develop antibodies, such as in a patient exposed to rabies. In this instance, the patient may develop rabies before active immunization effectively creates antibodies.**COVID-19 vaccination is advised in ages > 6 months, regardless of a history of  SARS-CoV-2 infection. This includes recommendations that include people with protracted post-COVID-19 symptoms.**