While no consensus guidelines or indications exist, phenol neurolytic injections may be utilized for persistent and intractable pain conditions. Careful patient selection is crucial, and it should be established that the patient has trialed other modalities of pain control prior to pursuing neurolysis. Psychological evaluation is also important before determining candidacy for neurolysis. Due to the adverse effects, extensive communication and a thorough informed consent process should be undertaken to describe the risks, benefits, and alternatives. While most patients have failed prior therapy, neurolysis should still be used in conjunction with other therapeutic regimens including pharmacotherapy, psychologic counseling, and physical therapy. Diagnostic local anesthetic blocks should also be employed prior to neurolysis in the desired target nerve, allowing the provider to predict a successful outcome of neurolysis. Furthermore, a trial of a local anesthetic block may also confirm the anatomic nature of the pain and allow the patient to experience short-term clinical effects similar to a neurolytic block but without the same adverse effect profile of neurolytic agents. If short-term pain relief is experienced, the patient may be a good candidate for successful neurolysis.

Targets for chemical neurolysis may include peripheral nerves, saddle blockade, lumbar sympathetic blocks, the celiac plexus, and the neuraxis. General indications include management of chronic and intractable pain unresponsive to other modalities, treatment of cancer pain in patients with a short life expectancy, and alternative management of spasticity to improve functional status including balance, gait, and self-care. While the indications for neurolysis may be broadly applicable to various neurolytic agents, phenol is a widely instilled agent to treat severe spasticity as direct injection near a motor nerve can selectively reduce hypertonicity.