Electrophysiological abnormalities frequently occur early and often precede structural findings on retinal imaging. The PERG has critical clinical applications in unexplained vision loss, especially when the fundus appears normal or when there is disc pallor in the absence of visible vessel irregularities accompanied by significant macular abnormalities.

**Optic Nerve Versus Macular Dysfunction**

The PERG response may be normal or decreased in optic nerve dysfunction. In particular, a decreased N95 amplitude is almost invariably observed in optic nerve disease with primary RGC dysfunction. P50 is typically spared in optic nerve disease. Notably, however, P50 amplitude and implicit time may be reduced in severe disease.

In contrast, an undetectable PERG or significant P50 amplitude reduction in the absence of decreased implicit time is indicative of macular dysfunction. Besides, P50 amplitude reduction in macular dysfunction may be likely be accompanied by concomitant 95, such whereby the N95: P50 ratio is unchanged, although the N95 is occasionally better preserved.

**Hereditary Optic Neuropathy**

Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON): A rare, maternally inherited mitochondrial disease of the RGCs characterized by bilateral loss of vision typically manifesting in the second to third decades of life. LHON exhibits significant N95 reduction with P50 preservation of the PERG response.

Dominant Optic Atrophy (DOA): An autosomal dominant optic neuropathy affecting the RGCs most commonly associated with an OPA1 nuclear gene mutation. In contrast to LHON, DOA is classically diagnosed during the first decade of life with a slowly progressive and symmetric loss of vision. DOA shows a preferential decrease in N95 amplitude in the early stages of disease followed by reduced P50 amplitude and implicit time in advanced stages.

**Multiple Sclerosis**

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system, including the anterior visual pathways, namely the optic nerve. Optic neuritis, inflammation of the optic nerve, characteristically presents as unilateral vision loss with pain on eye movement. Patients are typically females between 30 to 50 years of age. Demyelination of the retinal ganglion cell axons leads to optic nerve atrophy. PERG studies in MS have shown preferential N95 amplitude reduction with P50 sparing. Notably, reports have shown reductions in both N95 and P50 in acute optic neuritis, with the recovery of P50 to normal after remission.

**Non-Arteritic Ischemic Optic Neuropathy**

Nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) is acute onset, ischemic damage of the optic nerve most commonly affecting elderly patients greater than 50 years of age, presenting with altitudinal visual field defects. Risk factors include age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, smoking, and crowding of the optic nerve. NAION patients typically exhibit N95 amplitude reduction with the preservation of P50 in the PERG response.

**Glaucoma**

Glaucoma, a leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide, is a progressive optic neuropathy characterized by retinal ganglion cell degeneration and peripheral visual field loss. PERG has been recognized as an important test in diagnosing and managing glaucoma and diabetic edema.

**Neurodegenerative Diseases**

Alzheimer Disease (AD): The most common form of dementia pathologically hallmarked by fibrillar beta-amyloid and hyper-phosphorylated tau accumulations in the central nervous system.

Parkinson Disease (PD): A neurodegenerative disorder involving abnormal α-synuclein (α-syn) protein deposition leading dopaminergic neuronal atrophy.