**United States**

Opiates are frequently prescribed for moderate to severe pain in the US. They are often prescribed alone or in combination with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs or muscle relaxants. Based on data from the Automation of Reports and Consolidated Order Systems, from 2004 through 2011 the percentage increase of opiates was as follows:

- Buprenorphine 2318%

- Fentanyl 35%

- Hydromorphone 140%

- Methadone 37%

- Morphine 64%

- Oxycodone 117%

The use of codeine decreased by 20%.

At the same time data from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) has revealed that abuse of all the above opiates increased, with hydromorphone and buprenorphine leading the way with a 438% and 384% increase, respectively (

A few years ago, in 2015, US poison control centers reported a total of 18,425 single exposures to pure opiates which resulted in 68 fatalities and 764 cases of major toxicity. In addition, there were 14,632 exposures to a combination of opiates with alcohol, benzodiazepines, aspirin, acetaminophen or ibuprofen. The combined exposures resulted in 32 fatalities and 288 cases of severe toxicity (

**International**

The opiate toxicity epidemic is not only an American occurrence but a global concern. The 2014 United Nations Office on Drug and Crime estimates that at least 0.4% of the population or close to 20 million people regularly use heroin or opium. The highest level of usage are in South West Asia (1.21%), followed by Southeastern and Eastern Europe (0.83%) and Transcaucasia and Central Asia (0.81%). In Europe, the major cause of opiate deaths has been associated with the illicit use of fentanyl and its analogs. In countries where there is a heroin shortage, fentanyl and related products have replaced heroin as the illicit drug of use.