The anatomy of peripheral nerves consists of nerve fibers, supporting connective tissue, and blood supply. Sensory neurons are the afferent limb of somatosensory neural pathways. The neuron consists of a cell body, axon, and dendrites. Dendrites are finger-like projections that receive sensory input and transmit the signal through the axon to the cell body. Unipolar cell bodies of sensory neurons are located within sensory ganglia which may be in the dorsal root of the spinal cord or along cranial nerves. The receptive field of the neurons limits the ability of the sensory system to relay environmental information. An individual neuron's receptive field is the space in which a stimulus can modify the electrical activity of the neuron. There are different types of receptors for differing stimuli: thermoreceptors, mechanoreceptors, nociceptors, photoreceptors, and chemoreceptors. The receptors within a specific field react to stimuli by generating electrical activity along the associated first-order neuron in the form of an action potential.

Sensory nerves have different types of nerves fibers depending on their associated receptors. Classification of sensory nerves includes the numerical or Erlanger and Gasser system.

To summarize, in order of decreasing diameter and velocity:

- Proprioceptors: A-alpha, A-beta

- Mechanoreceptors: A-beta, A-delta

- Nociceptors and thermoreceptors: A-delta, C-fiber

The supportive structures of the nerve fibers include the mesoneurium, epineurium, perineurium, endoneurium, and myelin sheath.

Visceral sensory nerves transmit pain, stretch, temperature, and chemical change in visceral organs which gets interpreted as sensations like nausea, hunger, gas, cramping, etc.