# Introduction

The semitendinosus muscle is a member of the posterior component of the thigh, which also includes the biceps femoris and the semimembranosus muscles. These three muscles together are collectively referred to as the hamstring muscle complex, which serves as hip extensors and knee flexors that are integral to gait and running.

# Structure and Function

The semitendinosus, just medial to the biceps femoris, arises from three locations. The medial border of the ischial tuberosity, the medial border of the proximal tendon of the long head of the biceps femoris, and the proximal aponeurosis.

The semitendinosus muscle, collectively with the other two muscles of the posterior compartment of the thigh, works to extend at the hip and flex at the knee. The semitendinosus muscle, in particular, has the added functionality of assisting the popliteus muscle in rotating the leg internally.

# Embryology

The gastrulation phase of the embryo gives rise to three germ layers: the ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm. The paraxial mesoderm specifically develops into striated skeletal muscle and the skeleton except for the skull.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The semitendinosus muscle predominantly receives vascular supply from the profunda femoris artery, also known as the deep artery of the thigh, which is the largest branch of the femoral artery. Specifically, the perforating branches of the profunda femoris artery are responsible for the vascular supply of the muscle.

# Nerves

The tibial nerve, an offshoot of the sciatic nerve, innervates the semitendinosus muscle. Proximally, the sacral plexus branches into the sciatic nerve, which involve nerve roots from L4 to S2. The sciatic nerve then travels through the posterior compartment, which branches into the common fibular nerve and the tibial nerve. The tibial nerve, either before or after its separation from the common fibular nerve, innervates the semitendinosus and all other muscles of the posterior compartment of the thigh except for the short head of the biceps femoris.

# Muscles

The semitendinosus muscle accompanies the biceps femoris muscle and the semimembranosus muscle in the posterior compartment of the thigh. These three muscles compose the hamstring muscle complex. The semimembranosus muscle lies deep to the semitendinosus muscle and is the most medial muscle of the posterior compartment of the thigh.

The semimembranosus muscle originates from the superolateral aspect of the ischial tuberosity and inserts into the medial tibial condyle, posterior oblique ligament, the posterior joint capsule, and arcuate ligament.

The biceps femoris muscle is the most lateral muscle in the posterior compartment, with the long head originating from the ischial tuberosity and the short head rising from the lateral lip of the linea aspera of the femur. The biceps femoris then inserts into the head of the fibula and lateral condyle of the tibia.

# Physiologic Variants

Case studies have reported anatomical variations of the semitendinosus muscle. One such case was during an anterior cruciate ligament reconstructive surgery where during graft harvesting, the semitendinosus muscle had given off an additional tendinous attachment. Along with the original insertion of the semitendinosus muscle, the muscle gave off an extra tendinous slip that was attached to the gracilis tendon at its insertion point.

# Surgical Considerations

The semitendinosus and gracilis muscle tendons are commonly used as an alternative to the bone-patellar-tendon-bone graft (BPTB) for ACL reconstruction. When grafting for ACL reconstruction, the sartorius fascia is incised to expose the underlying semitendinosus and gracilis tendon. These two tendons are not adherent to the bone outside of the attachment sites, which allows differentiation of the tendons from the medial collateral ligament, which lies deep to the semitendinosus and gracilis muscles. Compared to the BPTB graft, the diameter of the hamstring graft is predetermined by the original diameter of the semitendinosus and gracilis tendons. In the BPTB graft, the diameter of the graft can be determined by the surgeon during the harvesting of the graft. Unlike the hamstring autograft, the BPTB graft includes bone which is believed to improve graft incorporation.

The BPTB graft is the most common autograft used in the United States and has originally been considered the gold-standard graft for ACL reconstruction. However, there is a debate about which autograft is superior. Hamstring autografts have the benefits of decreased anterior knee pain, osteoarthritis, and donor site morbidity. The benefits of the BPTB autograft include faster graft incorporation, reduced risk of rupture, and a larger proportion of patients returning to preinjury activity levels. Despite BTBP having a lower failure rate, both graft choices have low failure rates. Therefore, utilizing the semitendinosus and gracilis tendons as an autograft remains a reasonable option for reconstruction, and its use should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

MRI studies have also shown that the semitendinosus tendon has also been found to regenerate in 75% of patients after harvesting, with the remaining 25% of patients having an increase in the size of the semimembranosus muscle as compensation. Outside the common use of the semitendinosus and gracilis tendon grafts in ACL reconstruction, these tendons have also found use in repairing massive rotator cuff tears that have already undergone retraction and degeneration and muscle atrophy.

# Clinical Significance

Hamstring injuries are among the most frequently encountered muscle injuries in athletes and correlate with significant time away from the sport. Injuries typically occur during rapid acceleration or high-speed running. The biceps femoris generally is the most commonly injured muscle of the posterior compartment; however, the semitendinosus muscle has also been implicated in hamstring strains.