Patients with chronic pelvic pain and diagnosed with pelvic pathology who do not respond to standard therapy should be re-evaluated for possible pudendal nerve entrapment.

It is preferable to utilize minimally invasive therapies first, such as conservative measures with lifestyle changes, physical therapy, TENS, and pudendal nerve blocks.

The successful use of a diagnostic pudendal nerve block in Alcock's canal may strongly suggest pudendal nerve entrapment and the reasonable expectation of a good result from decompressive surgery.

Avoid using opioid medications if possible to minimize dependency.

The use of image guidance is suggested to make the injections more reliable.

For repeated injections, ultrasound is preferred over ionizing radiation for imaging guidance.

While there is no definitive analgesic or anesthetic medication, dosage, or mixture for pudendal nerve block injections, using a short and long-acting local anesthetic with a corticosteroid seems reasonable for maximum relief.

If repeated pudendal nerve blocks are used for therapy, be aware that they may lose efficacy after two years.

It is important to involve psychology and pain management early in treatment planning.

Patients should be well informed about diagnostic testing and realistic treatment options based on local experience and resources.

In the treatment planning of patients with chronic pelvic pain, it is crucial to understand that all pudendal neuralgias are not the result of nerve entrapment.

The pudendal nerve can get trapped at different locations; therefore, all patients will not benefit from the same therapy.

Patients with chronic pain syndromes tend to get frustrated with multiple failed treatments and can be clinically depressed as well.

A study was conducted by Raynor et al. on 1024 patients to study the prevalence of depression in patients with chronic pain and its impact on health care costs. They categorized 60.8% of patients with chronic pain into probable depression and 33.8% into severe depression based on a questionnaire survey. They also reported higher health care costs amongst patients with depression (p=0.001).

Chronic pain poses a substantial mental and economic burden on the patient. These aspects should be considered when providing care to patients.