Airway monitoring in the early postoperative period is essential, and nurses should be prepared to identify as well as manage obstruction. Two common interventions are the placement of a nasal trumpet and retraction of an intraoperatively-placed tongue suture, both of which help to displace edematous tissue out of the airway. Additionally, placing the patient in the lateral decubitus or the prone position will typically improve airway patency.

As the patient becomes more alert following emergence from general anesthesia, they will start opening their eyes and becoming more active. Sudden awakening or crying may cause intraoral bleeding due to a dramatic increase in blood pressure. If this occurs, gentle, direct pressure with a small piece of gauze for 5 minutes should decrease or stop the bleeding in most cases; however, it is imperative to ensure the airway is not compromised while inserting a finger and gauze. Patients with persistent or recurrent bleeding may require assessment in the operating suite under general anesthesia.

Postoperatively, it takes approximately two weeks for the palate to heal; therefore, ensuring the palate remains free of trauma during this time period is critical. Patients' diets should consist of milk or food that has been puréed, and carbonated beverages should be avoided. Hygiene is crucial and, in some patients, may require rinsing with a syringe and normal saline after meals. Small children older than 18 months or those who tend to introduce their fingers or objects into their mouths should wear arm splints at all times (except while bathing) to protect the palate repair during the first two postoperative weeks.