Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is suspected when an individual presents with a sudden attack of flaccid muscle weakness involving proximal muscles with decreased or normal deep tendon reflexes following the above mentioned identifiable triggering factors. The suspicion is further raised if there is a positive family history or previous personal history of similar attacks of muscle weakness.

When there is an established family history of hypokalemic periodic paralysis, no further diagnostic investigations are required to confirm the diagnosis of an episode of a paralytic attack. Otherwise, a low serum potassium level during a typical attack of weakness establishes the diagnosis.

Even the diagnosis of HypoKPP is clear other several laboratory investigations are also performed to exclude the secondary causes. These include thyroid function test (TSH, T3, T4 level) to rule out hyperthyroidism, an electrocardiogram (ECG) to look for ECG changes consistent with hypokalemia, and an ECG may also show the feature of Anderson syndrome, long QT interval.

After an attack or between attacks, the diagnosis can be challenging as the serum potassium level usually remains normal in primary HypoKPP. A low serum potassium level between attacks usually represents a secondary cause of hypokalemia, such as in distal renal tubular acidosis.

- Genetic testing is used to identify the mutation in primary HypoKPP when the pretest probability is very high, but this may not always reveal the mutation as there are many mutations that are genetically undetermined. Tests like provocative testing and EMG can guide to diagnosis when genetic tests come negative.

- Administration of potassium or insulin and glucose can be used as a provocative test to diagnose HypoKPP. However, provocative testing with potassium or glucose and insulin administration might be potentially dangerous as it can precipitating life-threatening arrhythmia or hypoglycemia. Thus they require intensive monitoring in a hospital setting and not necessary to establish the diagnosis.

- During attacks of weakness, electromyography (EMG) may demonstrate reduced amplitude of compound muscle action potential (CAMP) and may show electrical silence based on the degree of muscle weakness.

- Between attacks, EMG techniques can be used to demonstrate the change in excitability of muscle fibers due to channelopathy, called the "exercise test." In the long exercise test, an attack of focal muscle weakness is induced by vigorously exercising a single muscle for 2-5 minutes, and the change in postexercise CAMP in muscle fibers is measured by the EMG. The reduction of 40% or more in CAMP is considered abnormal and typical for periodic paralysis. The study showed no false-positive results when the reduction is more than 40% or more, and this change was present in greater than 70% of patients.

- Interattack muscle biopsy is usually not performed to confirm the diagnosis. It may show the presence of vacuolar changes or tubular aggregates, but are nonspecific findings to all periodic paralysis.