# Introduction

The pelvis consists of the right and left hip bones, formed by the union of the pubis, ischium, and ilium bones, together with the midline sacrum and coccyx. Anteriorly, the hip bones meet to form the pubic symphysis. Posteriorly, the hip bones unite with the sacrum to form the sacroiliac joints. Together, this structure forms a basin-shaped ring called the bony pelvis or pelvic girdle that connects the axial and the appendicular skeleton.

The bony pelvis is key to many functions of the body, as a transitional zone for neurovascular structures traversing between the abdomen and the lower limbs, a junctional point between the spine and lower limb forces during locomotion, and a structure within which lie crucial visceral structures such as the female reproductive organs, urinary bladder, and rectum.

# Structure and Function

Each hip bone consists of three bones: the ischium, ilium, and pubis. Together, these bones form the hip or innominate bone; they articulate in the midline with the sacrum posteriorly and anteriorly at the interface between the two pubic bones. The pelvic brim is the line formed by the continuation of the pectineal line on the pubic bones, the arcuate line of the ilium, and the ala of the sacrum. Below this brim is defined as ‘true pelvis,’ whereas the ‘false pelvis’ above this line is, in fact, part of the abdominal cavity.

The ilium is the physically largest of the three pelvic bones. It is located superiorly relative to the pubis and ischium. It is composed of a wing-shaped portion called the superior ala along with the inferior body. The rim of the superior ala is called the iliac crest. Anteriorly this crest ends at the anterior superior iliac spine and posteriorly at the posterior superior iliac spine.

The ischium is the inferior posterior portion of the hip bone. It consists of a superior body and an inferior ramus. At the posteromedial junction, the bone has a projection called the ischial spine—the concavity between this spine and the posterior inferior iliac spine forms the greater sciatic notch. The concavity between this spine and inferior ramus is called the lesser sciatic notch. The ischial tuberosity lies at the posterior and inferior surface of the ischium and is divided into a medial part which serves as an attachment for biceps, semitendinosus, and semimembranosus muscles, and a lateral part to which the sacrotuberous ligament is attached.

The pubis is the inferior, anterior portion of the hip bone. It consists of a superior ramus, body, and inferior ramus. The superior ramus helps form the acetabulum and is ridged by an upper pectineal line and lower obturator crest. The inferior ramus of the pubis fuses with the inferior ramus of the ischium. The pubis and ischium together form the obturator foramen, through which pass important neurovascular structures. The body of both the left and right pubis join to form the pubic symphysis joint in the midline, each covered with a layer of hyaline cartilage and intervened by a fibrocartilage disc.

The articular facet for the head of the femur, the acetabulum, is a hemispherical concavity lined by hyaline cartilage. It is formed by contributions from all three of the pubis, ilium, and ischium.

The sacrum forms from the fusion of the five sacral vertebral bodies, which get progressively smaller as they transition from superior to inferior. The sacrum is roughly triangular in shape, gently concave, and pierced by four bilateral sacral foramina to allow passage of the regional nerve roots.

The coccyx is a triangular bone formed by the fusion of four small pieces, and it articulates with the inferior-most part of the sacrum at the sacrococcygeal joint. This joint is reinforced anteriorly and posteriorly by corresponding sacrococcygeal ligaments. Furthermore, at each side, a lateral sacrococcygeal ligament forms a foramen through which the S5 nerve root passes.

The structural integrity of the bony pelvis is maintained by various important joints and ligaments. The pubic symphysis and sacrococcygeal joint have been described earlier.

The sacroiliac joint is formed by the articulation between the auricular surfaces of the median ilium and the pelvic surface of the sacrum.

Other important ligaments in the region include the sacrotuberous, sacrospinous, and iliolumbar ligaments.

****The functions of the pelvic bones are locomotion, childbirth, and support to the abdominal viscera. It transmits the weight from the axial to the lower appendicular skeleton. Likewise, the pelvis bears the weight of the upper body when sitting. The bony structure also provides attachment sites for many abdominal, pelvic, and lower extremity muscles and provides attachment sites for external reproductive organs. Additionally, the pelvic girdle serves to protect the pelvic and abdominopelvic viscera.

# Embryology

The formation of the pelvic bones involves a fusion of multiple elements which allow articulation of the axial skeleton with the lower extremities. The hip bones (ilium, ischium, and pubis) remain separate but attach via the triradiate cartilage in early life. Upon puberty, these bones fuse to form the acetabulum, a socket on the lateral aspect of the hip where the femoral head articulates.

The lateral plate mesoderm forms the ilium, ischium, and pubis. These bones then undergo endochondral ossification, similar to long bones, but an initial blastemal structure forms, which undergoes chondrification. Afterward, sites of primary ossification centers form. The sacrum undergoes this type of ossification as well.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Vascular supply to the hip bones comes from branches of both the external and internal iliac arteries. Both of these come from the bifurcation of the common iliac artery, which bifurcates at the level of the L5-S1 vertebral level. The external iliac artery travels along the pelvic brim and gives off the inferior epigastric artery and the deep circumflex iliac artery. It then transitions into the femoral artery after passing the inguinal ligament. The internal iliac artery travels posteromedial into the pelvis, bifurcating into the anterior and posterior divisions of the internal iliac artery.

The sacrum receives blood supply from the lateral sacral and the median sacral arteries. The lateral sacral arteries are a branch of the internal iliac artery. The median artery is a branch from the aorta after bifurcation into the internal and external iliac arteries.

The lymphatic system of the pelvis has many contributions and groups of lymph nodes. The main groups of lymph nodes are the external iliac lymph nodes, internal iliac lymph nodes, sacral lymph nodes, and the common iliac lymph nodes.

# Nerves

Innervation of the pelvis includes mainly the sacral and coccygeal plexuses.

The sacral plexus derives from the L4-S4 nerve roots, and it sits on the internal surface of the piriformis muscle—most of the sacral nerves stemming from the sacral plexus exit through the greater sciatic notch. The sciatic nerve forms out of the sacral plexus and can be compressed by the muscle, causing radicular pain down the leg. This form of entrapment neuropathy by the compression from the piriformis muscle is called piriformis muscle syndrome.

The coccygeal plexus forms from the S4-S5 nerve roots and lies along the pelvic surface of the coccygeus muscle.

The autonomic system also provides innervation to the pelvis, which mainly courses via the inferior hypogastric plexus. This plexus is made of the nerve fibers from the sympathetic splanchnic nerves, parasympathetic splanchnic nerves, and hypogastric nerves. The autonomic nerves travel to the organs via their corresponding splanchnic nerve group.

# Muscles

The pelvic bones are an attachment for many different muscle groups involving the abdomen, pelvis, perineum, and lower extremities. The muscles limited to the pelvis include the muscles of the pelvic wall and the pelvic diaphragm.

Along the anterolateral wall of the true pelvis lies the obturator internus muscle. This muscle extends from the bony surfaces of the pelvis into the lesser sciatic foramen and inserts on the greater trochanter. The muscle receives innervation from the nerve to the obturator internus (L5-S2). It serves as an external rotator of the hip and strengthens the hip joint.

Along the posterolateral surface of the true pelvis lies the piriformis muscle. This muscle extends from the bony surfaces of the sacrum and pelvis into the greater sciatic foramen, with its insertion on the greater trochanter of the femur. The muscle receives innervation from the anterior rami of S1 and S2. It also serves as an external rotator of the hip and strengthens the hip joint.

The pelvic diaphragm consists of the coccygeus muscles and the levator ani muscles.

The coccygeus muscle is the most posterior and superior of the pelvic diaphragm muscles. It extends from the ischial spines to attach to the lateral surface of the coccyx and inferior sacral segment. Its innervation comes from branches of the S4 and S5 spinal nerves. It serves as the support for the pelvic viscera and flexes the coccyx.

The levator ani is subdivided into different muscle groups (pubococcygeus, puborectalis, and iliococcygeus), but the margins are ill-defined. These muscle groups extend from the anterior bony surfaces of the pelvis to attach to the perineal body, anococcygeal ligament, and walls of the viscera near the pelvic floor.

# Physiologic Variants

Physiologic variants of the bony pelvis exist between males and females. The male pelvis is typically thicker and heavier than the lighter and thinner pelvis of the female. Males also tend to have a narrower pelvic opening than females.

Most physiological differences lie in variations of the pelvic girdle. There are four types classically described:

- The gynaecoid pelvis displays an oval shape with a wide transverse diameter. This variant is the most common type and provides adequate cavity space for a female to give birth.

- The android displays a heart-shaped inlet and is most common in males.

- The platypelloid type displays a wide inlet transversely but is short in the anterior-posterior axis. This type provides challenges for a female to give birth and is found among approximately 20% of women.

- The anthropoid type is characterized by a wide anterior-posterior axis but is short in the transverse axis and is found in around 15% of women.

# Surgical Considerations

The diameter of the pelvic ring is a surgical consideration that must be considered when planning childbirth.

Following pelvic trauma, reduction and fixation of pelvic fractures may be necessary. Depending on the type and severity of the trauma, plus the co-existence of any visceral injuries, a range of approaches and techniques can be used. In general, anterior and posterior approaches can be taken. However, in extremis, it may be most appropriate to undertake a complete trauma laparotomy to fully assess and treat the viscera and bony structures following trauma.

The anterior approach can be open or percutaneous. An open approach can be performed via a Pfannenstiel incision and allows access to the urinary bladder in case of urological injury in trauma requiring operative management.

# Clinical Significance

Fractures of the pelvis most often result following direct trauma, for example, in pedestrian vs. car accidents or a fall from significant heights, and may involve multiple bones of the pelvis or the hip joint. Pelvic fractures are potentially life-threatening, as more than 2 liters of blood can exsanguinate into the pelvic cavity without any evidence of external bleeding; for this reason, the management of pelvic fractures involves rapid fluid resuscitation and temporary external fixation to try and tamponade any internal bleeding while definitive treatment is planned.

The contemporary classification of pelvic fractures used is that outlined by Young and Burgess. It has a description of injuries resulting in force directed through the midline (anterior-posterior compression) from lateral to medial (lateral compression) or upwards off the midline (vertical shear).

Anterior-posterior compression (APC) injuries result from a force through the midline pubic symphysis. APC I injuries are defined as having less than 2.5 cm of widening at the symphysial joint and are considered clinically stable. APC II injuries demonstrate more than 2.5 cm diastasis at the symphysial joint, and there is disruption of the anterior part of the sacroiliac joint, but not the posterior part. They are considered rotationally unstable but vertically stable. APC III injuries include all the features of the APC II injuries, but with disruption of the posterior part of the sacroiliac joint, and therefore equate to a complete hemipelvis separation. They are unstable rotationally and vertically.

Lateral compression (LC) injuries are more common than APC injuries and result from a force from lateral to medial. LC I injuries are stable and comprise an oblique fracture of the pubic rami with an ipsilateral fracture of the sacral ala. LC II injuries also have an ipsilateral iliac wing fracture and are rotationally unstable but vertically stable. LC III injuries result from a greater force and cause contralateral anterior and posterior sacroiliac joint disruption.

Vertical shear (VS) injury results from an axial force delivered lateral to the midline and is the rarest, most severe, and unstable injury. This results in complete ligamentous disruption in the hemipelvis and pubic fractures.

Timely operative fixation is key to managing unstable and severe pelvic fractures and should be undertaken as soon as possible following appropriate trauma resuscitation and stabilization.