**Contraindications**

Colchicine metabolism is via the liver and other tissues and is dependent on the P-glycoprotein transport and CYP 384 isoenzymes. It is eliminated unchanged in the urine and via metabolism. P-glycoprotein and CYP3A4 inhibitors can decrease the metabolism of colchicine and therefore result in increased plasma levels of colchicine. Impairment of renal and hepatic function can decrease the metabolism and clearance of colchicine and result in elevated concentrations. These elevated levels can cause adverse reactions, including death.

The concomitant use of a P-glycoprotein or CYP3A4 inhibitor and colchicine in the presence of renal or hepatic impairment is contraindicated. Dose adjustments or alternative therapies are considerations for patients with renal or hepatic impairment who are not taking a P-glycoprotein or CYP3A4 inhibitor.

**Precautions**

**Biliary obstruction, renal impairment, hepatic disease, and renal disease**

Dosage adjustments are necessary for patients with normal renal and hepatic function, taking interacting medications, and patients with either renal or hepatic impairment.  Patients with renal impairment or elevated plasma concentrations of colchicine due to renal disease can develop myeloneuropathy characterized by proximal weakness, elevated serum creatinine, and possibly rhabdomyolysis.  Colchicine gets eliminated through biliary pathways. Therefore, patients with hepatic disease or hepatic biliary obstruction should have alternate therapies considered.

**Alcoholism, Gastrointestinal Disease**

The risk for colchicine-induced gastrointestinal tissue damage may be higher in patients with preexisting alcoholism or gastrointestinal disease. Therefore, the clinician should consider adjustments in dosing.

**Bone Marrow Suppression**

Colchicine taken over an extended period has correlations with bone marrow suppression. Therefore, colchicine should be used cautiously in patients with preexisting bone marrow suppression. Therapeutic doses of colchicine have reportedly correlated with myelosuppression, leukopenia, granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, pancytopenia, and aplastic anemia. Also, colchicine may worsen these types of blood dyscrasias.

**Dialysis**

Dialysis does not remove colchicine; patients receiving dialysis required a dosage reduction secondary to their impaired renal function.

**Dental Disease**

Colchicine can cause myelosuppression, and therefore, its use requires caution with patients with dental disease. The recommendation is that the dental work is performed before initiating therapy with colchicine or delayed until blood count returned to normal.

**Neuromuscular Toxicity**

Reports exist of colchicine-induced neuromuscular toxicity and rhabdomyolysis with chronic treatment in therapeutic doses of colchicine. Patients with renal impairment and elderly patients, even those with normal renal and hepatic function, are at increased risk. Concomitant use of colchicine and atorvastatin, simvastatin, pravastatin, fluvastatin, gemfibrozil, and fenofibric acid or cyclosporine may potentiate the development of myopathy.

**Geriatric**

With or without preexisting renal or hepatic impairment, geriatric patients have an increased risk of neuromuscular toxicity and rhabdomyolysis when taking colchicine. Caution is necessary, and a dose adjustment may be appropriate when dosing colchicine in geriatric patients.

**Pregnancy**

Colchicine classifies as pregnancy category C. Colchicine use during pregnancy should only be if the potential benefit to the mother justifies the possible risk to the fetus.

**Breast Feeding**

Colchicine is excreted into human breast milk. Colchicine can alter gastrointestinal cell renewal and permeability; however, there are no reported adverse effects in breastfed human infants. The American Academy of Pediatrics considers colchicine usually compatible with breastfeeding.