A myocardial infarction occurs when there is a narrowing or occlusion of a coronary artery due to atherosclerosis (plaque buildup due to cholesterol). In an infarction blood supply is insufficient to the contracting myocardium and oxygen supply does not meet oxygen demand causing cell death. This causes an ST-segment elevation on an ECG due to abnormal conduction through the heart.

Coronary arteries are end arteries, and this means there is only one source of blood supply to the myocardium increasing the risk of endocardial damage due to narrowing.

Considering that the function of the arteries is to supply the heart with oxygen, it is important to know which artery supplies which portion of them in order to be able to read an electrocardiogram (EKG). Knowing which leads in an ECG correspond to specific arteries helps localize the location of the obstruction which can produce predictable patterns.

- An inferior infarction shows ST elevation in leads II, III, and aVF and the vessel involved is the RCA.

- A posterior infarction shows ST depression in leads V1, V2, V3, and large R wave, and the vessels involved are proximal RCA and left circumflex.

- An anterior infarction shows an ST elevation in leads V1, V2, V3, and V4, and the vessel involved is the LAD.

- Lateral infarction shows ST elevation in leads I, AVL, V5, and V6, and the vessel included is the left circumflex.

- Right ventricular infarction shows elevations in leads II, III, and V1, and the vessel included is the proximal RCA.