Many patients will experience gastrointestinal upset (GI), headache, blurred vision, and insomnia when taking chloroquine. It rarely has been shown to cause QT interval prolongation. Its use requires caution in patients with a previous history of GI disorders, conduction abnormalities, or patients taking QT-prolonging drugs. Side effects of hydroxychloroquine are similar to chloroquine, although hydroxychloroquine is most commonly an alternative for patients who cannot tolerate the GI side effects of chloroquine.

Primaquine is known to cause hemolytic anemia in patients with G6PD deficiency. A G6PD level should be taken before administering primaquine to determine if the patient can receive this medication. The common side effect of primaquine is mainly limited to GI disturbances, such as abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.

Common side effects of atovaquone-proguanil are abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, headache, and increased serum transaminases (AST/ALT). Vomiting is of particular note because absorption may decrease in patients with diarrhea or vomiting. Healthcare providers should consider using an antiemetic in patients with vomiting or diarrhea that may impact the absorption of their medication. Atovaquone-proguanil may also enhance the anticoagulant effect of warfarin. Patients taking both drugs should be monitored closely for increased bleeding episodes.

Artemether-lumefantrine's most common side effects include headache, fever, dizziness, fatigue, nausea and vomiting, and anorexia. Of note, for this medication, muscular effects are common and usually manifest as weakness and/or myalgia. The most serious side effect associated with this agent is QT prolongation, especially in concomitant use with other medications that can prolong the QT interval.

Doxycycline and tetracycline are usually well-tolerated, but some GI upset can be seen and, less commonly, ultraviolet photosensitivity. Patients should apply sunscreen liberally to avoid photosensitivity. Patients also may have a side effect of Candida vaginitis, so offering women antifungal self-treatment for management is recommended. Clindamycin most commonly causes GI disturbances, most notably diarrhea, and is the most common antibiotic associated with C. difficile infections post-treatment.

Mefloquine side effects include GI upset, lightheadedness, headache, difficulty concentrating, mood swings, and strange dreams. A US box warning is that mefloquine can cause neuropsychiatric effects even after discontinuation. Symptoms to monitor include anxiety, depression, nightmares, hallucinations, dizziness, and paranoia. Severe neuropsychiatric reactions involve seizures, suicidal ideation, and psychosis.

A baseline EKG is recommended before using quinidine gluconate or oral quinine due to its potential to cause QTc prolongation. Once quinidine is initiated, continuous telemetry monitoring is recommended. A patient’s infusion should be stopped or slowed if any of the following occurs: an increase in the QRS complex by more than 50%, increase in QTc interval by more than 0.6 seconds, QTc prolongation of more than 25% from baseline, or hypotension that is unresponsive to fluid challenge. Other serious side effects associated with quinine and quinidine include central nervous system disturbances such as dizziness, confusion, and headache, and severe skin conditions from bullous dermatitis to Steven-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.