The most common reported symptom was dyspnea followed by cough and loss of taste or smell among the 32% of patients who reported persistent symptoms during a 60-day follow-up of 488 patients after hospitalization from acute COVID-19. The results of this observational cohort study also reported a readmission rate of 15% and a mortality rate of 6.7%.

A 6-month follow-up study by Huang et al. evaluated 1733 patients as follow up after post-COVID-19 hospitalization reported that fatigue (63%) was the most common symptom, followed by sleep disturbances (26%), depression/anxiety (23%), and hair loss (22%). Patients hospitalized with severe acute respiratory failure secondary to COVID-19 are considered to have impaired pulmonary function and abnormal chest imaging at 6-month follow-up. Based on these above studies, fatigue, shortness of breath, psychological stress (anxiety, depression), posttraumatic stress disorder, poor concentration, and sleep abnormalities were observed in at least 25% or more of the study participants.

**Pulmonary Manifestations**

- The severity and long-term complications of COVID-19 infection are yet to be seen. However, data shows that many patients have persistent respiratory symptoms weeks to months after the initial diagnosis of COVID-19.

- Both viral-dependent and independent mechanisms contribute to endothelial, epithelial damage caused by monocyte and neutrophil invasion resulting in ARDS. A decrease in diffusion capacity is the most reported physiologic derangement in post-acute COVID-19 and directly correlates with the severity of acute illness. The most common high-resolution lung CT findings of post-acute COVID-19 are the persistence of ground-glass opacities.

- Dyspnea, cough, oxygen dependence, difficulty to wean from mechanical ventilation or NIV, fibrotic lung changes, decreased diffusion capacity, and reduced endurance are the common pulmonary sequelae seen in patients with post-acute COVID-19 syndrome.

- Dyspnea is the predominant pulmonary symptom (40% to 50% prevalence at 100 days) in post-acute COVID-19. At a 6-month follow-up, the average 6-minute walking distance was significantly lower than the standard reference because of shortness of breath. About 6% of patients continue to require supplemental oxygen at 60-day follow-up.

- A study from Spain showed that about 50% of tracheostomy patients were successfully weaned off at 30-day follow-up post-discharge.

**Cardiovascular Manifestations**

- Direct virus-mediated cytotoxicity, ACE 2 receptor down-regulation, immune-mediated inflammation affecting the myocardium, and pericardium are the most common mechanisms of cardiovascular damage resulting in clinical symptoms such as dyspnea, fatigue, myocarditis, decreased cardiac reserve, dysregulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system(RAAS), autonomic dysfunction, and arrhythmias.

**Hematologic Manifestations**

- Acute COVID-19 associated thromboembolism is secondary to the hyperinflammatory and hypercoagulable state compared to consumptive coagulopathy from DIC.

**Neuropsychiatric Manifestations**

- Microvascular thrombi, systemic inflammation, direct viral-mediated neurotoxicity are hypothesized to be the possible mechanisms contributing to neuropathology in COVID-19. Dysautonomia, deconditioning, and posttraumatic stress disorder can contribute to post COVID-19 brain fog. Prolonged duration of ICU stay, prolonged intubation contribute significantly to long-term cognitive impairment in COVID-19 patients.

**Renal Manifestations**

- A significant proportion (20%) of severe COVID-19 patients requiring intubation also required renal replacement therapy(RRT) during hospitalization. The majority of them did not require dialysis near discharge.

**Endocrine Manifestations**

- Viral injury, inflammatory and immunologic damage contribute to post-acute COVID-19 endocrine manifestations. Isolated case reports of DKA, Subacute, and Hashimoto thyroiditis have been reported weeks after resolving acute COVID-19 symptoms.

**Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C)**

- MIS-C is a new clinical entity characterized by fever, multiorgan dysfunction, increased inflammatory markers seen in individuals less than 21 years old, with recent or current SARS-CoV-2 infection

- The most likely underlying mechanism is acquired an immune response from complement activation, formation of autoantibodies (viral host mimicry), and excessive cytokines from T-cell stimulation.