The landmark trial for ezetimibe is called the Improved Reductions of Outcomes: Vytorin Efficacy International Trial (IMPROVE-IT). It evaluated the effect of ezetimibe and simvastatin compared with simvastatin alone in patients with acute coronary syndrome. This double-blinded study published in 2015 followed over 18,000 hospitalized patients with acute coronary syndrome randomized to simvastatin monotherapy or simvastatin combined with ezetimibe. The study found that adding ezetimibe to statin therapy lowered LDL cholesterol by 24%. The combination also lowered the risk of cardiovascular events by 2%. This trial has been a watershed moment in lipid management. Based on the trial, a target LDL cholesterol of less than 70 mg per deciliter is recommended for patients after acute coronary syndrome.

Another trial, known as the SHARP (Study of Heart and Renal Protection), published in 2011, found that patients with chronic kidney disease receiving simvastatin and ezetimibe had reduced atherosclerotic events.

According to AHA(American Heart Association)/ACC (American College of Cardiology)/NLA (National Lipid Association) joint guidelines, patients with clinical ASCVD (atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease) on maximally tolerated statin therapy have a very high risk and have an LDL-C≥70 mg/dL; it is useful to add ezetimibe therapy.

Ezetimibe therapy is most effective when the entire interprofessional healthcare team is involved. The prescribing clinician can work with the pharmacist to ensure that dosing is appropriate and that there are no medications that will interact and result in adverse events, particularly rhabdomyolysis. Nursing involvement will include verifying compliance, monitoring for adverse events, and providing counsel regarding administration and what to look for as potential side effects. Both pharmacy and nursing will report any concerns to the prescriber promptly. This interprofessional team approach will maximize treatment effectiveness and minimize adverse events, resulting in better patient outcomes. [Level 5]