Patients should receive aggressive intravenous (IV) fluid hydration with crystalloids. Soft tissue infections, especially necrotizing fasciitis should be sought out and managed. Any source of bacteria such as tampons or nasal packing should immediately be removed. Emergent surgical consultation should be obtained for any wound debridement or surgical cause. This is critical in the early management of toxic shock syndrome.

Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be administered for those with an unidentified organism, if possible after blood cultures and cultures from the suspected source have been drawn. For most institutions, this will include vancomycin or linezolid given the high prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Clindamycin should also be administered to suppress toxin production. Studies have shown improved outcomes when Clindamycin is added to antibiotic regimens.

Once the organism is identified, and sensitivities have been determined, antibiotics should be optimized and narrowed in the spectrum. Penicillin is the preferred antibiotic for group A strep. For MSSA, clindamycin is recommended, plus flucloxacillin or a beta-lactamase-resistant penicillin such as nafcillin. Current recommendations are to treat for seven to 14 days.

Vasopressors should be administered for patients with shock refractory to IV fluids. Most current guidelines recommend Norepinephrine as a first option. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is thought to work by neutralizing the activity of the toxins produced and can be considered for shock refractory to fluids and vasopressors. While there are no randomized controlled trials supporting its use, observational trials have shown a reduction in mortality with IVIG compared to patients who only received antibiotics.