A nail biopsy should be conducted to diagnose inflammatory, infectious, or tumorous conditions. It is the most sensitive technique for diagnosing onychomycosis and is especially useful for pigmented nail lesions.

**Nail Plate**

A nail plate biopsy is the easiest to perform and has the lowest risk of scarring. If separation of the nail bed and nail plate is necessary or a proximal nail plate punch biopsy is needed, such as with proximal subungual onychomycosis, then anesthesia is required. Otherwise, a nail plate biopsy can be clipped from the free margin as is commonly utilized for distal-lateral subungual onychomycosis. An alternative method for diagnosing distal-lateral subungual and superficial onychomycosis does not require the removal of the nail plate. This modified nail plate biopsy involves a simple scraping of the subungual or superficial debris for direct microscopic examination with potassium hydroxide and sent for a fungal culture. Nail plate biopsies can also be useful for psoriasis, gout, and distinguishing melanin versus blood deposits.

**Nail Matrix**

Contrary to the nail plate biopsy, a nail matrix biopsy is the most difficult to perform and carries the highest risk of permanent nail dystrophy because of its role as the origin of the nail plate. The proximal matrix produces 81% of the cells in the nail plate; therefore, if possible, the biopsy should be confined to the distal matrix to decrease scarring potential.

Some clinicians prefer to replace the avulsed nail plate following the procedure.

**Nail Bed**

A nail bed biopsy is necessary for dyschromia, onycholysis, tumorous growths, atypical-appearing subungual warts, and to differentiate psoriasis from onychomycosis.

**Nail Fold**

Nail fold biopsies are useful for paronychia and nail fold tumors.

Another biopsy technique is the longitudinal biopsy, which incorporates all components of the nail apparatus. The incisions penetrate the periosteum with a straight medial incision and a curved lateral one.

Detailed information should be provided to the dermatopathologist, including pertinent patient history, differential diagnosis, and the exact location of the sample. Communicating the orientation of the sample is vital to optimizing histopathologic assessment because, as mentioned above, the histologic features greatly vary depending on the region of the nail unit. Ink, suture, or an accompanying diagram can facilitate communication of the orientation.

Processing a nail biopsy is more challenging than a standard skin biopsy. The specimen first undergoes fixation in a 10% formalin solution, and incubation time is proportionate to the tissue thickness. Because of the rigid nature of the nail plate, a softening step should be performed to reduce chattering, which may impair the quality of the slides and compromise the diagnostic potential. Many softening agents are available, including a combination of ethanol, methanol, acetone, glycerin, 4-hexylresorcinol, 10% to 30% potassium hydroxide, 10% potassium thioglycolate, polyoxyethylenesorbitan monopalmitate, 5% trichloroacetic acid, 4% phenol, 10% formalin, chitin-softening agent, 4 to 10% sodium hydroxide, and water.

Certain common household agents have even been shown to be effective softening agents.