Calculus size, location, and patient discomfort predict the likelihood of spontaneous stone passage. Approximately 90% of stones less than 5 mm pass within four weeks. Up to 95% of stones larger than 8 mm can become impacted, requiring intervention to pass.

Indications for hospital admission include a significant renal stone in a solitary kidney, severe kidney injury, an infected renal stone, intractable pain or nausea, urinary extravasation, or hypercalcemic crisis.

Patients with infected stones (e.g., nephrolithiasis plus evidence of urinary tract infection) require special and more urgent treatment. The infected stone acts as a nidus for infection and leads to stasis, decreasing the ability to manage infections. Frequently, these stones need to be removed in their entirety operatively to prevent a repeat infection and the formation of new stones.

Intervention for a stone is recommended by 4 weeks with no changes even if the patient is asymptomatic. This is due to the likelihood of scarring and other complications. It can be difficult to convince an asymptomatic patient to agree to a surgery. We have found the most effective technique is to explain the policy early so patients understand the need for a procedure if a stone or obstruction appears stuck and is not resolving on its own.

24-hour urine tests are the cornerstone of long-term preventive therapy, but they require very high levels of patient dedication and compliance to be successful. Nevertheless, they should be offered to all nephrolithiasis patients; especially those with recurrent stones and a high risk of new stone formation.