**Imaging**

- Slit-lamp photography to document

- Fundus photographs- especially ultra-widefield imaging (Optos) using scanning laser ophthalmoscope principle which can image through the small pupil and vitreous haze

- Fundus fluorescein angiogram (FFA) if the fundus is visible- May help to rule out other diseases

- Optical coherence tomography (OCT)- When fundus is visible, OCT can help to characterize the location and other characteristics of retinochoroidal or vascular involvement

- Anterior segment OCT in case of endophthalmitis after infective keratitis and others

- Ultrasound B scan – Endophthalmitis gives rise to vitreous inflammation, which is seen as point echoes in the vitreous cavity with mild to moderate amplitude. Ultrasound examination is also used to look for other features, including retinochoroidal thickening, posteriorly dislocated lens/IOL, concomitant retinal detachment, choroidal detachment, or IOFB, to follow up vitreous inflammatory reaction serially post intravitreal injection. A subretinal abscess at the macula may be present, especially in endogenous endophthalmitis.

- CT scan orbits to look for IOFB in post-trauma cases

**Ocular Sampling**

**1. Anterior chamber tap**

With the patient looking straight, a 30G/27G needle is introduced via a selected site on the peripheral cornea tangentially keeping direction parallel to the iris, with the needle directed towards exudate/hypopyon. With active suction, 0.1 to 0.2 cc of aqueous/exudate is aspirated. A cotton tip applicator is applied, and the needle is removed.

**2. Vitreous tap/biopsy**

Vitreous cultures usually produce more accurate results than do aqueous cultures.

**Vitreous Tap**

A 26 G needle is connected to a 2 cc syringe and is entered through pars plans (3 mm behind limbus in aphakic, 3.5 mm behind limbus in pseudophakic, and 4 mm behind the limbus in phakic). A sample of 0.2 to 0.3 cc is aspirated. It is controversial in non-vitrectomized eyes due to the possibility of vitreous traction and subsequent retinal detachment. In such cases, vitreous biopsy via vitrectomy cutter is preferred.

**Vitreous biopsy**

This can be obtained via one port vitrector or by combining it with a three-port diagnostic/ therapeutic pars plana vitrectomy. A 5 ml syringe is connected to the suction port of the vitrectomy cutter, and once the cutter port is visualized through the pupil, the surgical assistant aspirates, without starting the infusion. At the same time, the surgeon activates the cutter until the eye softens visibly. When combined with a three-port vitrectomy, the fluid infusion is turned on once the sample has been collected as described.

Samples are sent for microbiological and molecular diagnostic (PCR) testing. Though PCR allows improved pathogen detection even with low pathogen counts, cost, increased risk of contamination, lack of antibiotic sensitivity testing, lack of quality control standards limit its widespread usage.

The standard microbiological procedure includes smear preparation for specific stains and inoculation of selective culture media for recovery of intraocular pathogens and antibiotic sensitivity testing. Commonly used stains and culture media are elaborated in figure 2 (commonly used stains and culture media for the detection of microbial agents).

**Systemic Assessment**

- Look for signs of septicemia – fever, elevated ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate)

- Blood culture in cases of endogenous endophthalmitis

- Blood tests – hemogram, renal, and liver function tests (to look for drug toxicity)

- Search for the focus of infection in endogenous endophthalmitis