# Continuing Education Activity

Scrofula (historically known as the king's evil) is the tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis caused by hematogenous or lymphatic dissemination of pulmonary TB or reactivation of latent TB or very rarely through primary involvement of adenoids or tonsils. This activity will cover the pathophysiology, evaluation, and treatment of this condition and highlight the role of the interprofessional team in the management of patients with scrofula.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of scrofula.
- Review the appropriate evaluation of scrofula.
- Outline the management options available for scrofula.
- Describe interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance scrofula and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Tuberculosis is the oldest reported infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and is known as the 'barometer of social welfare' because of its higher prevalence in less developed areas. Tuberculosis frequently affects the lungs but also affects other parts of the body.

# Etiology

The main etiologic agent belongs to the genus Mycobacterium and over 175 other species.

# Epidemiology

Incidence and prevalence of tuberculous cervical lymphadenopathy vary among developing and developed countries. It is more commonly seen in developing countries, and in Europe and developed countries (nonendemic countries), travelers from endemic areas, especially immigrants and immunodeficient people, carry Mycobacterium.****rate was as high as 1014 per 100000 in Nepal to as low as  0.06 per 100000 in Danes. Due to increased migration and globalization, extrapulmonary TB, including scrofula, has been increasing in Europe.

# Pathophysiology

Most of the cases of peripheral lymphadenopathy are believed to have resulted from the reactivation of latent tuberculosis.

Cell-mediated immunity develops approximately 3 weeks after exposure. Bacterial antigens are presented to CD4 T cells by antigen-presenting cells dendritic and macrophages. CD4 T-cells produce interferon-gamma, which in turn activates the macrophages. Activated macrophages produce many factors such as tissue necrosis factor(TNF), cytokines, and chemokines which attract other phagocytes including neutrophils, monocytes, alveolar macrophages responsible for the formation of granuloma with epitheliod cells and multinucleated giant cells surrounded by a rim of sensitized T cells and later on central caseous necrosis that may contain tubercle bacilli. Activated macrophages also produce nitric oxide and free radicals that kill bacteria. Primary TB with lymph node involvement has the same pathogenesis as in granuloma formation.Reactivation of latent infection gives rise to secondary tuberculosis in previously sensitized patients may occur shortly or decades after the initial infection, principally when the host immune defense is weakened. It may also result from reinfection. Some hypothesis says lymph node involvement is less in secondary TB than in primary due to fibrosis and early wall off of focus in previously sensitized immunocompetent patients. Progressive secondary TB, especially in immunocompromised (HIV) and debilitated patients, cause massive hematogenous and lymphatic dissemination leading to miliary TB with multiple extrapulmonary involvements, mainly peripheral lymph nodes. Notably, cervical lymph nodes involvement is exceptionally more common.

Scrofula may be due to the draining of primary focus into peripheral lymph nodes, particularly cervical lymph nodes along with mandibular, upper jugular, and tonsillar. These lymph nodes are vulnerable due to lowered resistance by recurrent infections of other bacterial in the throat makes a suitable environment for the growth of mycobacteria. Tubercle bacilli reach these lymph nodes either by lymphatic or hematogenous dissemination.

Tonsils and adenoids can also be the primary source of tuberculous infections. The primary inflammatory reaction is followed by caseous necrosis and cold abscess formation, and later on, fibrosis and calcifications occur as a part of the healing process. Inflammation and necrosis are bounded by a fibrous capsule, which limits the spread of infection. Rupture of fibrous capsule causes accumulation of abscess under superficial fascia forms "collar-stud abscess."

# Histopathology

Macroscopic view of scrofula is enlarged lymph nodes, spherical or ovoid shape ranging from 3 to 10 cm with draining sinus and matted, erythema.

Microscopically, characteristics of TB lymphadenopathy granuloma formation same as in pulmonary TB. Central caseous necrosis surround by fused multinucleated giant cells, epithelioid cells, and a rim of sensitized T-cells mixed with fibrous connective tissue on later stages when healing occurs.

# History and Physical

Clinical manifestations of scrofula are often a part of miliary tuberculosis. Miliary TB is mostly subacute or chronic, less commonly, acute presentations. Subacute or chronic conditions may present with weight loss or failure to thrive. Fever, unusual rigors, frequent night sweats are the additional symptoms. These symptoms may begin 4 to 8 weeks earlier than the appearance of lymphadenopathy. History of progressively slow, painless mass starting in a single discrete group. Initially, 1 to 3 lymph nodes involvement is often unilateral (85%) is more common than bilateral. Symptoms are more in HIV-infected than HIV-negative patients. The rate of symptoms varies in different geographical areas in a series of studies, i.e., fever and weight loss are more common in endemic areas than in the United States of America.

On physical examinations, usually swelling on the one side of the neck, freely mobile, few in number, discrete, nontender lymph nodes are the common findings.

# Evaluation

In countries like Denmark, where incidence is low requires a high degree of suspicion to diagnose.

Diagnosis of tuberculous lymphadenopathy is provided by histopathology along with a smear of acid-fast bacilli and culture of lymph nodes. Fine needle aspiration and excisional biopsy are the gold standard for diagnosing peripheral lymphadenopathy, including tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis.

**Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA)**

FNA is the diagnostic choice with low morbidity, relatively safe and inexpensive, rapid, and simple.

**Mycobacterial Culture**

Definitive diagnosis depends upon the isolation and identification of bacteria from specimens. Specimens inoculated in the egg or agar-based medium (Lowenstein-Jensen) incubated at 37-degree Celcius. Culture is positive in 70% to 80% of cases.

**Excisional Biopsy**

It is the traditional technique with higher morbidity than FNA and causes a delay in diagnosis.

**Nucleic Acid Amplification (NAA) Testing**

NAA is performed where histology and acid-fast bacilli do not provide sufficient information for diagnosis.

**Imaging**

Neck imaging is achieved by ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, and computed tomography scan. Imaging would show tracheal deviation if present, calcifications of lymph nodes, a cold abscess formed after coalesce of multiple necrotic lymph nodes.

**Interferon-gamma Release Assay (IGRA)**

IGRA has high sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of tuberculous lymphadenitis.

**Mantoux Test**

Positive Mantoux test (skin injection of tuberculin with induration formation) shows a previous infection or latent TB.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment objectives are to prevent morbidity and mortality by killing the bacilli and interrupt transmission.

**Antitubercular Therapy**

Antitubercular therapy is the treatment of choice against mycobacterial tuberculosis in both pulmonary and extrapulmonary tuberculosis. Treatment modality may be different for HIV positive patients because HIV infected patients have more bacteria resistant to isoniazid and streptomycin.

HIV-infected patients should have a longer duration of antitubercular therapy along with antiretroviral therapy addressing the drug interaction and adverse effects. Monitoring of treatment responses and drug toxicity should be done regularly to make complete and effective therapy.

**Surgical Aspiration, Incision and Drainage, and Excision**

Excision and removal of affected lymph nodes may be sufficient to treat scrofula in immunocompetent patients if no concomitant pulmonary TB and other associated extrapulmonary TB, especially in immunocompetent children infected by atypical mycobacteria.

**Corticosteroid**

The benefits of steroids in TB lymphadenitis are unknown, but double-blind controlled trials revealed improvements in those receiving a 37-day tapering dose of steroid. Steroids are used selectively in discomfort and are not widely recommended.

**BCG Vaccination and Prevention**

The best way to prevent TB is to rapidly diagnose and isolate cases and administer appropriate therapy until patients become noninfectious and completely cured. Additional strategies include Bacille Calmette Guerin (BCG) vaccination. BCG is a live attenuated vaccine that was first administered in 1921. In addition, providing protection against tuberculosis, it also modulates immune responses to other vaccines.

# Differential Diagnosis

Differential diagnosis of scrofula is extensive, including lymphomas, metastatic cancer, and other infections that involve lymph nodes. It is challenging to extricate scrofula from lymphoma on clinical grounds because both cases involve weight loss with other constitutional symptoms and infectious lymphadenitis.

**Lymphoma**

Lymphoma is the neoplastic proliferation of lymphoid cells that forms a mass, may arise in lymph nodes or extranodal tissue. Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas are the major types of lymphomas that may involve the cervical lymph nodes, mimicking the tuberculous lymphadenitis. Contrast-enhanced CT can differentiate tuberculous lymphadenopathy and lymphoma. Tuberculous lymphadenopathy shows peripheral enhancement with frequent multilocular, and non-treated lymphomas show homogenous attenuation.

**Kikuchi Disease**

It is an idiopathic self-limiting histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis that has strong mimicry with tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis. In the past, steroid therapy was given to cervical lymphadenitis, assuming Kikuchi disease was not responding, and later on, surgical exploration confirmed TB. So only surgical exploration and microscopy helps in diagnosis.

**Fungal Diseases**

Fungal diseases, likely histoplasmosis, cryptococcus, Coccidioidomycosis, etc., have high chances of developing tuberculosis as opportunistic diseases in HIV-infected people. Histopathology of fungal infected lymph nodes shows caseous necrosis with granuloma (chronic) formation.

**Bacterial Adenitis**

Bacterial lymphadenitis is caused by varieties of bacteria such as staphylococcus, streptococcus, catch-scratch disease (Bartonella), listeriosis, syphilis, etc. To date, a cat-scratch disease caused by Bartonella henselae is most often encountered adenitis. Histological evaluation, culture, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have revolutionized the diagnosis.

**Kimura Disease**

It is a rare idiopathic chronic inflammatory disease characterized by subcutaneous swelling in the head and neck region common in young Asian males usually associated with lymphadenopathy.

**Castleman Disease**

Castleman disease is a generalized lymphoproliferative disorder of a poorly understood mechanism.

**Miscellaneous**

Sarcoidosis (noncaseating granuloma), carotid body tumor, lymphosarcoma, toxoplasmosis, lymphosarcoma, neurofibroma, osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, salivary gland abscess, branchial cyst, aberrant thyroid glands, metastatic cancer, etc. in the neck upset the correct diagnosis of scrofula.

# Prognosis

Many differential diagnoses and low incidence of TB lymphadenitis delays the diagnosis, which increases morbidity and mortality.

# Complications

Less than half of the cases with scrofula also have pulmonary TB. There are chances that scrofula can spread beyond the neck and involve other areas of the body. Ulcerations, draining sinus, open wound, and finally, chronic fistula formation are the most probable sequelae of scrofula. Superimposed secondary bacterial infections in open wounds lead to further serious infections. Scar formation is more prominent with nontuberculous mycobacterial involvement. The relapse rate is up to 3.5% in patients treated for tuberculous lymphadenitis.

The therapy-related paradoxical reaction occurs in about 25% during or after the cessation of treatment. Lymph nodes increase in size (79%), but it does not indicate treatment failure, worsening of the disease, and development of new diseases in other organs and new lymph nodes (29%) in the same or different sites.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Tuberculosis is a highly contagious infectious disease. The pattern of the disease to thrive on the basis of living standards and environmental sanitation makes it possible to predict the prevalence of disease so as to prevent it accordingly at the community level. Social awareness about the disease and individual effort at the patient level to isolate themselves has a significant role in controlling the disease. So patient education regarding the etiology and mode of transmission is always given the top priority for such communicable disease. People should be provided with information about the signs and symptoms of the disease to visit the clinician in earlier stages before disseminating the disease-causing miliary TB and multiorgan failure. Correct information helps to delay the complications. The importance of scheduled therapy, compliance, and follow-up should be notified. Detailed information in regard to side effects and outcomes of therapy, development of drug resistance in negligence of regular intake should be delivered. Educating the patient about the extensive treatment methods depend upon the understanding level of the patients.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis of scrofula only on the clinical background is difficult.