Seborrheic keratoses are the most common type of skin tumor seen by primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, and dermatologists in the outpatient setting. Generally, they are benign and present with distinguishing features. However, there can be some morphological similarities with other malignant skin lesions. Overlapping lesions or high numbers of seborrheic keratosis can make the diagnosis and workup of these lesions more difficult. Primary care clinicians, including the nurse practitioner, should consult with the dermatologist if the diagnosis remains in doubt.

Patients with large numbers of seborrheic keratosis need screening, as there can be an increased chance of missing co-existing malignant skin lesions. A team-oriented approach between nurses, primary care providers, and dermatologists would result in the best outcome for patients with seborrheic keratosis. Early incorporation of dermatologists in the patient’s care could aid in the screening and identification of any new or suspicious skin lesions. Additionally, they would be able to integrate the newest and current treatment modalities, such as laser therapy.  Nursing will often have more contact with the patient and can provide counseling as well as monitor treatment effectiveness following the procedure, and report to the managing clinician regarding their observations or if the patient has complications from treatment. While benign, seborrheic keratosis still require strong interprofessional teamwork between the clinicians (including specialists) and nursing to achieve optimal outcomes. [Level V]

**Outcomes**

The outcomes for patients with seborrheic keratosis are excellent.