**Cardiovascular**

- Quinidine is one of the most common drugs to cause a prolongation of QT interval, which sometimes can progress to a pleomorphic tachyarrhythmia torsades de pointes occurring in 1 to 3% of patients.

- Cardiac adverse effects tend to be more in the setting of lower heart rates and hypokalemia.

- The prolongation of QT interval is more pronounced in females than males, and a new onset severe QT prolongation tends to be an indicator of drug toxicity.

- Palpitations, angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia - new or worsened, and syncope are all signs.

**Central Nervous System**

- Quinidine crosses the blood-brain barrier by passive diffusion and active transport system, dizziness, fatigue, headache, disturbed sleep, nervousness, ataxia.

**Dermatologic**

- Skin rash

**Gastrointestinal**

- Hepatotoxicity, diarrhea, digestive distress, nausea and vomiting, esophagitis

**Neuromuscular and Skeletal**

- Weakness, tremor, Lupus-like syndrome

**Ophthalmic**

- Visual disturbance

**Miscellaneous**

- Fever, hypersensitivity reactions in people allergic to the drug.

- Hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia can precipitate drug toxicity.

- Hemolysis may occur in patients suffering from G6PD deficiencies.

- Cinchonism (quinidine is a stereoisomer of quinine derived from the bark of the cinchona tree) which can present as tinnitus, high-frequency hearing loss, blurring of vision, diplopia, photophobia, confusion, headache, delirium, decreased hearing to profound deafness, lupus-like syndrome, Sjogren syndrome.