Much of the human head/neck development derives from the framework of the pharyngeal arches, which appear during the fourth to fifth weeks of development. There are a total of six pharyngeal arches, and the spaces between the arches are the pharyngeal clefts. The pharyngeal pouches develop due to lateral migration of the endoderm and present as outpouchings of the primitive pharynx. The first pharyngeal pouch contributes to the formation of the middle ear and the mastoids, while the second pharyngeal pouch forms the epithelial lining of the palatine tonsil. The third and fourth pouches are responsible for the development of the parathyroids, the thymus, and a portion of the thyroid gland. The pharyngeal pouches are derived from the endoderm, while the pharyngeal arches are composed of mesoderm, and the clefts are ectoderm.

**Third Pharyngeal Pouch**- The third pharyngeal pouch divides into dorsal and ventral wings. The dorsal wing gives rise to the inferior parathyroid gland, while the ventral wing leads to the formation of the thymus. The thymus loses its connection with the pharyngeal wall and descends inferomedially to fuse with the contralateral portion in the anterior mediastinum. In the seventh week of gestation, the inferior parathyroid glands separate from the posterior pharyngeal wall and follow the path of the thymus, to reach their final destination on the posterior thyroid.

**Fourth Pharyngeal Pouch**- The fourth pharyngeal pouch divides into dorsal and ventral wings. The dorsal wing differentiates into the superior parathyroid gland, while the ventral wing differentiates into the ultimobranchial body. The ultimobranchial bodies fuse with the posterolateral thyroid and give rise to the parafollicular C-cells of the thyroid.