Apixaban is available in the oral formulation as 2.5 mg and 5 mg tablets. Dosing depends on the indication for treatment, the patient's age, serum creatinine, and body weight.

- Patients with deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are required to take 10 mg twice daily for seven days, followed by 5 mg twice daily.

- For patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation, the recommended dose is 5 mg twice daily.

- In the EU, it currently has approval as a prophylactic agent following hip and knee replacement surgery; it is not FDA-approved for this indication at the time of this writing.
- Age 80 years or older
- Serum creatinine greater than or equal to 1.5 mg/dl
- Bodyweight less than or equal to 60 kg

If the dose is not taken as per schedule, the patient should take the dose as soon as possible within the same day and resume the twice-daily schedule. However, a double dose is not recommended to make up for a missing dose.

Other options for administration: The patients who have difficulty swallowing whole tablets may be able to crush and suspend 2.5 mg and 5 mg of apixaban tablets in water, apple juice, 5% dextrose in water (D5W), or applesauce and administer them orally immediately. These crushed tablets remained stable for up to 4 hours. Alternatively, these tablets may be crushed and suspended in 60 mL of water or D5W for prompt delivery via a nasogastric tube.

**Specific Patients Population**

**Patient with Hepatic Impairment**

- Mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class A): No dose adjustment is required.

- Moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class B): Limited clinical experience in patients with moderate hepatic impairment; hence, any dosing adjustment has yet to be established.

- Severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class C): Apixaban is not recommended.

**Patient with Renal Impairment:**As mentioned above, the recommended dose for patients with at least 2 of the following should be reduced from 5 mg to 2.5 mg twice daily.

- Age 80 years or older

- Serum creatinine greater than or equal to 1.5 mg/dl

- Bodyweight less than or equal to 60 kg

Clinical efficacy and safety studies with apixaban did not include patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) on dialysis. It is, therefore, not recommended on the drug label as a proven anticoagulant of choice in patients with ESRD. An alternate anticoagulant like warfarin should be considered in patients with ESRD.

**Pregnant Women:**It is considered a pregnancy category B medicine. There is a limited amount of data available on the use of apixaban tablets in pregnant women and the associated risk of major birth defects, adverse outcomes, or miscarriage. The treatment with the drug may lead to an increased risk of bleeding during pregnancy and delivery.

**Breastfeeding Women:**There is****no data available on the presence of apixaban or its metabolites in human milk. However, apixaban and/or its metabolites were present in the rat milk. Taking apixaban tablets during breastfeeding is not recommended, as human exposure via milk is still unknown.

**Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of apixaban tablets are not established in pediatric patients.

**Geriatric Patients:**There is no clinically significant difference in the safety and efficacy of apixaban when comparing different age groups.