A team-based, interprofessional methodology should be implemented to ensure patient safety. Communication with the surgeon should take place to help assess the suitability of the block along with specific detail regarding the location of the incision, timing of the block, and other unique considerations. An appropriate time-out to promote patient safety is necessary before the start of the procedure. Maintaining meaningful verbal contact with the patient throughout the procedure is vital to monitor for any complications such as local anesthetic systemic toxicity, potential nerve injury, or visceral perforation. Practitioners should take extreme caution when handling sharps as accidental needle sticks may occur. Sharps require disposal using appropriately marked bins. Documentation of the procedure should include informed consent, date, time, procedure location, block technique, the medication used, volume and concentration of injectate, equipment used, ultrasound images, and documentation of any complications.

The interprofessional team will include clinicians (both general and specialists), nurses, surgical assistants, and pharmacists. The clinician should send the patient to the specialist, who will prepare the patient for the procedure in conjunction with the nursing staff.  The pharmacy will prepare the anesthetic and can act as a resource for any medication-related questions by the team. Nursing will assist during the procedure, and additional nursing duties are outlined below.  This type of interprofessional team paradigm will optimize the results from a TAP block leading to better patient outcomes. [Level V]