**Children**: Diphenoxylate/atropine can cause respiratory and CNS depression in children <6 years.

**Toxicity:**At****higher doses, it can present with anticholinergic side effects like hyperthermia, tachycardia, urinary retention, flushing, dryness of the skin and mucous membranes, confusion, headache, or opioid side effects like respiratory depression.

**Electrolyte imbalance:**The drug can worsen dehydration and electrolyte imbalance in patients with pre-existing electrolyte imbalance. Therefore the electrolyte imbalance needs correction before administration of the drug.

**Gastrointestinal complications:**Diphenoxylate/atropine can precipitate GI complications, including sepsis and prolonged diarrhea, when administered in patients with infectious diarrhea.

**Toxic Megacolon:**This drug can precipitate toxic megacolon in patients with acute ulcerative colitis. Due to decreased motility, the physiological secretions might get accumulated in the bowel leading to distension. The colon is already fragile in ulcerative colitis and is prone to rupture.

**Drug Interactions:**Diphenoxylate crosses the blood-brain barrier and causes central side effects like depression,  sedation/drowsiness, numbness of extremities, euphoria, malaise/lethargy, confusion,  dizziness, restlessness, headache, hallucination. Therefore its use requires caution in patients already taking drugs with CNS activity such as barbiturates, benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, antihistamines, or MAO inhibitors.

**Allergic reactions:**Patients can develop allergic reactions like anaphylaxis, urticaria, angioneurotic edema,  swelling of the gums, pruritus. Clinicians should not administer the drug to patients with previous episodes of an allergic reaction.

**Rare**: As its main action is on the enteric nervous system, higher doses can cause paralytic ileus, pancreatitis.

The adverse effects listed above have been organized based on severity and not on frequency.