# Continuing Education Activity

Phthalates are a group of plasticizing agents used industrially to impart durability and flexibility to plastic products. Depending on their designated industrial use, they are divided into low and high molecular weight categories. The toxicity of phthalates has gained increasing attention as studies have begun to show deleterious endocrine and metabolic side effects associated with various subcategories of phthalates. This has led to regulatory action, banning different phthalates that have been shown to cause harm. This activity will highlight the current literature regarding the industrial uses of phthalates, current regulation regarding their production, issues of concern related to humans and the environment, and known clinical associations between pathology and phthalate toxicity.

**Objectives:**
- Review the industrial uses for various low and high-molecular-weight phthalates.
- Summarize the current regulatory statutes in place regarding the use of phthalates in products.
- Explain the exposure media leading to bioaccumulation of phthalates, leading to toxicity.
- Review the current literature regarding the clinical significance and manifestations of phthalate toxicity.

# Introduction

Phthalates are a broad group of compounds that serve as plasticizers to impart flexibility and durability to products.

Phthalates are currently the most widely studied class of toxicants affecting the fetal male reproductive system.

# Function

Phthalates, or phthalate esters, are a group of compounds with a broad range of industrial applications, including their use as solvents and plasticizers, especially as additives in polyvinyl chloride (PVC) to impart flexibility.

Phthalates with a longer side chain are referred to as high molecular weight phthalates (HMWP), are more fat-soluble, and are used industrially as part of PVC, which may contain 50 to 80% phthalates by weight.

Low molecular weight phthalates (LMWP) are used primarily in personal care products (PCPs), enteric-coated tablets, adhesives, paints, printing inks, and solvents. They are also used as fixatives in fragrance-containing products to allow scents to last longer before evaporating.

# Issues of Concern

Phthalates have received significant attention due to their ubiquitous nature in industrial products and their potential for toxicity in the human body.

Food groups shown to contain the highest levels of phthalates through measuring urine metabolite levels include beverages, bread, meat, and dairy products.

Issues of concern related to phthalate toxicity have led to legislation banning various phthalates in consumer products. The European Union temporarily banned six phthalates found in children’s toys in 1999, which prompted the United States to do the same in 2008 by passing the Consumer Products Safety Improvement Act.

In addition to human toxicity, an abundance of phthalates has been detected in various ecosystems, mainly aquatic environments.

Another issue of concern related to public health includes the replacement of phthalates known to cause harm with other hazardous chemicals that are structurally similar with unknown long-term health effects. An example of this consists of the replacement of DEHP with diisonyl ester (DINCH) and bis(2-Ethylhexyl) terephthalate (DEHTP) in adhesives, polymers, and packaging products.

# Clinical Significance

The clinical significance of phthalate toxicity depends largely on the type of individual phthalate, route of exposure, the quantity of exposure, and temporal duration of continued exposure. Phthalates and phthalate metabolites have been detected in most bodily fluids, including serum, urine, breast milk, and semen. Phthalate toxicity is most closely tied to developmental dysfunction of the endocrine and reproductive systems; however, multiple other organ systems are also affected.

Once in the bloodstream, phthalates are capable of transplacental transition, which can lead to dysfunction of fetal development and other toxic effects on the embryo.

**Testicular Function**

Phthalate toxicity leading to testicular dysfunction has been demonstrated in rat cell cultures, showing apoptosis of both Sertoli and Leydig cells after exposure to DEHP and dibutyl phthalate (DBP). Prenatal exposure of rats to phthalates also resulted in malformed seminiferous tubules, dysgenesis of the testes, and abnormal morphology of Leydig cells, ultimately resulting in reduced testosterone biosynthesis.

**Ovarian Function, Fertility, and Gestational Effects**

Ovarian dysfunction from phthalate exposure has been demonstrated in rodent cell cultures, disrupting the normal follicular growth pattern, early reproductive senescence, and more rapid depletion of ovarian reserve.

Various phthalates have also been demonstrated to cross the placental barrier and reach the umbilical cord and amniotic fluid, thus having a potential effect on the developing fetus.

**Metabolic Effects**

Phthalates have also been studied to be associated with insulin resistance, a known risk factor leading to the development of type-2 diabetes mellitus.

Another mechanism by which phthalates disrupt the endocrine and metabolic axis is through interference with the protein sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG). Exposure to various phthalates has been associated with lower SHBG levels, with one study showing lower SHBG concentrations in pregnant women using cosmetics and hair products compared to those not using these products. Specifically, high exposure to MEP, a metabolite of DEP, was shown to be a prominent factor related to low SHBG levels. Although the exact mechanism has not been elucidated, it is hypothesized that phthalates may directly bind SHBG, in addition to disrupting the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis that plays a role in regulating sex hormone levels and steroidogenesis in the body.

Thyroid function was also shown to be affected by phthalate exposure, which may affect metabolic function and contribute to obesity. Higher concentrations of phthalate metabolites have been associated with decreased free and total thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). One study in mice showed that exposure to the phthalate DEHP induced hypothyroidism, leading to increased adipogenesis and weight gain.

Various studies have linked phthalate exposure to obesity, including one study showing the exposure of LMWP to be associated with obesity in male children, as well as HMWP exposure to obesity in all adult groups. In this study, reverse causation could not be ruled out since those with increased fat mass may store higher amounts of phthalates, resulting in increased urinary excretion.

**Risk of Breast Cancer**

There have been controversial data regarding the relationship between phthalate exposure and the risk of breast cancer. One meta-analysis that analyzed urinary metabolites of many phthalates showed a possible association between exposure to the phthalates mono-benzyl phthalate (MBzP) and mono-2-isobutyl phthalate (MiBP) with breast cancer. All other phthalate metabolites analyzed showed no statistical association.

**Respiratory Effects**

The effect of phthalates on the respiratory system showed one urinary phthalate metabolite, MBzP, to be associated with the prevalence of childhood self-reported asthma. Further studies are needed to determine the extent of the significance of these findings.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Familiarity with the various effects of phthalate toxicity is an essential component of patient education. As new evidence for the specific pathological effects of phthalates arises, it will become increasingly important for healthcare teams to stay up to date and educate patients and colleagues about the impact and potential exposure media leading to phthalate toxicity. This is especially important in the healthcare setting, as many medical devices directly related to patient care contain phthalates as plasticizing agents, as mentioned above. This evidence may be used to elicit future changes in medical device usage in the interest of patient care, especially regarding exposure in pregnancy, based on the evidence available for developmental consequences to the fetus.

All members of the interprofessional healthcare team should have some familiarity with phthalate toxicity signs and symptoms and immediately alert the appropriate clinical resources and public health officials to address the situation.

Public awareness of the dangers associated with phthalate exposure will also necessitate the development of industry alternatives used as plasticizing agents. Public education and awareness will hopefully give rise to regulations and other legislative changes regarding the use and production of various phthalates that have been shown to have consequential effects on both human physiology and the environment.