A systematic approach should be adopted to obtain the correct diagnosis of cystitis cystica. The definitive diagnosis requires cystoscopy and histopathological examination.

**Laboratory Investigations**

Examinations typically include a complete blood count, inflammatory mediators, urinalysis, and a kidney function test. Urinalysis, in particular, is important to detect the presence of hematuria or any urinary tract infection, and it should be obtained prior to commencing any antibiotic. If an infection is present, a culture and sensitivity test is required to identify the causative organism and the most effective treatment.

**Cystoscopy**

Cystitis cystica cystoscopic features can vary from a grossly unremarkable appearance to a large bladder cyst or mass. However, it typically appears as multiple small submucosal translucent cysts, found mainly at the trigone and the bladder neck. The bladder mucosa may demonstrate congestion, irregularity, thickening, multiple nodules, or ab exophytic polypoidal mass. A concurrent biopsy is typically performed on both the lesion and the mucosal changes since cystitis cystica typically has inconclusive cystoscopic and radiological features.

After establishing the diagnosis, it is recommended that patients with cystitis glandularis are maintained on follow-up visits every six months for two years, then yearly. The follow-up assessments may include clinical examination, urinalysis, ultrasound, KUB, and cystoscopy.

**Biopsy Analysis**

- Microscopic examination: - histopathological analysis of the obtained biopsy is the definitive method to diagnose cystitis cystica. The severity of the condition and the management plan is established according to the microscopic appearance and the presence or absence of intestinal metaplasia or other dysmorphic changes of malignancy. Cystitis glandularis with intestinal metaplasia (CGIT) has a similar appearance to a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, so it is essential to distinguish between the two entities clearly. The main difference between them is the extent to which the ectopic cells are present. In cystitis cystica, the cells are superficial to the lamina propria, while in adenocarcinoma, invasion of the deep muscle layer occurs. There are also other malignant criteria, including atypia, frequent abnormal mitotic figures, increased nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and the presence of necrotic tissue. Immunohistochemistry can be used in complex cases for differentiation. (See histopathology section.)

- Immunohistology: - the urothelial cells in the cystitis cystica nests are positively stained with p63, while nephrogenic adenoma is p63 negative.

- Immunofluorescence: - Cystitis glandularis typically exhibits a homogenous membranous expression of beta-catenin.

**Radiographic Imaging Modalities**

- Ultrasonography (US) is a non-invasive and reliable option to assist in the diagnosis of cystitis cystica. It is valuable in cases with recurrent urinary tract infections by measuring the bladder wall thickness. A study showed that bladder wall thickness values of more than 3 mm indicate cystitis cystica rather than simple recurrent UTIs, which generally have a bladder wall thickness of less than 3 mm.

- X-rays of kidneys, ureters, and bladder (KUB) can be done to detect stones.

- Computerized tomography (CT) scanning of the urinary system without and with contrast media (CT urogram) is used for the complete evaluation of the genitourinary system. It can visualize bladder lesions of sufficient size, measure the bladder wall thickness, and evaluate for any other lesion that may cause hematuria. In a CT urogram, cystitis cystica may appear as multiple, rounded, small-sized filling defects of 2 to 5 mm diameter in the bladder wall, although the lesions can be larger or rarely appear as a large, tumor-like mass.

- Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the urinary system can be done for a more detailed assessment and exclusion of other pelvic abnormalities.

- Cystograms can give a more detailed look at the bladder and are beneficial, especially in children, to detect the presence of vesicoureteral reflux, which may coexist with cystitis cystica or mimic its symptoms.