Thrombosis: Endovenous health-induced thrombosis occurs when a thrombus extends from the ablated greater saphenous vein into the deep femoral vein. It is differentiated into four types: type 1 at the junction of a superficial and deep vein; type 2 located in deep vein with partial occlusion (<50%); type 3 occlusion (50%-99%); type 4 complete occlusion. Incidence of endovenous health-induced thrombosis was found to be 1.4%, deep vein thrombosis was 0.3%, and pulmonary embolus was in 0.1% of cases.

Hematoma and ecchymoses: These are listed as complications of the procedure, but the impact on the patient is subjective depending on expectations. Furthermore, the use of higher wavelength lasers has been associated with decreased pain and ecchymoses due to better energy absorption by water and less by hemoglobin.

Skin burns: Ablating superficial veins close to the skin surface can cause full-thickness burns, but the frequency of complication significantly decreases to zero with better application of tumescent anesthesia. It can be treated with local wound care and monitoring for infection.

Nerve damage: GSV ablation can damage the saphenous nerve causing transient cutaneous paresthesia in the medial leg. SSV ablation can damage the sural nerve causing transient cutaneous paresthesia in the lateral foot. The majority of nerve injuries can be avoided with careful needle placement under ultrasound guidance and better tumescent anesthesia.

Recurrence: Meta-analysis showed that the five-year recurrence rate for laser ablation of GSV was found to be 36.6%, which is comparable to radiofrequency ablation and conventional surgery.