Although presentations of patients with LDs will be individualized and protean, there are general patterns that can help the health care provider more reliably identify the underlying pathology.

Commonly recognized specific learning disabilities include:

- Reading disability (dyslexia) - is the most common LD, representing at least 80% of all LDs, and results from deficits in phonologic processing. Skills necessary for appropriate phonologic processing involve reading decoding, phonics, ability to produce sounds, and proper auditory capabilities. The progression often originates with problems with reading decoding in the more nascent years, on to dysfluent reading, and then to difficulty with reading comprehension. These children may eventually avoid reading altogether.

- Dyscalculia - presents as a weakness in performing arithmetic operations. Patients will experience impediments organizing problems, finishing multiple-step calculations, distinguishing mathematical calculation signs. Proper math sense is incumbent on a broad range of neurodevelopmental functions including number sense, calculation and retrieval of math facts, the language of math, visual-spatial skills, and comprehension of word problems.

- Dysgraphia - is characterized by distorted writing despite thorough instruction and motor ability. Children with dysgraphia will produce inconsistent and illegible handwriting while rarely staying within the margins. These children might also demonstrate maladroit fine motor coordination, problems with spelling (encoding), grammar and syntax, or expressing ideas in writing.

- Nonverbal LDs (right hemisphere developmental LD) - as the name suggests, comprise hindrances with nonverbal activities, such as problem-solving, visual-spatial tasks, reading body language, and recognizing social cues.

Individual factors (intrinsic) and environmental factors will influence the clinical presentation. Intrinsic factors include comorbid psychiatric conditions and personality traits.