Extensive landmark studies assessing the mortality benefits of revascularization in a viable myocardium are not available, and studies are ongoing. Small- and moderate-sized studies showed no mortality benefits with revascularization and medical therapy versus medical therapy only in patients with viable myocardium. But these studies were statistically underpowered and had many confounding factors. In a sub-analysis of the STICH (Surgical Treatment for Ischemic Heart Failure) trial, 601 patients underwent a viability study before revascularization; about half received optimal medical therapy with CABG, and half received optimal medical therapy only. The arm with CABG and medical therapy had lower mortality, but it was statistically insignificant.

The STICH trial additionally showed that the increase in ejection fraction was more in patients with viable myocardium. Still, this increase was similar in both CABG with medical therapy and medical therapy-only groups. PARR-2 (FDG-PET assisted management of patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction and suspected coronary disease: a randomized, controlled trial) study showed PET viability imaging did not demonstrate survival benefits with revascularization compared to medical therapy.

The most important benefit mechanism from revascularization may be an improvement in ejection fraction and prevention of future coronary events, as the patients who benefitted most in the STICH trial were those with multivessel disease and severely reduced ejection fraction.

The benefits of CABG can be extrapolated from survival benefits to improving quality of life and exercise tolerance in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy.