Clinicians should include reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome as a differential in all patients presenting with a thunderclap headache, especially recurrent thunderclap headache. Other diagnoses on the differential are foremost, aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage, intracerebral hemorrhage, cerebral venous thrombosis, cervical arterial or cerebral arterial dissection, and pituitary apoplexy.

A common mimic of RCVS is primary angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS). When compared to patients with PACNS, patients with RCVS were younger than those with PACNS (mean age of 43 and 51, respectively) with approximately 2.6-fold higher percentage of the female gender. Also, an exposure or trigger, such as medications or illicit drugs, as well as physiological stress, is usually identified in patients with RCVS. In patients with PACNS, a trigger rarely gets identified. Although headache is common in both diseases, the nature of the headache in patients with RCVS a dramatic onset thunderclap headache, with recurrence. In patients with PACNS, reports are that about 50% present with headache; however, only 6% report as thunderclap headaches.

Diagnosis depends primarily on radiological imaging. Imaging plays a vital role in diagnosing and differentiating RCVS from PACNS. When compared, patients with RCVS had an abnormal initial CT or MRI 70% of the time, while patients with PACNS had exclusively abnormal initial CT or MRI. Infarcts are seen much more commonly in PACNS than RCVS (81% and 28%, respectively). Vasogenic edema and convexity subarachnoid hemorrhage are common features of RCVS but are rarely features of PACNS. An additional strong differentiating feature is a hyperintense artery sign on the FLAIR sequence of MRI, seen in approximately 61% of patients with RCVS and only in 7% of patients with PACNS.

The diagnosis of RCVS requires the radiological findings of vasospasm on cerebral angiogram features. Research has also compared cerebral angiogram features in patients with RCVS and PACNS. Vasospasm in RCVS is more widespread, symmetric, severe and includes involvement of the proximal arteries. Findings are described as smooth, tapering arterial constriction and dilation, giving a sausage-on-a-string appearance. The middle cerebral artery (MCA), anterior cerebral artery (ACA), and posterior cerebral artery (PCA) are most commonly involved in patients with RCVS. However, RCVS can involve almost any arterial segment. In PACNS, an irregular eccentric notched appearance of the cerebral arteries is more common. Additionally, RCVS patients have a significantly higher incidence of concurrent vascular lesions, such as dissection and unruptured aneurysms.

In patients with RCVS, cerebrospinal fluid examinations and analysis do not offer much utility, as results are normal.