Subacute combined degeneration is a rare but treatable complication of vitamin B12 deficiency, which is best managed by a multidisciplinary care team of internists, neurologists, gastroenterologists, and hematologists. Regular supplementation with vitamin B12 should be given to high-risk patients such as vegans and bariatric surgery patients to prevent neurological damage.

All clinicians must be aware of this condition as the presenting neurological symptoms are subtle and can be missed unless the clinician has a high index of suspicion. Patients with risk factors for cobalamin deficiency (veganism, gastrointestinal surgery, autoimmune gastritis, malabsorption, drug-induced) should be monitored for neurological symptoms of subacute combined degeneration. The presence of macrocytosis, hyper segmented neutrophils, and a mean corpuscular volume should also alert the physician to the possibility of an underlying cobalamin deficiency. [Level 2-3] In such cases, cobalamin, as well as folate levels, should be checked due to their close metabolic relationship. [Level 1]

Plasma homocysteine and methylmalonic levels can be used to support the diagnosis if serum B12 levels are borderline. In addition, anti-intrinsic factor antibodies should be checked in patients with suspected pernicious anemia, the most common cause of cobalamin deficiency (Level 1). Treatment with cyanocobalamin must be started without delay in patients with subacute combined degeneration to reverse and prevent irreversible neurological deficits. Treatment is continued until the deficiency is corrected and may extend indefinitely in patients with irreversible causes of B12 deficiency, such as pernicious anemia. Neurological deficits of subacute combined degeneration require regular assessment and monitoring by a neurologist.

Physical and occupational therapy may be necessary to reduce spasticity and improve gait and balance control. Patients may also require consultations with gastroenterology to determine if malabsorption is the cause of the deficiency. Those patients with pernicious anemia require gastroenterology referral for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy to exclude gastrointestinal malignancy.