Medicinal and recreational marijuana use comes with several reported side effects: dizziness, euphoria, somnolence, hallucinations, dry mouth, confusion, and nausea.  Furthermore, there remains some uncertainty regarding the more severe side effects such as myocardial infarction and/or stroke being associated with cannabis use. In chronic excessive users, cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome, in which marijuana use leads to the triad of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, may occur.

Another factor to consider is the method through which cannabis is delivered. Administration of cannabis may occur via oromucosal sprays, capsules, edibles food products, topical solutions, or inhalation. Smoke from the inhalation of marijuana has been found to contain several carcinogens that are also in tobacco smoke, such as formaldehyde, arsenic, and benzene.

Lastly, when utilizing medicinal marijuana to treat the side effects associated with oncology treatment regimens, clinicians must consider the possibility of cannabinoids interfering with the effectiveness of their patient's cancer therapy. Bar-Sela et al. evaluated the interaction between immunotherapy and cannabis use for patients with metastatic (stage IV) disease. The study found a significant decrease in overall survival rates (6.4 months for cannabis users vs. 28.5 months nonusers) and time to tumor progression (3.4 months for cannabis users vs. 13.1 months for non-users).

Halting or restraining the body's immune response may inhibit the effectiveness of immunotherapy and weaken the body's ability to destroy cancer cells. Exogenous cannabinoids, specifically THC, were found to suppress CD8 T-cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes. THC was also discovered to down-regulate the proliferation of lymphocytes and their maturation into cytotoxic T lymphocytes.