The distal femur is defined as the region from the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction to the articular surface of the knee, involving approximately the distal 15 cm of the femur. The shaft of the femur is a cylindrical shape and extends into two curved condyles at the distal end.  When viewed from the axial plane, the shape of the distal femur is trapezoidal.  The lateral cortex slopes at approximately 10 degrees, and the medial cortex slopes approximately 25 degrees.

The most common mechanism involves direct trauma to a flexed knee, typically seen in dashboard injuries during motor vehicle accidents. The deforming forces of distal femur fractures depend on the location of the fracture relative to the adductor tubercle. Generally, the hamstrings and extensor mechanism causes the fracture to shorten, and the adductor magnus displaces the fracture into varus. The two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle extend the distal fragment, resulting in an apex posterior angulation of the fracture. With intercondylar split fracture patterns, the two heads may also cause the distal condylar fragments to separate and rotate.

Soft tissue injuries are often associated with distal femur fractures. These may include ligamentous disruptions of the knee joint that are often difficult to diagnosis until the distal femur fracture has undergone stabilization. Controversy remains regarding the timing of treatment with concomitant cruciate ligament injuries. Options, including primary repair, ligament augmentation, and ligament reconstruction, are all made more difficult in the setting of a fracture and internal fixation devices. Polytrauma patients may also present with associated fractures to the tibia. Fractures of the distal femur with associated tibia plateau injury, referred to as a floating knee, often require CT imaging and aggressive treatment.

Distal femur fractures that result from a gunshot injury, high-energy trauma, or open injury present with a high risk for vascular injury. The femoral artery lies within the adductor canal, approximately 10 cm above the knee along the posterior medial cortex. Injuries associated with a knee dislocation increase the risk of injuring the popliteal artery.

The incidence of distal femur fractures following total knee arthroplasty is increasing.