The transversus thoracic muscle plane block (TTMPB) is a novel fascial plane nerve block that provides analgesia to the sternum and anterior chest wall. Sternal pain following a median sternotomy or open cardiothoracic surgery is very common and can be debilitating for patients. The TTMPB was primarily designed for these patients and has been shown to significantly reduce such pain and lead to improved patient outcomes. It is performed at the level of T4-T5 under ultrasound guidance and is a good alternative to neuraxial anesthesia when these techniques are contraindicated. This block has utility outside of large cardiothoracic surgeries and may be ideal in treating sternal fractures, chronic pain, and any pain located on the anterior chest wall, making it a versatile option in the anesthesiologist’s toolbox for pain management. This activity highlights the TTMPB’s utility in perioperative medicine and describes its role in advancing healthcare outcomes for patients presenting to the hospital primarily for open cardiothoracic surgery.

**Objectives:**
- Review the relevant anatomy of the chest wall related to the transversus thoracic muscle plane block (TTMPB).
- Outline the process of successfully performing a transversus thoracic muscle plane block (TTMPB).
- Describe the benefits of a transversus thoracic muscle plane block (TTMPB) over other forms of pain management in patients undergoing cardiothoracic surgery.
- Summarize the risks associated with performing a transversus thoracic muscle plane block (TTMPB).