**Initial treatment includes:**

- Aggressive wound care and antibiotics as needed for contaminated wounds.

- Analgesics.

- ICE and elevation.

- Immobilization with splinting, Bulky Jones type splints are commonly applied.

- All patients who are candidates for outpatient treatment are non-weight bearing at discharge.

**Closed fractures**

- All surgical treatment is aimed at restoration of heel height and width (i.e., reconstructing the anatomy to reapproximate Bohler and Gissane angles), repair and realignment of the subtalar joint, and returning the mechanical axis of the hindfoot to functionality.

- Most extraarticular fractures are treated conservatively with 10-12 weeks of casting (true extra-articular fractures only account for roughly 20% of all calcaneal fractures)

- Calcaneal tuberosity avulsion displaced sustentaculum tali, and large substantial calcaneal body fractures may require operative management.

- Some intraarticular injuries may be treated in a closed fashion depending upon severity. Many are treated with either open surgical reduction and internal fixation, percutaneous pinning, or sometimes arthrodesis.

- Nondisplaced Sanders type I fractures may be treated in a conservative, closed fashion.

A recent randomized controlled trial reviewed operative versus non-operative treatment for closed, displaced, intra-articular calcaneus fractures.  It included a total of 151 patients with 73 in the operative arm and 78 in the non-operative arm.  The operative group was treated as described below with the extensile lateral approach and the non-operative group was treated with initial immobilization followed by gentle mobilization as allowed by pain.  The results of the trial included a higher complication rate including infection and a requirement to remove hardware in 11% of the operative group, but there were no differences between the group with regards to health outcomes, range of motion, heel width, walking speed, and gait.  All participants of the study recovered very slowly from injury, most improvement plateaued at 18 months and most participants reported ongoing adverse effects from their injury at 2 years.  This study concluded with recommendations against operative intervention for closed, displaced, intra-articular fractures of the calcaneus.

A more recent meta-analysis from 2017 composed of 18 trials including 1467 patients found significantly improved anatomical improvements with operative intervention with regards to the restoration of Bohler's angle, calcaneal heights and widths as well as the likelihood of resuming former work.  The meta-analysis did confirm the higher complication rate of operative intervention but concluded that operative treatment of displaced, intra-articular calcaneal fractures has better anatomic recovery, functional outcomes and return to work.

**Surgical Treatment:**

When surgical management is recommended it is with the goal to restore calcaneal morphology and to restore articular congruency.  The decision to move forward with surgery must be based on fully informed consent of the abundant risks and expected benefits of surgery and must involve the patient in shared decision making as the operative intervention for calcaneal fractures is fraught with complications.

Surgical treatment must be delayed until the so-called, "wrinkle sign," returns.  This will usually occur five to ten days following the injury. Furthermore, all serous and hemorrhagic blisters must be epithelialized.

Surgical intervention is typically recommended for the following indications:

- Displaced tongue type Fractures

- Joint depression with articular comminution or anterior process involvement

- Bohler's angle of <5 degrees on initial presentation

- Fracture Dislocation

- Anterior process fractures with >25% of the calcaneocuboid articulation involved

- Calcaneal body fractures with significant varus or valgus malalignment, lateral impingement, loss of calcaneal height, or significant translation of the posterior tuberosity.

**Open fractures**

Open calcaneal fractures require emergent irrigation and debridement and careful wound management.  Outcomes with open calcaneal fractures are generally poorer than closed fractures.  An article by Aldridge et al in 2004 reviewed a case series of open calcaneal fractures and found that despite an increase in complications the quality of life metrics was higher than expected.  They found that despite a higher complication rate than closed calcaneal fractures treated operatively the complication rate in their paper was not as high as had been previously reported in the literature.

Previous literature by Siebert et al included 36 open calcaneal fractures in which there were 23 cases with complications including need for soft tissue coverage, nine cases of osteomyelitis, five amputations and one arthrodesis.  Their cohort of patients additionally had poor quality of life metrics post-operatively. The worst results with regards to patient-reported outcomes and complications were found in the Grade III open fractures.

Surgical treatment tends to fall into one of two categories, the open extensile lateral approach, and minimally invasive techniques.  Tourniquet use is recommended for both approaches.

**The Extensile Lateral Approach:**

The extensile lateral approach has been the primary approach for many years for operatively treating calcaneal fractures.  It allows for adequate visualization intra-operatively and allows for manipulation of the fracture to restore alignment and articular surfaces. The extensile lateral approach is performed by creating full-thickness soft tissue and periosteal flaps as previously described by Gould and lateral modified by Benirschke and Sangeorzan.

The fracture lines are opened at this time and may include temporary removal of the lateral wall.  Manual traction is used to restore the high and length of the tuberosity (placement of a Steinmann pin into the tuberosity is helpful in restoring these parameters).   The varus deformity must also be corrected at this time.  A temporary reduction may be maintained by the placement of Kirschner wires through this tuberosity fragment into the "constant" fragment of the medial sustentaculum.  The lateral posterior facet joint surface must be anatomically reduced under direct visualization and may be held with temporary fixation, typically lag screw fixation will allow for compression and healing across the articular surface as described by Sanders et al

**The Minimally Invasive Approach**:

The goals of the minimally invasive technique (or sinus tarsi approach) are to minimize soft tissue injury while simultaneously allowing for fracture reduction and stabilization.  The indication for this approach includes Sanders type II and III, patients with comorbidities that make soft tissue more vulnerable to complications include diabetes mellitus, smoking and/or obesity, peripheral vascular disease, and minimal posterior facet fragment comminution. The sinus tarsi approach is performed by creating a 2-4cm incision along a line from the tip of the fibula towards the base of the fourth metatarsal base. that allows for direct visualization of the posterior facet and the anterolateral fragment of the lateral wall.  Typically a small, low-profile is plate is used after reduction of the joint surface and is placed along the joint-line.  Adjunctive percutaneous screws are often placed to assist with the other parameters of calcaneal morphology including height, width and hindfoot alignment.  A Shantz pin is still used through a percutaneous incision for manipulation of the calcaneal tuberosity.  Alignment is still evaluated under fluoroscopy.  However, because of the lack of elevation of the L-flap, there is a decreased risk of peroneal tendon irritation and sural nerve complications.  Of note, this same incision may be used for subsequent subtalar arthrodesis should that be necessary.

Some authors contend that anatomic reduction, fracture disimpaction, and repositioning is exceedingly difficult with limited exposures.  Once the surgeon has committed to the minimal approach conversion to the extensile lateral approach is not recommended and thus great care must be taken in determining the correct approach for the correct patient.

Kline et al retrospectively reviewed a cohort of 112 calcaneal fractures in which 79 underwent the traditional extensile lateral approach and 33 were treated using minimally invasive techniques.  This allocation was based on surgeon preference.  The group demographics were comparable.  The extensile group's fracture composition was 53% Sanders II and 47% Sanders III.  The minimally invasive group's fracture composition was 61% Sanders II and 39% Sanders III.  Both groups had a 100% union rate and similar radiographic parameters with regards to Bohler's angle and the angle of Gissane.  The wound complication rate was 29% in the extensile lateral group with 9% of the total treated cases requiring repeat surgery for those complications.  Only 6% of the minimally invasive group had wound complications and none required additional surgery.  Kline et al concluded that the minimally invasive technique was valuable and could lead to a lower complication rate and comparable results.

**Special Cases:**

**Medial External Fixator Placement:**

Some authors have adopted a two-stage surgical approach for severely displaced closed calcaneal fractures to try to mitigate the issue of soft tissue compromise.  The calcaneus assumes a shortened and widened position with heel varus as a result of the fracture displacement and loss of Bohler's angle.  A small series was performed by Githens et al with the supposition that medial external fixator placement would allow for improved soft tissue healing, early restoration of calcaneal morphology, and reduction of wound-related complications by re-tensioning the incision during the operative intervention.  Twenty-one fractures were included in this series and the authors found that calcaneal length, height, and axial alignment can be restored with an external fixator, Bohler's angle cannot be restored with external fixator and ligamentotaxis alone.  The authors had no deep or superficial wound infections requiring surgical intervention, which is promising but the authors simultaneously cautioned against drawing conclusions from such a small and limited series without statistical power or a control group.

**Tongue Type Fractures:**

Tongue-type fractures can lead to variable amounts of displacement of the tuberosity fragment, but due to the pull of the Achilles tendon, significant superior and dorsal displacement may occur leading to the potential to tent the posterior heel skin and place the soft tissue at significant risk of breakdown.  Emergent reduction to relieve this tented skin is often recommended.  A temporizing measure is typically to place a removable posterior splint in plantarflexion with close skin monitoring until definitive treatment. If not treated emergently skin breakdown may lead to disastrous sequelae. Urgent fracture reduction should proceed at the first sign of skin compromise.

**Extremely comminuted fractures:**

Some surgeons will favor primary subtalar arthrodesis as it seems to reduce the need for subsequent procedures and the associated increased costs and lost time from work associated with those additional surgeries.