**Anatomical factors**- Normal pleural space lies between the parietal and the visceral pleura. While the parietal pleura lines the inner thoracic wall, including the bilateral medial mediastinum, subcostal right and left diaphragmatic leaflets, inner ribs, and associated musculature, the visceral pleura lies in close approximation with the lung parenchyma. The visceral and parietal pleurae join at the hilum.

The normal fluid volume in the pleural space measures ten ml/0.13 (0.26 +/- 0.1) ml/kg body weight.

**Physiological factors**- Both increased production and decreased reabsorption have been associated with the development of MPE.

**Molecular factors**- Molecules predisposing to the development of pleural vessels' hyperpermeability, which leads to overproduction of pleural fluid, comprise three different classes of chemical mediators.

**Genetic factors**- Mutations in KRAS, EGFR, MET, BRAF, PIK3CA, and RET, have been identified to be associated with the development of MPE.

**Impact on Respiratory Physiology**- The development of pleural effusion has been associated with hypoxemia and a reduction in the partial pressure of oxygen. The occurrence of a mild intrapulmonary shunt also predisposes to the development of reduced arterial oxygenation. A dramatic relief in the sensation of breathlessness following a successful thoracentesis procedure has also led to an added emphasis on the impact of pleural fluid accumulation on respiratory dynamics. Activation of mechanoreceptors in response to pleural fluid accumulation, in response to stretch, cough, and altered lung volumes have been shown to underlie the pathophysiology of dyspnea in MPE. Both alterations in hemi-diaphragmatic movement and paradoxical movement of the diaphragm have been identified. Shifts in inspiratory muscle pressure-volume curves predisposing to an unfavorable pressure-volume interdependence between increased thoracic volume and pressure have resulted in the accumulation of pleural fluid. Alterations in the length-tension relationship have also been shown to predispose to dyspnea.