In developed countries, the overall cure rate for sporadic Burkitt lymphoma approaches 90% in pediatric and young adult populations. Treatment is stratified based on patient age and stage. In pediatric patients with complete surgical resection of disease, it is recommended that patients receive two cycles of chemotherapy of moderate-intensity (i.e. cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisolone, doxorubicin). In pediatric patients with stage I and II disease, overall survival is greater than 98%.

Standard chemotherapy regimens, such as cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP) are inadequate in treating adult Burkitt lymphoma. Current recommendations are offered by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network and include multiagent regimens with CNS prophylaxis:

- R-hyper-CVAD

- CODOX-M/IVACA

- dose-adjusted EPOCH with rituximab

Immunotherapy has a role in treatment. Rituximab (anti-CD20) should be a component of all treatment regimens as it is correlated with a positive prognosis. Newer anti-CD20 agents, ofatumumab and obinutuzumab, are under investigation. Blinatumomab, an Anti-CD19 monoclonal antibody, and inotuzumab, an anti-CD22 monoclonal antibody, are under investigation. Experimental drugs to inhibit the growth of BL B-cells by inducing apoptosis include histone acetylase inhibitors (i.e., rapamycin, valproic acid, tubacin) and mTOR inhibitors (i.e., temsirolimus). Anti-PD1 agents prevent tumor cells from evading the immune system via the PD1 pathway. Therapies inhibiting the MYC oncogene are under investigation.

Highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HARRT) has allowed for the management of immunodeficiency-related Burkitt lymphoma using high dose chemotherapy in patients with HIV. In this patient population, it is advised that less toxic chemotherapy is used because of the susceptibility to organ failure and infection.

In patients with relapsing disease, the prognosis is typically poor, and treatment will depend on the specific clinical scenario. However, the development of more effective chemotherapy drugs (i.e., ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide) is improving patient outcomes. Salvage regimens may include R-IVAC, R-GDP, R-ICE, DHAP.