# Continuing Education Activity

Vertebral osteomyelitis is challenging to diagnose in its early stages and unfortunately can lead to significant morbidity in late stages. Systematic clinical workup and utilization of treatment algorithms are necessary to optimize clinical outcomes. This activity reviews etiology, evaluation, and management of vertebral osteomyelitis and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this disease.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the patient population at risk for vertebral osteomyelitis.
- Describe the clinical evaluation of vertebral osteomyelitis.
- Review typical imaging findings in vertebral osteomyelitis.
- Explain why careful planning and discussion amongst interprofessional team members involved in the management of patients with vertebral osteomyelitis will improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Vertebral osteomyelitis (additionally referred to as spinal osteomyelitis or spondylodiskitis) accounts for approximately 3% to 5% of all cases of osteomyelitis annually.

Vertebral osteomyelitis may develop after trauma to the spine, post-surgery, or via hematogeneous spread from an adjacent site. If left untreated, this infection has high morbidity leading to spinal deformity, paraplegia, and even death.

# Etiology

Vertebral osteomyelitis is most often a single pathogen infection. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common pathogen, particularly in the setting of hematogenous dissemination.S. aureus bacteremia within the preceding 3 months and compatible spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings.Propionibacterium acnes are the most common pathogens in cases of exogenous osteomyelitis after spinal surgery, particularly with the use of spinal fixation devices.Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Brucella.Aspergillus), and intravenous drug users and indwelling intravenous catheters (Candida and Aspergillus).

Risk factors for vertebral osteomyelitis include:

- Advanced age

- State of immunosuppression

- Diabetes

- Long term corticosteroid use

- Malignancy

- Malnutrition

- IV drug use

# Epidemiology

The incidence of vertebral osteomyelitis differs, depending on the region and population being studied. The estimated incidence of vertebral osteomyelitis in the United States is 4.8 cases per 100,000 and has been increasing in the last few decades.

# Pathophysiology

Hematogenous dissemination is the primary route of spread for vertebral osteomyelitis. This differs from extremity infection where direct inoculation through adjacent skin ulcers is the more common form of pathogen dissemination. Vertebral osteomyelitis can also originate from iatrogenic infection following spinal surgery and spinal procedures including facet or epidural injections for pain management. Once infectious pathogens have access to the vertebral column, the infection can spread to adjacent paraspinal tissues, nerve roots, epidural space, and even the intradural space; this creates inflammation, abscesses, and both soft tissue and osseous destruction.

The majority of infections involve the vertebral body and only 5% of cases involve the posterior structures of the spine. This disparity is chiefly due to the excellent blood supply of the vertebral bodies. Besides the arterial route of spread, retrograde seeding of venous blood via the Batson plexus can also spread the infection to the spinal cord. In rare cases, the infection may spread in a continuous fashion from the retropharyngeal space to the vertebral body.

# History and Physical

The initial clinical assessment of a patient with vertebral osteomyelitis often yields nonspecific and nonfocal findings, particularly early in the disease process. Back pain is the most common presenting symptom of vertebral osteomyelitis, with fever being present in only 35% to 60% of cases.

# Evaluation

The differential diagnosis for back pain in the outpatient setting is broad and can include spondylosis (degenerative disc disease and facet arthrosis), vertebral body and pars interarticularis fracture, or muscle spasms. Febrile status does not significantly narrow the differential, as fever is common in viral syndromes, infections of the retroperitoneum, vertebral osteomyelitis, and many other causes. Nonspecific symptomatology, nonfocal physical exam, and a broad differential all increase the likelihood of delayed diagnosis.

A complete blood cell count (CBC) is a reasonable test in the workup of febrile back pain. Unfortunately, in vertebral osteomyelitis, this test has low sensitivity. The neutrophil count is often normal,

In endemic areas, Brucella serologic testing and M. tuberculosis testing including purified protein derivative (PPD), or an interferon-y release assay are appropriate in the workup.

Besides laboratory evaluation, imaging also plays an important role in the workup of vertebral osteomyelitis. Radiographs are insensitive for vertebral osteomyelitis identification. However, radiography is often the first imaging test because of its wide availability and acquisition speed. It may suggest an alternative diagnosis for back pain.

Computed tomography (CT) evaluation has relatively limited utility in the evaluation of vertebral osteomyelitis as it may be at the reference range early in the disease process and may underestimate the soft tissue and bony extent in advanced cases. CT is often more sensitive than radiography and may show subtle vertebral endplate erosion or soft tissue abscess. CT findings of intervertebral disc space narrowing are nonspecific, as this finding is common to degenerative disc disease and osteomyelitis. MRI evaluation can improve specificity in this setting.

While MRI is the modality of choice for vertebral osteomyelitis evaluation, some patients may have an MRI contraindication and need an alternate imaging modality. Nuclear medicine is one such tool when MRI is not an option or not available. Gallium-67 single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) has proven to be an excellent MRI alternative with sensitivity comparable to MRI.

In situations where imaging findings support vertebral osteomyelitis but blood cultures are negative, percutaneous aspiration or biopsy is a recommended strategy to isolate the microorganism responsible for infection before starting antibiotic therapy.

# Treatment / Management

Antibiotic therapy is the mainstay of vertebral osteomyelitis treatment. Multiple regimens have been proposed that utilize both parenteral and oral antibiotic therapies based on the specific infectious pathogen. Most authorities recommend 6 weeks of therapy. Longer courses are not more efficacious for typical cases.

Bracing to provide stability is common. After treatment, serial scans and imaging studies are necessary to ensure healing is occurring. Rehabilitation to restore muscle strength is recommended.

# Differential Diagnosis

- Chronic non-bacterial osteomyelitis

- Ewing sarcoma

- Gout

- Gaucher disease

- Malignancy

- Pseudogout

- Septic arthritis

- Sickle cell anemia

- Vitamin C deficiency

- Vertebral compression fracture

- Vaso-occlusive pain episode

# Prognosis

Even with treatment, the recovery after vertebral osteomyelitis is prolonged. Some patients even require multiple procedures. In addition, surgery also has serious complications including paralysis. At least 15% of patients suffer from permanent neurological deficits. Most patients remain disabled and the quality of life is poor.

# Complications

- Recurrence of infection

- Fracture

- Paralysis

- Permanent neurological deficits

- Chronic pain

- Disability

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Patients with vertebral osteomyelitis should be educated regarding the prognosis for their disease process. The importance of medication adherence and the consequences of inadequate treatment should be discussed in detail. Patients should be urged to follow up regularly and to seek immediate care if their symptoms worsen during their treatment.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The diagnosis and management of vertebral osteomyelitis is not always simple and is best managed by an interprofessional team that includes a radiologist, infectious disease expert, orthopedic surgeon, internist, pathologist, nurses, and pharmacists. The initial treatment in all patients is antibiotics for a minimum of 6 weeks. Surgery is only recommended for complex cases, the presence of neurological deficits or failure to respond to antibiotics.

The final challenge of vertebral osteomyelitis management is determining the optimal follow-up strategy and diagnosing treatment failure. To date, there is low consensus for the definition of treatment failure. The current Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines define treatment failure as microbiologically confirmed pathogen persistence despite targeted antimicrobial therapy for an appropriate duration of treatment.

For treatment failure, management options are best selected by trending clinical, laboratory, and imaging data. If imaging suggests a persistent surgical target (paravertebral or epidural abscess), then a surgical consultation is appropriate.

The outcomes for patients with vertebral osteomyelitis are guarded. Even those who recover are left with mild to moderate degrees of functional and neurological deficits.