**Preprocedural Assessment**

Preprocedural assessment of the mitral valve is the most crucial step of PMBC, and it determines the procedural success and long-term outcomes of the procedures.

Multiple echocardiographic scoring systems have been developed to assess the suitability of mitral valve for PMBC and predict the outcomes of the procedure. Wilkin`s score was one of the first scoring systems proposed to predict the results of PMBC, and it is the most commonly used scoring system in the contemporary era.

A score of 8 or less predicts a more favorable outcome than those with a higher score. However, a score higher than 8 does not exclude a patient from having a balloon mitral commissurotomy. Although commissural calcification or fusion is not included in Wilkin`s scoring system, it is another important predictor for poor outcomes after balloon mitral commissurotomy.

In addition to evaluating valve morphology, a transesophageal echocardiogram is done in every patient before PMBC to assess the degree of mitral regurgitation and left atrial (appendage) thrombus. Left atrial thrombus is most commonly found in the left atrial appendage, and a transesophageal echocardiogram has a higher sensitivity than a transthoracic echocardiogram for evaluating left atrial appendage thrombus.

**Preparation for the Procedure**

On the day of the surgery, patients receive instructions to fast at least 6 to 8 hours before the procedure. Anticoagulation therapy is held prior to the procedure. At least two peripheral venous lines are required to administer drugs, and electrocardiographic leads are placed to monitor rhythm. Patients are selectively intubated, and the procedure is performed under general anesthesia. Before performing the percutaneous transcatheter balloon mitral valvuloplasty, a right heart catheterization is done to assess the pressures inside the invasive cardiac hemodynamics.