The intrinsic pulmonary restriction is most commonly characterized by inflammation of the pulmonary parenchyma with subsequent deposition of collagen in the interstitium, which ultimately leads to pulmonary fibrosis. Over time, this progressive fibrosis thickens the alveolar septae, imposing a physical barrier to gas exchange. This is reflected in pulmonary function testing (PFT), where decreased diffusing capacity for carbon dioxide (DLCO) can be observed.

The pathophysiology of extrapulmonary forms provides an altered mechanical function very often induced by deformations of the rib cage, but also linked to neurological or muscular pathologies, or from the occupation of space, as in the case of pleural effusions.

**The Compliance**

The distensibility of the respiratory system is termed as compliance (C). It a key concept in respiratory physiology and represents the volume change produced by a change in the distending pressure. It is determined by elastic forces formula:

C=ΔV/ΔP

Of note, lung compliance is independent of the thoracic cage, which is a semirigid casing, but lung and thorax are systems arranged in series. Thus, the compliance of an intact respiratory system is the sum of the compliances of both of these structures. Therefore, it is affected by any disease of the lungs, pleura, or chest wall. Lung compliance decreases if the lung is over rigid (restrictive pathologies) and increases in less stiff conditions such as emphysema. Thoracic compliance decreases in conditions of reduced distensibility of the rib cage (obesity, kyphoscoliosis). Combined compliance of thorax and lungs is 110 ml/cmH2O, whereas the compliance of lung alone is approximately 200 ml/cmH2O. Decreased compliance, either from intrapulmonary or extrapulmonary etiology, results in greater pressure generation and energy requirements from the respiratory muscles for any given tidal volume.

**Hypoxemia**

Hypoxemia (PaO2<60 mmHg), whether or not in association with hypercapnia (PaCO2>45 mmHg), can be a consequence of lung damage, and an expression of respiratory failure. In restrictive syndromes, it occurs with different mechanisms depending on the type of the disease. In the intrinsic conditions, it is produced by alterations in the gas diffusion with a mismatch in the ventilation-perfusion ratio. This process leads, in turn, to an increased intrapulmonary shunt that is the portion of the pulmonary blood flow that bypasses the alveoli or perfuses unventilated alveoli and does not participate in the gas exchanges. On the other hand, hypoventilation and pump failure are prominent in the extrinsic conditions.

**Functional Characteristics**

Functional characteristics of a restrictive pattern in pulmonary function tests (PFTs) include decreased TLC and forced vital capacity (FVC). This latter parameter is the maximum amount of air exhaled after a maximal inhalation and depends on the elasticity of the lung tissue, the anatomy of the thoracic cage, and the function of the respiratory muscles. According to the American Thoracic Society (ATS), the TLC predicted (adjusted for gender, age, height) value can be used for assessing the severity of the restrictive condition:

- TLC < 80% = Restrictive disease

- 70-80 % predicted: mild restrictive disease

- 60-70% predicted: moderate restrictive disease

- 50-60% predicted: moderately severe restrictive disease

- < 50% predicted: severe restrictive disease

Of note, in restrictive diseases, the forced expiratory volume over 1 second (FEV1) usually slightly decreases or stays normal, and the ratio of FEV1 to FVC is generally preserved or increased. These alterations in pulmonary dynamics can be compensated by an increased respiratory rate, with hypercapnia developing only at later stages of the disease.

The functional data are different from those observed in obstructive syndromes in which TLC and FVC are normal (80-120% of predicted) or increased, while the significant figure is the decrease in the FEV1 compared to FCV.

In summary, the patterns in PFTs in the two groups of respiratory disease are:

Restrictive Patterns:

- Decreased FVC and TLC

- FEV1 is usually slightly decreased or stays normal

- The ratio of FEV1 to FVC is usually preserved or increased.

- Reduced DLCO

Obstructive Patterns:

- TLC and FCV are normal or increased

- Decreased FEV1 compared to FCV

- The ratio of FEV1 to FVC is decreased

- Reduced DLCO in emphysema, normal in chronic bronchitis, normal or increased in asthma

There are also combined obstructive and restrictive patterns, usually featuring low or normal FVC, low FEV1, and a lower FEV1 to FVC ratio and with a decreased, normal, or increased TLC.