Medial tibial stress syndrome is the most commonly known case of tibial periostitis and is better known as shin splints. Shin splints are periostitis of the tibia from repetitive use. A chief complaint of new physical activity like running, after prolonged periods of inactivity, is the usual cause. The pathology is also present in dancers, or any activity requiring an overload of the lower extremities. The posteromedial surface of the tibia is the most common location of the inflammation. Patients will often describe the pain as sharp, non-radiating, and is elicited by their inducing activity. The pain will normally last the length of the activity, and shortly after, the patient chooses to rest.

Physical and anatomical variances like obesity and hyperpronated (flat) arches put an individual at risk. Also, improper footwear and gait abnormalities increase the propensity to develop shin splints. The physical exam is important to separate shin splints from other pathologies like fractures. Palpating the length of the tibia, anteromedially and posteromedially, is important. Pain and tenderness are present on the exam. In severe cases, nodules can be palpable. Sometimes, manipulation of the ankle and assessing for tightness in soleus and gastrocnemius can be an indication for shin splints. Rest, ice, compression, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the mainstay of shin splint management, in that order. Shin splints pain that is resistant to conservative management or pain that occurs outside of inducing activity may require imaging to rule out a stress fracture and other pathologies.

Tibial stress fractures have a similar presentation to shin splints. The epidemiology is also similar, with the addition of avid runners, and people with low BMIs. An X-ray is the first-line, but inconclusive imaging modality. X-rays often miss stress fractures, especially in the initial inflammatory period. The patient can undergo another X-ray after 2 to 3 weeks, or if an urgent diagnosis is needed, they can opt for an MRI. An MRI is the most sensitive imaging modality for tibial stress fractures and can aid in excluding other pathologies like acute compartment syndrome.

Apophysitis of the tibial tubercle, or Osgood-Schlatter disease, is another pain syndrome of the tibia. The pain is located directly below the knee with that, like shin splints, gets worse with activity and improves with rest; this is the point where the patellar tendon inserts on the tibia and can become stressed with repeated use of the knee. A palpable bony prominence can be present, and palpation to this point can be extremely painful. Rest and ice are the mainstays of treatment. Since this syndrome is most common in ten to fifteen-year-olds, the symptoms usually resolve as the epiphyseal plates close.

Compartment syndrome is a significant complication of tibial fractures and other traumas to the leg. Following the trauma, blood and other fluids fill the compartments created by the thick fascia and bones. This increased fluid within the compartments causes an increase in pressure that can compress the venous return, which can lead to tissue ischemia and cellular death.