Symptoms may be immediate or delayed after contact with Euphorbia latex. They may vary in severity based on the exposure location and amount of sap with which they come into contact. For example, patients might provide a history of gardening or landscaping and may report a sap or liquid squirting into their eye.

Following dermal exposures, patients might not know what substance is causing their symptoms or that their symptoms are due to plant material. Therefore, patients should be questioned regarding any new exposures to plants, chemicals, cosmetics, detergents, pets, or medications. Phytodermatitis symptoms after skin contact include burning, pain, and pruritis. Severe pain and irritation may be present, but symptoms are usually mild. Dermatitis symptoms tend to have a delayed onset beginning 2 to 8 hours after exposure, and they may progressively increase in severity.

Ocular symptoms begin immediately following contact with Euphorbia latex. The exposure may involve sap squirting or dripping directly into their eye or may occur if the sap is on their hands and they rub their eye. Symptoms include severe pain, burning, lacrimation, photophobia, and potentially loss of vision.

Ingestion of Euphorbia latex may irritate the oral cavity, throat burning, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.

Physical exam of the skin may reveal localized erythema, tenderness, blisters, vesicles, purpura, plaques, hemorrhagic bullae, or ulceration.

Ocular exam findings may range from mild conjunctivitis to severe keratouveitis or even blindness. Physical exam of the eye, including visual acuity assessment, pH testing, intraocular pressure (IOP) measurement, and slit-lamp exam, should be performed when ocular symptoms are present.Euphorbia latex.