**Intrinsic Respiratory drive**

The respiratory center is composed of three distinct neuronal groups in the brain: the dorsal respiratory group in the nucleus tractus solitarius, the ventral respiratory group in the medulla, and the pontine respiratory group in the pons. The latter is further classified into the pneumotaxic center and the apneustic center.

The dorsal respiratory group is mainly inspiratory, while the ventral medullary group is primarily expiratory. The rostral half of the ventral medullary group additionally contains neurons responsible for rhythm generation. Of particular significance is the preBötzinger complex, whose neurons possess neurokinin 1 (NK1) receptors, a potential target for many pharmacological, physiological, and anatomical studies. The pontine groupings are responsible for modulating the intensity and frequency of the medullary signals with their pneumotaxic groups limiting inspiration and their apneustic centers prolonging and encouraging inhalation. Each of these groups communicates with one another in a concerted effort as the pace-making potential of respiration.

**Thoracic Neural Receptors**

Mechanoreceptors found in the airways, trachea, lung, and pulmonary vessels provide sensory information to the respiratory center in the brain with regards to lung volume, airway stretch, and vascular congestion. There are two primary types of thoracic sensors: slow adapting stretch spindles and rapid adapting irritant receptors. The former conveys only volume information while the latter additionally responds to irritative chemical triggers such as harmful foreign agents and dust. Both types of mechanoreceptors transmit information to the respiratory center via cranial nerve X (the vagus nerve) to increase the breathing rate, the volume of breathing, or to stimulate cough. A notable example is the Pulmonary stretch reflex, also called the Herring-Breuer reflex, which prevents the lungs from over-inflating by sending inhibitory impulses to the inspiration center. Another type of receptor worth mentioning is the juxta-capillary receptors that respond to vascular congestion and interstitial edema in the lungs by sending signals to the brain to increase the breathing rate.

**Peripheral Chemoreceptors**

Peripheral chemoreceptors include the carotid and aortic bodies. The carotid bodies are located at the bifurcation of the common carotid arteries and send information to the respiratory center via cranial nerve IX, the glossopharyngeal nerve. The aortic bodies are situated within the aortic arch and send information to the brain via cranial nerve X, the vagus nerve. While capable of sensing carbon dioxide and hydrogen ions, the peripheral sensory system primarily detects low arterial oxygen levels (hypoxemia). Hypercapnia and acidosis increase the sensitivity of these sensors and, therefore, play a partial role in the receptor's function. The carotid bodies comprise approximately 15% of the total driving force of respiration. In healthy individuals, the respiratory center is more sensitive to rising carbon dioxide sensed by central chemoreceptors than decreasing oxygen levels. Oxygen runs the respiratory center only when there is severe hypoxemia.

**Central Chemoreceptors**

Central chemoreceptors in the ventral surface of the medulla and the retrotrapezoid nucleus hold most of the remaining control over the respiratory drive. They primarily sense pH changes in the central nervous system caused by alterations in arterial carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is a lipid-soluble molecule that freely diffuses across the blood-brain barrier and forms hydron ions within the cerebrospinal fluid. Chemoreceptors, in turn, respond to pH changes as they become more acidic and send sensory input to the brain to stimulate hyperventilation. The result is a slow and deep breathing pattern that helps eliminate carbon dioxide from the body. Likewise, when arterial PCO2 drops, pH in the cerebrospinal fluid becomes alkalotic, and hypoventilation ensues. Therefore, arterial PCO2 is the chief determinant of the respiratory drive under normal conditions.

**Integration of Receptor Input**

Respiratory centers located within the medulla and the pons are responsible for generating the baseline respiratory rhythm. However, an aggregated sensory input from the peripheral sensory system monitoring oxygen levels and the central sensory system monitoring pH modifies the rate and depth of respiration. These signals, along with several other sensory inputs coming from peripheral mechanoreceptors, modulate the respiratory rhythm to create a unified neural signal sent to the primary muscles of respiration. The total input culminates in a respiratory rate of approximately 12 breaths per minute for an average adult while at rest.

**Respiratory Drive During Sleep**

A variety of changes in respiratory physiology occur while asleep, especially during the rapid eye movement stage, also referred to as REM sleep. During REM, breathing becomes very irregular with periods of hypopnea, apnea, and a continually changing tidal volume and respiratory rate. Paralysis of all accessory muscles of respiration ensues, and people become diaphragm dependent. Additionally, drive output from the respiratory controller in the brain declines, and the respiratory center becomes less responsive to changes in arterial PO2 and PCO2 as well. Finally, upper respiratory dilator muscles become hypotonic, leading to airway narrowing and increased airway resistance. Even though a healthy person can tolerate breathing changes during sleep, sleep becomes problematic in patients with pre-existing respiratory disease.