Most axillary nerve injuries are treatable conservatively; however, select cases should require surgical management. For atraumatic injuries, a baseline EMG should occur within 1 month, and treatment with physical therapy (PT) should begin. In traumatic shoulder injury involving the axillary nerve, most patients may recover with non-operative treatment; however, there is the possibility of permanent paralysis. In many cases, then the shoulder is reduced, the need for surgical intervention is minimal. The reduced shoulder is immobilized for 4-6 weeks (young patients) or 7-10 days (elderly). This is then followed by extensive rehabilitation to regain muscle strength and shoulder mobility.

**Surgical intervention**can be considered in closed trauma if EMG shows no improvement after 3 months; however, acute nerve lesions warrant expedited surgical management. Neurorrhaphy, neurolysis, and nerve grafting are all possible surgical options. In patients with chronic muscle atrophy, muscle transfer may be a therapeutic option.

For patients with **neuropraxia,**full recovery occurs over 6-12 months. The muscle weakness spontaneously recovers without any specific treatment.

For those with **axonotmesis,**the recovery rates are about 70% to 80% and often take many months. The patient should be followed with serial electromyogram (EMG) studies to assess for regeneration. If by 6-9 months, there are no signs of recovery, surgical exploration may be considered.

For those with **neurotmesis,**there is never any recovery without surgical intervention.