The prevalence of urinary incontinence of any kind varies mainly with age and obesity. Other factors found to be associated with urinary incontinence of different subtypes include previous hysterectomy or pelvic surgery, parity, pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, dementia, or residing in a nursing home.

The data regarding the true prevalence of different types of urinary incontinences vary widely depending on the population studied, the social stigma and lack of interest to self-report (respondent bias in observational studies), and also on the case definitions in the questionnaires used.

Accurate prevalence measurement for urinary incontinence via robust epidemiological studies and validated measures tend to exist more in the United States and some developed European /Asian countries rather than the developing world. Even then, the reported prevalence for any sub-type of urinary incontinence in adult women is of a broad range (5% to 72%), with an approximate convergence of 30% according to different studies).

Overall, the association of age and urinary incontinence is well established. When the whole population is considered as one, most studies pick either mixed or urge incontinence as less prevalent than stress incontinence.

When considering the prevalence of urge incontinence specifically among women and men, a slightly different picture is depicted. Studies have shown that stress incontinence is of high prevalence among postmenopausal women, whereas urge incontinence may have a somewhat lower prevalence. Even then, it is this second type of incontinence that is often extraordinarily bothersome and is more likely to require treatment.