CO-oximetry utilizes multiple wavelengths of light to measure oxyhemoglobin and carboxyhemoglobin, and some meters can also measure methemoglobin. Care should be taken in the placement of the meter probe and to make sure extraneous light or fingernail polish is not present, which could cause an erroneous reading.

- Zero to 5% is considered normal.

- Five percent to 10% is considered normal in a smoker.

- Greater than 10% is abnormal in any person (consider high flow oxygen)

- More than 15% is significantly abnormal in any person, and treatment is mandatory.

CO-oximetry should not be relied upon solely because it has not been fully tested in clinical trials. Laboratory evaluation of suspected CO poisoning should include direct blood COHb level, complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic panel, lactic acid, and blood gas can be very helpful. The examiner should also consider other concomitant toxicity such as alcohol intoxication, cyanide poisoning, inhalation of smoke (especially the burning of plastics in a fire), and urine toxicology if suspected of drug use. All unconscious patients should have blood sugar levels tested and be closely monitored. The patient should have an ECG, and cardiac enzymes checked, looking for cardiac toxicity.  A chest x-ray is helpful if looking for pulmonary edema and is especially important if the patient is suffering from smoke inhalation. If the case is from a suspected suicide attempt, it is good practice to do a salicylate and acetaminophen level. CT scan of the brain is not helpful unless trying to exclude other causes of a headache and neurological impairment, such as intracranial bleeding. There has been an association of CO poisoning with hemorrhage of the globus pallidus and, to a less extent, white matter, but this is a rare finding.