The majority of the lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are caused by mutations in the genes encoding a lysosomal enzyme. These monogenic disorders involve forty different acid hydrolases in the lysosomes. Genes with a specific chromosomal locus encode them.

Many types of mutations can produce a defective enzyme. Generally, a nonsense mutation has a more profound defect than a missense mutation. There are many gene variations for a single disease numbering up to a thousand. Sometimes, mutations run in families, and knowledge of this is essential to screen for that particular defect to maximize genetic testing benefits. In some but not all cases, genotype-phenotype correlations are predictable. The reasons for this variability lie in epigenetic and environmental factors. In some instances, a defective enzyme activator, membrane transporter, or a membrane protein can cause the dysfunction. In mucolipidosis, the enzymes are targeted to the extracellular matrix instead of the lysosome. This targeting defect results in their dysfunction.

Most LSDs have an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Three have an X-linked inheritance pattern: Hunter disease, Fabry disease, and Danon disease. Some mutations, however, do not produce a defective enzyme and are therefore not relevant to LSDs. Apart from genetics, inflammation and oxidative stress are crucial players in LSDs.

There are several classifications of LSDs. The commonest is according to the accumulated substrate. Many LSDs have the names of the persons who first described the conditions.

The broad categories of LSDs, representative examples within the classes, and the accumulated substrates/defects are:

I. Sphingolipidosis:

Complex sphingosine containing phospholipids accumulate.

All disorders comprise a mutant enzyme. Multiple sulfatase deficiency is the exception and is a post-translational disorder.

A) GM2 gangliosidosis:

- Type A (Tay Sachs disease)

- Type O (Sandhoff disease)

- Type AB (GM2 activator deficiency)

B) Niemann-Pick diseases A, B, and C (transmembrane protein defect C1, soluble non-enzymatic protein defect C2)

C) Gaucher disease types 1, 2, and 3

D) Fabry disease (classic and late-onset types)

E) Metachromatic leukodystrophy

F) Globoid leukodystrophy (Krabbe disease)

G) GM1 gangliosidosis types 1, 2, and 3

H) Multiple sulfatase deficiency

II. Oligosaccharidosis (glycoproteins; all disorders with mutant enzymes):

- Alfa mannosidosis

- Schindler disease

- Aspartylglucosaminuria

- Fucosidosis

III. Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) (mucopolysaccharides a.k.a glycosaminoglycans (GAG); all disorders with mutant enzymes):

- Hurler syndrome

- Scheie syndrome

- Hurler-Scheie syndrome

- Hunter syndrome

- SanFilippo syndrome A, B, C, and D

- Morquio syndrome A and B

- Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome

- Sly syndrome

IV. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (lipofuscin, a waxy pigment):

- CLN 1 through CLN 14

V. Sialic acid disorders (sialic acid):

- Galactosialidosis (enzyme protection protein defect)

- Infantile sialic acid storage disease

- Salla disease (transmembrane protein defect)

- Sialuria

VI. Mucolipidosis (membrane transport protein defect; targeting error):

- Sialidosis I and II (Mucolipidosis I)

- I-cell disease (Mucolipidosis II)

- Pseudo-Hurler-Polydystrophy (Mucolipidosis III)

- Mucolipidosis IV

VII. Miscellaneous:

- Lysosomal Acid lipase deficiency infantile and childhood/adult types (cholesterol esters, triglycerides)

- Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type II)

- Danon disease (glycogen)

- Cystinosis (cystine)

Tables A and B show the****LSDs, defective enzyme, gene, and the accumulated substrate. The reader should study both classifications to understand better the causation of LSDs (Note: A protein ending with "ase" is an enzyme, or else, it is a non-enzymatic protein).