Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the ideal imaging modality for assessing nearly all pituitary lesions. MRIs do not require ionizing radiation like CT or traditional radiography use and instead can generate tissue contrast based on differences in the magnetic properties of hydrogen atomic nuclei. MRI can easily differentiate between solid and cystic lesions and also between different soft tissues, such as gray and white matter. Specific MRI imaging protocols are available for evaluating the pituitary. These include both high-resolution coronal and sagittal T1 weighted images with a small field-of-view centered about the pituitary. Sagittal plane images allow assessment of the pituitary, the stalk, the infundibulum, and the optic chiasm.

An optimal assessment of sellar and suprasellar mass lesions requires both non-contrast and gadolinium-enhanced MRI imaging. Regions exhibiting gadolinium enhancement demonstrate T1 shortening, which increases the imaging signal intensity, further accentuating image contrast differences between anatomic structures. Regions of the brain without a blood-brain barrier avidly enhance postcontrast imaging. Both the pituitary gland and stalk demonstrate enhancement given their rich vascularity from the pituitary capillary plexus. Differential enhancement between a seller mass and the pituitary is particularly relevant during the presurgical evaluation, as inadvertent damage of the normal pituitary gland may result in pituitary insufficiency. Contrast also increases the sensitivity of detection of small adenomas, which typically are hypo-enhancing lesions. Intravenous contrast administration allows for the assessment of vascular encasement within the cavernous sinus. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is not routinely performed during the initial evaluation of sellar lesions unless there is a concern for vascular pathologies such as an aneurysm or cavernous-carotid fistula. Follow-up MRA may be required for surgical planning if there is evidence of vascular encasement or narrowing.

Sellar and parasellar lesions comprise a heterogeneous group of pathologies that may be developmental, neoplastic, vascular, infectious, inflammatory, or degenerative. Most pituitary lesions are discovered incidentally and are comprised mostly of pituitary adenomas and Rathke’s cleft cysts, both easily diagnosed using contrast-enhanced MRI. Other rare diagnoses such as pituitary metastasis, abscess, infarction/hemorrhage, or epidermoid cyst demonstrate unique imaging characteristics and rarely pose a diagnostic dilemma. Seldomly, large meningiomas and craniopharyngiomas may occupy the sellar and suprasellar regions, mimicking a pituitary mass.