# Continuing Education Activity

Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency is the most common of the urea cycle disorders. It is an X-linked genetic disorder that prevents the breakdown and excretion of ammonia. This allows ammonia to accumulate, rising to toxic levels where it affects the central nervous system. This activity describes the evaluation and management of ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency and examines the role of the interprofessional team in improving care for affected patients.

**Objectives:**
- Review the typical presentations of ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency 
- Review the typical laboratory and imaging findings in ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. 
- Describe the treatment strategy for ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. 
- Explain why careful planning and discussion amongst interprofessional team members involved in the management of patients with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency will improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTCD) is an X-linked genetic disorder that prevents the breakdown and excretion of ammonia; this allows ammonia to rise to toxic levels and affect the central nervous system. The organ most involved in the processing of ammonia is the liver. Liver mitochondria are the primary site of the urea cycle.

# Etiology

The underlying cause of OTC deficiency is a gene mutation on the X chromosome. Over 100 mutations have been found to result in OTCD.

# Epidemiology

Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency is the most common of the urea cycle disorders.

# Pathophysiology

Ornithine transcarbamylase is a critical enzyme in the urea cycle. The urea cycle converts nitrogenous waste into urea. Urea is water soluble, allowing for its excretion from the body via urination. The OTC enzyme is involved in arginine biosynthesis.

# History and Physical

OTC deficiency is not part of routine neonatal screening or testing. Since it is genetic, it is useful to ask about family medical history. Signs of OTCD in neonates include tachypnea, vomiting, and lethargy within the first day of life.

In the late-onset form of OTCD, symptoms are vague and variable at first. These symptoms include lethargy, loss of appetite, early morning headaches, and confusion.

# Evaluation

The clinician should suspect OTC deficiency in patients with elevated ammonia and liver function tests. Ammonia above 200 micromol/L suggests an inherited metabolic disease.

MRI will not always be helpful. In an acute presentation, cerebral edema may be present. Chronic findings of OTC on MRI are cortical atrophy, white matter cysts, and decreased myelin.

# Treatment / Management

Treatment includes hydration, arginine, and hemodialysis.

# Differential Diagnosis

It is imperative to distinguish ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency from other genetic disorders that cause hyperammonemia. Hyperammonemia can be caused by other urea cycle disorders as well as by organic acidemias, defects of fatty oxidation and disorders of pyruvate metabolism. Signs in the patient's bloodwork that limit the differential to a urea cycle disorder will include respiratory alkalosis with a normal anion gap, normal blood sugar levels, and severe ammonia levels on the order of 1000micromol/L.

# Prognosis

Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency causes high mortality and morbidity, particularly in males since they are hemizygous for the X-linked mutation. Fifty percent of infants perish. Even if an infant survives a hyperammonemic coma, they will probably face intellectual disabilities if they were in the coma for over 24 hours.

# Complications

If physicians fail to diagnose OTCD timely and a patient is untreated for long, severe complications ensue. Acute complications vary but include acute liver failure and severe hyperammonemic encephalopathy.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Prevention and immediate treatment prevent mortality and reduce morbidity from OTC deficiency. The diagnosing physician should refer an OTCD patient and his/her family to a biochemical geneticist as they will need genetic counseling. OTCD patients should reduce their dietary protein and maintain adequate hydration. Certain medications should be avoided, such as steroids that increase protein breakdown into nitrogenous waste. OTCD patients should not take valproic acid even if they have seizures since valproic acid inhibits the urea cycle. These considerations will prevent the buildup of ammonia and reduce OTCD complications.

# Pearls and Other Issues

Ornithine transcarbamylase is an enzyme in the urea cycle, and lack of it can lead to toxic levels of ammonia.  Although OTC deficiency is the most common of the urea cycle disorders, it is a rare disease. Signs and symptoms of OTC deficiency present earlier in males since the genetic code for this enzyme is on the X-chromosome. Symptoms are variable, initially vague, and present later in life for females. Early recognition and treatment can prevent severe or lethal outcomes.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Given that this is a rare and potentially lethal condition, a knowledgeable team member could have a dramatic impact on the patient’s outcome. Additionally, since this is a genetic condition, helping one patient helps others in their family. Members of the patient’s care team work together to make this diagnosis, firstly by having a low threshold for suspicion that vague behavioral and neurologic signs and symptoms may underlie a metabolic condition. Symptoms may first be discovered by nurses monitoring a patient’s vitals, by the patient’s parents or the patient themselves. Pediatricians, internists, or family physicians should have a low threshold for suspicion to test ammonia levels in patients presenting with neurological or behavioral disturbances. Given these presenting symptoms, specialists such as psychiatrists, neurologists, and radiologists play a role in diagnosis. Hemodialysis is an option for emergent treatment; thus nephrologists should be consulted immediately. Geneticists, pharmacists, and dieticians play key roles in treating these patients in the short and long term. It is the ethical responsibility of the care team to recommend genetic counseling to the patient or their family since carrying this mutation will affect not only their lives but also the lives of their relatives. This condition is treatable if caught early and fatal or debilitating if left undiagnosed.