**Radiation Protective Measures**

In general, ALARA or as low as reasonably achievable fundamentally guides practitioners in the use of ionizing radiation as it is generally accepted that there is some associated risk with any amount of radiation exposure, no matter how small. Therefore, training and education of healthcare personnel who utilize fluoroscopy are paramount for the safety of the patient and those who work in fluoroscopy settings such as radiation technicians, nursing, and assisting providers as many acute radiation-related injuries are deemed preventable with proper technique, awareness, and training.

To further decrease radiation exposure, three guiding principles are time, distance, and shielding.

Dosimeters are easily implemented, cost-effective, and can increase the awareness of providers about their personal radiation exposure. Education of providers who utilize ionizing radiation in terms of maximal annual permissible radiation doses should be known and readily available to practicing providers and healthcare workers so that it may be compared to actual, measured exposure doses to keep exposure as low as possible. The Sievert (Sv) serves as the SI unit of measurement for radiation exposure. As recommended by the International Commission on Radiologic Protection (ICRP), total body dose should not exceed 20 mSv annually, extremities are limited to 500 mSv per year and lens of the eye 150 mSv per year while the European Atomic Energy Community limits exposure to the lens to 20 mSv annually.

Distance is likely the most important variable to control as it may be the most effective means to decreasing exposure since radiation intensity rapidly falls with increasing distance.

Protective lead shielding is an effective means of protection against radiation exposure, especially to sensitive tissues such as the thyroid gland, gonads, bone marrow, and lens of the eye. Hence the need for protective garments such as aprons, thyroid shields, caps, and lead glasses during fluoroscopic procedures. Lead aprons of the wrap-around, vest type variant are superior to non-vest type aprons due to their adequate coverage of the posterior aspect of the provider and a double layer of lead equivalence in the anterior aspect.

Shielding of the patient also helps decrease the amount of radiation delivered and the total amount of radiation scatter and subsequent occupational exposure. As the lens of the eye is one of the most sensitive tissues to radiation damage, protective eyewear is of the utmost importance. The risk of radiation-induced cataracts is cumulative in nature and has been shown to specifically damage the posterior subcapsular region of the lens.