The initial management of the trauma patient with splenic injury should follow the ABCs (airway, breathing, and circulation) of trauma resuscitation. The assessment of circulation during the primary survey includes early evaluation of the possibility of hemorrhage in patients with blunt trauma. It is important to assess whether the patient is in early shock and provide prompt resuscitation. Beware that there is a possibility of concomitant hollow viscus injury in patients with solid organ injury.

**Spleen Organ Injury Scale**

Splenic injury is classified based on CT findings according to the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) Organ Injury Scale. It is a useful scale that categorizes splenic injuries, but it does not predict the need for surgical intervention.

**Grade 1**

- Hematoma, subcapsular, less than 10% surface area

- Laceration, capsular tear, less than 1 cm parenchymal depth

**Grade 2**

- Hematoma, subcapsular, 10% to 50% surface area

- Intraparenchymal, less than 5 cm in diameter

- Laceration, capsular tear, 1 cm to 3 cm parenchyma depth that does not involve a trabecular vessel

**Grade 3**

- Hematoma, subcapsular,  more than 50% surface area expanding; ruptured subcapsular or parenchymal hematoma; intraparenchymal hematoma 5 cm or greater and expanding

- Laceration greater than 3 cm parenchymal depth or involving trabecular vessels

**Grade 4**

- Laceration, laceration involving segmental or hilar vessels producing major devascularization ( more than 25% of the spleen)

**Grade 5**

- Laceration, completely shattered spleen

- Vascular; a hilar vascular injury that devascularizes the spleen

This CT grading may not always correlate with the grading of the injury as identified with surgical exploration. This may be due to technical issues and variability of the CT scan interpretation.

Hemorrhaging from a splenic injury can be ongoing at the time of presentation or may have stopped. Injuries in which bleeding has ceased can be managed without splenectomy, although patients may develop delayed hemorrhaging. Delayed splenic rupture may occur up to 10 days following an injury. The rate of late bleeding may occur up to 10.6% of the time, but it varies with the grade rating of the splenic injury. Therefore, a careful selection of patients should be performed, and make sure that one closely monitors these patients, and a serial abdominal examination should be performed.

**Non-operative Management of Splenic Trauma**

Treatment of splenic injury is aimed to maximize salvage therapy. In children, the use of non-operative management of hemodynamically stable patients has become the standard of care. Up to 80% of blunt splenic injuries can be managed non-operatively. It has been increasingly used in adults, and age has not influenced the outcome of non-operative management of blunt splenic trauma.

However, it should be considered only in a hemodynamically stable patient without signs of peritonitis. It is important that only patients who are stable and have no evidence of ongoing blood loss should be selected for non-operative management.

Non-operative management has been attempted in high-grade injuries as long as the patient remains hemodynamically stable without evidence of active bleeding. These patients should be hospitalized in a center where a pediatric surgeon is available for close observation and a series of multiple examinations. In this situation, the option of surgical intervention must be available at all times.

Patients who require transfusions involving more than two units of blood, or show signs of ongoing bleeding, should be considered for operative management or embolization.

**Operative Management**

Operative intervention and splenectomy remain life-saving events for many patients. The decision for surgical intervention depends on the clinical or hemodynamic status and the results of imaging studies. These include:

- Hemodynamic instability, which the majority of trauma surgeons consider an indication for emergent splenectomy in blunt trauma to the spleen

- Peritonitis

- Pseudoaneurysm formation

- Associated intra-abdominal injuries that require surgical exploration (bowel injuries)

**Embolization**

Splenic embolization requires specialized imaging facilities and a vascular interventionist. The following are guidelines for embolization in spleen trauma patients:

- Grade 3 or higher splenic injury

- Contrast blush on CT scan

- Moderate hemoperitoneum

- Evidence of ongoing bleeding

Prophylactic angioembolization in patients with splenic trauma, active arterial blush on CT, and stable hemodynamics are not indicated.

The complication rate is up to 35%. The following are common complications:

- Splenic infarction is devascularization of more than 25% of the spleen, which may occur in up to 20% of patients after embolization

- Re-hemorrhage

- Abscess