Genetic mutations, also known as serpinopathies, in the serpin superfamily cause alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. The condition is autosomal codominant, which consequently will make the affected individuals have a homozygous or heterozygous mutation in the SERPINA1 gene located on the long arm of chromosome 14. The standard nomenclature to describe alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency uses an acronym for protease inhibitor (PI) along with the alleles that have been identified. The most common allele is associated with normal function of alpha-1 antitrypsin and is labeled M. PI*MM is the most common homozygous allele. The most common deficiency alleles are Z, and S. Uncommon deficiency alleles include I,  M, M, null, as well as other very rare ones. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques are used to detect specific DNA sequences that identify AAT alleles. The PI*Z allele, characterized by a single amino acid substitution of lysine for glutamic acid at position 342 on the 394 amino acid AAT molecule, is involved in approximately 95% to 96% of known clinical cases of severe AATD. Such amino acid substitution leads to polymerization of the abnormally formed protein in the hepatocyte and lowers inhibitory function to neutrophil elastases in the lungs. The PI*S allele, which involves the substitution of valine for glutamic acid at position 264, is associated with accelerated degradation in hepatocytes, but not with an increased risk for liver disease. The homozygous condition PI*SS is not associated with clinical lung disease, yet approximately 10% of double heterozygous PI*SZ can be at risk of COPD if the AAT levels were below the reference range, or if they were smokers.