To effectively decrease medical error rates and keep their patients safe, healthcare organizations, particularly hospitals and long-term care facilities, must restructure nursing work environments. Inadequate working environments, excess duty hours, and high workloads can lead to missed nursing care and an increased risk of adverse events.

According to the Institute of Medicine (IOM), fatigue during shift work increases error rates and must be addressed to improve patient safety.

- Clockwise shift rotations (i.e., from day to evening to night) rather than in the reverse order.

- Avoid scheduling prolonged periods of wakefulness. The report notes that extending shift hours to result in 17 hours or more of prolonged wakefulness can negatively impact task performance, equivalent to the legal limit of alcohol intoxication.

- Avoid scheduling more than four consecutive 12-hour shifts.

- Avoid short off-duty periods. Off-duty periods of 8 hours or less will result in excessive fatigue during the following shift.

- Avoid extending duty hours beyond what was scheduled for the day.

According to the IOM report, these interventions should guide scheduling and are not absolute cut-offs for working hours. Their report noted that the overall error rate by nurses was around 0.00336 errors per hours-worked; however, working overtime, working longer than scheduled on a given day, and working extra shifts did not result in any significant increase in this error rate unless the shift durations exceeded 12 consecutive hours.

Noting this data, the IOM calls for legislative and regulatory bodies to prohibit nursing staff from providing patient care in excess of 12 hours in any given 24-hour period under any circumstance. The IOM also recommends limiting nursing work hours to 60 per 7-day period for nurses who provide direct patient care.

Other interventions recommended by the IOM focus on establishing a work environment that allows easy monitoring of patients, limits interruptions, and minimizes clerical tasks. Special education and training should be provided for error-prone tasks such as medication administration, patient hand-off, and supervising trainees.

An overall commitment to patient safety at the organizational level greatly influences nurses' adherence to and compliance with patient-safety principles. Creating an organizational patient-safety climate, managing workload, reducing time pressure, and providing education for improving knowledge and skills enhances their adherence to patient-safety principles.

Close monitoring for missed nursing care and nurse fatigue should follow the implementation of patient safety interventions. Nonpunitive, focused, and effective feedback can improve patient safety adherence and clinical outcomes.

Focused emphasis should be given to individuals who require personal motivation, resist change, or are averse to innovation. These individuals need empowerment and a nonjudgmental approach in their training toward patient-safety practices. Improving knowledge regarding patient care tasks and the breadth of medical errors that can be prevented with adherence to patient-safety principles has been shown to enhance their commitment to patient safety.

An essential step in transforming nurse work environments to promote patient safety is to involve the patient and their families. Patients are critical players in ensuring safe patient care occurs. Engaging patients in safe-care initiatives compliment patient-safety principles and should be employed as much as possible.