A detailed history is essential to know about the mechanism of injury and the nature of the foreign body. Trivial injuries are often difficult to detect. The patient presents with conjunctival congestion and blurring of vision or may be asymptomatic.

A meticulous examination is very important. Presenting and best-corrected visual acuity should be recorded. Lids and eyebrows should be examined to look for external signs of injuries and small foreign bodies. Slit-lamp examination is a must. Careful examination should be done to look for conjunctival laceration, hemorrhage, and entry site of IOFB. Pigment under the conjunctiva may indicate uveal prolapse and possible entry site. Corneal perforation should be examined.

The extent of the defect and its location should be recorded. A Seidel test should be performed. Iris should be inspected for transillumination defects and heterochromia (usually seen in longstanding cases). The entry wound of the cornea and iris may help in localizing the foreign body. The lens should be evaluated for pigmentation, focal opacity, cataractous changes, capsule rupture, and phacodonesis.

Gonioscopy is done to look for trabecular pigmentation, scarring, and foreign body, especially in the inferior angle of the anterior chamber. Intraocular pressure should be noted. However, in an obvious open globe injury, any undue pressure on the globe should be avoided as it may lead to extrusion of intraocular contents. Most foreign bodies are located in the posterior segment.

Dilated fundus examination is essential. The retina should be inspected to locate the site of impaction of the foreign body. Often a fibrous capsule forms over it, and there may be surrounding pigmentary changes. Optic atrophy may be present in longstanding cases. In cases of media haze due to cataracts, vitreous hemorrhage, or endophthalmitis, the USG (ultrasonogram) B scan is done to locate the foreign body and measure the size.