The AP and lateral views may be obtained with or without weight-bearing. For non-weight bearing images, the patient is seated on the table with the hip and knee flexed and the ankle in a neutral position or supine with the entire leg straightened on the table. AP images are obtained by directing the x-ray beam from the dorsum of the ankle to the plantar surface, with the image receptor beneath the sole of the foot. Internal oblique images are obtained by internally rotating the ankle 15–20 degrees and directing the x-ray beam in a dorsoplantar direction similar to the AP view. Lateral images are obtained by directing the x-ray beam from left to right, with the image receptor medial to the ankle. Weight-bearing images are obtained similarly, though with the patient standing. Typically, a special stand with steps is used, with a slight cut into the top step used to hold the x-ray cassette.

The gravity stress view is obtained using a cross-table projection of an externally rotated foot and ankle, with the affected side-lying upward. The ankle is allowed to lie distal to the edge of the table so that the weight to the foot provides the gravity stress. The talar tilt stress view is obtained by maintaining the talus in inversion by holding the talus and tibia while obtaining a dorsoplantar projection. Finally, the anterior drawer stress view is obtained by allowing the leg to suspend from the edge of a table while the ankle lies in a gravity-assisted plantar flexion, and the foot is pulled while stabilizing the tibia.

Multiple specialized radiographic views of the ankle have been described for specific purposes. The external oblique is used to view the medial column of the foot, navicular, medial cuneiform, first metatarsal, and its articulations and is obtained similar to the internal oblique view, except that the ankle is in 45 degrees of external rotation. The Harris view better evaluates the calcaneus, middle facet of the subtalar joint, and sustentaculum tali. This is obtained with the patient standing and beam angled approximately 45 degrees toward the midline of the heel. Broden views are superior for imaging the subtalar joint and are obtained with the patient in supine, knee slightly flexed, and supported by a sandbag, with the foot in neutral dorsiflexion. The leg and foot are internally rotated 45 degrees, and images are obtained in multiple degrees of cephalic tilt, as necessary. The Canale view is useful for assessing the degree of comminution and displacement of talar neck fractures and is taken with the foot plantarflexed and pronated to 15 degrees. Finally, the Saltzman view has been used to determine the relationship of the hindfoot with the leg to characterize complex hindfoot malalignments and is obtained both with and without weight-bearing, with the beam oriented posteroanterior and craniocaudally, tangential to the hindfoot.

Patient positioning for CT is less important due to the cross-sectional nature of the study and typically easily performed multiplanar reformations of the obtained images. Additionally, the real-time image acquisition nature of ultrasound and angiography obviates the need for special patient positioning in these situations. Conventionally, images provided to the interpreting provider are presented in the standard three anatomic planes to aid in recognition and interpretation.

MRI evaluation of the ankle is typically performed with the patient supine and the foot in approximately 20 degrees of plantar flexion. The plantar flexion is important to decrease MRI artifact (magic angle), to accentuate the fat plane between the peroneal tendons, and to allow better visualization of the calcaneofibular ligament.