A shoulder arthrogram is typically performed to assess the rotator cuff complex and detect labral tears. When performed in conjunction with MRI, this provides a detailed evaluation of the cartilage and structures within the glenohumeral joint itself. The imaging technique should both be accurate and atraumatic for the patient. If contrast media is improperly placed, this can simulate pathologic conditions, and an improper needle placement can cause injury. A systematic approach should be utilized when performing a shoulder arthrogram to minimize injury to articular structures and perform the technique effectively. A variety of methods of fluoroscopically guided shoulder arthrograms have been described since their first utilization in 1933.

An initial report describes positioning the patient obliquely to place the glenohumeral joint space in profile while the needle is advanced into the space. In 1975, that was replaced by a supine position for the patient to avoid injuring the glenoid labrum.

Utilizing this technique, a drop in the fluid level of the anesthetic would indicate that the tip of the needle was in the correct placement within the intra-articular space. In 1980, Neviaser suggested that the shoulder be internally rotated once the needle tip was at the humeral head to facilitate intra-articular placement.

A posterior approach for shoulder arthrograms has been proposed in the more recent literature. Aspects of the previously mentioned techniques are incorporated within the fluoroscopically guided anterior approach and will be further discussed.

Radiographic images are essential for performing an arthrogram. The Scout radiograph includes anteroposterior radiographs of the shoulder on internal and external rotation. These views allow for assessing for calcium hydroxyapatite deposition in the rotator cuff complex. If calcium deposits are not identified before injection of the contrast medium, these depositions could be interpreted as an extension of the contrast agent into the rotator cuff and be diagnosed as a tendon tear. Also, depositions within a tendon may not necessarily be visualized on MRI because both the tendon and the calcification appear as regions of low signal intensity.

Patient positioning is essential to ensure successful arthrogram examination and minimize complications. Ideal patient positioning for fluoroscopically guided arthrography of the shoulder from an anterior approach is with the patient in the supine position and the shoulders slightly externally rotated, using a rotator interval approach.

The Schneider technique has the same preparation as the rotator interval. It targets the caudal third of the glenohumeral joint. In this approach, the needle may pass through important anterior structures such as the subscapularis tendon and the anteroinferior labroligamentous complex. This may distort these structures and lead to difficulty interpreting the images or misinterpretation.

A posterior approach for a fluoroscopically guided shoulder arthrogram has been described. In this approach, the patient is in the prone position, and the ipsilateral shoulder is raised off of the table with a pad which allows the glenohumeral joint to be visualized tangentially. The posterior approach has been suggested for a patient for whom the anterior approach should be avoided. This can be secondary to a pathologic condition to avoid any iatrogenic injury and any interpretive errors with the MRI. In the posterior approach glenohumeral arthrogram, the patient is in the prone position with their arm placed into external rotation. The palm is facing downwards.

The rotator interval approach is an effective, rapid, and easily performed technique, which will be further discussed. With this positioning, the coracoid process is easily avoided.

With the patient in the supine position, a needle tip that is advanced in the anteroposterior direction towards the humeral head will thus not come in contact with the glenoid labrum. The oblique positioning is important. Using a posterior oblique position or a Grashey view will place the glenohumeral joint in profile, but it also causes rotation of the glenoid labrum in the direct path of the advanced needle tip when the radiologist aims for the clear space of the glenohumeral joint. The labrum in this circumstance could be penetrated with needle advancement. Theoretically, if the needle was continually advanced between the humerus in the glenoid labrum without contacting bone, the needle tip could be advanced and penetrate the posterior aspect of the rotator cuff. Utilizing external rotation of the glenohumeral joint exposes more of the articular surface of the humeral head anteriorly but also increases the intra-articular area that is available for insertion of the needle via an anterior approach.

External rotation aids in ensuring that the biceps tendon is not inadvertently injured during the arthrogram. To assist the patient in maintaining external rotation, a weighted object or sandbag may be placed in the patient's hand. Excessive external rotation of the glenohumeral joint is uncomfortable for the patient and can also increase the tightness of the anterior capsule. This tightness will place the anterior aspect of the joint capsule closer in proximity to the humerus, thus decreasing the joint space within the anterior recess and making intra-articular needle placement more difficult.

Once the patient is in the proper supine position as described, the next focus is needle insertion. The target for the procedure is the medial upper quadrant of the humeral head. A radiopaque instrument and fluoroscopy are used to localize the joint insertion site and to ensure that it is not too lateral nor too medial. The skin is prepped and marked over the humeral head to indicate where the needle insertion will occur. Optimum positioning is located at the level of the coracoid at the superomedial humeral head. Even though the articular space extends laterally, connecting both the greater and lesser tuberosities, the intra-articular space is increased within the anteroposterior dimension located at the medial aspect of the humeral head.

The skin should not be marked medial to the medial cortex as needle insertion in this site could jeopardize the anterior labrum. It should be centered fluoroscopically to avoid any distortion or inaccurate needle placements. Once the overlying skin is marked for the entrance site of the needle, the area is prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion. Next, the skin and subcutaneous tissues are anesthetized. A skin wheal is created using a buffered 1% lidocaine. The lidocaine should be infiltrated into the deeper tissues along the projected track of the needle for the arthrogram. The needle of choice varies by institution, but a 20 or 22-gauge 3.5-inch spinal needle is typically used.

A stylet is useful during the advancement of the needle as it reduces soft tissue injury and avoids obstruction of the needle by the soft tissues themselves. The needle is inserted by an anterior approach in an anteroposterior position. The needle hub should be centered over the tip to ensure that advancement is perpendicular to the fluoroscopy beam. If a patient experiences any discomfort or pain during the advancement of the needle, more local anesthetic can be utilized.

The intra-articular needle placement is crucial. With intermittent fluoroscopy, the needle is advanced posteriorly until at the site of the humeral head. Once there is contact with the articular cartilage and the underlying cortex of the humeral head, the needle has a typical appearance one of two ways at fluoroscopy. In one circumstance, the needle is obliquely angled toward the glenoid due to the needle initially being aimed at a portion of the humeral head that curves away from the inserted needle. The needle has a natural deviation in this direction once contact is made. This needle position is likely to occur if the initial skin mark is placed close to the medial cortex of the humeral head. Another circumstance is where the needle remains in the anteroposterior direction as the tip of the needle did not slip down the curvature of the humeral head.

Once the intra-articular needle is in proper placement, the stylet is removed, and the syringe plunger is drawn backward to exclude the intravascular placement of the needle. A couple of drops of the contrast can be dripped into the needle hub to prevent any injection of air bubbles into the joint space. Extension tubing is then attached. A test injection of local anesthetic is made of approximately 1 to 2 mL of anesthetic not only anesthetizes the joint but also determines the needle tip positioning within the compartment.

The utilization of an anesthetic within the injected solution can also have a functional purpose as a diagnostic procedure. This anesthetic ensures that the patient's pain does come from the glenohumeral joint if the pain is alleviated with its usage. Low resistance to injection will be present if the needle tip is within an adjacent bursa or the glenohumeral joint. When the needle is oriented obliquely, the test injection will also have a low level of resistance.

If the needle is oriented in the anteroposterior direction, low resistance to this tester injection may not occur. The needle tip in this circumstance may be within the hyaline cartilage. The needle can be gently manipulated by slightly moving it away from the humerus or rotating it.

If there is an abrupt decrease in this resistance to injection, this indicates that the tip of the needle is located in a compartment, whether the joint space or bursa. The needle must not be pulled back more than a few milliliters as the tip could enter the subacromial-subdeltoid bursa. If attempting to manipulate the needle does not obtain the desired results, the needle may be medially directed; in this case, it should not be advanced as such could penetrate the glenoid labrum and lead to cartilaginous risk for injury. If a high resistance to the injection is met, the tip of the needle might be tightly opposed to the joint surfaces. Turning the bevel of the needle until the anesthetic easily flows or retracting 1 to 2 mm while injecting can be attempted. If high resistance is met, the needle may be exterior to the joint or in the capsule. The needle may also be plugged.

Signs that the needle is intra-articular position include a give and resistance after the capsule has been passed into the joint space. There may be a bony touch from the tip of the needle. Imaging serves as evidence of the intra-articular position. Low resistance with a small amount of injected fluid is a sign of the intra-articular position, but it can also be felt if the tip of the needle is in a tendon sheath or periarticular bursa.

There should be either a spontaneous or aspirated return of joint fluid before the injection of contrast. Using a local anesthetic for the test injections rather than iodinated contrast materials can be utilized as the latter could mask the area and thus make needle visualization more challenging. The gadolinium compound should not be utilized for the tester injection before the MRI, as any inadvertent injection outside of the glenohumeral joint during needle placement can be misinterpreted either as a capsular injury or rotator cuff tear on MRI.

Once the anesthetic test injection indicates that the tip of the needle is within the adjacent bursa or the glenohumeral joint, then iodinated contrast material is used to differentiate between these two. A connecting tube is used between the syringe and the needle. Lower resistance to injection should still be present. The movement of contrast material away from the tip of the needle is consistent with a bursal location or an intra-articular one. To confirm an intra-articular placement of the contrast, a column of contrast agent between the humerus in the glenoid should be observed.

Any free-flowing contrast material that pools over the head of the humerus can be located in the posterior glenohumeral joint recess or anteriorly within the subacromial-subdeltoid bursa. If contrast is not visualized between the humerus and the glenoid, gentle inferior traction upon the patient's arm can be applied to create a negative pressure within the joint space which will pull the contrast agent within the joint space properly and thus confirm the intra-articular placement. The intra-articular contrast material can also be identified within the axillary recess, subcapsular recess, and long head of the biceps tendon sheath, as these are normal communications within the glenohumeral joint.

If the tip of the needle is not within the adjacent bursa or the joint, then an irregular pooling of contrast will occur at the needle tip. Overall, the flow of the injected contrast medium should be away from the tip of the needle and demonstrate opacification of the joint space and that of the subcoracoid recess, which confirms intra-articular positioning.

Once there is confirmation that the needle is placed in the intraarticular space, the iodinated contrast material is injected for fluoroscopic imaging or possibly CT. If an MRI examination is to follow, then a mixture of iodinated contrast and gadolinium can be injected. A combination of 0.1 mL of gadopentetate dimeglumine, 10 mL of sterile 0.9% sodium chloride, 10 mL of iohexol, and 0.3 mL of epinephrine within a 20 mL syringe is created. The combination of radiolucent gadolinium with the radiopaque iodinated contrast allows for the continual visualization of the injection and more information during fluoroscopy. A portion of the saline in this mixture can be substituted for a local anesthetic such as ropivacaine or bupivacaine. Also, even if the MRI cannot be completed, valuable information regarding the integrity of the rotator cuff is available from the arthrogram images taken. Iodinated contrast lowers the signaling intensity of low osmolality gadopentetate dimeglumine solutions; the signal intensity intraarticularly on MRI is adequate.

To reduce delayed discomfort or pain for the patient, a non-ionic iodinated contrast agent is utilized. The addition of epinephrine delays the absorption of the contrast agent from the joint cavity. This delaying effect can serve an important role depending on the time interval between the joint injection and the MRI. Notably, the epinephrine intraarticularly can increase arthrographic pain. This pain is either because it is directly irritating the synovium or because its use increases the amount of time the synovium is exposed to the contrast agent used. If a patient is undergoing the MRI, the introduction of air bubbles must be minimized during any part of the injections as they produce artifacts on imaging.

To distend the shoulder, an injection of approximately 10 to 16 mL is typically used. An injection of more than 15 mL does have an increased risk for extra-articular leakage that can be mistaken as a rotator cuff tear and be a source of postprocedural pain.

In a patient with a shoulder prosthetic with a high clinical suspicion for a full-thickness rotator cuff tear, the rotator interval approach is employed. Skin markings are made using the prosthetic humeral head component.

In more recent data, modifications to arthrography have been used, such as that of targeting the articular recesses with or without ultrasound guidance have been noted. The purpose of using the articular recess as a target rather than the joint space can be optimum when the joint space is not accessible. A non-accessible joint space can be due to an overlapping normal bone structure or severe degenerative joint changes like osteophytes. This targeting also may aid in avoiding patient manipulation and tube angulation. Utilizing this technique, the needle is advanced until it comes into contact with the bone, which provides the depth limit to insertion. This has the potential to increase the safety of the arthrogram procedure and aid in avoiding the articular fibrocartilage, such as the labrum in the glenohumeral joint. This technique also is transposable to guidance via ultrasound. With this, the needle is best placed tangentially to the transducer rather than vertically. The advantages to utilizing ultrasound over fluoroscopy are the absence of ionizing radiation for the patient and the operator, the imaging of all the soft tissues that surround the glenohumeral joint, and the possibility of performing the ultrasound in an office setting.

**Indirect Arthrography**

An indirect arthrogram is an MRI technique that produces the arthrogram images without direct injection into the joint.

Imaging of the shoulder is performed after a delay of between 5 to 15 minutes has elapsed. During this time, mobilization and exercising of the joint, in this case, the glenohumeral joint, is performed, facilitating the diffusion of contrast into the joint. The advantage of indirect arthrography is that it does not require direct injection into the joint, is less invasive for the patient, and lacks image guidance. Despite a good level of sensitivity and specificity for certain labral and rotator cuff tears, there are drawbacks. These include a lack of predictability of the degree of the intra-articular enhancement. With this technique, there is a diminished signal intensity of the intra-articular fluid, a lack of capsular distention, and a potential for the misinterpretation of imaging due to an enhancement of granulation tissue, synovial structures, vessels, bursa, and tendon sheaths. This diminished signal intensity is dependent on inflammation, the amount of joint fluid, and the synovial surface area. There is an inability to detect any non-anatomical communications between fluid-containing spaces due to simultaneous enhancement with this technique. The third drawback is a lack of joint distention. This joint distention will be present if a joint effusion already exists.

**Image Acquisition**

For CT scan, axial images should be taken with a 0.625 mm thickness using spiral scanning with isotropic data acquisition. Multiplanar reformats should be oblique, parallel, and perpendicular to the glenoid or the belly of the supraspinatus muscle. CT arthrograms of the glenohumeral joint can adequately detect full thickness and articular surface partial tears to the infraspinatus and supraspinatus. Fatty degeneration and loss of volume to the rotator cuff muscles can also be demonstrated well utilizing CT.

For MRI, the usage of a dedicated shoulder coil should be implemented. A T1 weighted fat suppressed sequence within the axial, oblique sagittal, and oblique coronal plains with a 3 to 4 mm slice thickness. A sagittal, non-suppressed T1 image is needed to detect fatty infiltration. A T2 weighted fat suppression in the coronal plane is used for detecting findings less well demonstrated in T1. The sagittal T2 imaging further optimizes the evaluation of rotator cuff tears in the anteroposterior (AP) plane. This also allows for evaluating signal changes in the bicipital tendon and muscle edema.

Abduction with external rotation, ABER, positions the patient with the palm behind the head.

Some Bankart lesions can be visualized where there is the periosteal attachment of the labrum due to the separation of the base of the labrum from the periosteum. This can aid in diagnosing Perthes lesions. This is particularly true in athletes with a superior labral tear from anterior to posterior, SLAP tears. However, some have found that this does not increase accuracy, but it does increase scan times in terms of positioning, using surface coil, and acquiring a new sequence.

Postprocedural care for the patient should be discussed before the arthrogram is performed. It is typically a safe procedure for the patient with discharge following the CT or MRI. A patient should receive education on the signs of infection. A patient should be given instructions for postoperative care and should call with symptoms such as fever or worsening pain. If a patient experiences an increase in joint pain that does not settle within 24 to 48 hours with any associated systemic symptoms like fever, this raises a concern for the possibility of a joint infection, septic arthritis. In this circumstance, the patient needs to be clinically assessed and may require joint aspiration, antibiotic therapy, or surgical lavage.