Pancytopenia is a tricky manifestation with multiple etiological factors. Patients can present with symptoms of anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia. History taking is essential in this condition to determine the underlying cause of pancytopenia. While the hospitalist or the primary care provider is usually the first physician to contact the patient, it is imperative to involve multiple teams and specialists such as hematologists/oncologists, rheumatologists, pathologists, radiologists, and pharmacists. Hematologists help in the diagnosis and management of pancytopenia. They can also perform bone marrow biopsy if the etiology is inconclusive.

Pathologists and hematologists sometimes work together with these patients. Rheumatologists play a role in managing pancytopenia secondary to autoimmune diseases or the side effects of medications used for autoimmune diseases. Pharmacists help with drugs and dose-dependent adverse reactions. Finally, nurses play a huge role in managing these patients; not only do they monitor the patient's vitals (especially fever), but they also help with patient counseling and education about the adverse effects of the potential culprit drugs.

While pancytopenia treatment depends on the underlying cause, improved outcomes are seen with prompt consultation with an interprofessional group of clinicians and specialists, and nursing staff, engaging in coordinated activity and open communication to ensure accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment based on the underlying cause of pancytopenia. This interprofessional approach will yield the most optimal patient outcomes. [Level 5]