**Steps of IOL Implantation**

**1. Anaesthesia**

The patient can be operated on under topical, sub-tenon or peribulbar anesthesia, depending on the patient's and the surgeon's comfort.

**2. Intra-operative axis alignment and toric axis marking**

**Manual Marking**

This 3-step technique consists of preoperative reference marking by free hand marking, slit lamp, or a Nuijt-Solomon bubble marker. This is done preoperatively under topical anesthesia. The ocular surface should be dry and excess drops or tear fluid should be removed. Primary gaze in a sitting position is preferred as a change in position from lying down to sitting can cause significant cyclotorsion. The second step is the intra-operative alignment of the horizontal axis using a Mendez gauge. The third step is the intraoperative marking of the desired axis, along which the IOL markings should be aligned.

**FLACS Assisted Marking**

It aids in making two markings 180 degrees apart in the steep axis. The advantages included avoidance of parallax error found with manual markings and aiding in making astigmatically neutral arcuate incisions.

**Image-guided Marking**

Various image-guided systems are available to overcome the disadvantages associated with the manual marking of the axis. These images capture high-resolution images of the iris architecture, iris, and limbal vessels, which serve as landmarks to plan the incisions intraoperatively. They help plan the location of clear corneal incisions, limbal relaxing incisions, and capsulorhexis. They may also help optimize the results based on the individual surgeon’s surgically induced astigmatism (SIA).

Placido disc-based topography with ray tracing aberrometer may provide power maps, corneal curvatures, and internal, corneal, and total higher-order aberrations. Considering the SIA, they have an inbuilt toric IOL power calculator that guides the incision placement.

**3. Wound Construction**

Clear corneal incisions that do not leak and are self-sealing are placed in astigmatically neutral sites, and their placement may be guided by the systems mentioned above.

**4. Capsulorhexis**

Adequate-sized continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis covering 0.5 mm of the edges is essential to prevent postoperative rotation. A centered round rhexis is required for ideal IOL positioning. A large rhexis may lead to instability of IOL.

**5. Removal of Lens Material**

The lens material is removed by phacoemulsification, and cortex wash is done. Thorough polishing of the capsule is done to prevent posterior capsular opacification, which may cause IOL tilt and visual discomfort to the patient.

**6. IOL Implantation**

A cohesive viscoelastic is preferred over a dispersive viscoelastic to inflate the bag for IOL implantation, considering the ease of removal. The IOL is implanted into the bag with the axis markings left around 3 to 5 degrees anticlockwise to the final lens position.

If the patient is operated on under topical anesthesia, they are asked to fix at the microscope light, and the IOL is perfectly centered based on the first Purkinje image. The viscoelastic is removed completely from the anterior chamber and behind the IOL in the bag, and the wound is hydrated before the final rotation of the IOL is made to align with the axis. Intraoperative aberrometry is advantageous in estimating the residual astigmatism of the eye and adjusting the IOL position intraoperatively.

**7. Postoperative Care**

The patient is asked to maintain a supine position an hour after surgery to avoid changes in the IOL position. The postoperative IOL alignment can be confirmed by refraction, dilated examination to look for the IOL axis, keratometry, and ray tracing aberrometer. Postoperative steroids are prescribed in tapering doses.