Several mutations were found in a population study to determine the frequency of familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia. In the children with the identified mutations, apo A-I levels were reduced by roughly 50% in the heterozygotes, and homozygotes were deficient in plasma HDL and apo A-I. The deleterious mutation is believed to be autosomal dominant. ATP binding cassette transporter (ABC1) mutations were detected in both familial HDL deficiency, and Tangier disease resulting in impaired cholesterol efflux from macrophages via the cholesterol efflux regulatory protein.

Tangier disease has also shown marked hypercatabolism of apoA-I in atypical lysosomes inside mononuclear phagocytes.

Polymorphism of the CETP gene affects the concentration and activity of CETP in the plasma. The B1 gene variant has been associated with lower HDL cholesterol and higher CETP concentration. Various genotypes were evaluated in an angiographic study of men with previously documented coronary atherosclerosis. The study compared the progression of coronary artery disease in these patients based on their CETP genotype. The B2B2 genotype had the least progression noted, the B1B1 genotype had the greatest progression, and B1B2 genotype had an intermediate progression of coronary disease. A different report evaluated two common mutations in CETP, resulting in a decreased CTP activity, comparing healthy subjects to those with coronary heart disease.

Lower HDL cholesterol concentrations were found in those who are heterozygous or homozygous for these mutations compared to the non-carriers. Despite the low HDL level associated with the mutations, women and men had a lower CHD risk.