It is imperative to identify the risk factors and perform a thorough assessment of the patient before an endoscopic brow lift. A team approach is an ideal way to limit the complications of this procedure. Prior to surgery, the patient should have the following done:

- Evaluation by a surgeon experienced in selecting the appropriate patient for the surgery

- Evaluation by the primary care physician and anesthesiologist or nurse anesthetist to ensure that the patient is fit for general anesthesia

- Evaluation by the optometrist or ophthalmologist if the patient suffers from dry eyes, blepharoptosis, or lagophthalmos

- Evaluation and monitoring by the pre-, intra-, and postoperative specialty nurses to assist with coordination of care and patient and family education

An interprofessional team of a surgeon, anesthesiologist, surgical assistants, and operative nurses should perform the endoscopic brow lift to ensure the best outcomes. A nurse dedicated to the monitoring of the patient during anesthesia is highly recommended. Pharmacist involvement comes in the form of prophylactic antibiotic verification pre-operatively (e.g., dose, appropriateness of agent selected). Post-operatively, pharmacist recommendations for pain control and corticosteroid dosing are helpful, along with a complete medication reconciliation to ensure no drug-drug interactions. Close follow-up during the initial postoperative period by a wound care nurse and/or clinician experienced in the postoperative care of endoscopic brow lift patients should identify any complications that arise, including hematoma formation. The patient will also require education on avoiding strenuous activity, heavy lifting, or bending over during the first several days post-operatively in order to prevent complications. Only through this type of interprofessional healthcare team approach can outcomes for this procedure be consistently optimized. [Level 5]