Normal growth is regulated by more than just genetics and hormonal principles; environmental factors such as psychological influences, physical activity, nutrition even climate play a role in how children grow.

It is growth hormone (GH) along with insulin-like-growth factor 1 (IGF-1) the central mediators in growth. GH gene located on 17q22 is regulated under a very complex hormonal network, as every tissue in our body has a way to stimulate somatotrophs and GH expression; this occurs through the POU1F1. Its daily secretion occurs in a pulsatile matter, and there are times that if measured it is undetectable. Current thinking is that there are approximately ten pulses of secretions a day lasting about 90 minutes, each one of them 2 hours apart.

Currently, the focus is on growth; linear growth velocity is a reliable indicator of a child's general health, mediated by different hormones and systems in the body, with the primary drivers being growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor 1, androgens, and thyroid hormone. All of these result in chondrogenesis. While at the same time steroids (glucocorticoids) inhibit chondrogenesis. It is important to remember that thyroid deficiency looks similar to GH deficiency and if suspicious of thyroid deficiency, the clinician should first correct the thyroid abnormality before performing the GH stimulation test.

The specific pathophysiology of constitutional growth delay is not very well established; it is known that there is an overall delay, meaning, all tissues are affected, which is why patients normally catch up on their normal growth pattern, it just starts later. Dr. Tommiska studied the gene LIN28B, which is believed to play a role in constitutional growth delay.