**Non-operative Treatment of PFT**

PFT could be treated non operatively if the patient presents early after suffering from the hand penetrating injury within 48 hours, with less dramatic Kanavel signs. Non-operative treatment measurements to treat PFT include intravenous antibiotics, high arm elevation, and splinting. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be prescribed to cover the suspected organisms until the results of the culture are available. The non-operative management of PFT necessitates close monitoring of the infection by repeated hand examination and laboratory inflammatory markers. If no clinical improvement is noticed or there is worsening of the Kanavel signs, an urgent surgical washout should be performed.

**Operative Treatment of PFT**

Various surgical approaches and techniques have been reported to treat PFT. The flexor tendon sheath can be washed out with closed irrigation via two volar incisions. However, severe PFT with delayed presentation and tissue necrosis may require more invasive surgical treatment with debridement and open irrigation.

**Closed Flexor Sheath Catheter Irrigation**

Flexor sheath irrigation can be performed through two small volar incisions. The proximal incision is made over the level of the A1 pulley and the distal proximal to the distal interphalangeal crease.

**Open Flexor Sheath Irrigation and Debridement**

Open flexor sheath washout can be performed via a single extended volar incision to expose the entire flexor sheath. Two types of incisions have been described for open flexor sheath washout: a straight mid-axial incision and a zigzag incision, also known as Bruner incision (Figure 1).