Given that the head and neck are the key areas of interest, scanning should be performed with arms down to avoid CT beam hardening artifacts in the head and neck area. In addition, a neck immobilization device should be used to prevent patient motion that can cause anatomic misregistration artifacts. The timing of image acquisition can be modified using breathing-gating software to correct for respiratory motion, but this technique lengthens scan time.

If tumor staging is the only purpose of the PET-CT, then low-dose CT can be performed. If the scan is performed for treatment planning purposes, regular dose CT should be performed to better anatomic resolution and interpretation.

The method used to favor a benign vs. malignant process can use an average SUV or use the highest detected (SUV) inside the region of interest. Many clinical studies performed with 18-FDG pre-defined 2.5 as the critical threshold, with the interpretation of the finding as benign if its average SUV was below this value and interpretation of a finding as malignant if its average SUV was above this value.  This strategy is based on the assumption that background tissue activity always has an average SUV below 2.5.

However, some radiologists believe that using a threshold SUV higher than that measured in the blood pool is the most accurate means of predicting whether a finding is malignant.  Radiologists also use other factors, such as the shape of the abnormality, to guide image interpretation. For example, linear uptake is most likely a result of a benign process, such as post-radiation inflammation.

Clinicians should realize that radiologic interpretation of cancer using PET-CT remains a subjective process.