**DIEP Flap**

The patient is placed in a supine position, arm in abduction. Perforators can optionally be assessed with the pencil Doppler. A lower incision is made carefully to preserve the superficial inferior epigastric vein with the longest length possible.

The incisions are carried down to the abdominal fascia. Scarpa’s fascia is carefully maintained, and beveling is performed at the lateral aspects and at the level below Scarpa’s fascia only.

The flap is usually elevated from lateral to medial, and the search for perforators is begun when the territory of the rectus sheath over the lateral rectus muscle is reached. If bilateral flaps are being prepared, the midline incision can be made, and the flap traced from medial to lateral as well, to help surround the perforators. Larger perforators are identified, and a single flap can be supported on one major perforator. The umbilicus is separated from the flap with a periumbilical incision. When a large dominant perforator is isolated, the rectus fascia is incised longitudinally, around the perforator vessels, especially the vein can be quite delicate.  The fascia is opened for 10 to 12 centimeters, and the perforator is traced through the muscle. When the entire flap is isolated on the perforator, and DIEA/DIEV and the recipient area is ready, the DIEA and the venae can be ligated and divided.

Once all of the side branches are divided and the pedicle is free near its origin, The deep inferior epigastric vessels are clipped, and the flap is ready for transfer to the recipient region. Typically the anastomosis is technically easier with the contralateral lower abdominal flap because of the position of the artery and vein, as most people use the internal mammary vessels for inflow.

Once the anastomosis is complete, the flap is allowed to perfuse for a short period of time and is inspected for arterial inflow and venous congestion. It is important to maintain the superficial inferior epigastric vein during shaping to be used as a second venous anastomosis in cases of venous congestion.

The flap may be secured in position with surgical staples, and the patient placed in a seated position to assess for symmetry.

The abdominal incision is closed in layers over suction drains with the hips flexed and knees bent in a semi-Fowler position. The umbilicus is brought through the abdominal wall and sutured into position.

**SIEA Flap**

The preparation of the recipient site is the same as described above for the DIEP flap.  During flap harvest, the superficial inferior epigastric vessels are approached first, and if the caliber of these vessels is sufficient (1 to 1.5 mm)  at the level of the inferior flap incision, they are followed down to their origin from the common femoral artery and saphenous vein. Since the vascular pedicle of the SIEA flap is typically smaller than that for a DIEP flap, using a smaller perforating branch of the internal mammary vessels is recommended.

**SGAP Flap**

The Doppler probe is used to end perforating vessels from the superior gluteal artery, found in one-third of the distance on a line from the posterior superior iliac crest to the greater trochanter. The skin paddle is marked in an oblique pattern from the inferior medial to the superior lateral to include these perforators.

****IGAP Flap****

The gluteal fold is noted with the patient in a standing position. Doppler probe used to end perforating vessels from the inferior gluteal artery. The internal mammary vessels are preferred as anastomosis to these vessels, especially important for the SGAP flap, which typically has a shorter pedicle than the IGAP flap. The artery and vein diameters for anastomosis are 2.0 to 2.5 mm and 3.0 to 4.5 mm, respectively. The skin and fat overlying the gluteus maximus muscle are elevated superiorly and inferiorly to allow solid approximation of the fascia of the donor site.

**Profunda Artery Perforator Flap**

To identify key perforators and to assist in determining the amount of tissue available for reconstruction, all patients undergo magnetic resonance or computed tomographic angiography preoperatively.

The patients are placed supine in a frog-leg position with the thighs abducted. The surgeon incises the medial part of the thigh and continues up with deep fascia. A perforator-based flap is then elevated from medial to lateral just posterior to the adductor longus muscle, with the gracilis muscle reflected anteriorly, the adductor magnus fascia is entered. Dissection proceeds posteriorly until key perforators are identified.

The dissection of the pedicle can proceed to its origin at the profunda vessels If more length is needed. Once vascular microanastomosis is performed with the internal mammary vessels, The flaps are coned for inset to recreate the desired breast shape and contour.