Treatment consists of both pharmacological and nonpharmacological measures. Smoking cessation is the key to preventing further lung destruction and so is the avoidance of environmental pollution. Annual influenza and appropriate pneumococcal vaccinations are a must unless contraindicated in these patients. Avoidance of sick contacts helps in the prevention of exacerbations. Adequate nutrition and, preferably, the assistance of a nutritionist can be helpful in these patients.

Long term oxygen therapy is necessary for patients who have an oxygen saturation of less than 88% or a PaO2 of less than 55 mmHg, at rest or with exertion.

Pharmacological therapy is the mainstay in the management of COPD. Inhaled bronchodilators such as albuterol, levalbuterol, anticholinergics like ipratropium, inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), long-acting beta agonists (LABA) and long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA). Though traditionally a combination of ICS and LABA were used more, with recent evidence of increasing pneumonia in these patients, a more 'nonsteroidal' approach with the combination of LABA and LAMA have been successfully tried, of late, by many clinicians. LABA alone, without ICS or LAMA, have been approved for COPD though there has been evidence of increased deaths if used in asthma.

Systemic corticosteroids are primarily useful in COPD exacerbations along with inhaled medications. Methylprednisolone, hydrocortisone, dexamethasone are frequently used all over the world. Oral prednisone is equally effective as intravenous steroids.

Patients with alpha-1 anti-trypsin deficiency would be candidates for "augmentation therapy" with the enzyme.

Lung volume reduction surgery is possible for selected patients with bullous emphysema. In the "end stage" disease, a lung transplant might be another option in suitable patients.