Patients with suspicious nodules should have thyroid function checked with thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and thyroxine (T4) levels and confirm nodules with an ultrasound of the thyroid gland with cervical node evaluation. If TSH is low, indicating a functional nodule, this can be confirmed by a radioiodine imaging scan. These functionally hyperthyroid or "hot" nodules are rarely cancerous and require management of hyperthyroidism or thyrotoxicosis.

Non-thyrotoxic thyroid nodules should be evaluated with fine-needle aspiration (FNA) and biopsy. FNA is sufficient to diagnose papillary and anaplastic thyroid cancers. However, FNA cannot distinguish between a benign adenoma and malignant carcinoma for follicular and Hurthle cell tumor types, and this generally requires a thyroid lobectomy or thyroidectomy to perform a surgical pathological evaluation showing capsular invasion, vascular invasion, or infiltration of the thyroid gland to prove invasive cancer.

Molecular studies are increasingly being used to distinguish benign from malignant follicular-derived tumors to help avoid aggressive surgeries. These include testing for BRAF and RAS mutation, mRNA genomic sequencing classifier testing, and microRNA gene expression modalities.

Some patients may need CT or MRI evaluation for widespread disease depending on presenting symptoms and laryngoscopic evaluation if present with local symptoms like dysphonia or dysphagia.

PET-CT is useful in patients suspected of having metastatic disease.