A good understanding of muscle relaxants in conjunction with the proper management of myofascial pain and muscle spasm can favorably impact a patient's mobility, quality of life, safety,  and outcome after an acute painful muscular injury or strain. Carisoprodol indications include the relief of discomfort associated with acute, painful musculoskeletal conditions. This medication is recommended to be used together with rest, physical therapy, and other measures to relax muscles after strains, sprains, and muscle injuries.  It is also important for healthcare team members to be aware that this medication is a schedule IV controlled substance with abuse potential and, therefore, to assess a patient's risk factors for substance abuse. Risk factors for substance abuse include a personal history of substance abuse, a first-degree relative with substance abuse problems, and environmental factors. To minimize the potential risks of drug dependence and abuse, it is not recommended to use carisoprodol for more than three weeks and is therefore approved for only up to three weeks of use.  In addition, due to potentially serious side effects such as sedation, seizures, and falls, this medication is not recommended to be used in pediatric patients under 16 years of age nor in elderly patients over the age of 65.

In summary, healthcare professionals need to work together as an interprofessional team to thoroughly evaluate a patient and consider a patient's risk factors, including a history of substance abuse and a history of medication noncompliance, to make informed decisions about the potential role of carisoprodol in their treatment. It is also essential for healthcare providers to be cognizant of the duration of treatment with this medication. The pharmacist should perform medication reconciliation and verify there are no interactions and that dosing is within proper limits, and let the prescriber know of any concerns. Nursing should counsel patients on possible adverse effects and monitor the patient's usage to ensure there is no misuse and that therapy is effective, reporting any concerns to the prescribing clinician. Carisoprodol has been a commonly prescribed muscle relaxant for many years. To help improve patient outcomes when considering utilizing carisoprodol in a patient's care, the interprofessional health care team members should be aware of the indications, potential interactions, potential adverse effects, pharmacodynamic variables, and pharmacokinetic factors that can affect the successful implementation and use of this medication. [Level 5]