Examination via ultrasound during pregnancy confirms the presence of the vanishing twin phenomenon. Additionally, the examination of the placenta after giving birth provides morphological details about the vanishing twin that was established following an ultrasonographic examination.

Moreover, a study performed to compare the rise of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) between normally progressing twin pregnancies and pregnancies with vanishing twins demonstrated a slower rise of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) in vanishing twin pregnancies as compared to the normal twin pregnancies. The reason for the slower rate of human chorionic gonadotrophin rise could be the result of poor trophoblastic activity due to embryonic causes. These findings indicate that the abnormality in the human chorionic gonadotrophin in vanishing twin syndrome is present from the earliest days of implantation and not due to some acute insult.

A recent study, including a large series of pregnancies with a vanishing twin, was performed to determine the use of maternal serum pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) and serum-free B-human chorionic gonadotrophin (B-HCG) in first-trimester screening for trisomies in relation to the interval between embryonic death and blood sampling. Compared to the previous studies, this study revealed that multiples of the median (MoM) values of maternal serum free B-human chorionic gonadotrophin (B-HCG) were not altered, but that of PAPP-A (MoM) was increased in both pregnancies with an empty gestational sac or a dead embryo.

If the pregnancy is conceived via an assisted reproductive technique, complicated by advanced maternal age, chances of vanishing twin phenomenon to occur get higher, most probably due to the increased chances of chromosomal abnormalities in the fetus associated with advanced maternal age.