**No Treatment**

When left untreated, some infertile couples still manage to produce a pregnancy.  Studies have shown that 23% of untreated infertile couples conceive after 2 years which goes up to 33% after 4 years. Even in men with severe oligozoospermia (<2 million sperm/mL), 7.6% of these untreated male infertility patients are able to produce a pregnancy within two years.

**Lifestyle Changes**

Reasonable healthy lifestyle changes should be recommended or at least discussed with all male infertility patients. These changes include stopping smoking, limiting or eliminating alcohol intake, adopting a more nutritious diet, weight loss measures if obese, increased exercise, avoiding potentially toxic artificial lubricants during sexual activity, reducing stress, eliminating illegal and recreational drug use (such as marijuana), minimizing prescription drugs, avoiding exposure to pesticides and heavy metals (such as lead, mercury, boron, and cadmium), and eliminating any unnecessary chemical exposures.

Clothing selection, "boxers or briefs," might play a role in male infertility due to possible alterations in scrotal temperature, with "boxers" being preferred, although the evidence is not compelling or definitive.

While it remains unclear exactly how much influence these factors have in male infertility, it is reasonable to expect that avoiding potentially spermatotoxic activities and adopting a healthier lifestyle will improve overall male fertility.

**"Empirical, Optional and Controversial" Therapies: Clomiphene, Tamoxifen, Aromatase Inhibitors, Carnitine, and Antioxidants**

It is often difficult for physicians to suggest or even discuss non-traditional, alternative treatments to patients when the medical literature shows so much conflicting and contradictory data or only poorly done studies supporting their use. Simple treatment options for the majority of men with proven male factor infertility are essentially limited to ejaculatory duct resections, vasectomy reversals, and varicocele repairs.  Although it may be difficult, it is still important to properly inform patients and their partners about optional, alternative therapies even when the available data is inadequate, incomplete, contradictory, or inconclusive.  The following therapies have all demonstrated some beneficial effects on sperm quality or male infertility in the medical literature. While their use may be controversial, patients deserve the right to make an informed decision about their infertility treatment. The therapies are relatively inexpensive, and using them may provide some psychological benefit. There are enough reports of a potential benefit to justify a clinical trial in infertility patients who cannot afford or are not otherwise candidates for other treatments.

Clomiphene is an anti-estrogen and, in small doses (25 to 50 mg 3 times per week), can increase gonadotropins (FSH and LH) and stimulate spermatogenesis making it potentially useful in idiopathic cases of male infertility. It works by inhibiting the estradiol negative feedback response to the hypothalamus, which results in a higher release of LH, causing higher testosterone levels but also resulting in higher estradiol levels.

Nasal testosterone gel is a testosterone replacement supplement that appears to uniquely have minimal effect on semen parameters, unlike virtually all other forms of testosterone replacement therapy.

Aromatase inhibitors have shown an ability to improve semen parameters but have not been conclusively proven to improve pregnancy rates, as most of the available studies are either case reports, anecdotal, or of low quality.

L-Carnitine is an amino acid and antioxidant that is typically found in high concentrations in the epididymis and has long been suggested as a possible, non-toxic general therapy for male infertility.

Antioxidants to reduce the effects of oxidative stress on semen and sperm would seem a reasonable male infertility therapy, but data on this is somewhat conflicting.

Overall, there is certainly a paucity of data to definitively support recommending any of these therapies, but it may not be unreasonable to offer one or more of them to a couple for consideration. Every practitioner will need to decide for themselves whether or not to offer any of these tempting but still unproven remedies.  It is the rare physician who can deny a simple, harmless, inexpensive potential therapy to a desperate infertile couple, even if its actual clinical efficacy is currently unclear.

**Gonadotropic Therapy**

The use of gonadotropin therapy in most men with idiopathic infertility is controversial. A meta-analysis of six randomized trials of gonadotropic therapy in male infertility patients reported higher pregnancy rates than the placebo group, but the overall quality of these studies was low with highly variable treatment protocols and follow-up periods.

We know that FSH stimulates Sertoli cell activity and sperm production, but when used alone as a therapy for male factor infertility, it appears to have only a limited benefit on sperm production.

Results are better when gonadotropins are used to correct specific pituitary and hypothalamic disorders. Successful gonadotropin therapy typically consists of some combination of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), LH, FSH, GnRH, and human menopausal gonadotropin (HMG). hCG acts similarly to LH but is cheaper and has a longer half-life. Human menopausal gonadotropin (HMG) contains both FSH and LH and works similarly to GnRH.

For infertile men with idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH), the first step is usually to stop any exogenous testosterone supplementation. (While often used in symptomatic hypogonadal men, exogenous testosterone supplementation only worsens semen parameters and exacerbates their infertility by reducing FSH and LH.)

Various combinations of HCG, FSH, GnRH, and HMG have been successfully used to treat male infertility in men with IHH. Spermatogenesis has been stimulated in only about 20% of cases treated with HCG and pulsatile GnRH but adding human FSH appears to be effective in normalizing fertility.

**Sexual Disorders**

Sexual intercourse during the most fertile period should be at least twice a week. Erectile dysfunction should be treated and retrograde ejaculation generally responds to oral sympathomimetic drugs, although there is little data on its ultimate effectiveness in producing pregnancy in infertile couples.

**Ejaculatory Duct Cyst Puncture or Resection**

Midline prostatic and ejaculatory duct cysts are present in about 10.2% of all infertile men. The presence of such cysts should be suspected in men with low ejaculate volume, azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia, normal hormonal screening, normal secondary sexual characteristics, and dilated seminal vesicles on transrectal ultrasound examinations.

**Varicocelectomy**

Varicocele repairs are generally only recommended in infertile men with abnormal semen parameters who have large, clinical grade 3 varicoceles.  Essentially, these are the varicoceles that are clinically apparent on physical examination.  Varicocele repair is also reasonable if the varicocele is causing symptoms with or without infertility. According to most experts, men with infertility and small varicoceles that are not palpable on physical examination (typically with varicose vein diameters <3 mm) are not likely to benefit from varicocelectomy, but this is somewhat controversial.

Recent studies have suggested that subclinical varicoceles may sometimes have an impact on semen characteristics based on testicular size and intratesticular hemodynamics rather than varicocele size, palpability, or vein diameter. Among men with subclinical varicoceles, those with infertility were more likely to have bilateral disease, lower average testicular volumes, and higher resistive and pulsatility indices, as well as increased peak retrograde flow rates, higher average scrotal temperatures, and lower end-diastolic and peak systolic velocities.

**Transurethral Resection of the Ejaculatory Ducts**

Patients with ejaculatory duct obstructions, usually found on transrectal ultrasonography, are likely to benefit from transurethral resection of the ejaculatory ducts. This is done by resection of the verumontanum but must be done carefully to avoid injury to the external sphincter.  Elevation of the distal prostatic urethra with a finger using an O'Connor drape may be helpful in performing the procedure safely. Afterward, there is a potential for epididymitis from reflux.

**Vasovasostomy and Vasoepididymostomy**

These are advanced microsurgical procedures performed on men with obstructive azoospermia due to bilateral epididymal or vasal obstruction. This may be obvious in a patient who had a bilateral vasectomy surgery, but in others, obstructive azoospermia is suggested by the finding of no sperm in the semen together with the normal testicular size and hormone levels. The use of surgical microscopes has greatly increased the success rates of these procedures. Improved fertility rates occur with vasovasostomy compared to vasoepididymostomy, a shorter time period from the original obstructive surgery or injury, finding sperm at the time of vasovasostomy (especially if found bilaterally), and if the nature of the original obstructive event was surgical rather than infectious. Even after successful surgery, some men will remain infertile due to their development of an exaggerated immune response to the sperm granulomas that form on the proximal side of a vasectomy.

**Intrauterine Insemination (IUI)**

This is a form of assisted reproduction where semen and sperm are collected from the male partner (or a donor) and artificially instilled into the fertile female uterus. It is most useful where the postcoital test showed no sperm but may also be used in cases of idiopathic infertility or when there are significant abnormal sperm parameters but still some normal spermatozoa. It avoids potential vaginal allergic responses and toxic cervical mucus. The overall pregnancy success rate is only 4% if used alone, but when combined with female superovulation (produced by the use of aromatase inhibitors, clomiphene, and gonadotropins), the success rate increases up to 17% per attempt. The overall success rate is about 12% per attempt, but this decreases as more attempts are made.  Pregnancy rates increase to about 40% - 50% after 9 attempts. In most cases of unexplained or mild male factor infertility, three to four attempts are often recommended before resorting to IVF.

Intrauterine insemination techniques should not be used when the sperm are dead (positive hypoosmotic swelling test or sperm vitality staining).  Abnormal functional sperm tests (such as capacitation, acrosomal reaction, and sperm penetration assays) would suggest that IVF with ICSI should be used instead.

The semen can be processed in various ways to collect only the high motility, normal morphology sperm.  The semen is washed to remove dead cells leaving healthy sperm, which are concentrated for the insemination.  If the male has a low semen volume, several specimens can be combined and then injected into the female partner's uterus at the optimal time.

In general, a total motile sperm count of at least 1 million is needed for successful intrauterine insemination.  The formula is: Total Motile Sperm Count = Sperm Concentration (million/mL) x Sperm Motility (%) x Semen Volume (mL).

While less reliable than ICSI outlined below, it is far less expensive, so it can be easily repeated and may be optimal where there is no female factor present, and the male's semen is not too inadequate.

**In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) and Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI)**

IVF can be used in couples where intrauterine insemination with ovarian stimulation has failed, in women over 40 years of age, or where there are known conditions precluding the use of simpler techniques such as bilateral tubal disorders.

The ultimate assisted reproductive technique currently available, ICSI, is similar to the IVF described above but involves the use of a microscope and micropipette to inject a single sperm taken from the male partner directly into an egg from the female partner that has been surgically extracted. The fertilized eggs are implanted into the uterus of the female partner.  The overall fertilization rate of ICSI is about 60%, with an initial pregnancy rate of about 20% to 30% per cycle.