# Introduction

Calcium channels play an essential critical role in a variety of physiological functions in cells. They include all pore-forming membrane proteins that are calcium-permeable and used for the transport of these ions across cell membranes. As an ion, calcium is unique in biological systems; this is because calcium not only functions to generate membrane potentials and electrical signals but also functions as a central cell signaling molecule. Therefore, calcium channels play an even more involved role in the cell by allowing for the generation of a multitude of cellular responses. Calcium channels come in many forms and are incredibly diverse in both structure and function.

Furthermore, there are a variety of methods by which they may be categorized. To provide an overview of calcium channels, it is necessary to describe the different types of calcium channels, their structures, functions in cellular responses, pharmacological properties, and associated pathologies. This article will attempt to summarize this diverse class of proteins to elucidate their nature at the molecular, cellular, tissue, and organismal levels.

# Fundamentals

Ion channels are pore-forming integral membrane proteins that are composed of various combinations of subunits.

The concentration of calcium inside the cell can vary widely depending on location.

A plasma membrane is an important place for calcium channels to carry out their function by regulating the entry and exit of calcium from the cell. One of the most important types of calcium channels found on plasma membranes is voltage-gated calcium channels, which rapidly transport calcium into the cytoplasm. These channels respond to a change in voltage across the cell membrane, which is driven by an electrochemical gradient. They are especially critical for the initiation of cellular processes, including muscle contraction and gene transcription.

Other calcium channels exist on the plasma membrane to transport calcium out of the cell to provide a very low cytosolic concentration. These channels include various calcium channel pumps and exchangers. Among these are the plasma membrane calcium ATPase (PMCA) pump and the sodium/calcium ion exchanger (NCX), which expend large amounts of energy to function.

Calcium is so essential for intracellular processes that the cell stores it in high concentrations, particularly in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in muscle cells). The ER/SR serves as the main storage site for calcium inside the cell.

Other channels exist to transport calcium in the opposite direction from the endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic plasmic reticulum to the cytoplasm, such as the inositol triphosphate (IP3) receptor and ryanodine receptor (RyR).

Once calcium has been released into the cytoplasm, the calcium stored inside the storage organelles of the ER/SR eventually becomes depleted. For the cell to continue performing calcium-dependent responses, these stores need to be rapidly replenished. Special calcium channels exist for this purpose called store-operated calcium channels, which mediate a process called store-operated calcium entry (SOCE). The way these channels function involve a complex series of events that have only recently come to light. They form when concentrations of calcium in the lumen of the ER are low, sensed by a calcium-sensing protein called the stomal interacting molecule (STIM). When calcium becomes low, the STIM protein oligomerizes and moves to the ER membrane, where it interacts with another protein called Orai1, referred to as a calcium-release activated channel (CRAC). The interaction between these two proteins creates a passageway for calcium between the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum and the plasma membrane. Through the bypassing of these two different membrane systems, a direct passageway for calcium from the cell exterior to the primary storage organelles is made possible. Because the concentration of calcium is generally one thousand or more times greater outside of the cell than inside, it provides a powerful mechanism by which intracellular calcium levels are rapidly replenished.

All calcium channels play an essential role in calcium homeostasis and signaling in the cell. It is not possible to describe every type of calcium channel in this article. However, the essential calcium channels that contribute to the regulation of calcium concentration in the cell will be discussed. Ultimately, calcium channels are involved in a large number of different processes. They exhibit significant diversity in both structure, function, and pharmacology. The abnormal functioning of calcium channels is associated with a large number of pathological conditions. As a result, a greater understanding of calcium channels is necessary.

# Cellular Level

Calcium channels perform functions that act not only on a molecular scale through the transportation of calcium ions, but on a cellular level by participating in whole-cell processes that affect an entire organism. As a result, the regulation of calcium is exceptionally precise. As stated previously, the concentration of calcium during resting conditions is kept extremely low by the actions of various calcium pumps, channels, and exchangers. The purpose of this is so that calcium may act as an intracellular signal, which may be initiated or modified by calcium channels on the plasma membrane or in membranes of intracellular organelles. These rapid calcium fluxes exhibit characteristics that provide the cell with additional information than signal stimulus intensity. These signals also give information that shows both spatial and temporal properties.

Furthermore, calcium signals may be self-regulatory, whereby calcium channels are regulated by calcium itself. As a result, not only does calcium act as a signal itself, but it can modify its own signal through its actions on calcium channel function. Because of the unique features of calcium channels, they can participate in functions much more complicated than merely the transportation of ions. Each cell type can carry out specific physiological functions by the presence of unique combinations of calcium channels on their cell membranes. Together, they provide information concerning the precise duration, frequency, timing, and amplitude of a calcium signal to control a particular calcium-dependent signaling process.

All calcium channels generate brief pulses or transients of calcium by their opening.

Calcium waves spread throughout the cytoplasm and occur on the order of seconds to minutes. At this time scale, ryanodine receptors, for example, mediate a self-regenerative calcium amplifying process known as calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) through positive feedback, which is essential for muscle contraction. Calcium channel-generated calcium waves are also involved in modifying the actions of various calcium-dependent proteins such as CaMKII, MAP-kinases, and CREB, which can modify intracellular processes.

Calcium channels also generate signals that are spatial in nature that dependent on highly localized signaling structures and processes. For example, the release of calcium by a single calcium channel generates a localized increase in calcium just adjacent to the channel. This localized increase in calcium may create elementary calcium signals referred to as calcium "puffs" or "sparks," depending on the channel and can initiate highly localized responses; this is made possible by the ability of some calcium channels such as IP3 and ryanodine receptors to form organized and highly localized macromolecular complexes with other proteins such as receptors (i.e., G-protein coupled receptors or receptor tyrosine kinases) or calcium-binding/calcium-dependent proteins.

These organized macromolecular signaling processes are the bases of calcium signaling "units," which can function autonomously. These calcium signaling units can then be summed, multiplied, or otherwise calculated together to create even more complex cellular responses. Examples of processes that involve these organized macromolecular complexes include the synaptic integration of information by single neurons. Input-specific calcium-dependent synaptic modifications occur during the processes of learning and memory on individual dendritic spines, and they depend on localized processes that occur adjacent to single calcium channels.

Calcium channels do not simply open and close to allow the passage of calcium. Calcium channels can open and close in intricate patterns that contain specific temporal and spatial characteristics to produce complex cellular responses. The cell has utilized calcium channels not only to provide calcium for calcium-dependent cellular processes but to encode information that accompanies the release of calcium to produce specific intracellular signals. Through this, calcium channels mediate processes that affect the entire cell addition to the affecting processes at the molecular level.

An example of a whole-cell process controlled almost entirely by the actions of calcium channels is in the regulation of cardiac muscle contraction in cardiac myocytes. Calcium channels are the structural components of cardiac cells that provide a mechanism to modulate the force of contraction. One of the ways that this occurs is through beta-adrenergic receptor (b-AR) stimulation to cause a positive inotropic response that is regulated by protein kinase A (PKA). The initiation of a cardiac muscle contraction is mediated by the entry of calcium through L-type voltage-gated calcium channels on the membrane of the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

During each action potential, cAMP is produced by the Ga(S) subunit of the B-adrenergic receptor upon activation by norepinephrine. PKA becomes activated by cAMP resulting in widespread changes in calcium channel function. As a kinase, it displays phosphorylative activity to modify the actions of calcium channels, specifically L-type VGCCs, SERCA, and RyRs. When L-type VGCCs are phosphorylated, each action potential can produce a larger flux of calcium resulting in potentiation of channel currents. Secondly, PKA phosphorylates phospholamban, which disinhibits the actions of the SERCA pump, which results in more calcium available in the sarcoplasmic reticulum for muscle contraction. Thirdly, phosphorylation of ryanodine receptors by PKA increases their ability to generate the calcium sparks necessary for calcium-induced calcium release (CICR), which is required to initiate muscle contraction. Ultimately, this process is an example where calcium channel activity can be modified to produce different responses by the sympathetic nervous system through kinase-mediated phosphorylation.

# Molecular Level

Both PMCA and SERCA are P-type ATPases. All P-type ATPases exhibit a similar structure and mechanism of action. Both of these pumps use the energy derived from ATP to pump calcium against their concentration gradients.)

VGCCs are located on the plasma membrane and open in response to a change in voltage across the plasma membrane. Currently, there are ten known subtypes of voltage-gated calcium channels, each with a different molecular structure and variations in subunit composition.

The a1 subunit contains the channel gate, which controls ion flow, the voltage sensor which controls channel activation, and the ion-conducting pore for calcium ions to flow through.

L-Type VGCCs are found in both excitable and non-excitable cells and are present throughout the body.****family of a1 subunits. They are distinguished by their voltages of activation, which occur at negative membrane potential.****Cav2.2 subtype.****Cav2.3 a1 subunit.

Most subtypes of voltage-gated calcium channels contain some combination of auxiliary subunits, principally the beta and A2sd subunits. All of the subunits take part in modifying channel gating, assembly, and insertion of the channels into the plasma membrane, among other functions.

The beta subunit can be found in both the Cav1 (L-type) and Cav2 (P/Q, N, and R-type) families of voltage-gated calcium channels.

IP3 channels are consist of four subunits that make up a tetrameric channel embedded in the membrane of the endoplasmic and sarcoplasmic reticulum.

The ryanodine receptor displays some structural similarities to the IP3 receptors. It is also composed of four subunits, which form a homotetrameric channel.

Finally, The Orai subunit of store-operated calcium channels is a four transmembrane-domain spanning protein containing two extracellular loops, one intracellular loop, and cytosolic N and C-terminals.

# Function

The primary functional role of the PMCA pump is to transport calcium against its concentration gradient out from the cytoplasm out of the cell through the plasma membrane.

The main functional role of SERCA is to pump calcium from the cytoplasm back into the lumen of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is essentially the endoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells.

The Na+/Ca+ exchanger also is responsible for keeping cytosolic calcium levels low. Unlike PMCA and SERCA, it has a low affinity for calcium but a high transport capacity.

Voltage-gated calcium channels play a crucial role in various cellular processes. In particular, they act as key signal transducers by influencing the electrical excitability of multiple cell types such as neurons and endocrine cells. They convert electrical signals in the form of action potentials or depolarization into the form of a calcium transient inside the cell by generating rapid calcium fluxes into the cell. These rapid fluxes of calcium are important for mediating fast cellular processes such as muscle contraction, initiation of neurotransmission, and secretion in muscle cells, neurons, and endocrine cells, respectively. In other cell types, the influx of calcium into the cytosol via VGCCs regulates various biochemical processes, such as enzyme activity and gene expression.

Different subtypes of  VGCCs have different electrophysical properties in terms of current and voltages of activation. As such, these channels mediate the activation of various signal transduction pathways and are involved in diverse cellular processes. For example, in cardiac and smooth muscle cells, large influxes of calcium into the cytoplasm by voltage-gated calcium provide the calcium required to initiate the process of calcium-induced calcium-release (CICR) in ryanodine receptors of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is essential for initiating muscle contraction. In skeletal muscle cells, VGCCs are mechanically linked to ryanodine receptors and controls their activation directly via conformational changes.

The Cav1 family of VGCCs plays an important role in the nervous system by contributing to the integration of synaptic input and transmission at sensory synapses. Furthermore, they play important regulatory roles in gene expression, secretion, and muscle contraction in skeletal and cardiac muscles.

P/Q-type calcium channels (Cav2.1) play a crucial role in neurotransmission. They are involved in linking neuronal excitation in pre-synaptic neurons to the secretion of neurotransmitters by mediating the increase in local calcium concentration in the pre-synaptic cell.

IP3 receptors have a diverse variety of functions in the cell. It is a component of one of the many calcium signaling pathways in the cell, which is highly versatile.

P3 receptors function as a hub for cell signaling activity by forming macromolecular complexes with various other molecules to create signaling cascades and activate cellular pathways.

IP3 receptor channels also play a critical role in various processes during development. In neurons, they play a role in synaptic plasticity and neuronal growth. For example,  IP3 receptors are necessary for calcium release in dendritic spines during long-term potentiation. Furthermore, the guidance of axons to neuronal targets and the formation of neuronal growth cones are dependent on IP3 receptors. They are also necessary to regulate cell proliferation.

Ryanodine receptors play a crucial role in the normal functioning of muscle cells. In muscle cells, the cytoplasmic domain of RyRs is coupled to L-type voltage-gated calcium channels on the cell membrane. Electromechanical coupling between these two receptors allows depolarizations in the cell membrane to directly control the gating of the ryanodine receptor.

Critical for excitation-contraction coupling in both skeletal and cardiac muscle.

One of the most important functions of ryanodine receptors is to play a critical role in excitation-contraction coupling, which links electrical signals to calcium release during the initiation of muscle contraction.

Store-operated calcium channels are located on the membrane of the endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic reticulum. They play an essential role in maintaining a constant store of calcium when required by the cell. Calcium continually leaks out of the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol during normal cellular processes. To avoid depletion of the cell's calcium stores, the cell utilizes store-operated calcium channels. Although the SERCA pump provides the initial storage of calcium, upon generation of cellular response and the utilization of second messengers of which calcium is an important such messenger, calcium gets used by the cell for such processes and, eventually, the calcium store becomes depleted. As such, store-operated channels function to avoid the complete emptying of calcium. Essentially, store-operated calcium channels act as mediators of communication for the cell between the endoplasmic reticulum and the plasma membrane and provide vital information regarding the status of calcium homeostasis at any given time.

# Mechanism

SERCA and PMCA belong to a group of ion pumps called P-type ATPases. P-type ATPases exist in two conformational states: E1 and E2. In the E1 conformation, the pump exhibits a high affinity for calcium on the cytoplasmic side of the cell. In the E2 conformational state, the transporter’s affinity for calcium rapidly decreases and subsequently leads to the release of calcium to the other side of the membrane.

When calcium concentrations are low in the cytosol, the PMCA pump is in the resting position, elicited by the blocking of the phosphorylation site by the C-terminal auto-inhibitory domain. A calcium-sensing protein called cAM binds to calcium when concentrations of cytosolic calcium increase. This causes a conformational change driven by the interaction of Ca-cAM and the autoinhibitory site, which dissociates from the active site. Calcium is transported to the extracellular environment when it ATP-phosphorylates a conserved aspartate residue.

The voltage sensor for the voltage-gated calcium channels is located at the S4 segments of each a1 homologous domain. Under the influence of an electrical field, these segments undergo conformational changes that cause them to move outward and rotate, causing the pore to open. The lining of the pore within the channel is composed of segments S5 and S6. Required for calcium selectivity is a glutamate residue located inside the pore loop. At the S6 segments are the binding sites for the organic calcium channel antagonists.

Voltage-gated calcium channels are highly regulated, specifically through G-protein coupled receptors and second messengers.

The NCX does not use the energy from ATP directly. Instead, its energy derives from the sodium concentration gradient, which is used to move calcium against its concentration gradient. This process is called secondary active transport.

The formation of IP3 occurs in response to various stimuli, including neurotransmitters, hormones, and growth factors. These stimuli act to stimulate IP3 production via activation of either GPCRs and RTKs which are coupled to phospholipase C. Upon the binding of these ligands to their receptors; a downstream signaling pathway is activated via the hydrolysis of the G-alpha and G-beta/gamma subunits of G-protein coupled receptors causing the activation of phospholipase C. PLC converts a molecule called PIP2 into IP3 and DAG. Phospholipase C then produces IP3.

A variety of means perform the regulation of the IP3 receptor function. Central to its functions in cell signaling are inositol triphosphate (IP3) and calcium. Both of these are the primary controllers of IP3 receptors and are its two main ligands, of which calcium is its molecule of transport.

The expression of IP3 receptors is triggered by an increase in intracellular calcium levels via the activation of different receptors, including voltage-gated calcium channels, NMDA receptors, and D1 receptors.

Calcium oscillations are generated by the IP3/calcium signaling pathway when the receptor produces calcium transients/spikes repeatedly over an extended period.

The oscillations generated by both IP3 and ryanodine receptors enhance the activity of the sodium/calcium exchanger by releasing pulses of calcium, which depolarizes pacemaker cells by creating an inward calcium current. The SERCA pump refills calcium stores in the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is relied upon for the periodic release of calcium from the SR by IP3 and RyR receptors. Ryanodine receptors are sensitized to release periodic calcium sparks upon the slow accumulation of calcium in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum by the SERCA pump. Toward the end of the pacemaker cell action potential, these calcium sparks begin to develop as a result of IP3 receptor calcium signaling. Immediately preceding and contributing to the pacemaker cell depolarization, the action potential is triggered when calcium is suddenly released by ryanodine receptors. The frequency and amplitude of these ryanodine-receptor mediated calcium sparks driving the pacemaker potential are increased by IP3 channel calcium release, which in turn are activated by beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation.

IP3 channels mediate the oscillatory calcium signals that drive smooth muscle contraction and are essential for the maintenance of smooth muscle tone. These IP3 channels become activated by various neurotransmitters, including serotonin and norepinephrine. Signals in the form of oscillatory frequency vary according to neurotransmitter concentration. Vascular tone is driven by oscillations generated from the release of calcium stores, which in turn is driven by the presence of these neurotransmitters whose concentration determines the extent of vascular smooth muscle contraction.

Ryanodine receptors are critical for both skeletal and cardiac muscle contraction. In these cells, it is involved in excitation-contraction coupling. This process is slightly different in skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle. In skeletal muscle, calcium currents through L-type voltage=gated calcium channels open ryanodine receptors via a mechanical coupling.

The mechanism by which SOCE channels operate is unique.

When calcium concentration in the endoplasmic reticulum is low, this is sensed by the EF-hand domain on STIM. The release of calcium from the EF-Hand domain promotes its oligomerization into dimers and more complex oligomers due to the exposure of hydrophobic surfaces. STIM then redistributes via diffusion into clusters to sites near the plasma membrane at junctional sites that form between the PM and ER membranes.

# Pathophysiology

Calcium channels appear to be involved in the pathophysiology of chronic pain. Synaptic nerve terminals located in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord receive action potentials propagating through primary afferent fibers, which occur upon activation of peripheral nociceptors in different organs and the skin. Pain is perceived when neurons activate in higher brain areas upon receiving an excitatory synaptic transmission from these dorsal horn synaptic terminals. The neuronal excitability of the afferent fibers is known to be regulated by Cav3.2 T-type VGCCs. Furthermore, neurotransmission in dorsal horn synapses is controlled by both Cav2.2 and Cav3.2 channels. In chronic pain conditions, these calcium channel subtypes have shown to be upregulated.

Voltage-gated calcium channels are thought to be involved in the pathophysiology of seizures, including absence seizures. Cav3.1 and Cav3.2 channels, for example, are expressed on thalamocortical and reticular thalamic neurons, and alterations in their activity have been shown to result in absence seizures, which may occur as a result of various mutations in these channels. Specific seizure disorders have links with specific calcium channels. For example, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy and juvenile absence epilepsy are associated with Cav3.2 (T-type) channel mutations. Importantly, more than 30 mutations have been found in just the Cav3.2 a1 subunit gene alone that have correlations with various types of epilepsies. Also, gain-of-function mutations have been found to affect the gating activity and plasma membrane trafficking of these channels. Increased seizure susceptibility associated with overexpression or overactivity of these channels makes also makes them an important target for treating absence seizures. Absence seizures are one of the hallmarks of idiopathic generalized epilepsy, which accounts for one-third of all epilepsies.

All addictive drugs share common underlying pathophysiology in addiction in that they all can increase dopamine in the mesolimbic dopamine system and change CREB-dependent gene expression in the ventral segmental area and nucleus accumbens, whether it be through activation of opioid receptors (opioids), nicotinic receptors (nicotine), GABA receptors (alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines) or dopamine receptors (stimulants). Voltage-gated calcium channels are involved in these processes, which lead to several important neurobiological and behavioral changes associated with addiction. For example, changes in neuroplasticity associated with stimulant abuse appear to involve the CaV1 family of voltage-gated calcium channels. Increased glutamatergic activity on the VTA occurs upon activation of Cav1.3 channels resulting from chronic exposure to psychostimulants.

The activity of Cav1.3 channels, along with increased glutamatergic activity in the VTA, causes NMDA and AMPA receptor-dependent changes in gene expression, which involves the upregulation of Cav1.2 receptors in VTA neurons. Since the firing behavior of neurons in the VTA is differentially regulated by Cav1.2 and Cav1.3 channels, dopamine release is increased onto the D1 receptors of the NAc. This activity leads to the insertion of AMPA receptors onto the NAc neuron plasma membranes and mediates long-term changes in gene expression. Ultimately, these activities have been linked to behavioral sensitization to psychostimulants.

Mutations in STIM and Orai are both associated with pathological diseases. Both gain and loss of function mutations lead to numerous pathologies.

Adrenergic receptors are important physiological mediators of both cardiovascular and smooth muscle activity. They are especially significant pharmacologically as they are the targets of a variety of drug classes such as beta-blockers, alpha-blockers, and alpha-adrenergic receptor agonists. Epinephrine, a general adrenergic receptor activator, has a significant influence over cardiovascular and smooth muscle activity. This activity occurs in part through its actions on both the plasma membrane and intracellular calcium channels. In cardiac muscle, beta-adrenergic receptors are targeted by epinephrine and produce positively chronotropic, inotropic, and dromotropic physiological effects, which are mediated by their ability to increase the opening time of voltage-gated calcium channels. In vascular smooth muscle, both contraction and vascular tone are increased by norepinephrine by alpha-receptor activation due to its ability to increase cytosolic calcium levels through a depolarization-independent IP3-receptor-mediated mechanism.

# Clinical Significance

Calcium channel blockers have a variety of uses in medicine and are used to treat a variety of conditions, including but not limited to cardiac arrhythmia and hypertension. Also, there are currently several drugs used for bipolar disorder that block calcium channels.

Because of the involvement of Cav2.2 channels in chronic pain states, they serve as a potentially important target for treating this condition. As stated previously, voltage-gated calcium channels are regulated by G-protein coupled receptors, and Cav2.2 channels are no exception. Both the GABAb receptor and various subtypes of opioid receptors affect the functioning of this channel. Morphine's ability to reduce the symptoms of chronic pain appears to be associated with its ability to mitigate primary afferent neuron activity by inhibiting the activity of Cav2.2 channels resulting in a decrease in neurotransmitter release. Another group of drugs called the gabapentinoids also affects the activity of Cav2.2 channels but through a different mechanism. Overexpression of Cav2.2 channels in chronic pain states is thought to occur as a result of the upregulation of a2D subunits, which influence the cell-surface expression of these channels. By interfering with a2D subunit functioning, gabapentinoids appear to decrease presynaptic plasma membrane Cav2.2 channel density, thereby decreasing neurotransmitter release.

Because of the involvement of T-type calcium channels in the absence seizure pathophysiology, pharmaceutical agents that target their activity may act as potent anti-epileptic drugs. The ability of T-type calcium channels to increase seizure susceptibility in the thalamus makes them an important clinical target for treating absence seizures. Drugs that inhibit specific subtypes of T-type calcium channel subunits would likely decrease absence seizure activity by reducing channel activity and expression. Mouse models of absence seizures exhibit resistance to drug-induced seizure activity when crossed with Cav3.1 T-type channel knockout mice, serving as an important clinical indicator of the importance of targeting this calcium channel in treating absence seizures.

The variety of different calcium channels in myocardial cells contribute to different physiological activities associated with cardiovascular functioning, and mutations in these channels contribute to various diseases of the cardiovascular system. For example, the SERCA pump plays a vital role in mediating the positively chronotropic effects of beta-adrenergic stimulation because beta-adrenergic generate cAMP, which activates a protein kinase that phosphorylates phospholamban. When phospholamban is phosphorylated, it disinhibits the SERCA pump, increasing the rate of cytosolic uptake of calcium into the sarcoplasmic reticulum and decreasing the relaxation time of the heart during increased physical exertion. Mutations in the SERCA pump have been linked to dilated cardiomyopathy.

The Na+/Ca+ exchanger is extremely important for healthy cardiovascular functioning. It exchanges sodium for calcium in a 3 to 1 ratio. This electrogenic action contributes to the voltage of the cardiac cell membrane and subsequent direction of calcium flux, which favors calcium influx during systole and calcium efflux diastole.

Calcium channel blockers are useful for the treatment of angina and related ischemic conditions because they ultimately exert a variety of physiological responses that affect the balance between myocardial oxygen supply and myocardial oxygen demand. DHP calcium channel blockers cause selective vasodilation of the coronary arteries and inhibit vascular smooth muscle contraction, which reduces vascular resistance, which increases blood flow, increases myocardial oxygen supply. Calcium channel blockers also decrease myocardial oxygen demand, determined by the contractile state of the heart, blood pressure, and heart rate. All calcium channel blockers reduce blood pressure, and this is achieved by peripheral vasodilation, which in turn reduces blood pressure. Non-DHP calcium channel blockers are active at the heart's nodal areas, where they decrease calcium influx and reduce the rate of depolarization in cardiac pacemaker cells, thereby reducing heart rate.

The dromotropic effects of calcium channel blockers like verapamil and diltiazem can be linked to their ability to interact with In SA and AV nodal cardiac cells. They cause blockage of L-type voltage-gated calcium channels at these sites, which reduces pacemaker cell depolarization and subsequent firing rate. This effect is beneficial during the treatment of angina and related ischemic conditions because it reduces the heart's oxygen demand. Because this pacemaker cell depolarization depends on T-type calcium channels as well, they do not achieve total depression of sinal rhythmic activity. In contrast, short-acting nifedipine-like calcium channel blockers, when administered in short-acting formulations, may increase heart rate as a result of reflex tachycardia, which occurs when significant vascular smooth muscle vasodilation causes a rapid decrease in blood pressure, which, in turn, increases sympathetic activity. As a result, they may exacerbate the symptoms of angina and related ischemic conditions of the cardiovascular system by increasing the heart's oxygen demand.

The inotropic action of calcium channel blockers plays an essential role in improving symptoms of angina because it reduces oxygen demand. However, this is also responsible for their ability to exacerbate conditions such as heart failure, in which the heart does not pump sufficient amounts of blood. For short-acting DHP calcium channel blockers such as nifedipine, their negative inotropic effect may be counteracted by reflex sympathetic stimulation due to rapidly reduced systemic vascular resistance. Sympathetic stimulation directly enhances cardiac contractility by increasing the calcium influx and, therefore, the availability of calcium for the heart's contractile apparatus. In angina, a decrease in cardiac contractility is particularly beneficial as it increases the heart's oxygen supply by reducing metabolic demand. Finally, concerning the negative chronotropic effect of the heart by calcium channel blockers, it is important to note that their ability to depress heart rate depends on their ability to inhibit adrenergic transmitters release the ability of the heart to adjust sympathetic tone reflexively.

In addition to affecting both myocardial oxygen supply and demand, calcium channel blockers are beneficial for certain diseases of the cardiovascular system because they reduce the heart's workload. Vasodilation of the systemic veins, for example, reduces pre-load. Afterload is also reduced because vascular resistance to blood flow decreases. Two separate mechanisms are responsible for this, inhibition of myogenic tone in vascular smooth muscle and a decrease in responsiveness to vasoconstricting substances like norepinephrine.

In diseases that restrict coronary blood flow, calcium channel blockers exert several beneficial effects. By decreasing heart rate, the ventricular filling time of the heart is increased, which increases the efficiency of the pumping of blood by the heart. Furthermore, The reduction of ventricular wall tension that occurs due to vascular smooth muscle dilation works by improving perfusion. During anoxic conditions, calcium channel blockers prevent the exaggerated accumulation of calcium by inhibiting calcium influx, which increases the redistribution of blood to ischemic regions. Patients with angina benefit from the inhibition of vascular smooth muscle contraction via blockade of L-type voltage-gated calcium channels, which dilates the coronary vessels and increases blood flow. The reduction of coronary vasospasm is a significant clinical effect of CCBs because it is the primary cause of ischemia in those with angina.