The mechanism of the formation of Harrison sulcus appeared to be due to the inward pull of ribs by the diaphragm along with its costal attachment. However, this mechanism has long since been challenged and is now rejected. Several authors have attempted to propose more credible mechanisms, but it remains speculative. Experiments by Herlitz, who made an important observation that the diaphragm has no attachments along the groove and that the diaphragm pulls the lower rib in an upward direction.

He explains that the diaphragm lines the lower part of the thoracic wall due to the vacuum that exists between them and due to the abdominal organs pushing up on the diaphragm, preventing it from flattening, causing the pull of the diaphragm to be directed upwards. Therefore, he asserts that if the pull of the diaphragm were to be the cause of the groove, it would have pulled ribs up and outwards instead of inwards. He further noticed that the groove appeared along with the site where the diaphragm leaves the thorax to move inwards medially, also called the costo-phrenic sinus, which led him to believe that a strain is generated along the costo-phrenic sinus as the diaphragm tries to move away from the thoracic wall. This strain, along with retractive forces of the lungs, may cause the groove to form.

Brodkin, on the other hand, presents a mechanism similar to the one originally presented here.

Another consideration would be that the groove is due to abnormal respiratory mechanics and physiology. The strain on the chest wall, the accentuated retractive forces of the lung, and abnormal contraction of the diaphragm are all possible manifestations of the physiological dysregulation.