History taking is the most valuable technique to differentiate among different causes of chest discomfort. A thorough history and physical exam is the hallmark for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease. For example, a history pertinent for typical anginal symptoms, decreased exercise tolerance, syncope, pre-syncope, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea should prompt the clinician to get a detailed history and physical exam and diagnostic tests (e.g., electrocardiogram and cardiac enzymes for patients who present with chest pain).

Characteristic features of stable angina are chest pain that worsens with emotional and physical exertion, cold weather, and meals. The patient experiences pain relief from rest and nitrates. Features of unstable angina include pain at rest that lasts over 30 minutes and does not relieve with sublingual nitroglycerine. Pain associated with sweating, nausea, and vomiting may suggest myocardial infarction (MI). Patients may present with complications of MI such as heart failure, ventricular septal defect (VSD), harsh systolic murmur, or papillary muscle rupture.

EKG is a tool for assessing patients who are either stable or in emergent situations. The presence of specific EKG findings should prompt referral, when necessary, for thrombolysis. However, EKG is not absolute as ST-segment elevations are present in only 50% of MIs confirmed by cardiac enzymes. Echocardiogram, stress testing, cardiac CT, and angiography are also other available options. Patient’s age, risk factors, and the symptoms will determine whether if any additional testing is necessary.