**Definition**

The conoid of Sturm is the configuration of rays refracted through a toric surface. Its main elements are the two focal lines that are created by the two meridians of the toric lens. The distance between the two focal lines is called the interval of Sturm. The circle of least confusion is located halfway between the two focal lines.

**What is a toric lens?**

Lenses can be of two broad types:

- Spherical

- Astigmatic

The focusing power of a surface is created by the degree of curvature and the change in the index of refraction. A surface with equal curvature and focusing power throughout the lens is spherical. Light falling through this lens will be focused in a spot of light called a focal point. On the other hand, when the curvature of the surface is unequal, with a maximum curvature in one orientation and a minimum curvature at an orientation that is 90 degrees away, it creates a toric surface.

The points of maximum and minimum curvature are called the two principal meridians of the lens. The two meridians each focusing light in a line 90 degrees away from the orientation of the meridian. The orientation of the focal line is the same as the axis of the power of the meridian that created the focal line. One way of looking at the axis of a refracting surface is to imagine that the meridian can rotate around the axis.

Astigmatic lenses can further be of two types:

- Plano-cylindrical

- Sphero-cylindrical

Plano-cylindrical lenses have one meridian that has no focusing power (the Plano meridian) and one meridian that does focus light (the cylindrical meridian). The Plano meridian creates a focal line at infinity, while the cylindrical component creates a focal line at a finite distance. [See the image - A Plano-cylindrical lens]. Therefore, in the case of the Plano-cylindrical lens, one of the focal lines is at infinity, and since the circle of least confusion is halfway in between the two focal lines, its location is at infinity as well [See the image on- Refraction through a cylindrical lens].

In sphero-cylindrical lenses, both meridians have focusing power, and both will create a focal line at a finite distance. The circle of least confusion is halfway between the two focal lines.

When a lens surface is toric, the base curve of the lens is defined as the principal meridian with the minimum curvature. This meridian will form a focal line that is farthest from the lens.

**Power of a Toric Lens**

Toric lenses can be represented as an optical cross or as a fraction. The optical cross format displays the focusing power (in diopters) of the two meridians written next to two perpendicular lines representing each of the meridians. The fraction format contains the power of one of the meridians as the numerator and the difference in power of the other meridian as the denominator. The numerator is the spherical power, and the denominator is the cylindrical power.

For example, if a toric lens has +4 diopter power in one meridian and +6 diopter power in the perpendicular meridian. This can be considered a +4 diopter spherical lens with a superimposed +2 diopter cylindrical lens. This lens could be represented as +4 DS/+2 DC. The DS designation indicates "spherical diopter," and the DC designation "cylindrical diopter."  The power of one meridian is the numerator of the fraction, and the power of the other meridian is the sum of the numerator and the denominator.

**The Spherical Equivalent of a Toric Lens**

The spherical equivalent of a toric lens is the average focusing power of the lens.   It is the average of the two meridional powers (optical cross format) or can be calculated by adding half the denominator (designated DC) to the numerator (designated DS) when using the fraction format.

For example, the spherical equivalent of the lens discussed above would be:

+4 DS + 1/2(+2DC) = +4 + 1 = +5 diopter.

The position of the circle of most minor confusion of the conoid of Sturm can be found by calculating the focal distance of the spherical equivalent power of the astigmatic lens.