The pathophysiology of melanoacanthoma remains to be determined. Many researchers postulate that melanoacanthoma is a type of seborrheic keratosis. However, clinical investigations and observations suggest that melanoacanthoma is not merely an irritated seborrheic keratosis. Trauma-induced cutaneous injury and partial inhibition of melanin pigment transfer from large melanocytes with numerous dendritic processes to adjacent keratinocytes may also have a role in the pathophysiology of melanoacanthoma.

Mevorah and Mishima, in 1965, attempted to establish whether irritation with 20% to 50% croton oil or trauma from excision of half of the lesion would induce a seborrheic keratosis to develop pathologic changes observed in a melanoacanthoma. They observed an increase in the number of keratinocytes in the stratum spinosum of the seborrheic keratoses. However, in contrast to melanoacanthomas in which the melanocytes are dispersed throughout the epidermis, the melanocytes of the irritated and traumatized seborrheic keratoses predominantly remained in the epidermal basal layers at the junction between the epidermis and dermis.

More recently, Gutierrez et al. described an 85-year-old man who not only presented with a large melanoacanthoma on his abdomen but also two biopsy-confirmed pigmented seborrheic keratoses on his posterior shoulder and axilla. The concurrent presence of multiple pigmented seborrheic keratoses and a solitary melanoacanthoma prompted the clinicians to hypothesize that the melanoacanthoma pathophysiology might be different than the etiology of the seborrheic keratoses in that individual.

Melanoacanthomas tend to develop in sites of prior trauma. Hence, it has been postulated that cutaneous injury may be an etiologic factor in the pathophysiology of melanoacanthomas. Additional investigation is needed to establish whether trauma-associated skin injury directly or indirectly influences the development of melanoacanthoma.

An incomplete block in melanin transfer, from melanocytes to keratinocytes, has been demonstrated in the electron microscopy studies performed on a melanoacanthoma from the back of a 74-year-old man. The ultrastructural evaluation of the lesion confirmed the presence of keratinocytes and richly dendritic, unusually large, melanocytes; the majority of melanin pigment was found in the latter cells whose features resembled those that have been noted in inflamed skin from African Americans in whom melanin transfer from melanocytes to keratinocytes is blocked. The investigators hypothesized that changes in the rate and pattern of keratinocyte differentiation resulted in an alteration of the cell’s surface and thereby inhibited or prevented the transfer of pigment from the melanocytes.