# Continuing Education Activity

Intestinal perforation, defined as a loss of continuity of the bowel wall, is a potentially devastating complication that may result from a variety of disease processes. Common causes of perforation include trauma, instrumentation, inflammation, infection, malignancy, ischemia, and obstruction. Early recognition and prompt treatment are critical to prevent the morbidity and potential mortality of peritonitis and its systemic sequelae that result from the spillage of intestinal contents. This activity reviews the cause and presentation of intestinal perforation and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the presentation of intestinal perforation.
- Describe the evaluation of a patient with suspected intestinal perforation.
- Summarize the treatment of intestinal perforation.
- Explain modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by intestinal perforation.

# Introduction

Intestinal perforation, defined as a loss of continuity of the bowel wall, is a potentially devastating complication that may result from a variety of disease processes. Common causes of perforation include trauma, instrumentation, inflammation, infection, malignancy, ischemia, and obstruction. Early recognition and prompt treatment are critical to prevent the morbidity and potential mortality of peritonitis and its systemic sequelae that result from the spillage of intestinal contents. A thorough history and physical exam, along with the aid of adjunctive studies, can help establish the diagnosis promptly and better direct therapy.

# Etiology

There are ultimately four mechanisms that can lead to a perforation of the intestinal tract.

- Ischemia (bowel obstruction, necrosis)

- Infection (appendicitis, diverticulitis)

- Erosion (malignancy, ulcerative disease)

- Physical disruption (trauma, iatrogenic injury)

# Epidemiology

The common causes of a perforated viscus vary by patient age and geography. For instance, the most common cause in premature infants is necrotizing enterocolitis

# Pathophysiology

As described above, four main mechanisms can lead to intestinal perforation. A thorough understanding of these mechanisms is critical to guide the appropriate workup and management.

Numerous etiologies can lead to ischemia and perforation. In the case of bowel obstruction (small or large), the physical distention of the bowel wall results in decreased perfusion.

The most common infectious causes of perforation are appendicitis and diverticulitis. Appendicitis can be considered at any age; whereas, diverticulitis is more common beyond middle age.

Erosive diseases, such as the local invasion of the wall of a viscus by a tumor or ulcerative disease, also can cause perforation. In peptic ulcer disease, there is direct erosion through the layers of the bowel wall by the ulcer itself, usually due to Helicobacter pylori infection, acid overproduction, or lack of acid protective mechanisms.

Mechanical injury to the wall of a hollow viscus can be caused by penetrating or blunt trauma to the abdomen, or iatrogenic injury from instrumentation, for example, endoscopy.

In addition to the mechanism, the variation in bacterial flora between the upper and lower intestinal tract must also be considered. For instance, upper intestinal perforations proximal to the ligament of Trietz result in significantly less bacterial contamination than distal colonic perforations. In the treatment of distal perforations, antibiotics must include gram-negative and anaerobic coverage.

# History and Physical

The importance of a thorough history and physical cannot be overstated and is usually sufficient to ascertain the etiology of the perforation. Almost all patients experience some element of abdominal pain, and this is usually accompanied by nausea, vomiting, decreased bowel function, or fever. Details about the symptoms including the length of time, prior episodes, recent procedures such as ERCP and colonoscopy,

At the time of the initial evaluation, vital signs should be promptly assessed. These can show signs of SIRS or septic shock, and an urgent need for resuscitation and treatment may be warranted. On physical examination, it is important to visually inspect the abdomen for surgical scars, visible hernias or injuries, and distension. Palpation of the abdomen usually elicits discomfort and may yield peritoneal signs which are commonly present with perforation, peritonitis, or localized abscess.

# Evaluation

There are multiple imaging modalities and laboratory tests that can be useful to identify the presence and etiology of a hollow viscus perforation. Abdominal and upright chest x-rays are quick and cheap and can identify even small amounts of pneumoperitoneum. Evidence of small and large bowel obstructions can also be visualized. CT of the abdomen and pelvis, however, is the most sensitive and specific test to diagnose a perforation and ascertain the most likely etiology.

In children, the preferred primary test is ultrasound given its ease and lack of radiation exposure. If necessary, secondary testing such as x-ray, MRI, and CT are reasonable options.

# Treatment / Management

Once the initial assessment is complete and an intestinal perforation is suspected, management can ensue. Many, but not all causes of perforated viscus, require surgery. However, all cases should be evaluated by a surgeon.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for the location of intestinal perforation can be narrowed down based on several factors. A thorough history and physical taking can help to diagnosis acute and chronic onsets of disease and likely location of the perforation. Importantly, being able to narrow down the likely location of the perforation along the intestinal tract helps to narrow down the intervention.

Upper GI perforation (stomach and duodenum) is most commonly caused by peptic ulcer disease with severe epigastric or back pain, with acute onset. Sometimes there are chronic symptoms leading up to the perforation event, such as dyspepsia, bloating, nausea, and early satiety.

Colonic perforation should be considered with a history of left lower quadrant or history of diverticulitis also usually with decreased stool output. Malignancy is a consideration also, especially with lack of endoscopy screening history. Imaging typically shows free air located near the area of perforation with possible abscess formation present due to the leakage of stool into the peritoneal cavity.

# Prognosis

Short- and long-term prognoses of a patient with bowel perforation depend on multiple factors. For instance, age, medical comorbidities, benign or malignant cause, and tolerance to treatment are important considerations when discussing prognosis. Since surgery is commonly necessary, patients who are unable to tolerate or choose not to undergo surgery when it is required may have a worse prognosis.

# Complications

Complications caused by an intestinal perforation can be related to the disease process that caused it or the treatments that are enlisted. Perforation and subsequent leakage of intestinal contents can lead to peritonitis and eventually sepsis if left untreated. Adequate resuscitation and antibiotic initiation early on are important to decrease the physiologic detriment of the infection.

If necessary for control of leakage, surgery can be undertaken, and it is important to discuss potential complications of surgery with patients and their families. Risks of infection, bleeding, potential anastomotic leakage, hernia formation exist. Other risks of pulmonary complications, thromboembolic events, cardiovascular events, and possible prolonged need for ventilator support must also be discussed as well as expected recovery and possible level of function.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

A frank discussion of the risks and potential complications, based on patient's current medical status, likely cause of the obstruction, and possible postoperative outcomes. Setting expectations from the surgical perspective and understanding a patient's wishes for recovery and return to expectations is imperative. Living will and other legal documentation of patient's wishes are essential when patients are unable to communicate with the care team physically. A discussion of postoperative pain management and expectations are important as well and to use multimodal therapies to decrease the need for opioids.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Initially, the evaluation of a patient with an intestinal perforation is most commonly performed by the emergency department physician. A thorough history and physical examination can suggest the diagnosis of perforation and help initiate appropriate diagnostic studies and therapeutic modalities. Early surgical consultation is recommended, regardless of whether operative intervention is warranted. Conservative management is occasionally an option, with close clinical surveillance. If surgery is necessary, direct communication between the surgeon and the anesthesia team is imperative to avoid complications associated with the induction of anesthesia. Close nursing care and monitoring are vital to for early recognition of patient deterioration. Discharge coordination is also important to direct the plan for discharge and arrange for post-hospital needs and care.