Concerns arise in women who take hormone-based birth control as they have an increased incidence of breast cancer, making the contraceptives a significant public health priority. In a recent study, Mørch et al. showed that hormonal contraception had a 20% higher risk of breast cancer, regardless of the dose of estrogen, than women who never used any birth control methods

Irregular bleeding is a common side effect and patients should be counseled accordingly based on the form of medication or device they choose. Contraceptive-induced menstrual bleeding changes (CIMBCs) should be recognized as a critical concern in contraceptive counseling and usage

IUD’s are being utilized more frequently in the US.   They provide excellent contraception with few side effects and are rarely contraindicated based on a patient’s medical history.  Pelvic infection is possible, but the highest risk is within 20 days from insertion.  If a woman contracts a sexually transmitted infection first line is to just treat the infection, removal of the IUD is only considered if the patient fails therapy.  The key to minimizing problems in contraceptive practice is the consideration of sustainability (efficiency, cost, duration of action and suitability), making a careful and correct choice, and then counseling the patient well

Venous thromboembolism (VTE) and arterial thrombosis (AT) are the most concerning side effects of the OC pill. The rate of VTE in non-pregnant women is 4-5 per 10,000, in OC pill users is 9-10 in 10,000, while in a normal pregnancy it is approximately 30 in 10,000

The number of children desired per family averages around two in the United States. Despite the number of available options, close to 50% of pregnancies in the United States are not planned, and approximately 25% of babies born are unwanted at the time of birth