Methylphenidate blocks the reuptake of two neurotransmitters, norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine, in presynaptic neurons. More specifically, it inhibits the transporters of these neurotransmitters, increasing the concentration of dopamine and NE in the synaptic cleft.

With the increase in dopamine levels, methylphenidate can provide neuroprotection in certain conditions like Parkinson disease, which involves loss of dopaminergic neurons and methamphetamine abuse.

**Dependence**

The therapeutic dosages for ADHD or narcolepsy that physicians prescribe are not harmful enough to activate the reward system within the CNS, known as the nucleus accumbens. However, excessively higher dosages taken by those who intentionally abuse the drug lead to an overexpression of deltaFosB, a transcriptional activator, in specific neurons within the striatum. This accumulation of deltaFosB in the nucleus accumbens activates a series of signaling cascades that further triggers the addiction.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- Absorption: Slow but extensive; relative bioavailability for extended-release tablets 105% in children and 101% in adults (verses immediate-release tablets); the absolute oral bioavailability for extended-release capsules in children was 22% and 5% for d-methylphenidate and l-methylphenidate, respectively.

- Time of peak plasma concentration: 1.9 hours for immediate-release tablets and 4.7 hours for extended-release tablets

- Food effects: Increase total exposure and peak plasma concentration; reduce the time for peak plasma concentration for extended-release tablets.

- Alcohol effect: 98% of the drug from extended-release 40 mg capsule dosage form was released in an alcohol concentration of 40% in an in-vitro study.

- Distribution: Volume of distribution was 2.65 and 1.80 L/kg for d- methylphenidate and l- methylphenidate, respectively.

- Plasma Protein Binding: 10% to 33%

- Metabolism: It is primarily metabolized by de-esterification to ritalinic acid, which is pharmacologically inactive.

- Excretion: A majority of the drug (78% to 97%) is excreted in the urine, while small amounts are excreted in feces.