Zinc is a divalent cation not synthesized within the human body and needs to be taken from outside to maintain adequate levels. The dietary intake of zinc increases from 3 mg/day in children to 8 mg/day in adult females and 11 mg/day in adult males. These requirements are even higher in pregnant and lactating women.

Zinc deficiency is commonly seen in developing regions that is attributable to malnutrition; however, in developed regions, it is found to be associated with aging and many chronic illnesses. Zinc deficiency can be acquired or inherited. Acquired deficiency can occur from decreased intake, inability to absorb the micronutrient, increased metabolic demand, or excessive loss. Patients with an acquired form of zinc deficiency usually have a combination of various factors, such as:

- Nutritional: lack of meat intake, excess phytates (present in legumes, seeds, soy products, and whole grains), or oxalates (found in spinach, okra, nuts, and tea)

- Chronic illnesses: the presence of chronic illnesses (chronic gastrointestinal diseases, diabetes, liver disease, sickle cell disease, kidney disease, excess alcohol consumption, HIV infection) or chronic or infections.

Absorption is decreased with the co-ingestion of phytates, calcium, and phosphate. Inadequate intake can be seen with exclusive parenteral nutrition, strict vegetarian diets, and anorexia nervosa. Causes of inadequate absorption include Crohn disease and subsequent small bowel malabsorption, short bowel syndrome, hookworm infestation, and pancreatic insufficiency.

Medications including penicillamine, various diuretics, certain antibiotics, and sodium valproate can inhibit absorption as well.

Increased demand occurs in multiple settings, one of which is during pregnancy and lactation.

Excess loss occurs by burns, hemodialysis, hemolysis, diarrhea, or urinary loss by alcohol use or diuretics.

Acrodermatitis enteropathica is an inherited form of zinc deficiency from impaired absorption.SLC39A4 gene on chromosome 8q24.3 that encodes the Zip4 transporter.