Prognosis depends on the type of exposure and concentration of the solution. Topical and ophthalmic exposures are likely to have a very good prognosis, regardless of the concentration.

Inhalation injuries often present with mild symptoms, but more severe injuries require early intervention. Again, the prognosis is quite good if presenting with only mild symptoms. The prognosis remains fair to good if the patient presents with more severe symptoms and early intervention is taken.

Ingestions have an extremely variable prognosis depending on the concentration of the solution and the amount ingested. The prognosis for ingestion of relatively small amounts of a dilute solution is extremely good, and these patients can be safely observed at home.

Ingestion of larger amounts of dilute hydrogen peroxide or small amounts of more concentrated hydrogen peroxide can have a much poorer prognosis, especially if air embolization has occurred. Even small amounts of concentrated hydrogen peroxide can be lethal in certain situations. For example, a 2-year-old boy presented after accidental ingestion of about 120 to 180 mL of 35% hydrogen peroxide. An antemortem chest X-ray revealed air in the mediastinum and the entire right ventricle. He presented in extremis and unfortunately did not survive.

Another fatal ingestion involved a 2-year-old female who accidentally ingested "2 sips" of 35% hydrogen peroxide while visiting a dairy farm. On autopsy, she was found to have diffuse alveolar damage, erosion of the trachea, and gaseous distention of mucosal membranes in the gastrointestinal and respiratory tract.