Zellweger syndrome is a rapidly progressive disorder with a high mortality rate. With no curative treatment available, treatment options are limited to supportive care to improve quality of life.

Various treatment modalities that have been tried include:

1. Docosahexaenoic acid - This is a long-chain unsaturated fatty acid essential for myelination, brain, and eye development. The levels of docosahexaenoic acid are low in the plasma of patients with ZS. However, its replacement was not associated with improvement in neurological symptoms or visual disturbances in randomized controlled trials.

2. Lorenzo's oil - Lorenzo's oil is a mixture of glyceryl trioleate and glyceryl trierucate, and its use was initially attempted in patients with X linked adrenoleukodystrophy. It was shown to reduce VLCFA levels in plasma but did not affect disease progression in ZS patients.

3. Cholic acid - This is 24 carbon bile acid, which is helpful in the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. Due to liver dysfunction and lipoprotein synthesis impairment in patients with ZS, there is a deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins, and the use of cholic acid has been tried in other disorders of hepatic function. It has been approved by the US FDA for use in patients with ZS. However, there is little evidence regarding its efficacy.

Supportive measures include:

- Hearing aids or cochlear implants for hearing loss

- Ophthalmologist referral, cataract removal, and glasses for vision impairment

- Standard antiepileptic drugs for seizures

- Vitamin K supplementation for coagulopathy

- Cortisone for adrenal insufficiency

- Gastrostomy for insufficient calorie intake

- Vitamin supplementation for low levels of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E)