There are several options for testosterone replacement including oral, buccal, transdermal (gel, patch, solution, pellet), and intramuscular injections (add reference: Surampudi, P. et al. An Update on Male Hypogonadism Therapy. Expert Opin Pharmacother 15(9):1247-1264, 2014). Among these transdermal gels and intramuscular injections are the most widely used in the US. Testosterone gels are generally recommended due to patient preference, cost, convenience, and insurance coverage. The primary advantage of gels is the maintenance of stable serum testosterone concentrations resulting in stable libido, energy, and mood. There are various commercial prescription testosterone gel products, in varying concentrations. Gels should be applied to shoulder, upper arms, or abdomen and shouldn't be applied to the scrotum. Miller and colleagues (9) showed that the bioavailability of testosterone gel is 30 percent lower when applied to the abdomen compared to the arms or shoulders

Contraindications to androgen replacement therapy include a history of breast cancer, prostate cancer, uncontrolled heart failure, untreated obstructive sleep apnea, a pre-treatment hematocrit (Hct) over 48%, palpable undiagnosed prostate nodules, an elevated prostate specific antigen (PSA) above 4ng/mL, or an elevated PSA level above 3ng/mL in high-risk patients including African Americans as well as men that have a first-degree relative with prostate cancer

Monitoring:

Pretreatment: Hgb, Hct, DRE (digital rectal exam), PSA level, two early morning testosterone levels, consider DEXA scan

- One month after initiating treatment: morning testosterone level

- 3 to 6 months after from the start of therapy during the first year: morning testosterone level, liver function tests (LFTs), lipid profile, PSA, DRE, Hgb, Hct

- Annually after the first year: morning testosterone level, LFTs, lipid profile, DRE, PSA, estradiol, Hgb, and Hct.