Sacroiliac joint pain can arise from a variety of clinical conditions. A thorough history of clinical symptoms and past medical conditions should be a routine part of the comprehensive evaluation of a patient presenting with SI joint disorders.

Patients usually complain of deep-seated pain, which extends down the posterior thigh and up to the knee. Pain can frequently mimic and be misdiagnosed as radicular pain. Patients are also likely to complain of pain while sitting down, lying on the ipsilateral side or when climbing stairs. Pain from the sacroiliac joint usually follows an inciting event and does not arise insidiously

Patients with isolated SI joint dysfunction often localize their pain inferior and medial to the PSIS. Pointing the finger to this area is the Fortin finger test

A comprehensive physical examination should consider alternate pathology in the thoracolumbar spine, pelvic organs, or hip that could refer pain to the posterior hip region. Test the range of movement and tenderness in these areas. Perform a neurological examination encompassing sensory (pinprick and light touch), motor power, deep tendon reflexes, and Babinski on both lower limbs. Leg length should be measured as unequal leg lengths can lead to sacroiliac joint dysfunction.

Numerous stress tests to identify sacroiliac joint dysfunction are available. Unfortunately, there is no single test that is both sensitive and specific in identifying sacroiliac joint dysfunction. A few of these maneuvers are

**Patrick's or FABER's (flexion, abduction, and external rotation) test**

The patient lies supine on the exam table. Flex and externally rotate the hip and knee of one leg to rest the lateral malleolus just proximal to the contralateral patella. Pain in the sacroiliac joint region is considered positive for sacroiliac joint dysfunction. Pain in the hip or groin suggests hip pathology.

**Gaenslen's test**

The patient lies supine on the exam table. Flex the contralateral hip and knee towards the patient's chest while the opposite leg is allowed to drop off the table's side. Pain in the sacroiliac joint region of the lowered leg suggests sacroiliac joint dysfunction.

**Distraction test**

The patient lies supine on the exam table. The examiner applies outward rotatory stress on both the anterior superior iliac spines. Pain in the sacroiliac joint region is suggestive of sacroiliac joint dysfunction.

**Thigh thrust**

The patient lies supine on the exam table. The examiner flexes the hip and knee on one side till the thigh is vertical to the exam table. The examiner wraps an arm around the flexed thigh and knee and provides a posteriorly directed force. The opposite hand of the examiner supports the hip and the sacroiliac joint. Pain in the sacroiliac joint region is suggestive of sacroiliac joint dysfunction.

**Lateral compression**

The patient lies on theire side. A downward directed compression force is applied with the heel of the hand to the iliac crest on the top. Pain in the sacroiliac joint region is suggestive of sacroiliac joint dysfunction.

**Sacral thrust**

The patient lies prone on the exam table. A downward directed force is applied with the heel of the examiner's hand centrally over the sacrum. Pain in the sacroiliac joint region is suggestive of sacroiliac joint dysfunction.

The presence of three or more of the provocative tests will increase diagnostic accuracy