Even though the government passed the first law safeguarding the public from food and pharmaceuticals in 1906, the present-day FDCA was not passed until 1938. The 1938 rule stipulated that drug items that were not already on the market may not be commercialized until these medications were demonstrated to be safe. In addition, drug labels must include proper instructions for use and caution. Several legislations and laws followed to functionalize the pre and post regulations in enactment today:

- The Prescription Drug Marketing Act (PDMA) of 1987 created prescription drug sample distributions and prohibited hospitals and other healthcare bodies from reselling medications to other enterprises.

- The 1984 Patent Term Restoration Act (PTRA) streamlined the approval system for generic pharmaceuticals while allowing innovator drug items to keep their patents.

- The Orphan Drug Act of 1983 incentivizes drug and biologic producers to discover and sell treatments for uncommon diseases and illnesses.

- The 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendment added a requirement for the efficacy of drug products proven with substantial evidence, made retroactive to 1938. Drugs that were on the market before 1938 were exempt.

- The Durham-Humphrey Amendment defined two classes of drugs: prescription and OTC.

- Producers must pay application fees for NDAs under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) of 1992.

- The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA) of 1984 established dietary supplements and mandated the FDA to regulate them more like foods than medications.

- The Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act (FDAMA) of 1997 facilitated regulatory procedures to speed up medication and device availability and established a fast-track approach for medications designed to treat critical or life-threatening conditions.

- The Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA) of 2007 gave the FDA much more power to oversee drug safety, including requiring Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS) when appropriate.

- Among other measures, the Food Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA) of 2012 introduced user fees for generic pharmaceuticals and biosimilars.

- The Drug Quality and Security Act (DQSA) of 2013 simplified the law on pharmacy compounding, introduced track and trace rules for prescription medications, and made a novel sterile compounding entity termed "outsourcing facilities."

- The Cures Act of 2016 facilitated and expanded the drug development and approval systems, enabling other patients to experience data collection along the way.

The FDCA's principal purpose is to safeguard the public, but there is a trend toward indirect control rather than direct regulation.