Administration of recombinant factor VIII replacement for the treatment of acute bleeding in severe hemophilia A patients should occur promptly with initiation before completion of the patient assessment. Calculation of factor VIII replacement for bleeding in severe hemophilia A is

- Dose of factor VIII = percentage desired of factor x bodyweight (kg) x 0.5

For severe, life-threatening hemorrhage, administer factor VIII to achieve a 100% desired factor VIII level; for mild to moderate hemorrhage, administer factor VIII to achieve a 30% to 50% desired factor VIII level. Accounting for the hemophilia A patient’s native factor VIII levels should be factored into factor VIII repletion if known. The combination of effective blood product screening with viral inactivation protocols and recombinant production of Factor VIII have enhanced factor VIII replacement products safety from the viral transmission, such as HIV and hepatitis C.

Other pharmaceutical adjuvant therapies for hemophilia A-induced bleeding include desmopressin, tranexamic acid, epsilon aminocaproic acid, and management of factor VIII inhibitors. Intravenous, subcutaneous, or intranasal desmopressin (DDAVP) has utility for the treatment of bleeding in mild to moderate hemophilia A patients by triggering the release of complexes von Willebrand’s factor and factor VIII from vascular endothelial cells.

Periodic, prophylactic Factor VIII concentrates infusions for severe Hemophilia A patients have benefit in preventing spontaneous bleeding. The intent of factor VIII prophylaxis aims to modify severe hemophilia to a milder form by keeping the nadir level of factors more than 1% of normal. The World Federation of Hemophilia recommends factor VIII prophylaxis initiation in hemophiliac children after their first or second episode of hemarthrosis to prevent joint destruction and preserve musculoskeletal function. Mild and moderate hemophilia A patients receive factor VIII concentrates or desmopressin to prevent hemorrhage in anticipation of trauma or surgery.