Most spider bites are harmless. Death from brown recluse spider bites are rare and have been reported only in children.

**Identifiable Features:**The brown recluse spider may be identifiable by the violin pattern on the cephalothorax which attaches to the legs, although other species may exhibit similar markings.

**Habits;**Most bites occur in the summer months. The spiders like to hide in warm, dark corners and crevices like attics, garages, shoes, bed corners. The spiders are usually not aggressive and bite as a defense mechanism when they are being pressed against a surface by the skin of the patient.

**Venom;**The brown recluse spider venom is very poisonous but rarely causes a lot of damage because of the small quantity. One of the active enzymes in the venom causes significant damage to blood vessels and cell death to the tissue at the envenomation site. Also, the venom causes the patient's body to release inflammatory cells like interleukins, cytokines to help deal with the venom but these cells can cause harm to the patient once they activated; this results in red blood cell destruction (hemolysis), platelet destruction (thrombocytopenia), end-organ damage (kidney injury and coma).

**Symptoms;**Bites are usually painless initially; patients will start to feel a stinging sensation after about 3 hours.  Look out for redness around the site and fang marks. Most commonly, there will be a white blister formation that progresses to scarring and healing over a few weeks. Less commonly, one will see blue discoloration after the blister formation that progresses to necrosis and an ulcer formation. Patients may also experience nausea, vomiting, severe itching, and muscle pain.

**Diagnosis:**In the event of a spider bite, the best course is to see a doctor on the same day. If possible, bring the spider as this will help with a definitive diagnosis. Lab tests are not necessary if the patient only has skin complaints but if thee are systemic complaints like fever, headache, muscle pain the doctor may order a complete blood count, electrolyte panel, check coagulation studies, kidney function and urinalysis.

**Treatment:**Before presenting to the ED, the following are steps to take:

- Clean the bite site with soap and water

- Elevate the area above the level of the heart

- Apply ice to the area

- Treat pain with acetaminophen

Additional treatment options include; tetanus immunization, antihistamines for itching, antibiotics if there are signs of infection, escalation of pain medications. There are no antivenoms available in the US. Some have suggested dapsone and systemic steroids, but there is little to no evidence they work, and these medications can have serious side effects.

**Disposition**

- Daily follow up with a primary care physician to determine the extent of skin damage

- Admission for observation and further care if there are systemic findings and or lab abnormalities

- If there is skin necrosis, the patient will eventually need to be evaluated by a surgeon