Chronic pain, defined as pain lasting longer than three months, affects 100 million Americans each year. Estimates are that 5 to 8 million Americans use opioids for chronic pain.****Other uses of opioids include acute pain, cancer-related pain,****post-surgical pain, and vascular pain.

The FDA has also approved the use of opioids as antitussive and anti-diarrheal medications. Loperamide, also known as the over counter medication Imodium, is an opioid used to treat diarrhea and irritable bowel syndrome. It exerts this effect by decreasing intestinal motility and increasing absorption time.

Opioids such as codeine and dextromethorphan are useful as cough suppressants. Codeine is considered the standard cough suppressant against which new drugs get tested. Codeine is also a valuable antitussive as it provides additional benefits of analgesia and sedation.

The use of opioids for analgesia is controversial due to the risk of addiction and tolerance. In 2014, 2.5 million adults in the United States were misusing opioids. Signs of opioid addiction include cravings, obsessive thinking about opioids, and the inability to refrain from opioid use. These behavioral changes, in turn, lead to functional and structural changes in the brain, which make it challenging to stop opioid use.

On another note, prescription opioids are known to serve as a gateway drug for heroin. From 2000 to 2003, the death rate from heroin overdose nearly tripled.

While discussing opioids, it is important to examine the history which led to the opioid epidemic. In the mid-1990s, certain pharmaceutical companies funded non-profit organizations focused on pain management, which led to the belief that the medical community was undertreating chronic pain in some individuals and ultimately led to pain being considered the fifth vital sign. One of these companies also funded a program that led to a guide that stated that prescribers had exaggerated concerns about addiction to opioids. In 2004, encouraged by individuals with ties to the manufacturing of opioids, the Federation of American Medical Boards urged medical societies to punish prescribers who undertreated pain.

Physicians also played a role in the epidemic. Many "pill mills," where clinicians overprescribed opioids and other controlled substances without medical justification, were run in states such as Florida in the mid-2000s. Since then, investigations have led to arrests and convictions of such physicians. However, one must note that surveys filled out by physicians show that many feel pressure to prescribe opioids due to the link between reimbursement and patient satisfaction with pain control. For this reason, the American Academy of Family Physicians and the American Medical Association have both voted to drop pain as a vital sign.