Suspicion of syphilis infection should be confirmed before or considered in conjunction with the diagnosis of neurosyphilis; syphilis is further discussed in StatPearls - Syphilis.

Diagnosis of neurosyphilis remains a challenge due to no existing standardized testing, but it is rather made on a combination of clinical and CSF analysis findings. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) states that in primary and secondary syphilis, patients often have CSF abnormalities. Thus CSF analysis is not recommended if patients are without neurological symptoms. Patients diagnosed with tertiary syphilis should, however, undergo CSF analysis before treatment and should receive a neurosyphilis regime if abnormal. In most cases, a normal CSF excludes neurosyphilis.

- CSF VDRL - Highly specific and is generally accepted as the diagnostic test of neurosyphilis. CSF rapid plasma reagin (RPR) is not a recommended test due to lower sensitivity.

- CSF treponemal tests (FTA-ABS) - Highly sensitive; however, it is nonspecific and thus more useful to rule out neurosyphilis when the pretest probability is moderate to low.

- CSF pleocytosis (defined as greater than five cells/mL) - The diagnosis of neurosyphilis usually needs a CSF white blood cell (WBC) count of 20 cells/microliter or more. This is sensitive but is nonspecific as both infectious and noninfectious causes can result in increased cell count. Interpretation of pleocytosis is further confounded in patients with HIV who may have pleocytosis regardless of the presence of neurosyphilis, particularly if they are not on antiretroviral therapy.

- CSF protein - may aid in the diagnosis, but their presence is neither sensitive nor specific in the diagnosis.

Neuroimaging can be helpful in the diagnosis and management, but findings are generally nonspecific. The most common findings are frontal and temporoparietal atrophy. Nonspecific white matter lesions are found in patients with tabes dorsalis and changes consistent with infarction are usually encountered in patients with meningovascular disease.

Reverse sequence screening is an increasingly used algorithm across US laboratories that use treponemal tests as the initial screening to identify those patients with treated, untreated, or incompletely treated syphilis.

Novel biomarkers are being studied such as beta-2 microglobulin. Its presence may help in the diagnosis of CNS involvement and may aid in monitoring the response to therapy.

As neurosyphilis is a rare diagnosis in the post-penicillin era, much of the evidence level of diagnosis and treatment pertains to syphilis. In screening tests, T. pallidum enzyme immunoassay (EIA) may be necessary for those that are low risk for ruling out the possibility of syphilis (Evidence level IIb). If EIA is positive before the initiation of therapy, additional and confirmatory serological tests such as VDRL/RPR should be performed (Evidence level IV).

In terms of treatment, guidelines from the CDC recommend parenteral penicillin G for all stages of syphilis as it has long been effective and is also the mainstay treatment of neurosyphilis (Evidence level III).