Renal failure pathophysiology can be described by a sequence of events that happen while during acute insult in the setting of acute renal failure and also gradually over a period in cases of chronic kidney diseases.

Broadly, AKI can be classified into three groups:

- The decrease in renal blood flow (prerenal azotemia): Prerenal AKI occurs secondary to either an absolute reduction in extracellular fluid volume or a reduction in circulating volume despite a normal total fluid volume, e.g., in advanced cirrhosis, heart failure, and sepsis. Normally kidney auto-regulatory mechanism maintains intra-capillary pressure during initial phase by causing dilation of afferent arterioles and constriction of efferent arterioles. When prerenal conditions become severe, renal adaptive mechanisms fail to compensate unmasking the fall in GFR and the increase in BUN and creatinine levels.

- Intrinsic renal parenchymal diseases (renal azotemia): Intrinsic disorders can be sub-divided into those involving the glomeruli, vasculature, or tubulointerstitium respectively.

- Obstruction of urine outflow (postrenal azotemia)

The pathophysiology of CRF is related mainly to specific initiating mechanisms. Over the course of time-adaptive physiology plays a role leading to compensatory hyperfiltration and hypertrophy of remaining viable nephrons. As insult continues, sub sequentially histopathologic changes occur which include distortion of glomerular architecture, abnormal podocyte function, and disruption of filtration leading to sclerosis.