The use of Extrinsic PEEP also can cause some complications. Normal respiratory physiology works as a negative pressure system. When the diaphragm pushes down during inspiration, negative pressure in the pleural cavity is generated, creating negative pressure in the airways that suck air into the lungs. This same negative intrathoracic pressure decreases the right atrial (RA) pressure and generates a sucking effect on the IVC increasing venous return. The application of extrinsic PEEP changes this physiology. The positive pressure generated by the ventilator or BPAP transmits to the upper airways and finally to the alveoli which are transmitted to the alveolar space and thoracic cavity, creating positive pressure (or at least less negative pressure). This increases RA pressure and decreases venous return, generating a decrease in preload. This has a double effect in decreasing cardiac output: less blood in RV means less blood reaching LV and less blood that can be pumped out decreasing cardiac output, at the same time, the decreased preload means that the heart works at a less efficient point in the frank-startling curve, generating less effective work and further decreasing cardiac output and resulting in a drop in mean arterial pressure (MAP) if there is not a compensatory response by increasing systemic vascular resistance (SVR). This is a very important point to have in mind, especially with patients who may not be able to increase their SVR, such as those with distributive shock (e.g., septic, neurogenic, or anaphylactic).

This effect on RA pressure and venous return (VR) may be beneficial when used in patients with cardiogenic pulmonary edema. In patients with volume overload, decreasing VR will have a dual beneficial effect: the LV may be over distended, also be working at a less-than-optimal point of the frank starling curve. Decreasing VR will again decrease preload, but in this particular case, it has been proposed that the decrease in preload will place the LV at a more efficient workload, possibly increasing cardiac output and improving pulmonary edema, although it has never been shown that higher PEEP directly improves LV function.

Another special circumstance in which extrinsic PEEP’s effect on CO and MAP is important to consider is in patients in whom a cerebral perfusion pressure (CCP) has to be maintained after a stroke or subarachnoid hemorrhage. In this case, although PEEP does not directly affect CCP, and cerebral autoregulation will normally compensate for changes in MAP, special attention has to be given in cases of disturbed cerebrovascular autoregulation, as the decrease in MAP can directly affect CCP causing adverse effects.

Other adverse effects of extrinsic PEEP include its capacity for generating barotrauma, especially in non-compliant lungs by increasing plateau pressures, and its interference with hemodynamic measurements in patients with right-heart catheters.