**Lateral Epicondylitis**

After extensive conservative management has been trialed and has failed to relieve symptoms, surgical intervention is indicated to treat lateral epicondylitis. Surgical intervention aims at debriding angiofibroblastic tissue at the origin of the ECRB. In some instances, tendon repair or complete muscle release may be indicated depending on the extent of pathology appreciated. There are multiple surgical approaches, and there is a lack of evidence supporting one specific surgical technique.

**Tendon Injury**

Extensor tendon injuries occur more frequently than their flexor tendon counterparts. Part of this increased susceptibility to injury is attributed to the natural anatomy, as the extensors are more superficial in location.

**Mallet Finger Injuries (Zone I)**

Injuries to zone I (i.e., mallet finger injuries) classically result from forced flexion of an extended DIP joint. These injuries present with varying degrees of flexion deformity of the affected finger, with an inability to actively extend the DIP joint. Initial management of most cases utilizes DIP extension splinting and conservative management. In refractory cases, or in cases where a large bony fragment is appreciated on injury radiographs, consider closed reduction percutaneous pinning (CRPP) versus open reduction internal fixation (ORIF). Several techniques are available for the surgical management of mallet finger injuries. One of the more common methods includes the dorsal blocking pin CRPP technique.

**Zone II Injuries**

If damage occurs to an extensor tendon in zone II, treatment via immobilization and splinting is the management of choice during the acute phase. Tendon repair is indicated in cases where lacerations involve >50% of tendon width. Various tendon repair techniques have been described, and the literature supports utilizing 4-6 strand repair techniques (crossing the laceration site) as these techniques allow patients to begin early active motion postoperatively.

**Zone III injuries**

An injury to zone III disrupts the central slip over the PIP joint. Finger posturing in a position of PIP flexion and DIP extension or hyperextension characterize central slip injuries. This position is known as the boutonniere deformity. Patients will present with this deformity in part due to the lateral bands of the dorsal interossei muscles.

A physical exam will reveal absent or weak active PIP extension. The most reliable physical examination test for diagnosing a central slip injury is an Elson test:

- The examiner places the injured hand/digit over the edge of a table to allow 90-degree flexion at the PIP joint of interest. Against resistance, the examiner asks the patient to extend the digit. A positive test (i.e., positive central slip injury) includes documentation of weak PIP extension force and compensatory DIP joint rigidity.

- DIP joint rigidity on an exam is indicative of lateral band activation, an involuntary compensatory finding consistent with a central slip injury

- A negative Elson test consists of the DIP joint remaining flexible (or "floppy") during PIP joint extension against resistance.

Conservative management should be attempted before performing surgery. Nonoperative management consists of splinting the PIP joint in full extension for 4 to 6 weeks.

Surgery is indicated in refractory cases, persistent PIP joint instability despite nonoperative splinting, or in the setting of an acute displaced avulsion fracture seen at the base of the middle phalanx. Surgical techniques described include:

- Primary central band repair 

- indicated in cases of displaced avulsion fractures or the setting of an open wound requiring irrigation and debridement

- Lateral band relocation techniques

- Terminal tendon tenotomy techniques

- Tendon reconstruction techniques

- PIP joint arthrodesis

- indicated for rheumatoid patients with chronic deformity or in patients with painful, stiff, arthritis PIP joints

**Zone IV Injuries**

Zone IV is located over the proximal phalanx of the digits (or the thumb metacarpal). These injuries to the digits include injury to the common extensor tendon(s). Repair of the tendon with the aforementioned 4-6 strand techniques also applies to this region.

**Zone V Through Zone VIII**

Like injuries to zones I-IV, injuries to zones V, VI, VII, and VIII should be managed conservatively when possible. Surgical intervention is indicated for specific injuries to these areas, but the indications and procedures are highly variable and should be individualized to the patient. A caveat includes managing zone V injuries (zone V injuries include disruption over the MCP joint of the digit or the CMC joint of the thumb. Clinicians must rule out "Fight Bite" injuries and carefully inspect the skin for open wounds/lacerations. In this setting, irrigation and debridement should be performed. In closed injuries, clinical suspicion includes ruling out sagittal band ruptures.