Patients undergoing preoperative workup for aortic valve replacement should undergo multiple tests. The main imaging modality to assess the aortic outflow tract is a transthoracic cardiac echo, but it can also be viewed using transesophageal echo, computed tomography (CT) scan, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The main goal is to view the entire aortic root in multiple different planes to get the most precise measurements. Patients will need to be assessed for associated coronary artery disease so they will need to undergo stress testing and left heart catheterization. After the cardiac angiogram is performed and the possible need for coronary bypass grafting or stenting is ruled out, the anatomy and course of the arteries should be studied in great detail to rule out any aberrant courses. An echocardiogram should be performed to look at the left ventricle for signs of hypertrophy and assess the overall function of the heart. The patient can also be evaluated for subaortic stenosis which can be addressed during a myectomy if needed. CT imaging and echocardiogram can identify any ascending aorta calcification or aneurysmal dilation. An electrocardiogram should be performed to assess for any preoperative cardiac electrical conduction abnormalities such as atrial fibrillation, which can also be addressed during the operation.

The choice of the aortic valve should be made prior to the operating room. There should be a long discussion with the patient regarding which type of valve is best for their anticipated longevity and if they can tolerate anticoagulation. If a patient prosthesis mismatch is possibly suspected after preoperative assessment with the prosthetic valve that was going to be placed, a decision will need to be made after discussing all the options. A different valve can be used that has a larger effective orifice area and a lower profile such as a newer mechanical valve, a stentless bioprosthetic valve, or an aortic root enlargement procedure can be continued with the placement of a larger prosthetic valve. The last option is to continue with the original plan of aortic valve size with acceptance of patient prosthesis mismatch and the associated clinical conditions.

Preoperative planning should be aimed at reviewing all the imaging to give the patient the best chance at avoiding patient prosthesis mismatch. This includes discussing the best type of valve for the patient and the best aortic enlargement technique to provide the best overall outcome.