P-VEPs represent a sensitive indicator of abnormalities in the integrity of the entire visual system, which can be the subject of demyelinating or axonal pathologies. Depending on the type of pathogenetic mechanism, P-VEPs can signal the presence of demyelination phenomena, expressed by changes in latency and an increase in retinol-cortical conduction time, as well as indicating the existence of axonal damage evidenced by alterations in the amplitude and morphology of the acquired responses. According to these principles, P-VEPs are used to diagnose pre-chiasmatic, chiasmatic, and retrochiasmatic neurological pathologies.

**Neuropthalmological Field**

VEPs are used in the field of neuro-ophthalmology for several clinical applications, which include: the quantification and monitoring of functional damage in optical neuropathies of different inflammatory, demyelinating, compressive, ischemic, traumatic, hereditary, degenerative, and/or toxic-metabolic origin; the differential diagnosis between optic nerve pathologies and retinal pathologies through the use of results associated with functional examinations of the retina; and, in the distinction between cortical blindness and malingering.

**Neurological Field**

Multiple sclerosis is an inflammatory disease of the white matter characterized by a multifocal involvement of the brain's white matter. The clinical manifestations are very variable in relation to the localization and extent of demyelination outbreaks; however, the lesions seem to have a preferential distribution in some areas of the central nervous system. In more than 20% of cases, the symptom of the onset of the disease is optic neuritis, and over 50% of patients have a clinical episode of optic neuritis. Studies have sown that VEP latency and optical coherence tomography retinal nerve layer thickness measurements correlated with disability measurements and can be useful in the management of these patients.

In demyelinating pathologies of the optic nerve, P-VEPs show a delay in the latency of responses, often in the absence of significant alterations of the amplitude related to the decrease in patients'  visual acuity. The latency alterations of the P-VEP could persist for a long time, even after the full recovery of visual acuity. It is sometimes possible to observe the delay of the latency of the P-PEV also in the contralateral eye. This alteration type can reveal the presence of sub-clinical alterations of the conduction of the impulse along the optic nerve,  even before clinical signs or symptoms of nerve involvement manifest.

In the ischemic neuropathy of the optic nerve, anterior ischemic optic neuropathy or AION is due to infarction of the laminar or laminar portion of the optic nerve head caused by occlusion of the short ciliary posteriors arteries. The clinical onset of this alteration is generally unexpected, without pain, and the loss of vision can progress for many days. Studies have shown VEPs useful in the management of these patients.

The campimetry deficit is typically altitudinal and may involve the central fixation area, which justifies the severe loss of visual acuity. Regarding VEP alterations, it is possible to observe a pre-dominant alteration that turns out to be the marked reduction in the amplitude of P100 associated with a poor modification of latency.

The cause of optic nerve compression is frequent optic pathway gliomas of pediatric age. The clinical onset is characterized by a gradual loss of vision without orbital pain, which may even be asymptomatic for a long time. An early clinical diagnosis and an accurate follow-up of patients with compressive neuropathy of the optic nerve, especially in the presence of meningiomas or gliomas, is of fundamental importance to improve the therapeutic approach based on surgical resection and/or radiotherapy procedures.

Concerning neurodegenerative diseases, the study VEPs do not typically have a diagnostic role. These testing methods, however, can offer the possibility of investigating the physio- and pathophysiological mechanisms and the involvement of the different neurotransmission systems involved in the pathogenesis of these morbid conditions in a refined and non-invasive way.

Leber optic neuropathy (LON) and Kjer-type dominant optic neuritis (DON) are the most common hereditary forms of primary retinal ganglion cell disease. LON typically presents a progressive loss of bilateral vision not associated with orbital tissue and is linked to mitochondrial mutations. In these cases, P-VEPs are markedly delayed, but relative maintenance of P100 morphology is possible in the initial stages of the disease.

Alterations in the P100 amplitude are related to the stage and clinical form of the disease. Alterations of P-PEVs are generally preceded by the reduction of the amplitude or even by the lack of reproducibility of the N95 potential.

In Friedrich's Ataxia, PEVs are used to assess the evolution of visual function in this neurodegenerative disease, which tends to be abnormal in two-thirds of patients. The delayed latency and the increased amplitude of wave p100 is the most frequent electrophysiological alteration in this pathology.