The diagnosis of PDS and PG is based on clinical evaluation and imaging.

**Visual Acuity**

Snellen's uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) and best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) should be documented in each case. Visual acuity can be reduced due to corneal edema, associated cataract, or retinal detachment.

**Intraocular Pressure**

Intraocular pressure assessment by noncontact tonometry (NCT) should be reconfirmed with gold standard applanation tonometry (GAT), which gives an idea about ocular hypertension and PG. The IOP changes can be volatile; some patients will show wider variations in IOP than primary open-angle glaucoma patients. When pigment dispersion reduces with time in PDS patients, the IOP will also come to normal. Some patients can be wrongly misdiagnosed as NTG when the pressure has come to normal and signs of PDS have resolved.

**Gonioscopy**

Gonioscopy is a crucial tool to diagnose PDS. PDS is a type of open-angle glaucoma. The majority of angles are wide open, there is concavity in the mid-peripheral iris, and the iris is bowed backward. There is heavy trabecular meshwork pigmentation in all quadrants, and a dense circular homogenous posterior band is seen. There may be a line of pigmentation anterior to the Schwalbe line called Sampaolesi's line. The pigmentation in angles reduces with age and can also be seen after trauma to the eye.

**Visual Field Analysis**

Standard automated perimetry is a valuable tool to assess the extent of glaucomatous damage in PDS and PG cases. In PG, the temporal field damage is less as compared to POAG. The nasal optic disc damage is less damaged in cases of PG. The possible reasons for this could be young patients in PDS and myopia as a risk factor.

**Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography**

Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography (AS-OCT) is a vital tool to assess anterior chamber depth, width, the volume of iris, and iris concavity in patients with PDS. Aptel et al., in their analysis using Visante OCT, compared PDS and PG eyes and showed that PDS eyes had a larger anterior chamber volume and irido-lenticular contact area and larger iris volume to length ratio than the healthy subjects. They also assessed the angle opening distance (AOD) and trabecular iris space area (TISA) at 500mm and 750mm and showed that indices were also more in eyes with PDS and PG patients than normals.

**Optic Nerve Head Optical Coherence Tomography**

This is an essential tool to assess the optic nerve head (ONH), retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL), cupping, and ganglion cell complex (GCC) morphology. The OCT used is either spectral-domain or swept-source to classify the disease as either PDS or PG. OCT is also helpful in assessing the progression of glaucoma pathology or therapeutic response to glaucoma treatment.

Retinal nerve fiber and macular thickness are surrogate measures of glaucomatous structural defect. Various studies have documented that at least 40% of ganglion cell damage should ensue before any detectable glaucomatous field defect. Arifoglu et al., in their analysis, found that PDS and PG patients had lower superior and inferior RNFL thickness and ganglion cell layer thickness as compared to normal.

Therefore, OCT is a valuable tool in documenting disease progression and differentiating the types of glaucoma. Another hypothesis is intermittent IOP spikes may result in lower RNFL thickness in PDS patients. In preperimetric glaucoma, the RNFL and GCC assessment with OCY help pick up disc suspects and patients with ocular hypertension. The OCT parameters analysis may also help monitor the later progression of advanced disease.

**Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography (OCTA)**

OCT angiography is a valuable tool for assessing the retinal and optic nerve blood flow. The advantage of OCTA is that it is non-invasive. OCTA can scan superficial peripapillary retinal plexus and macula also. But optic nerve imaging poses challenges like artifacts and interpreting anatomical landmarks.

OCTA depicts reduced vascular density, an excellent diagnostic predictor of glaucoma. OCTA is a sensitive marker for diagnosing, progressing, and monitoring glaucoma with visual field changes. A good diagnostic OCTA is possible only with a good quality scan when factors like cataract, corneal opacity, eye blinking, and other artifacts are eliminated. A good signal strength and scan centration are other factors influencing the results.

**Ultrasound Biomicroscopy (UBM)**

UBM is a helpful tool to assess the detailed anatomy of angle structures and factors that predispose to irido-zonular and irido-lenticular contact. In PDS, UBM is a valuable tool to see the relationship between peripheral iris and zonular structures during accommodation and after exercise and scleral indentation. The anatomical details that UBM in PDS and PG patients can assess are concave iris configuration, increased iris and lens contact, increased lenticular thickness, increased distance from scleral spur to iris insertion, increased posterior bowing of iris, anterior chamber depth, irido-zonular contact, and Schwalbe's line to iris root distance.