Diagnostic suspicion of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis is often arrived based on clinical background, the history & clinical features supported by characteristic imaging findings. The definite confirmation of diagnosis needs cytology and/or biopsy & histopathology, which is usually performed only on patients who are safe to undergo the procedure. The closest differential diagnosis for pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis is pulmonary tumor embolism. Other pulmonary interstitial pathologies also need to be ruled out.

**Imaging**is an insensitive modality for the detection of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis as well as pulmonary tumor embolism and often normal in initial stages. However, imaging is often performed to diagnose or rule out other causes for dyspnoea & cardio-respiratory symptoms rather than to diagnose lymphangitic carcinomatosis.

**X-ray chest:**Often normal (in 30 to 50 %), especially in the initial stages. Reticular, nodular, or reticulonodular patterns with coarse bronchovascular features are often noted as the disease advances. The abnormalities are often bilateral &predominantly seen in lower lobes, although unilateral & asymmetric changes are also seen. Kerley  A &B lines typically represent interstitial lymphangitic edema. Hilar/mediastinal adenopathy (in 20 to 40% of cases & are usually asymmetric) with associated pleural effusions (in one third to half of the patients) are observed. Signs of pulmonary hypertension is much more commonly seen in tumor embolism rather than lymphangitic carcinomatosis.

**CT thorax:**Interlobular septa & peribronchovascular interstitium exhibits smooth (early stage), or nodular thickening(late development).Thickened interlobular septa form polygonal arcades(tessellating polygons) with thickened limbs. Interstitial edema or parenchymal extension of tumors often results in ground-glass opacities. The abnormalities could be on one or both sides, focal or widespread, symmetrical, or asymmetrical. Smooth or irregularly thickened interlobular septa are more in favor of lymphangitic carcinomatosis rather than tumor embolism. Although nodular thickening of septa is believed to differentiate lymphangitic carcinomatosis from other interstitial lung patterns, certain pathologies like sarcoidosis & asbestosis can closely mimic the same. Another differentiating feature in pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis pathology is the preservation of the general as well as the lobular architecture of the lung.

**V/Q scans:**V/Q scan is of limited help in the diagnosis of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis since they are often normal. However, a study on 32 patients has shown that pulmonary lymphangitic pattern in perfusion scan has been associated with extremely poor prognosis, which helps attending physicians in making crucial treatment decisions.

**F-18 FDG PET/CT**is found to be 86% sensitivity and 100% specificity in detecting pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis by subjective analysis. The mean, standard uptake value(SUV) was 1.37 +/- 0.64 in the lymphangitic area in comparison with 0.51 +/- 0.29 in the normal lung. The standard uptake ratio (SUR) of mediastinal blood pool to the lymphangitic lung was 1.26 +/- 0.45, whereas the ratio between the blood pool to the normal lung was 3.78 +/-1.37.

Conventional pulmonary arteriography & EBUS are unhelpful in making a diagnosis of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis but might be able to suggest a diagnosis of pulmonary tumor embolism, which is the close differential diagnosis of pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis.

**Laboratory evaluation**: findings are often non-specific. A small increase in leucocytes may be noted secondary to stress response.D-dimer values are non-specific. Arterial blood gas typically shows hypoxemia, respiratory alkalosis with a widened A-a gradient. Pulmonary function tests done in stable patients could show a restrictive pattern with decreased diffusion capacity. ECG and ECHO could be normal & may reveal signs of right ventricular strain & pulmonary hypertension, which is more commonly seen in pulmonary tumor embolism. A mean pulmonary artery pressure more than 40 mmHg rules out acute pulmonary embolism in most patients, though mean pulmonary artery pressure more than 40 mmHg could also be seen in any chronic pulmonary hypertension apart from pulmonary tumor embolism.

**Histopathological diagnosis**: Histopathology is an accurate measure to diagnose pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis though it is not feasible in many clinical circumstances. In real practice, many authors have observed that by the time a dyspnoeic patient with suspected pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis gets evaluated with varying imaging modalities, she/he might have already progressed to severe respiratory distress, making him or her unfit for any invasive diagnostic procedure. Most often, the postmortem evaluation provides a retrospective diagnosis in such cases.

The decision regarding the utilization and the choice of intervention to achieve a definite histologic/cytologic diagnosis in a given patient with suspected pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis is made after a complete consideration of the general condition of the patient with the safety of the proposed procedure, the stage & expected prognosis of the underlying malignancy, availability of effective anti-cancer therapy for the underlying tumor & finally the choice and decision of the patient. The expected yield by the particular intervention & the procedural risks is always taken into account. Sincere assessment of risks versus potential benefits from the intervention is mandatory. It is not surprising that many clinicians & patients often opt for management plans based on radiologic findings rather than an invasive diagnostic procedure, especially in advanced malignancies with poor expected prognosis.

**Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)**may show malignant cytology in lymphangitic carcinomatosis though a negative report can not rule out malignancy. Lung biopsies are usually attempted only in patients with an adequate cardiopulmonary reserve and who are stable enough to undergo the procedure. Transbronchial lung biopsy is expected to provide a high yield in diffuse lung diseases like lymphangitis carcinomatosis with insignificant procedural complications. Few centers have started using transbronchial lung biopsy using cryoprobes, which is expected to improve the diagnostic yield by providing more tissue volume without distortion of architecture. If transbronchial lung biopsy is negative, surgical lung biopsy(open lung biopsy) is often considered for a definite diagnosis in a suitable patient. Although surgical biopsy has the highest yield, it has higher procedural risks too. A video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy is also considered to be a safe intervention in stable patients & provides good yield in expert hands.

**Right heart catheterization**is usually performed in patients who are unfit for an invasive diagnostic procedure and do not help in diagnosing pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis. Positive aspiration cytology for malignant cells from a wedged pulmonary artery catheter may give a clue for pulmonary tumor embolism. A mean pulmonary artery pressure value of more than 40 mm Hg practically rules out acute pulmonary embolism.

**Presumptive diagnosis**:  In unstable patients whose histologic/cytology diagnosis could not be achieved with non-invasive or semi-invasive interventions, the invasive interventions are also often deferred & a presumptive diagnosis is made on the basis background history, clinical symptoms & signs, and imaging. This approach is commonly considered in patients who are having an advanced underlying malignancy with poor functional status with a poor response documented or expected to anti-cancer therapy. The possible life-threatening risks involved in such invasive diagnostic measures are unacceptably high in such patients when compared to potential benefits. Patient & family need to be adequately involved & counseled in such decisions.