Once the diagnosis of shoulder dystocia is made, it is important to recognize the situation and inform other team members about the dystocia. This allows other members of the team to assist with the maneuvers as well as call for help. The provider can then attempt maneuvers to assist with relieving the shoulder dystocia. Maneuvers are typically divided into first-line and second-line maneuvers.

Shoulder dystocia is an obstetric emergency that requires preparation and training for proper management by delivering providers. Not only does the baby need to be delivered quickly, but care must also be taken to mitigate the risk of injury to the mother and the infant.

**First-Line Maneuvers**

- McRoberts maneuver: This is commonly the first maneuver performed along with suprapubic pressure. The patient's thigh is hyper-flexed towards the abdomen. This will straighten the maternal sacrum on the lumbar spine.

- Suprapubic pressure: the goal of suprapubic pressure is to decrease the fetal bisacromial diameter by adducting the anterior fetal shoulder. Pressure is applied to the suprapubic area in a downward fashion or a rocking motion from the fetal back toward the front.

**Second-Line Maneuvers**

Rotational Maneuvers (Rubin or Woodscrew)

- Rubin’s maneuver: performed by placing a hand into the vagina and applying pressure to the posterior aspect of the most accessible fetal shoulder towards the fetal chest. This will lead to the adduction of the fetal shoulder, which would then allow the anterior shoulder to rotate and deliver from behind the pubic bone where it is impacted.

- Woods corkscrew maneuver: the obstetrician places a hand on the anterior aspect of the posterior fetal shoulder and rotates the shoulder toward the fetal back. The goal is to attempt to rotate the fetal shoulder 180 degrees. This allows the fetus to descend while the rotation is occurring.

- Delivery of the posterior arm: the obstetrician slides a hand along the fetal posterior shoulder and arm, and the fetal forearm or wrist is grasped and swept across the anterior fetal chest to effect delivery of the posterior arm. If the fetal forearm is not easily accessible, one can follow the posterior fetal arm and put pressure on the antecubital fossa, and this will typically lead to flexion of the fetal arm, allowing access to the fetal forearm. With the successful delivery of the posterior arm, the axillo-acromial diameter becomes the presenting part, and it is typically about 3 centimeters shorter and leads to delivery of the anterior shoulder.

- Gaskin Maneuver: with the patient on her hands and knees (all fours position) or in a racing start or sprinter position, gentle downward traction is applied to the posterior shoulder (the shoulder against the maternal sacrum), or upward traction is applied on the anterior shoulder (the shoulder against the maternal symphysis).

Posterior Axillary Traction (Menticoglou or posterior axillary sling traction) - may be especially helpful in situations where the fetal arms are extended. With each method, the assistant should hold the fetal head and flexes it upward toward the anterior shoulder.

- Menticoglou maneuver: the obstetrician places their middle fingers under the posterior fetal axilla and applies downward and outward traction, which leads to delivery of the posterior shoulder; this is then followed by delivery of the posterior arm.

- Posterior axilla sling traction: a suction catheter or firm urinary catheter is used as a sling. Traction is applied to the sling to deliver the posterior shoulder, followed by the arm. Alternatively, the sling can be used to rotate the shoulders by applying lateral traction towards the baby’s back while the other hand is placed on the anterior shoulder, putting pressure towards the fetal chest.

**Heroic Measures**

- Intentional clavicular fracture: the fetal clavicle is intentionally fractured by pulling the anterior clavicle outward. If successful, this will decrease the bisacromial diameter. Disadvantages: difficult to execute, the possibility of injury to underlying vascular and pulmonary structures.

- Zavanelli maneuver: the fetal head is rotated to its pre-restitution attitude, flexed, and elevated up to the vagina and back into the uterus. A Cesarean section then achieves delivery.

- Abdominal rescue: If a cephalic replacement or the Zavanelli maneuver is unsuccessful, a low transverse hysterotomy is performed, and the fetal shoulders are manually rotated to an oblique diameter through the transabdominal incision. Once the fetal shoulders are rotated, vaginal delivery is then attempted.

- Symphysiotomy: with the patient in the lithotomy position, a Foley catheter is placed. The urethra is retracted laterally with the Foley catheter. The skin and subcutaneous tissues are incised with a scalpel to the level of the pubic symphysis as well as the anterior fibers of the pubic symphysis. Recommended only as a last resort when all the other measures have failed or in cases where immediate access to an operating room facility for Zavenelli or abdominal rescue is not available.

**Obstetric Plexopathy Treatments**

Any suspected brachial plexopathy should undergo a trial of observation and daily passive exercises to await the return of function. The most important consideration in early non-operative management is maintaining the passive motion of the extremity while awaiting nerve function return.

At 3 to 9 months of age, surgical intervention may be considered. Nerve grafting is indicated for patients without antigravity biceps function if the nerve injury is postganglionic, while preganglionic nerve injures better treated with nerve transfer or neurotization.

To prevent glenohumeral dysplasia from persistent internal rotation of the humerus, tendon transfers or tendon lengthening procedures may be considered. The Hoffer procedure is a transfer of the latissimus dorsi and teres major to external rotators of the humerus. Pectoralis major and subscapularis tendon lengthening procedures can serve to lessen the internal rotation forces that remain unopposed in upper lesions. Alternatively, practitioners may consider a Wickstrom osteotomy, which serves as a proximal humeral derotation osteotomy to combat the internal rotation contracture present in such plexopathies.

Serial nighttime elbow extension splinting is the mainstay of treatment for elbow flexion contractures, but operative capsular release and biceps tendon lengthening may be considered for persistent contraction.

A number of tendon transfers distally may be employed to treat deficiencies in the hand and wrist. Wrist drop is most frequently treated with pronator teres to extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) transfer. Loss of finger extension may be treated with the transfer of flexor carpi radialis or ulnaris (FCR or FCU) to extensor digitorum communis (EDC). Loss of thumb abduction may be treated with extensor indicis proprius (EIP) to abductor pollicis brevis (APB) transfer.