**Pectus Excavatum**

The sternocostal joint deformity causes an abnormal sternum depression that results in a decreased chest anteroposterior diameter. Compression severity is associated with cardiopulmonary impairment and paradoxical chest wall movement that causes dyspnea and pain, especially with physical activity. Other physiologic alterations may be present with a coexisting malformation (congenital heart diseases). Psychosocial issues are of paramount importance.

**Pectus Carinatum**

Impaired sternocostal cartilage collagen arrangement causes an abnormal sternum protrusion. Cardiopulmonary physiology impairment is not associated with this condition; however, respiratory symptoms are attributable to a fixed chest wall with augmented residual lung volumes.

The pathophysiological impact will depend on the expressed phenotype. Poland syndrome usually represents an aesthetic deformity. Organic impairment and associated anomalies are rare conditions; however, some chest wall anomalies and hand deformities could cause functionality impairment (superior limb motion, lung herniation, and flail chest). Therefore, in these scenarios, regardless of age, surgical repair is mandatory. Psychosocial cosmetic issues are of paramount importance, highlighting that these are more prevalent in adolescents females with asymmetric hypoplastic breasts.

**Sternal Clefts**

Sternal clefts cause mediastinum structures exposition with somatic covering. The physiological impairment will depend on the cleft type and anomalies associated, highlighting paradoxical respiration. However, the most physiopathologic impact can occur in the post-surgical stage due to cardiac compression.

Ectopia Cordis

VFM (Ventral folding morphogenesis) impairment causes ventral body wall closure failure; the common denominator effect is an ectopic heart outside the thoracic cavity through a sternal cleft. Thoracic ectopia cordis highlights are; rotated ectopic hearth without somatic covering. Thoracoabdominal ectopia cordis highlights are a non-rotated ectopic heart with a thin membranous or cutaneous layer covering and a coexisting abdominal wall defect. Cervical ectopia is an extremely rare and lethal condition, where the heart is cranially located. In general terms, the lack of cardiac protection at birth causes severe cardiopulmonary impairment. Congenital anomalies association has a strong negative impact on survival.

**Jeunes Syndrome**

The genetic mutation causes a costochondral dysplasia (short rib size). Ribs cannot extend anteriorly, resulting in anteroposterior and lateral thoracic diameters reduction (narrow chest). The highlights include alveolar hypoventilation and lung growth restriction. Respiratory impairment is progressive.

**Jarcho-Levin syndrome**

Mesodermal somite cells signaling induction for axial skeleton development is damaged (somite segmentation failure). Spondylothoracic dysostosis highlights are; All ribs symmetrical fusion at costovertebral union across the entire spine (classic crab aspect). This condition causes a restrictive thorax with progressive respiratory failure. Spondylocostal dysostosis highlights include symmetrical intrinsic ribs anomalies. These can be; bifid, wide, or fused ribs, resulting in progressive scoliosis that cause a restrictive thorax. Both phenotypes converging points include vertebral segmentation and restrictive thorax with progressive lung development arrest.