Color Doppler transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is the most valuable tool for diagnosis due to its high sensitivity. Color Doppler TTE can detect up to 95% of VSDs, especially non-apical lesions larger than 5 mm; it provides morphologic information such as size, location, and the number of the defects as well as hemodynamic information such as jet size, severity, and estimation of pulmonary artery pressure. TTE is useful in detecting any associated aortic insufficiency and other associated congenital heart defects. Lastly, TTE is also helpful in evaluating the right and left ventricular chamber size and function. Limitations include operator dependence and poor acoustic window. When conventional TTE is equivocal, a trans-esophageal echo (TEE) is recommended.

Electrocardiography (ECG) is entirely normal in half of the patients with VSD. When the ECG is abnormal, it may detect LV hypertrophy in those with large shunts. In patients with PAH, the ECG may show right bundle branch block, right axis deviation, and right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy and strain.

Chest radiography (CXR) is often normal in those with small defects. Enlarged cardiac silhouette can be observed in those with larger defects and increased LV size. RV enlargement and increased pulmonary diameter can be observed in those with PAH.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) are useful in cases where anatomy is complex such as VSD accompanied with other congenital heart anomalies and in defects in unusual locations that are hard to visualize by conventional TTE.

Cardiac catheterization gives accurate hemodynamic information regarding the pulmonary vascular resistance and response to vasodilators; this is particularly useful in those who are being evaluated for surgical closure. It provides more details on coexisting aortic regurgitation, in multiple VSDs, and when coronary artery disease is suspected.