**Screening for Suicide Risk Summary of the Recommendations**[5]

**Population**

Adolescents, adults, and older individuals who do not have an identified psychiatric disorder do not need a screen. The indication to screen depends on the presenting and past clinical history.

**Risk Assessment**

Since the suicide risk varies by gender, age, and race/ethnicity, some populations need careful screening, for example, older white males.

Assess for presence of:

- Mental health disorder

- Serious adverse childhood events

- A family history of suicide

- Prejudice or discrimination associated with being lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender

- Access to lethal means

- Possibly a history of being bullied

- Sleep disturbances

- Chronic medical conditions

In men, assess socioeconomic factors, such as low income, occupation, and unemployment.

In older adults, additional risk factors include social isolation, spousal bereavement, neurosis, affective disorders, physical illness, and functional impairment.

Risk factors of importance to military veterans include traumatic brain injury, separation from service within 12 months, posttraumatic stress disorder, and mental health conditions.

It is important to understand that one single risk factor has very little predictive value, and hence, one should look at the entire picture. Many Americans have one risk factor for suicide at any point in their lives, but very few will attempt suicide, and even fewer will die from it.

**Screening Tests**

The choice of screen tests is a matter of personal preference because they all have a broad range of accuracy. Data on predictive values of the screening tests are limited.

**Treatment**

Once a patient is deemed to be at risk for self-harm, referral to a mental health professional is recommended. The key treatment to reduce the risk of suicide is psychotherapy, which includes cognitive behavior therapy (e.g., dialectical behavior therapy, problem-solving therapy, and developmental group therapy).