PAF is not a sole mediator of diseases, but it has a crucial role in specific syndromes and diseases. Most of these conditions result from increased PAF or PAF-like activity, which can be due to increased production of PAF or decrease degradation of PAF or PAF-like lipids. PAF acetylhydrolase is the key enzyme responsible for PAF degradation. PAF acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH) has two intracellular isoforms (PAF-AH 1 and PAF-AH II) and one extracellular form called lipoprotein-associated phospholipase (Lp-PLA2).

PAH-AH I plays a vital role in brain development, sperm production, amyloid-beta precursor trafficking to lysosomes, cancer pathogenesis, protein trafficking, and sorting, and aspirin metabolism.

Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase (Lp-PLA2) or plasma platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH), is mainly associated with LDL (>80%) and HDL (<20%). However, only <1% of LDL particles contain Lp-PLA2. A small subset of LDL particles with Lp-PLA2 is protective against oxidative inactivation. Oxidants are potent and irreversible inhibitors of Lp-PLA2 activity.

The Lp-PLA2 has two main biological activities. It hydrolyzes and inactivates PAF and hydrolyzes PAF-like oxidized lipids found in oxidized LDL. The latter role is crucial in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis because it results in the production of two pro-inflammatory mediators: lysophosphatidylcholine (lysoPC) and oxidized nonesterified fatty acid (OxNEFA). The low activity of Lp-PLA2 is also associated with patients with asthma attributed to the higher levels of PAF in those patients.

Epidemiological studies show that Lp-PLA2 activity has a protective role in atherosclerotic lesions. These studies of the Japanese population reveal that 4% of their population has the Lp-PLA2 variant with the loss-of-function V279F mutation. People with V279F variant Lp-PLA2 have a higher risk of stroke, MI (in men only), cardiomyopathy (both dilated and hypertrophic), coronary artery disease, cerebral hemorrhage, atherosclerosis, polycystic ovary syndrome, and asthma. Also, Lp-PLA2 gene transfer with adenovirus has shown that plasma expression of Lp-PLA2 is associated with reduced oxidized LDL accumulation in the arteries.

However, a meta-analysis of 32 prospective studies has shown that Lp-PLA2 activity has a strong positive association with the risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) and stroke. The magnitude of the relationship of Lp-PLA2 is similar to non-HDL cholesterol or systolic blood pressure.

When Lp-PLA2 hydrolyzes PAF-like oxidized lipids in LDL, it generates two pro-inflammatory mediators. These are called lysophosphatidylcholine (lysoPC) and oxidized nonesterified fatty acids (OxNEFA), and they promote plaque development. These pro-inflammatory mediators can recruit and activate leukocytes, impair clearance of dead cells, and induce apoptosis. LysoPC and oxFFA bind to G2A, G protein-coupled receptor that is highly expressed by macrophages in atherosclerotic lesions.

Lp-PLA2 is a reliable plasma biomarker for cardiovascular disease, and its activity is an independent predictor of coronary heart disease in the general population.

Increased PAF activity in the lungs is associated with the pathogenesis of asthma. It mediates bronchoconstriction, bronchial hyperreactivity, mucous secretion, and inflammatory cell infiltration. Aerosolized inhaled PAF causes hyperresponsiveness with methacholine challenge in healthy and asthmatic patients. It increases blood flow through poorly ventilated areas in the lungs. Clinical trials in Japan with PAF receptor antagonist, apafant, showed dose-dependent clinical improvement in clinical symptoms in 8-week treatment in patients with mild to moderate asthma.

The deficiency of plasma PAF-AH is associated with the severity of asthma. A V279F polymorphism is a loss-of-function mutation of plasma PAF-AH in the Japanese population, and it is associated with an increased risk of developing asthma and atopy compared to wild type. There are also other genetic mutations associated with polymorphisms of the plasma PAF-AH gene found in German and British individuals.