The anatomy involved with wrist arthroscopy consists of the radiocarpal joint and the ulnocarpal joint. The carpus of the hand is made of 8 bones arranged in 2 rows, proximal and distal. The proximal row is the most involved in wrist arthroscopy and is made of the scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum, and pisiform, in a radial to ulnar direction, respectively. The ulnocarpal joint consists predominantly of the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC). This TFCC consists of ligamentous and fibrocartilaginous structures that aid in the stabilization of the wrist joint.

The standard dorsal radiocarpal portals used in wrist arthroscopy are named and placed in relationship to the dorsal extensor compartments. There are 6 dorsal extensor compartments of the wrist. The first compartment is the most radial and contains the extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) tendon and abductor pollicis longus (APL) tendon. The second dorsal compartment contains the extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) tendon and extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) tendon. The third compartment courses around Lister’s tubercle on its ulnar side and contains the extensor pollicis longus (EPL) tendon. The fourth extensor compartment contains multiple slips of the extensor digitorum communis (EDC) tendons and the extensor indicis proprius (EIP) tendon. The fifth extensor compartment contains the extensor digiti minimi (EDM) tendon. Finally, the sixth extensor compartment is the most ulnar compartment, containing the extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU) tendon.