The etiology ranges and includes genetic and environmental factors.

**Clubfoot:**Although the etiology of the clubfoot is largely unknown, genetic and environmental factors have been involved. A positive family history is noted in 24.4% of newly diagnosed neonates.

Although in 80% of cases, clubfoot is an isolated deformity. Clubfoot can present as part of various genetic syndromes and medical conditions in 20% of cases. More specifically, clubfoot has been linked with arthrogryposis, myelodysplasia, amniotic band syndrome, myelomeningocele, trisomy 18, Larsen syndrome, Pierre-Robin syndrome, and prune belly syndrome.

Environmental factors such as maternal smoking, maternal diabetes, and oligohydramnios have also been linked with clubfoot.

**Planovalgus:**Pes planovalgus can be congenital or acquired. Flexible flatfoot is common in childhood and can persist up to age 5.

**Cavovarus:**Pes cavovarus is usually associated with neurologic or traumatic conditions but can present as idiopathic; almost two-thirds of the cases are due to a neurologic condition. Other conditions present with cavovarus foot deformity are cerebral palsy, amniotic band syndrome, and Friedreich’s ataxia.

**Congenital vertical talus:**The exact etiology of CVT is unknown. However, over half of the cases are associated with chromosomal, musculoskeletal, or neurologic conditions. Commonly associated conditions are arthrogryposis, myelomeningocele, and cerebral palsy.

**Congenital oblique talus:**The etiology of COT is unknown; however, some cases are associated with neuromuscular conditions such as cerebral palsy or Down syndrome.

**Metatarsus adductus:**The exact etiology of metatarsus adductus remains unknown.

**Skew foot:**Etiology can either be congenital or acquired, and occurrence after metatarsus adductus has been described. However, the exact etiology is unknown and can be attributed to muscle imbalances.