# Continuing Education Activity

This activity outlines the biomechanics, indications, contraindications, procedure steps, and complications of reverse shoulder replacement.

**Objectives:**
- Understand the biomechanics behind the reverse shoulder arthroplasty.
- Identify when reverse shoulder arthroplasty is a valid treatment option.
- Identify when reverse shoulder arthroplasty is contraindicated.
- Be familiar with the reverse shoulder arthroplasty procedure.

# Introduction

Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) is increasingly gaining popularity worldwide in treating various traumatic and degenerative glenohumeral diseases and irreparable rotator cuff arthropathies. The number of performed RTSA in the United States of America has increased from 22,835 in 2011 to 62,705 in 2017.

RTSA was introduced in the United States of America in 1998 after being used in Europe for several years.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Understanding the shoulder joint anatomy and biomechanics is essential for selecting the suitable prosthesis for shoulder arthroplasty and successful outcomes. The Shoulder joint complex includes four combined articulations: the acromioclavicular joint, the glenohumeral joint (GH), the sternoclavicular joint, and the scapulothoracic joint.

**The Glenohumeral (GH) Joint**

GH joint is a synovial multiaxial ball and socket articulation between the humeral head and the bony glenoid that permits a wide range of motion.

**Reverse Total Arthroplasty Biomechanics**

In the RTSA, the shoulder center of rotation is displaced inferiorly and medially. This modification in the center of rotation allows the deltoid muscle to work on a longer lever arm. This mechanical advantage allows more deltoid muscle fibers to act on shoulder abduction**.**Also, the downward humerus displacement increases the deltoid muscle tension.

# Indications

**RTSA has been used to manage and treat the following conditions:**

- Rotator cuff arthropathy, which is a degenerative shoulder disease caused by massive rotator cuff tear causing arthritic glenohumeral joint changes and proximal humerus migration.

- Pseudo shoulder paralysis due to irreparable massive rotator cuff tear

- Acute three or four parts proximal humerus fractures

- Post-traumatic glenohumeral arthritis

- Chronic irreducible shoulder dislocation

- Revision surgery for failed ATSA

- Revision surgery for failed proximal humerus hemiarthroplasty

- Inflammatory joint conditions, e.g., rheumatoid arthritis

# Contraindications

**RTSA is contraindicated in patients with the following:**

- Axillary nerve palsy

- Deficient deltoid muscle

- Active infection

- Significant glenoid deficient bony stock

- Skeletal immaturity

- A neuromuscular disorder that may increase the risk of prosthesis dislocation

# Equipment

The initial designs of the constrained RTSA prosthesis were not successful and had to be withdrawn because of the high failure rate.

The large size of the glenoid hemisphere causes medialization of the center of rotation. The bigger humeral neck-shaft ankle lowers the center of rotation and the proximal humerus, which increases the deltoid tension. The common problems associated with the newer prosthesis design were scapular notching, bony impingement, and polyethylene wear.

Currently, there are various models of RTSA available in the market which vary in design.

- A cementless glenoid base plate; is seated on the prepared glenoid and fixed by multidirectional screws.

- The modular glenosphere; is usually half of a sphere and is secured on top of the glenoid base plate.

- The humeral stem; is inserted into the prepared humerus. Two types of stems are available either cemented stem or cementless press-fit stem.

- The humeral cup; is fitted on top of the humeral stem. It is designed to allow the concave insert to be secured on top of it.

- A concave polyethylene insert is fitted on top of the humeral cup. It is concave and articulates with the geosphere.

# Personnel

To perform a reversed shoulder arthroplasty safely, the minimum operative team required to include:

- Anesthetist

- Anesthetist assistant

- Scrub nurse

- Operative room runner

- Shoulder surgeon

- Surgeon assistant

- Recovery nurse

- Prothesis company representative (optional) - sometimes, the company representative's presence is required to identify the surgical instrument kit and the various prosthesis parts if the team is unfamiliar.

# Preparation

The RTSA preoperative preparation includes obtaining a complete history, perform a full clinical assessment, arrange the appropriate imaging modalities, and medical optimization for the surgery.

**Patient History**

Detailed history, including the personal, medical, and social history, is mandatory to identify all medical comorbidities, social circumstances, and the patient’s functional baseline. For example, patients who live on their own or usually use a mobility aid will need extra support postoperatively.

**Clinical Assessment**

Full preoperative clinical assessment should be performed, including:

- The current shoulder active and passive range of movement

- Rotator cuff examination,

- Axillary nerve function,

- Deltoid muscle function,

- Skin condition over the involved shoulder,

- The entire upper limb neurovascular status.

**Imaging Modalities**

**Shoulder X-rays******

Anteroposterior, Y-scapular, and axillary views are usually obtained prior to RTSA. X-rays are useful for preparative templating, identify bony lesions and assess bone quality.

**Computed Tomography (CT) Scan**

CT scan is beneficial in assessing the humerus and glenoid bony stock and glenoid version for preoperative planning**.**A preoperative three-dimensional (3D) CT scan can determine the proximal humeral retroversion.

**Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scan**

MRI could be used to assess the integrity of the rotator cuff before the surgery.

**Medical Optimization**

Patients with medical comorbidities, e.g., diabetes, anemia, cardiac or renal diseases, require medical assessment, medication review, and optimization prior to the surgery.

# Technique or Treatment

**Anesthesia**

General anesthesia associated with a regional nerve block, e.g., interscalene brachial plexus block, is usually used for RTSA.

**Patient Position**

For RTSA, the patient is usually positioned in a beach chair position with the chest is tilted to 60 degrees. The shoulder should be on the edge to allow full arm extension and adequate exposure of the humerus during the procedure. To give the surgeons enough access to the surgical field, the recommendation is for the anesthetic team to be on the other side of the operative table.

**Examination Under Anesthesia**

Shoulder passive range of motion could be masked by pain, and challenging to determine the exact range while the patient is awake.  After patient positioning, it is useful to examine the shoulder for passive range movement and soft tissue tension to allow proper planning for soft tissue contracture release as required.

**Surgical Approach**

RTSA is commonly performed through the deltopectoral approach or the anterior superior approach.

**Deltopectoral Approach**

The bony landmarks for the deltopectoral approach are the coracoid process, the acromion, and the proximal humerus. The inter nervous plane for the deltopectoral approach is between the axillary nerve, which innervates the deltoid muscle, and medial and lateral pectoral nerves, which innervate the pectoralis major muscle. A 10 to 15 cm long skin incision is required along the line between the coracoid process and the proximal humeral shaft over the deltopectoral groove. Careful dissection is required to identify and protect the cephalic vein. The cephalic vein is usually mobilized laterally toward the deltoid muscle. The conjoint tendon (the short head of the biceps and coracobrachialis) is then identified and retracted medially without much traction to protect the musculocutaneous nerve. The clavipectoral fascia should be incised lateral to the conjoint tendon to expose the subscapularis muscle. Subscapularis muscle can be divided lateral to the musculotendinous junction to reveal the shoulder joint capsule.

**Anterior Superior Approach**

****Bony landmarks are the acromion, acromioclavicular joint, anterior border of the clavicle. Skin incision starts 1 cm medial to and on the anterior half of the acromioclavicular joint. The incision extends in the line of the anterior clavicle border to the point 3 cm lateral to the acromion. The anterior deltoid muscle fibers are identified and detached from the acromion. The subacromial bursa is excised, and the rotator cuff muscles are explored.

**Procedure Steps**

**Humeral Head Dislocation**

Regardless of which surgical approach has been used, the humeral head is dislocated by adducting and externally rotating the arm while pushing the elbow upward and forward.

**Humeral Preparation**

The humeral head is resected slightly below the greater tuberosity tip. Intra medullary or extramedullary guide can guide the humeral head resection depending on the surgeon's preference. Resection guides are specific for each prosthesis type and have different resection angles.  The humeral head is usually resected at about 30 degrees of retroversion.  The forearm axis with the elbow flexed in 90 degrees is used as a reference axis for retroversion.****

**Glenoid Exposure**

The subscapularis muscle is released and retracted medially by a glenoid retractor to expose the glenoid. For full glenoid exposure, the labarum is excised from all around the glenoid. Diathermy tip is used to identify the anterior bony margin of the glenoid (position at 5 o’clock in right shoulder and 7 o’clock in left shoulder). The glenoid's bony margins are adequately exposed and examined to address any bony deficit in the glenoid before seating the base plate. Glenoid bony defects less than 25 degrees can be managed by eccentric reaming and bone graft. For example, if there is a bone loss from the superior glenoid, the upward tilt of the glenoid component is avoided by reaming inferiorly and superior bone graft insertion to maintain the desired inferior tilt of 10 degrees. Glenoid bony defect larger than 25 degrees requires a patient-specific graft prepared using preoperative 3D planning software.

**Glenoid Preparation**

It is important to identify the lower glenoid rim for proper base plate seating. Inferiorly placed a base plate with 10 degrees inferior tilt shown to reduce the base plate failure.****The pilot wire is then removed from the glenoid. The base plate holder is used to apply for the glenoid plate, and it is flushed to the bone. The base is compressed to the exposed glenoid subchondral bone by the central screw. Superior and inferior screws aiming for dense bone are inserted to secure the base plate and reduce the micromotion at the plate-bone interface.

**Glenosphere Trial and Offset Selection**

Lateralized and eccentric glenosphere in the modern prosthesis designs reduce the scapular notching and allow a better range of motion without bony impingement.****Different glenosphere sizes (32 to 42 mm) are available depending on the prosthesis type. Glenosphere trial is used to determine the suitable diameter size, offset, and eccentricity direction.  The suitable glenosphere should allow enough separation from the scapular pillar anteriorly, posteriorly, and inferiorly as well as free humeral component movement without superior impingement. The 36 mm glenosphere size is commonly used for female patients and 40 mm for male patients. Trials with different lateral offsets and eccentricities can be carried out to find adequate soft tissue tension. Proper soft tissue tension is necessary for prosthesis stability and deltoid muscle function after RTSA.

**Humeral Tray and Polyethylene Insert Trial**

The humeral tray and polyethylene insert trials are mounted onto the stem trial, and the prosthesis trial is reduced and checked. Different tray and insert heights can be tried to achieve the optimal range of motion,  soft tissue tension, and stability. The deltoid muscle, conjoint tendon, and triceps muscle tension are tested to ensure proper soft tissue tension. Joint stability in all directions without impingement is checked at this stage. If there is excessive soft tissue tension or the prosthesis trial cannot be reduced, the proximal humerus can be resected into a lower level.

**Definitive Prosthesis******

Once all components are confirmed and checked, trial components are removed, and the definitive components are prepared for use. The glenosphere is implanted first while there is more space, followed by implanting the humeral stem (cemented or cementless). If a cemented stem is to be used, antibiotic-loaded cement is recommended. A cement restrictor is inserted then the humeral canal is washed and kept dry prior to cementing.  Once the stem is secured, the humeral cup is mounted onto the humeral stem, followed by the polyethylene insert on top. The prosthesis is reduced, and a final check is carried out for stability and soft tissue tension. The wound is then washed out with normal saline.****

**Subscapularis Muscles Repair and Wound Closure**

It is still controversial whether to repair subscapularis muscle or not during RTSA. Some published evidence indicates increased shoulder internal rotation after subscapularis muscle repair.

**Post-operative Care******

The operated shoulder is immobilized in a board arm sling after the surgery for two weeks. Arm external rotation beyond the neutral level is avoided for the first four weeks. Pendulum shoulder exercises and elbow movement can start early. Post-operative X-rays are obtained to check the prothesis components, anchoring screws, and the bone of the humerus and glenoid. A regular follow-up should be organized starting from two weeks after the surgery to check the surgical wound and exclude any complications.

**Advances of RTSA**

**Stemless Humeral Component**

The stemless humeral component is also known as the canal sparing humeral component. The canal-sparing component is especially useful for patients who have a humeral deformity. The stemless humeral component preserves the bony stock of proximal humerus in case it is needed for future secondary revision procedures.

**Preoperative 3D Planning Software**

Digital software is a new development to allow virtual RTSA preoperative planning. This software creates a 3D virtual shoulder model from the shoulder 3D CT scan. It enables the surgeon to navigate the shoulder, identify any bony loss and plan for different components size, glenoid component tilt, and humeral component version.

# Complications

**Prothesis Infection**

The infection rate post-RTSA ranges from 1 % to 10 %.**.**

**Prothesis Instability and Dislocation**

The reported prosthesis dislocation rate after RTSA is about 3.6%.

**Axillary Nerve Palsy**

Transient axillary nerve neuropraxia may result from nerve traction caused by the arm position during glenoid exposure.

**Scapular Notching**

Mechanical impingement of the humeral prosthesis against the scapular neck may result in scapular notching.

Sirveaux classified the scapular RTSA notching based on the extend of scapular bony defects in X-rays into four grades:

- Grade 1; scapular bony defects are confined to the pillar

- Grade 2; scapular bony defects extend to the glenoid baseplate lower screw

- Grade 3; scapular bony defects extend beyond the glenoid baseplate lower screw.

- Grade 4; loose glenoid base plate

**Base Plate Failure**

The glenoid baseplate failure can result from increased motion at the baseplate–bone interface and inadequate bone growth into the plate. Several advancements in prosthesis design have been introduced to overcome this mode of prosthesis failure. The use of variable angle locking screws to fix the base plate has been suggested to engage the dense bone in the coracoid base scapular spine.

**Other Less Common Complications After RTSA**

- Iatrogenic intraoperative Periprosthetic fracture

- Vascular injury

- Heterotopic ossification

- Surgical scar complications

# Clinical Significance

RTSA is gaining popularity around the world to treat different shoulder pathological conditions in adult populations. More than 60,000 RTSA are performed every year in the USA with very satisfactory results. RTSA is mainly used to treat patients who suffer from deficient rotator cuff function with or without glenohumeral articulation arthritis. The alteration of the shoulder of rotation and allows the deltoid muscle more mechanical advantage to mobilize the arm.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

It is essential for the health care practitioners involved in managing patients with shoulder disease to be familiar with the RTSA procedures. Understanding the indications and biomechanics for RTSA is necessary to select suitable patients for this type of treatment. Arthroplasty nurses and physicians should provide clear postoperative counseling about arm usage after the surgery. Patient education about safe arm use after RTSA reduces the risk of prosthesis dislocation. Post-operative proper pain management and physiotherapy lead rehabilitation are essential to achieve enhanced recovery and reduce the length of hospital stay. Regular follow-up consultations after the surgery with serial postoperative X-rays and clinical assessment are required to identify any postoperative complication.