**Strategies to Prevent Polypharmacy**

- Maintain an accurate medication list and medical history and update whenever possible.

- Encourage patients to bring all medications, including prescription, OTC, supplements, and herbal preparations.

- Review any changes with the patient and caregiver and, if possible, provide all the changes in writing.

- Use the fewest possible number of medications and the simplest possible dosing regimen.

- Try to link each prescribed medication with its diagnosis.

- Discontinue all unnecessary medications.

- Screen for drug-drug and drug-disease interactions.

- Use a team approach, if possible, involving the caregiver or family and pharmacist (community pharmacist).

- Avoid starting potentially harmful medications; use Beers Criteria.

- Try to start a new medication at the lowest dose and then titrate slowly.

- Avoid starting medications to combat the potential side effects of other medications.

- Exercise careful medication reconciliation during transitions of care, including proper communication handoffs to accepting providers. Ensuring a close post-discharge follow-up for updating medical history and medications can help prevent medication errors, treatment failures, and rehospitalizations.

- Consider goals of care and life expectancy of patients when assessing medication appropriateness.

- The polypharmacy does not consider the medications that were reduced in dose but not discontinued.

- The integration of STOPP (Screening Tool of Older Person's Prescriptions) & START (Screening Tool to Alert to Right Treatment) for medication review in multi-morbid older people in clinical settings.

- A study investigated using artificial intelligence(AI) to reduce polypharmacy. Results of the study were promising, and it endorsed the use of a multi-disciplinary research team consisting of specialists in AI, medicine, biostatistics, pharmacy, public health, law, and ethics, which can analyze polypharmacy from additional points of view and will contribute to an in-depth understanding of the clinical, social, and ethical issues related polypharmacy and its solution.