Treatment indications for cavum septum pellucidum are the following conditions:

- Association of a CSP cyst on imaging studies and clinical signs and symptoms because of the obstruction of the cerebrospinal fluid flow in the foramen of Monro

- Direct compression of surrounding tissues by the cyst

- Mental status changes or focal neurological deficits attributable to the CSP cyst

The primary goal of treatment is to relieve the mass effect caused by the cyst, and it is only surgical.

The classic treatment in these cases is surgical approaches, including open surgical procedures, conventional shunting, and stereotactic fenestration.

Dandy published the first treated CSP cyst in 1931; he treated a 4.5-year-old boy by a transcallosal fenestration.

Since 1995 when Jacowski et al. described the first endoscopic approach,

Three endoscopic approaches are described:

- A frontal approach on the coronal suture 3 cm from the midline targeting the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle (used by the majority of authors)

- The same cortical frontal approach but directly targeting the cyst that is punctured and then a fenestration of the two walls is performed

- An occipital burr hole to optimize the trajectory into the atrium of the lateral ventricle, which would allow an approach both leaflets of the cyst perpendicularly.

The endoscopic fenestration offers a less invasive approach, direct visualization, and effectiveness. Direct visualization of neural and vascular structures prevents inadvertent injury. It is also important to inspect the foramina of Monro to search potential adhesions, which may play a role in the hydrocephalus to persist after apparently successful drainage of the cyst. Additionally, this technique avoids the need to place a shunt and allows a biopsy of the cyst walls.

The presence of CSP and cavum vergae may affect the choice of route for intracranial endoscopic surgery, with the transcavum interforniceal path preferred over the transforaminal approach into the third ventricle.