Antiarrhythmic drugs serve to control the heart rate in arrhythmias or to convert the rhythm back to normal sinus rhythm. There are four classes of antiarrhythmic, and they each affect different channels in the heart. Class 1 (Na+ channel blockers) and Class 3 (K+ channel blockers) affect channels in the myocyte and exhibit an effect on the myocyte action potential. Class 2 and 4 antiarrhythmic drugs exhibit their effects on the SA and AV nodes. Class 1 (Na+ channel blockers) affect Phase 0 (upstroke) of the cardiac myocyte action potential and have variable effects on Phase 3. The goal of Class 1 antiarrhythmic is to control the rhythm of the myocardium. Class 3 antiarrhythmic drugs (K+ channel blockers) affect Phase 3 of the cardiac myocyte action potential. A severe adverse effect of class 3 antiarrhythmics is a polymorphic ventricular tachycardia called Torsades de pointes, due to QT prolongation. Class 3 antiarrhythmic drugs are also therapeutic agents for rhythm control.

Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a life-threatening condition caused by inhaled anesthetics (halothane, sevoflurane, desflurane, isoflurane) or the muscle relaxant succinylcholine. The inheritance pattern for this condition is typically autosomal dominant. The pathophysiology of malignant hyperthermia involves mutations in the voltage-sensitive ryanodine receptors. In susceptible individuals, inhaled anesthetics or succinylcholine causes increased Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (as a result of ryanodine receptor mutation). The patient develops hyperthermia and severe muscle rigidity that can lead to rhabdomyolysis. Dantrolene, which binds the ryanodine receptor and prevents Ca2+ release from the SR, is used to treat MH.

Digoxin/digitalis is a drug that is used to treat patients with severe heart failure. Digoxin has been shown to reduce symptoms and hospitalizations without lowering mortality. Digoxin is an ionotropic agent because it increased cardiac contractility. Its primary mechanism of action is through blocking Na+/K+ ATPase pumps (which pumps Na+ out and K+ in) on the myocyte surface. Blocking this pump leads to an increase in intracellular Na+. Due to increased intracellular Na+ and decreased extracellular Na+ concentration, there is a decrease in the activity of a Na+/Ca2+ exchanger on the cell surface, which usually exchanges Na+ into the cell for Ca2+ out of the cell. Thus, digoxin ultimately results in increased intracellular Ca2+ concentrations and increased contractility. Increased Ca2+ also lengthens Phase 2 of the cardiac myocyte action potential and slow the heart rate.

Rhabdomyolysis is a potentially severe condition that results from injury to skeletal muscle. Some causes of rhabdomyolysis include trauma, toxins, drugs, infections, muscle ischemia, exercise, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and malignant hyperthermia — injury to the myocyte release cellular components such as myoglobin, creatine kinase and lactate dehydrogenase. Rhabdomyolysis may present with myalgias, weakness. Myoglobin begins to spill into the urine (myoglobinuria), and patients may describe their urine as “tea-colored.” More severe complications of rhabdomyolysis include acute renal failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Diagnostic testing for rhabdomyolysis includes following the creatine kinase level, which is very sensitive. Treatment is mainly supportive and provides for fluids to preserve renal function.