The arterial pulse may be palpated in the extremities and the neck and assists with locating the artery. Before arterial catheterization, the surrounding anatomy, adjacent landmarks, and the size and depth of the artery must be considered.

**Upper Extremity Vasculature**

The radial artery is a preferred catheterization site. The radial artery is palpated superficially in the thenar area of the wrist at the radiocarpal joint. The radial pulse is best felt slightly medial to the extensor tendons of the thumb.

The ulnar artery is opposite the radial pulse in the volar aspect of the wrist at the ulnocarpal joint. The ulnar artery divides into two branches, joining a similar division of the radial artery to form a rich collateral network known as the deep and superficial palmar arch. The ulnar artery is smaller and less readily palpable than the radial artery. Therefore, the ulnar artery is used less commonly for catheterization but may be accessed when other options have been exhausted.

The axillary artery rises to the superficial axilla as it courses through the pectoralis minor muscle, which is delineated best while the arm is abducted. This large vessel can be palpated slightly lateral to the belly of the pectoralis major muscle. The axillary artery and vein form a neurovascular bundle with the cords of the brachial plexus. Catheterization of the axillary artery requires abduction of the arm and is only used when peripheral options have failed. Advancement of the catheter into the subclavian artery provides a central pressure arterial waveform.

Catheterization of the brachial artery is not performed as there is a lack of collateral arterial flow; this increases the risk of ischemic injury to the distal upper extremity.

**Lower Extremity Vasculature**

The dorsalis pedis artery is readily palpated over the bony prominence of the navicular bone at the mid-dorsal aspect of the foot. The dorsalis pedis artery has ample collateral circulation, making it a preferred access site for the lower extremity. The operator accesses the artery by aiming directly at the pulsation as if performing venipuncture.

The posterior tibial artery is the other significant arterial supply to the foot. The posterior tibial artery runs posterior to the medial malleolus in a groove bordered by the Achilles tendon posteriorly. The posterior tibial artery is smaller in caliber than the dorsalis pedis artery and is at greater risk of occlusion.

The femoral artery is the main arterial supply to the lower extremity. The femoral pulse is a well-known anatomical landmark as the artery demarcates the inner one-third of the inguinal ligament from the outer two-thirds. The femoral artery is the single vascular trunk perfusing the lower extremity; no other major collateral arterial vessels exist for the lower extremity. Therefore, complete obstruction of the femoral artery may lead to lower limb ischemia with devastating consequences.

**Other Vessels**

The superficial temporal artery is a branch of the external carotid artery. It may be palpated in the temporal area of the head anterosuperior to the ear.

The umbilical cord traditionally contains two umbilical arteries and one umbilical vein at birth. The umbilical stump typically involutes within the first few days of life. Before involution, however, the umbilical arteries are accessible; they are branches of the internal iliac arteries.