Non-divers can also develop decompression sickness (DCS) during exposure to altitude. Altitude decompression sickness has been observed during high-altitude balloon and unpressurized aircraft flights, extravehicular activity (EVA) from a spacecraft, and rapid depressurization of pressurized aircraft. Rapid exposures to altitudes between 18,000 feet and 25,000 feet have shown a low occurrence of altitude decompression sickness. However, at altitudes of 25,000 feet or higher, the risk of developing decompression sickness increases significantly. Additionally, repetitive exposures (within a few hours) and longer exposures to altitudes above 18,000 feet increase the risk of developing decompression sickness. Exercise at altitude has also been shown to increase the risk.

Other factors that can affect the decision of how long one should wait prior to flying include a prior history of DCS, availability of a recompression chamber at the destination, and the depth and time of the recent dives. The use of enriched air can also ameliorate DCS risk. Avoiding deep diving and repetitive diving before a flight is recommended.

Studies are looking at healthy divers with echocardiography. There has been variability among divers as to their susceptibility to forming bubbles in the bloodstream. Half the divers never formed detectable bubbles in one study, but approximately a quarter of the divers always bubbled. After 24 hours, before flying, no diver had detectable bubbles; however, half of the frequent bubbling divers exhibited bubbles at altitude, although they all resolved within 90 minutes. Of note, none of these divers had symptoms of DCS. However, it does seem to indicate that there are people at higher than usual risk for DCS after a dive, and these divers are at increased risk from flying after diving as well.

The situation of flying after having had DCS that required treatment in a recompression chamber deserves special consideration. This scenario carries a very high risk of DCS recurrence. One study noted that in divers with residual symptoms, DCS recurrence occurred in over half of cases. Flying with symptoms is associated with an adverse outcome. Avoidance of flying or even exposure to an altitude such as driving over a mountain pass is recommended. The consensus is for at least a week of delay, and some recommendations advocate much longer delays. Certainly, there is evidence that a 72-hour pre-flight interval would be an absolute minimum given a large number of patients having relapses of DCS symptoms. Diving in remote locations may necessitate flying earlier than would be medically recommended. The use of oxygen in such cases could be considered.