Thiazides and loop diuretics toxicity can cause electrolyte abnormalities ( mainly hypokalemia and hyponatremia) and metabolic acidosis (hypochloremic). Severe dehydration can occur. No antidotes are available for these diuretics, and treatment is primarily volume and electrolytes replacement.

Potassium-sparing diuretics toxicity presents as severe hyperkalemia; the main treatment is to stop all medications that cause elevated potassium levels, IV hydration, IV calcium gluconate, IV insulin with glucose, sodium bicarbonate, and potassium binding resins.

Non-dihydropyridine CCB toxicity occurs due to the decreased ionotropy effect on the cardiac muscle leading to bradycardia and hypotension. A complete heart block and idioventricular rhythm can occur.

Toxicity from ACE inhibitors and ARBs can cause severe hypotension, hyperkalemia, and hyponatremia. No antidotes are available, and IV hydration and management for hyperkalemia are recommended.

Like CCBs, beta-blockers cause hypotension and bradycardia and may lead to second or third-degree AV blocks. IV glucagon is the initial antidote; IV hydration and an external pacemaker may be required if there is no response.

Hydralazine toxicity can cause severe hypotension, tachycardia, and skin flushing; in severe cases, patients may develop cardiac shock or myocardial ischemia. No antidote is available; IV hydration and IV vasopressors are interventions for severe cases. Beta-blockers can be used for severe tachycardia.

Clonidine toxicity can present as lethargy, hypotension, bradycardia, and miosis. In severe cases, respiratory depression may develop. Treatment is supportive care with hydration and vasopressors. Dopamine and norepinephrine are common choices in this scenario. IV atropine is an option for severe bradycardia, and the use of an external pacemaker is reserved for cases resistant to atropine treatment.

Minoxidil toxicity can cause tachycardia and hypotension. Treatment is supportive with IV hydration and vasopressors.

Alpha-blockers toxicity can cause severe hypotension, and IV hydration and vasopressors are the primary treatment option.