Phentermine/topiramate is available as oral capsules in various strength combinations (i.e., 3.75 mg/23 mg, 7.5 mg/46 mg, 11.25 mg/69 mg, and 15 mg/92 mg of phentermine mg/topiramate mg ER). It is recommended to take this medication in the morning to prevent insomnia.

- The medication's initiation begins with the lowest dose of 3.75 mg/23 mg phentermine mg/topiramate mg ER. Continue on the lowest dose for 14 days, then increase to the 7.5 mg/46 mg phentermine mg/topiramate mg ER dosage. Reevaluate in 12 weeks.

- If 3% weight loss is not achieved after 12 weeks on the 7.5 mg/46 mg phentermine mg/topiramate mg ER dosage, discontinue or escalate the dose to 11.25 mg/69 mg every morning for 14 days. Reevaluate again in 12 weeks.

- If 5% weight loss is not achieved after 12 weeks on the maximum dose of 15 mg/92 mg phentermine mg/topiramate mg ER, discontinue by gradually tapering the dose to prevent possible seizures.

**Renal Impairment**: For patients with severe renal impairment, it is recommended that the clinician should not prescribe more than 7.5 mg/46 mg phentermine mg/topiramate mg ER per day.

**Hepatic Impairment**: No dosage adjustment is essential for patients with mild hepatic impairment. The maximum recommended daily dose for patients with moderate hepatic impairment is phentermine 7.5 mg/topiramate 46 mg per day. Phentermine/topiramate has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score 10 - 15)

**Pregnancy Considerations**: Phentermine/topiramate is teratogenic with a category X classification. Data has indicated that users who become pregnant have an increased risk of oral clefts due to exposure to topiramate in the first trimester. Topiramate has been shown to cause metabolic acidosis, leading to fetal growth restriction and hypoxic events.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**: Phentermine/topiramate has been found distributed in breast milk. There is a potential for adverse effects like hypertension and weight loss in breastfeeding; therefore, breastfeeding is contraindicated on phentermine/topiramate.