Speech assessment, through its multifactorial approach, includes the child or individual’s family history, health, and socioeconomic status. It gives an insight into the circumstances they stem from, including cultural and ethnic backgrounds, which is especially relevant in multi-lingual households.

A child, for example, who is not responsive to the parents or the clinician’s verbal command, may be suffering from hearing impairment or other auditory dysfunctions. Autism Spectrum Disorder and other disorders might also be underlying issues that have not been diagnosed but can be done so through thorough speech assessment. Clinical conditions and communication disorders are coexisting conditions in cases of cleft palate, hearing deficit, traumatic or congenital brain injury, and anomalies of the orofacial structure and difficulty in deglutition (dysphagia).

SLPs are trained in the management of swallowing disorders as well, and there is a significant overlap with speaking difficulties. In addition to the phonatory functions of the vocal folds, they serve a protective function during deglutition. Impaired oropharyngeal phase leads to aspiration of saliva or other pathogens, including liquids/food. Poor bolus control or weak oral musculature can affect the optimum intraoral pressure that is essential for food propulsion in the esophagus. Patients with neurologic deficits may have poor oral hygiene, which acts as a medium for bacterial and fungal growth. Oral thrush is a common finding in hospitalized patients that have suffered from cerebral vascular accidents or have other neurological conditions that have impaired their speaking and swallowing ability. SLPs are consulted before a patient is started on a solid or semi-solid diet. A proper bedside swallowing test can give a general risk of aspiration in the patient.

Acquired swallowing disorders are prevalent among intensive care unit (ICU) patients. Such patients face potential malnutrition, as well as problems with the administration of medications. A speech-language pathologist assesses all stages of the swallowing mechanism. In the case of poor oral hygiene, there is an increased chance of vulnerability for developing dysphagia. Early detection of oropharyngeal dysfunction will improve the prognosis and outcome of patients as they say early intervention leads to an early cure in most cases.

In the ICU, when patients are extubated, the first oral intake trial for the assessment of intact swallowing efficacy is conducted by the speech-language pathologist, after which they give the go-ahead for the provision of safe and smooth oral feeding. If any physical symptoms of deglutition are found like coughing, throat clearing during or after the oral trial, or drop in saturation, other ways of feeding are then recommended to fulfill nutritional requirements and medication intake. Rehabilitative strategies are also guided to improve the strength of oral musculature.

Silent aspiration is another important feature when dysphagia is addressed. Patients suffering from dysphagia do not exhibit noticeable symptoms of swallowing difficulties. The observers that include nursing staff, attendants, and even primary consultants are not unaware of the fact that food particles and liquids have entered in patient’s lungs. Specially trained speech pathologists can suggest videofluoroscopy, also known as a modified barium swallowing test.

Stroboscopy is a method of examination of a fast-moving vibrating object, such as the vocal folds. A bright flashing light lasting a fraction of a second (10 microseconds) illuminates the vocal folds. It 'freezes' the movement of the vibrating vocal folds when synchronized with a known frequency of vibration of normal vocal folds. SLPs are trained in the management of swallowing disorders as well, and there is a significant overlap with speaking difficulties. The diagnostic practice of SLPs has been revolutionized by high-speed digital imaging. This method runs at 4000 frames per second. This rate is fast enough to easily visualize the complete movement and behavior of the vocal tract. Multiple procedures like nasometry, stroboscopy, videofluoroscopy, vital stimulation therapy aid in the assessment of speech and swallowing disorders, and improving patient outcome.

Nasometry is a method or term used to describe noninvasive techniques for measuring the size of the velopharyngeal opening. During the articulation of speech using vowel sounds, nasometry measures the nasalance of speech. The nasality of speech is usually determined by the size of the velopharyngeal opening.