Neural crest cells (NCC) are multipotent cells and are extremely important for embryonic development.

**First Wave**

In the first wave, neural crest cells pass between the anterior surface of the lens and the surface ectoderm. the first wave cells further differentiate into trabecular meshwork and corneal****endothelium; this corneal endothelium will lead to form the Descemet membrane.

**Second Wave**

Second wave neural crest cells are present between the corneal epithelium and endothelium. These cells further form corneal keratocytes of the corneal stroma.

**Third Wave**

Neural crest cells in the third wave migrate to the angle between the corneal endothelium and the anterior edge of the optic cup. Third-wave cells differentiate into the iris stroma and ciliary body.

The neural crest is responsible for developing an anterior segment of the eye, including the cornea, iris, sclera, ciliary body, trabecular meshwork, and aqueous outflow tracts. Any defect in the neural crest leads to anterior segment anomalies such as Axenfeld–Rieger syndrome and Peters anomaly. Peters anomaly occurs due to abnormal separation of lens vesicles from the surface ectoderm.

**Anterior Chamber Cleavage Syndrome**

It is also called mesodermal dysgenesis of the iris and cornea. This syndrome includes three groups:

- Central

- Peripheral

- Central and peripheral components

Peripheral abnormalities include prominent Schwalbe line, attachment of iris strand to Schwalbe line, and anterior iris stromal hypoplasia. Central abnormalities include a central posterior corneal defect, central iridocorneal adhesion, and corneo-lenticular adhesion. Peters anomaly has also been called anterior chamber cleavage syndrome as it is associated with mesodermal dysgenesis of iris and posterior embryotoxon.

**Posterior Corneal Ulcer (Von Hippel’s Internal Corneal Ulcer)**

It has corneal opacity associated with adherent iris and/or lens, along with signs of inflammation. Signs of inflammation differentiate it from Peters anomaly.