First, the patient is injected with a radio-labeled tracer compound selected by the nuclear pharmacist. For cerebral studies, the patient will first be seated in a quiet, dimly lit room and asked not to read or speak for at least 10 minutes prior to tracer injection. If the patient requires sedation for the procedure, it should be administered after the tracer, if possible. Following injection, there is a variable waiting period to allow the tracer to circulate and be taken up by the target tissues. This waiting period can be as long as 90 minutes for cerebral studies or as short as 15 minutes for cardiac stress tests. Wait periods for a particular study will also vary depending on tracer selection and dose.

Once the waiting period has elapsed, the patient will then be moved into the detector apparatus. If the patient is undergoing cardiac stress testing, they will be given cardiac stimulants such as atropine in accordance with standard stress testing protocols. Both cerebral and cardiac studies may utilize vasodilatory medications to assess tissue perfusion. Once the patient is in place and the necessary medications have been administered, the detector will rotate around the patient taking planar scans every 3 to 6 degrees, which will be combined to produce the final 3D image. Specific imaging protocols vary and may require a single scan, as in brain imaging, or several scans may be taken at set timing intervals, as in stress/rest imaging for cardiac SPECT.

Certain SPECT protocols that can be employed to reduce radiation exposure and hazards include the following:

- Appropriate patient selection for SPECT imaging based on clear indication will reduce unnecessary radiation exposure to patients as well as prevent the possibility of an error occurring.

- Technetium-99m based SPECT protocols (sestamibi and tetrofosmin) offer lower patient radiation exposure than thallium-201 (stress/redistribution and stress/reinjection) protocols. For the evaluation of chest pain and the diagnosis of ischemia, technetium-99m based protocols are safer and preferred.

- Radiotracer dose should be weight-based to optimize the radioactivity dose required.

- Cadmium zinc telluride detectors in the imaging camera are more sensitive to the incident ionizing radiation, and these detectors have better energy and spatial resolution. Utilization of cadmium zinc telluride cameras and Anger cameras can optimize radiation techniques.

- SPECT stress-only protocols using technetium-99m labeled radiotracers may reduce radiation exposure by 25% in comparison to typical rest/stress studies. Stress-first imaging is advisable in subjects who are good imaging subjects and who do not have a high pretest probability of an abnormal study. This is particularly important and feasible in young patients, and especially those with low to moderate pretest probability of coronary artery disease.

- The 2-day rest/stress technetium-99m (14 mSv) can be optimized to either stress only (7 mSv) or single-day rest/stress protocols (10 mSv), thereby minimizing radiation exposure.

- Image acquisition practices can be optimized to lower the amount of required radioactivity. In cooperative patients, the radiotracer dose can be reduced by lengthening acquisition times. It is important to position the camera as close as possible to the patient throughout the acquisition to lower the required radioactivity dose.

- Newly developed reconstruction algorithms are able to maintain image quality from SPECT studies, despite reducing the radiotracer dose. Using a novel wide-beam reconstruction algorithm, superior image quality can be acquired with a 50% reduction in radiation dose.

- If a scanner utilizes a CT scan for attenuation correction, the acquisition protocol can be optimized to use the lowest dose available for attenuation correction (rod-source).

- Software developments like resolution-recovery techniques are able to significantly reduce radiation exposure.