To measure mixed venous saturation, a flow-directed pulmonary artery catheter is typically placed utilizing pressure waveform and/or fluoroscopy/echocardiographic guidance. The basis of the measurement is the physics principle of reflection spectrophotometry. The PAC capable of measuring continuous SvO2 has a fiberoptic transmission that receives and sends the signal to monitor and utilizes a LED photodetector that connects to the optical module on PAC, which typically displays a red light at the distal end of PAC. This monitoring system analyzes the saturation of red cells in blood flowing into the pulmonary artery.

Once a central vein has been localized, it is ready for cannulation. It is now the standard of care to use ultrasound guidance while inserting central venous catheters. A central venous catheter is inserted into the central vein with a finder needle, guide wire, and angiocath. To insert a pulmonary artery catheter, repeat the same steps but with the addition of an introducer, which serves as a point of entry for the pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) [see attached image]. Though this article concentrates on its utility in measuring mixed venous saturation, PACs also have several components to allow them to monitor cardiac output, central temperature, and pulmonary artery pressure and to infuse medication or fluids. The PAC design may vary by manufacturer but commonly entails a multi-lumen catheter.

The catheter that inserts into the body has several crucial segments. The blue proximal injectate port sits in the right atrium and can be used as a port to inject fluids or to monitor central venous pressures. Another port, known as a proximal infusion port, also sits in the right atrium and can be used to inject fluids and drugs. The thermistor usually lies within one of the pulmonary arteries proximal to the balloon tip. The yellow PA port leads to the distal lumen behind the balloon, which measures PA pressures and mixed venous oxygen saturation. The catheter that stays outside of the body is covered by a sterile cover and features valves for balloon inflation, thermistor connection, and distal and proximal injection sites. Caution must also be taken not to overinflate the PAC balloon, and no more than 1.5 ml of air should is put in the balloon.

During insertion and maintenance of the catheters, it is crucial to maintain sterility to prevent central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI). Every time the ports are accessed, they should be cleaned with an antiseptic to decrease the risk of contamination.

After the initial placement of the catheter, the depth at which PAC is secured should be noted, and the position should be confirmed by pressure waveform analysis as well as chest X-ray. Further, to avoid complications from misplacement, skilled providers should monitor patients.

Signal Quality index - the measured value of SvO2 should always be considered with signal quality index and is reported by automated machines typically varying from level 1 to 4, with 1 being a normal signal, 2 being moderately compromised, 3 being poor, and 4 being an unacceptable signal. Factors that compromise the signal quality include - the catheter tip against the wall of the pulmonary vessels, clotting at the tip of the catheter, and wedging of the catheter. Whenever SQI is high, that is a poor quality signal; the catheter position should be checked for migration or malposition and adjusted or recalibrated to get reliable SvO2 measurement. To recalibrate, mixed venous blood should slowly be drawn from the distal port of PAC and sent for venous gas analysis.