Key landmarks derive from the temporal bone and mandible.

- Areas to recognize on the temporal bone palpation include the mastoid process, parietal notch, and zygomatic process. Important landmarks that are non-palpable include the external acoustic meatus, occipital mastoid suture, spheno-squamous pivot, mandibular fossa, and eustachian tube.

- Palpable areas to recognize on the mandible include the ramus, angle, body, articular eminence, and mental protuberance. Non-palpable areas that remain clinically important include the condylar process, articular cartilage, medial and lateral collateral ligaments, stylomandibular ligament, and sphenomandibular ligament. Internally, the lateral temporomandibular ligament and joint capsule balance the sphenomandibular ligament. Inferiorly, the mandible angle is connected to the styloid process by the stylomandibular ligament, which contracts and extends to allow for the hinge and gliding action resulting in jaw opening and closing. When full jaw flexion (opening) displays on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the region resembles a "bow-tie" with the articular disc seeded inside the anterior condyle at its mid-point. With jaw-closing or extension, the disc's posterior aspect eventually lines up perpendicular to the anterior condyle. Pathology typically presents in the form of hyperextension resulting in bite blocks advised for prevention.

Many patients suffering from TMJ have an overbite, classified as Class II in the dental literature. Class I patients have little to no overnight, whereas class III an underbite with protrusion of the lower teeth.

While osteopathic manipulative treatment focuses on the joint itself, it also involves treatment of the muscles, which are also affected secondarily affected by the joint dysfunction.

- The muscles of mastication, controlled by cranial nerve V, include the temporalis, masseter, lateral pterygoid, and medial pterygoid.

- 
              
- The temporal muscle originating at the temporal fossa and inserting on the medial aspect of the mandible's ramus and coronoid process.
              
              
- The masseter assists with mastication and originating on the zygomatic arch and maxilla and inserting on the posterolateral aspect of the mandibular angle.
              
              
- The lateral pterygoid and medial pterygoid muscles originating on the greater wing of the sphenoid and medial aspect of the lateral pterygoid plate of the sphenoid, respectively, and inserting on the mandible.

- The TMJ's functions are opening, closing, protrusion, retrusion, lateral motion, and chewing.

- 
              
- Opening – depression, or dental flexion, a hinge, and glide motion allowing the jaw to drop appx 50mm, which estimates as 3 MCPs of the dominant hand. On CT or MRI imaging, the joint itself has a "bow-tie" appearance.
              
              
- Closing – elevation or dental extension.
              
              
- Protrusion and retrusion- represent the forward and backward motion of the joint.
              
              
- Lateral motion
              
              
- Chewing – requires all four muscles of mastication.