**Auto-PEEP or intrinsic PEEP**

Intrinsic or auto-PEEP is a complication of mechanically ventilated patients.

**Factors leading to auto-PEEP**

- Airway inflammation and mucus plugs generate dynamic airflow obstruction as a forced expiratory effort will increase the pressure around the airway leading to closure around the plugs or inflamed area and trapping air in the alveoli that are dependent on that airway.

- High lung compliance as in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) works similarly, as the airways lack scaffolding to stay open during forced exhalation, leading to dynamic airway collapse and air trapping.

- High tidal volume ventilation, where the tidal volume may be too high to be exhaled in a set amount of time, so air is retained by the time the next breath is delivered.

- The high respiratory rate is generating a short exhalation time.

- Slow inspiratory flow generating a higher inspiratory to expiratory time ratio (too much time taken during inhalation does not leave enough time for a full exhalation).

**Two types of auto-PEEP**

- Dynamic hyperinflation with intrinsic expiratory flow obstruction is the most common cause of auto-PEEP in COPD patients in whom alveolar collapse during expiration leads to air trapping. It has been stipulated that low-level extrinsic PEEP can help decrease auto-PEEP in these patients by splinting airways open, leading to the easier release of air from the alveoli. Airway inflammation and mucus plugs also cause dynamic hyperinflation in a similar fashion, although the use of extrinsic PEEP in these patients has not been shown to be beneficial as in COPD.

- Dynamic hyperinflation without airflow obstruction occurs when not enough time is given for the patient to exhale, for example in high respiratory rate, low inspiratory flow, or high tidal volume in which there may not be enough time for the air to leave the lungs before the next respiratory cycle leading to air trapping. In cases like this application of extrinsic PEEP would be detrimental as it would generate backpressure preventing air to flow freely out of the lungs.

**When to suspect auto-PEEP**

- Exhalation is still ongoing when the next respiratory cycle starts. This can be easily checked by looking at the volume curve in the ventilator display. If this curve fails to go back to zero, then it is a sign that air is being trapped.

- Increasing plateau pressures on the ventilator.

- Active exhalation by the patient as seen by the use of accessory muscles of respiration during exhalation.

- Drop-in blood pressure.

- Long expiratory times.

- Respiratory distress.

Although there is a big differential for an intubated patient, who develops respiratory distress, the presence of a volume curve that does not go back to zero before the next breath is delivered is very highly suggestive of auto-PEEP.

**Treating auto-PEEP**

It is important to minimize or prevent the development of auto-PEEP in the ventilated population as its consequences may be dire.

In the most extreme case in which patients are in respiratory distress and shock, disconnecting the patient from the ventilator and allowing enough time for exhalation before manually bagging the patient is a quick life-saving measure.

For less dramatic cases, several measures can be taken to reduce the amount and prevent the development of auto-PEEP.

Assuring enough time for exhalation so that all the air in the lungs can get out is the most important principle governing the prevention of auto-PEEP. This may be achieved by multiple methods:

- Decreasing respiratory rate will increase the time between breaths and decrease the inspiratory to expiratory (I:E) ratio to 1:3 to 1:5.

- Increasing the inspiratory rate to 60 to 100 L/min will assure fast delivery of air during inspiration, lending more time for exhalation.

- Utilize a square waveform for ventilation delivery. This is uncomfortable for the patient but speeds the inspiration process.

- Decrease tidal volume. When there is less air being pushed into the lungs, there is less air needed to be pushed out and less time is required to finish a full exhalation.

- Decrease respiratory demand by decreasing CO2 and lactate production (minimize work of breathing, control fever and pain, ensure adequate sedation, control anxiety, treat sepsis)

If there is also flow obstruction, minimize it by treating bronchoconstriction with bronchodilators and suctioning mucus plugs. Treat airway inflammation with steroids when indicated.

The use of extrinsic PEEP is tricky, and although it may be beneficial, it has to be guided by good clinical sense. In cases of dynamic flow obstruction, especially in COPD where there is alveolar collapse, (Note: This does not include asthma where there is inflammation of the airway but not necessarily airway collapse.) the application of extrinsic PEEP will splint the airways open, permitting this way for air to be flushed from alveolar pouches and decreasing auto-PEEP. Extrinsic PEEP will also decrease the work of breathing in the appropriate setting. Nevertheless, when applied in the wrong setting, like in patients without dynamic airflow obstruction, the application of extrinsic PEEP will generate back pressure that will prevent air from getting out of the lungs, worsening air trapping. It is also important to understand that the extrinsic PEEP initially will add to the auto-PEEP, increasing the intrathoracic pressure. When used, it is recommended to maintain extrinsic PEEP below 75% to 85% of the auto-PEEP. Again, the use of extrinsic PEEP to treat auto-PEEP has to be driven by strong clinical sense as not all patients will benefit from it and others will be harmed. A practical way to assess the effects of extrinsic PEEP in auto-PEEP is to apply small increments of extrinsic PEEP and check the static pressures in the lungs. If the static pressures do not increase, then applying extrinsic PEEP may benefit the patient, but if the pressures increase, then it is time to back down on this strategy.