An accurate diagnosis is paramount in the management of foot injuries. It is important to first properly identify which dislocation has occurred to formulate a treatment plan. Reduction of dislocation should be done immediately to reduce avascular necrosis risk. Minor sprains with no joint displacement can be treated conservatively with initial immobilization and avoidance of weight-bearing. Ligamentous injuries can be treated with partial arthrodesis.

When a subtalar fracture or dislocation is present, it can be treated with numerous different methods of surgical internal fixations and/or joint fusions. Early closed reduction with sedation is performed if possible, but an open reduction is necessary if there is soft tissue obstruction or locked dislocations. These operations have varying efficacy, with a common goal to improve overall foot anatomy and function and relieve pain.

Lisfranc injuries can have serious complications if left untreated. Immediate surgical intervention is often necessary. The gold standard treatment for Lisfranc injuries is surgical open reduction and internal fixation, accompanied by arthrodesis. A new and promising technique for ORIF of Lisfranc injuries employs a Lapidus plate system, which has shown success in several reported cases. Although few cases have been reported, less invasive surgical options for Lisfranc injuries such as percutaneous fixation have been noted as effective alternatives to open reduction and internal fixation in patients with certain types of Lisfranc injuries.

In most cases of midtarsal dislocation, closed reduction is initially attempted; however, the majority of these injuries eventually require open reduction and fixation.

If surgery is performed, reevaluation of the affected foot is necessary. A physical exam of the affected foot, as well as repeat imaging, should be done to determine the efficacy of the surgical intervention.

Initial pain control is usually achieved with intravenous opioids such as morphine and fentanyl along with intravenous ketorolac. Following acute management, oral medications such as NSAIDs, acetaminophen, and oral opioids can be used to limit the duration of use of opioids when possible.

The type of injury will dictate the functional limitations post-injury. As a general rule, patients suffering from any foot dislocation will usually be non-weight bearing following the injury whether or not surgery is required or not. Following surgery, this can be for up to six to eight weeks. After this period, a walking boot or cast will be used and worn for another amount of time, and this is solely determined by the type of injury and rehabilitation status of the patient.