**DNA Viruses**

**Herpesviridae**

**Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis (PHGS)**

Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis self-resolves after ten to fourteen days and treatment is directed at alleviating symptoms. Patients should be recommended to bed rest, have a soft diet, and increase fluid intake. Oral pain is managed with systemic or topical analgesics, and secondary infection of the lesions can be prevented with chlorhexidine mouthwashes. Immunocompromised or severely unwell patients must be indicated systemic antivirals.

**Herpes Labialis**

Herpes labialis lesions often heal within two weeks without scar formation. However, topical antiviral medication such as penciclovir or acyclovir 5% cream can be indicated during the prodrome stage to reduce the duration of clinical disease.

**Chicken Pox**

Treatment of chickenpox consists of supportive measures: over-the-counter analgesia, increased fluid intake, and a healthy lifestyle. Aspirin should be avoided due to the risk of Reye syndrome.

**Shingles**

Shingles infection is treated with supportive measures, and ulcers are expected to heal in approximately three weeks.

**Infectious Mononucleosis**

In most cases, infectious mononucleosis resolves spontaneously; thus, treatment mainly supports patient-specific symptoms. It is essential to avoid oral antibiotics such as amoxicillin or ampicillin due to the risk of developing a cutaneous eruption.

**Oral Hairy Leukoplakia**

Treatment of oral hairy leukoplakia involves using topical agents such as 0.1% vitamin A and podophyllum.

**Cytomegalovirus**

The recommended antimicrobial therapy for CMV infection is usually intravenous ganciclovir. Foscarnet and cidofovir can also be indicated.

**Kaposi Sarcoma**

Kaposi sarcoma lesions vary in size and location. Treatment depends on the lesion's specific features and ranges from excision, laser destruction, and sclerosing agents to the use of intralesional chemotherapy and radiation.

**Papillomaviridae**

**Human Papillomavirus**

****Verruca Vulgaris, Oral Squamous Papillomas, Condyloma Acuminatum, and Heck's Disease****

Lesions of the oral cavity due to the human papillomavirus, including verruca vulgaris, oral papilloma, and condylomas, require surgical removal. This may be performed with scalpel incision, laser excision, or cryosurgery.

Lesions of focal epithelial hyperplasia or Heck's disease may recur in immunocompromised patients. The recommended therapy includes topical imiquimod 5% cream, cidofovir gel, podofilox solution, or intralesional injection of interferon-alpha.

**Poxviridae**

**Molluscum Contagiosum**

Lesions associated with molluscum contagiosum are usually removed surgically with cryotherapy or chemical destruction with cantharidin.

**Enteroviruses**

****Herpangina, Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease, and Acute Lymphonodular Pharyngitis****

The management of most coxsackie virus A infections is mainly supportive. Symptoms are self-limiting and usually resolve spontaneously within seven to ten days.

**Paramyxoviruses**

**Measles or Rubeola**

The incidence of measles infection has significantly reduced after widespread vaccination.

Treatment with immune serum globulin may be necessary for high-risk populations, including pregnant women, young children, and immunocompromised individuals. It is most effective when administered within six days of exposure to the virus.