Palliative care is often confused with hospice care. Palliative care is a larger umbrella that encompasses hospice care but is not limited to it. Palliative care works to enhance the quality of life and limit suffering in patients regardless of their goals of treatment, including working with patients seeking curative treatment. Dame Cicely Saunders first developed hospice in 1967 to care for patients dying from advanced cancer. Hospice programs and payment models vary across the country. A patient must meet the criteria to qualify for hospice set forth by insurance and federal programs. The exact criteria are diagnosis-specific; however, in general, a patient is eligible for hospice if they have decided to forgo curative treatment and instead focus on treatment aimed at improving quality of life (controlling pain and other unpleasant symptoms) and having a life expectancy or prognosis of 6 months or less. If a patient lives longer than six months after enrolling in hospice, they can renew or prolong services as long as they meet admission criteria. Hospice services are most often delivered in the patient's home or living facility; however, they can also be utilized in hospital settings.

The hospice movement was initially controversial, creating myths and misconceptions about palliative care. Erroneous beliefs circulate, for example, that palliative care is only intended for dying patients and that entering hospice was akin to "giving up" or that palliative care hastened death by the medicalization of the dying process. These misconceptions can be dispelled appropriately. Studies have shown early use of palliative care improves the quality of life and, in many cases, prolongs survival in patients with advanced cancer.