It is imperative to complete a thorough evaluation of the clinical circumstances such as the patient’s age, gender, a complete history, and physical examination, use of a hormonal form of contraceptive, history of chronic liver disease, and travel history may provide vital clues to the etiology.

HCs generally cause no symptoms. however, A small fraction of patients manifests with dull right upper quadrant abdominal pain, early postprandial satiety, nausea, vomiting, and Shortness of breath, which arise from a mass effect. Infrequently, a cyst is large enough to produce a palpable abdominal mass and is associated with serious morbidity and mortality.

Furthermore, bile duct obstruction presented as jaundice and itching, rupture of the cyst could cause bacterial peritonitis or presentation similar to hepatic abscesses in the form of fever, abdominal pain, and leukocytosis. It also could cause acute torsion of the cyst presented as acute abdomen.

The detection of multiple liver cysts requires extensive family history taking regarding the occurrence of ADPKD or PCLD. Clinically, patients could present as hepatomegaly on physical examination, and patients rarely progress to hepatic fibrosis, portal hypertension, and liver failure. Infrequently, the liver cysts will impinge the vascular structures of the liver, leading to portal hypertension and upper GI bleeding in terms of Esophageal Varices. Patients with liver cysts can also experience impingement on the Portal veins causing a presentation similar to 'Budd-Chiari syndrome, which blocks the venous drainage from the liver.

Recurrent right exudative pleural effusion has been reported in a patient with PCLD.

In ADPKD, patients present with kidney cysts with an extrarenal manifestation include Cerebral aneurysms, pancreatic cysts, Cardiac valve disease, Colonic diverticula, Abdominal wall, inguinal hernia, and seminal vesicle cyst.

BCA and BCAC generally have a similar clinical presentation. BCAC invades the adjacent biliary tree, while BCA is a slow-growing tumor and causes late biliary compression.