After a comprehensive neurological exam and ruling out significant sensory, motor, or cognitive dysfunction, the assessment of apraxia can begin. It must start with a demonstration that the patient is able to understand the tasks being asked to perform and has the adequate capacity to execute as instructed. Once this is established, the examiner can initiate physical testing in phases (Figure 2). It starts with testing for the praxis by instructing the patient to pantomime demonstrated actions. The actions can be intransitive (waving goodbye, saluting) or transitive (coin flipping, combing, hammering).

Testing must start with the dominant extremity and then with the non-dominant extremity. Gesture imitation must be attempted after establishing the ability to follow verbal instructions. Subsequently, the examiner can perform gestures without naming them and also can perform gestures like linking pinkies to check patients' responses. Next, the examiner can ask the patient to identify various gestures performed. The fourth level of testing consists of sequential actions with imaginary tasks, like making a sandwich or washing dishes. Next, using pictures of tools, the examiner asked to pantomime the use of such objects. Finally, the examiner can assess fine motor actions like tapping and pincer grasp. Essential tools can be present if the patient finds it difficult to understand the pictures or instructions. Testing for certain specific apraxias appears below (Table 1).

**Examination for Ideomotor apraxia:**Patients are unable to pantomime and imitate gestures. Patients have spatiotemporal difficulty with orientation and positioning along with the abnormal trajectory of fingers, hands, and arms.

**Examination for Ideational apraxia:**Patients are unable to perform tasks in the correct sequence, adding filling on the outside while pantomiming/making sandwiches.

**Examination for Conceptual apraxia:**Patients tend to perform tasks unrelated to the objects or tools presented to them. Patients have difficulty pantomiming with the presented tool, for example, using a screwdriver to drive a nail.

**Examination for Limb-kinetic apraxia:**Patients use incorrect fine motor actions to perform the learned task. If asked to pick up a coin off the table, patients may slide it off the table to pick it up instead of the thumb and index finger.

**Examination for Dissociation apraxia:**Patients cannot pantomime verbal instructions; however, they can imitate the examiner.

Further testing in Limb apraxia can utilize tools like Florida Apraxia Battery–Extended and Revised Sydney (FABERS), Apraxia Battery for Adults-2, Short Screening Test for Ideomotor Apraxia (STIMA), Cologne Apraxia Screening (KAS) or (KAS-R), Diagnostic Instrument for Limb Apraxia (DILA or DILA-S), Test of upper limb apraxia (TULIA.)