The peroneus longus is important in plantar flexion and eversion of the foot at the ankle. For this reason, it is tested during the physical exam to assess the range of motion and motor strength of the ankle. Weakened or absent motor strength can indicate muscle or nerve damage to the peroneus longus and/or peroneus brevis muscles—the two muscles of the lateral compartment of the lower limb.

The peroneus longus muscle can also be involved in tendinitis, subluxation, dislocation, and acute or chronic tendon tears. Most peroneal tendon injuries occur in young, active patients, commonly occurring secondary to sports such as football, soccer, and running. Injury to the peroneus longus tendon is a cause of lateral ankle pain and may lead to ankle instability. Tears are most commonly longitudinal due to subluxation over the fibula but can also be transverse.

An isolated tear is more commonly found in the peroneus brevis muscle but can also occur in the peroneus longus. Non-operative treatment includes NSAIDs, ice, rest, immobilization, and physical therapy. Steroid injections can also be used in patients refractory to previously mentioned treatments. Recent literature has shown a growing interest in PRP injections under ultrasound guidance; however, it is not commonly adopted in practice yet. If conservative treatment fails, operative treatment can include an open debridement, synovectomy, and arthroscopic peroneal tendoscopy for tendinitis. For peroneal tendon tears, operative treatment includes an end-to-end repair, side-to-side anastomosis, or Pulvertaft weave with chronic tears, as well as allograft reconstruction.

Lastly, the lateral compartment of the leg can be involved in compartment syndrome. Although the anterior compartment is the most common site for compartment syndrome, lateral compartment syndrome can occur acutely following blunt force injury or trauma or as a chronic, exertional syndrome commonly seen in athletes.