The clinical literature regarding the use of topically applied oxygen on open moist wounds has clearly shown that the technology is safe and efficacious for recently advanced implementations. Older literature on the topic of topical oxygen suffers from multiple issues that resulted in a wide variety of outcomes, including not only poor study design but also devices that were not designed and tested to ensure efficacious delivery of oxygen to ensure that the wound stayed moist using humidified oxygen or that the oxygen source delivered oxygen to the wound.  Recent advances in topical oxygen device development within the last decade have led to consistent outcomes that demonstrate significant improvements in wound healing. Recent studies using rigorous designs with run-in periods to eliminate non-chronic wounds, full blinding of data with independent analysts, and random enrollment into either the oxygen or a control group have shown excellent results compared to moist wound therapy alone.

These studies have been analyzed in recent literature reviews, including meta-analysis, which shows that current methods of topically applied oxygen are efficacious in a wide variety of wounds, including diabetic foot ulcers, leg ulcers, and pressure ulcers.

These reviews and other recent literature support the efficacy of topically applied oxygen in various wound types. Studies show that oxygen applied directly to wounds resulted in accelerated closure of the wound, either in comparison to the history of the wound on the same patient or in comparison to another standard of wound care therapy.  This is even more significant when one considers the types of wounds involved and the duration for which those wounds were unresponsive to other technologies.  For example, closure rates using oxygen on recalcitrant wounds were high in studies with open-ended time frames, which are more representative of real-world clinical results than defined time clinical trials, ranging from 73% to 90% full closure.

The studies show that the use of oxygen resulted in a significant acceleration of the rate of wound closure, thereby significantly reducing the time of treatment. Furthermore, many other beneficial effects of oxygen are listed in recent literature, including dramatic and rapid pain reduction, increased patient compliance, reduced recurrence of wounds, and reduced infection rates and costs.