Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the illness caused by SARS-CoV-2, has had a crippling effect on healthcare systems and economies worldwide. The emergency authorization for clinical use of monoclonal therapies in combatting COVID-19 appears promising. There are limited published data regarding the adverse effects and drug-drug interactions with these therapies. Hence its clinical use in patients with COVID-19 illness presenting to the emergency department (ED) who do not require hospitalization but are at high risk of developing severe illness requires an interprofessional team that includes ED physicians, nurses, and pharmacists. They should be aware of the mechanism of action of these therapies, reported potential side effects, drug-drug interactions, and recommended doses for these medications.

Designated interprofessional teams must evaluate all patients presenting to the emergency department with confirmed COVID-19 illness of mild to moderate severity for treatment with monoclonal neutralizing antibody therapy to prevent progression to severe disease. Emergency department clinicians and nurses should utilize clinical algorithms for the expected presentation of patients who will progress to severe disease to ensure monoclonal therapy is offered to all candidates. Referral plans for outpatient infusion centers and infectious disease consultants should be in place to improve the utilization of this essential therapy in the emergency department, which in turn will help improve clinical outcomes.

Patient education regarding this novel therapy is crucial. All patients should receive the fact sheet issued by the US FDA about the monoclonal antibody cocktail before receiving the drug. Considering monoclonal antibodies are commonly associated with infusion-related reactions, the patient should be monitored closely during the infusion and at least 1 to 2 hours after the infusion is complete. There should be close communication between the ordering emergency department (ED) physician, the pharmacist, and the ED nurse. Such a holistic approach would lead to the early identification of potential side effects and drug-drug interactions associated with these agents. Lastly, outpatient clinics and healthcare communities should have a plan in place to triage moderate and high-risk patients for additional therapy, such as monoclonal antibodies in the emergency department if clinically indicated.