Encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis requires a multi-faceted approach regarding proper diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up care. Adequate communication and trust are pivotal because various clinicians, surgeons, mid-level providers, nurses, pharmacists, and technicians are involved in patient education. As highlighted above, the healthcare team can implement the teach-back method, avoid medical jargon, actively engage in patients' questions, and explain the diagnosis. It can help patients make more informed decisions regarding their care. Proper communication ensures that the healthcare team efficiently and effectively provides patients with the highest quality of care. It is essential to recognize the complex interplays of various healthcare providers in the treatment of encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis.

Firstly, EPS patients are typically on peritoneal dialysis, typically under the care of a nephrologist managed by a dialysis-trained healthcare team. This team can consist of mid-level providers, nurses, medical assistants, and dialysis-trained technicians who actively manage patients' dialysis needs. In addition, should a patient become hospitalized for symptoms pertaining to suspected EPS, consider the radiologist that reads the CT scan, the pharmacist that manages the tamoxifen or steroids, the primary care team which coordinates care with surgery, the surgeon that proceeds with lysis of adhesions and the numerous other healthcare providers. This dynamic interplay necessitates the vital role of good communication in ensuring effective care, as one healthcare provider's actions can affect another healthcare provider's interpretation and management plans.

Regarding the decision to proceed with emergent surgical intervention highlighting a patient's objective deterioration, understanding a patient's wishes, and involving the patient's family in the decision can help enhance care. In addition, trust is pivotal in this example, and all other healthcare interactions highlighted above. By trusting what another clinician writes regarding a patient's history and correlating it with the pertinent laboratory/imaging/physical exam findings made possible by the healthcare team, the team becomes more efficient. And by working efficiently and effectively on behalf of a patient, trust can develop. A meta-analysis of four databases on the trust between healthcare professionals and health outcomes revealed that patients reported more beneficial health behaviors, fewer symptoms, higher quality of life, and more satisfaction with treatment when they had higher trust in their healthcare professional.