Pramipexole is administered orally and is available in the form of tablets. As soon as it got approved for PD treatment, the immediate release (IR) tablet form became available in 0.125 mg, 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 1.5 mg doses. In 2010, pramipexole became available in extended-release (ER) in larger doses of 0.375 mg, 0.75 mg, 1.5 mg, 2.25 mg, 3 mg, 3.75 mg, and 4.5 mg,  permitting a simplified single daily dosing. Both IR and ER have an identical mechanism of action and efficacy.

In PD, pramipexole is initiated at 0.125 mg thrice daily and gradually increased every week to a maximum dose of 1.5 mg thrice daily, depending on the clinical response. This slow titration is to minimize the adverse effects of the drug.

Pramipexole is given as a single dose 2 to 3 hours before bedtime for RLS treatment. The dose can be increased every 4 to 7 days to attain maximum symptom relief. Usually, most patients are free of symptoms in the dose range of 0.125 mg to 0.75 mg. Hence, IR tablets are most suitable in RLS, given the small dose required for symptoms to diminish.

**Use in Specific Population**

**Renal Impairment:**The elimination half-life of 8 to 12 hours in individuals with normal renal function increases to 36 hours in patients with moderate to severe renal function.

- In patients with creatinine clearance (CrCL) of 35 to 59 ml/min, the initial dose should be 0.125 mg twice daily and increased gradually over a longer period of two weeks compared to a week in patients with normal renal function.

- For severe renal impairment (CrCL of 15-34 ml/min), the initial dose should be 0.125 once daily.

**Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustments should be made in cases of hepatic insufficiency since pramipexole undergoes minimal hepatic metabolism.

**Pregnancy considerations:**Studies conducted on rats showed that pramipexole could affect fetal development at higher doses. The evidence of teratogenicity remains insufficient. Hence, the advice is to avoid pramipexole in pregnancy. According to the product labeling, there is no adequate data on the developmental risk associated with using pramipexole dihydrochloride tablets in pregnant women.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**According to the package insert, the judgment during breastfeeding and therapy should consider the risk versus benefit to the infant and the benefits of treatment to the mother. Being a dopaminergic agonist, it is contraindicated in lactating mothers since it suppresses lactation. It is around six times more concentrated in milk than in plasma, and hence the risk of transmission to the nursing baby increases. Pramipexole interferes with prolactin secretion in humans, and that may inhibit lactation.