**Management of Primary Lesion**

Much of the surgical management has been discussed in the treatment/management section of this topic. Low-risk tumors can be managed with organ-sparing and glans-sparing procedures. Penile sparing techniques have a higher local recurrence rate than partial penectomy, but these two techniques have a comparable cancer-specific survival rate. Penile sparing techniques include circumcision, wedge resection, Mohs’ surgery, laser ablation and laser excision, topical therapy (5-FU or imiquimod) and radiation therapy.

Patient’s with T1 grade 3 and 4 lesions or T2 lesions or greater typically require more extensive surgical intervention with partial or total penectomy. A partial penectomy removes the distal penis, including the glans, distal corpora, and distal urethra. Traditionally a 2cm tumor-free margin has been recommended, but a 5mm tumor-free margin is considered safe.  2-3cm of penile length should be left if possible to allow the patient to have some degree of sexual function and void in the standing position. A total penectomy removes all of the penis distal to the pubic bone. The urethral stump is diverted into the perineum with a perineal urethrostomy, so the patient must void in the sitting position.

**Management of Inguinal Lymph Nodes**

Please see the above treatment/management section for a full description of when to perform the below-described procedures.

**Dynamic Sentinal Node Biopsy**

For patients with high-risk disease, it is becoming more common to perform dynamic sentinel node biopsy (DSNB). This technique uses lymphoscintigraphy and is performed with technetium-99m-labeled nanocolloid and patent blue dye isosulfan blue to identify the sentinel LN in the inguinal region to allow for excisional biopsy of this node to evaluate for metastasis. Palpable nodes should be biopsied, preferably with FNA.

**Inguinal Lymph Node Dissection**

ILND should be performed on patients with proven metastases. It is a highly morbid procedure. The boundaries of the standard, full template are the inguinal ligament superiorly, the fossa ovalis inferiorly, the medial border of the sartorius muscle laterally, and the lateral edge of the adductor longus muscle medially. The fascia lata separates the superficial and deep inguinal LNs. The superficial nodes are divided into 5 zones. The deep inguinal LNs are deep to the fascial lata and are located medial to the femoral vein in the femoral triangle. The node of Cloquet is the most cephalad node in the deep inguinal region. During radical ILND, the saphenous vein is ligated where it arises from the femoral vein and where it passes through the fossa ovalis, and this vein segment is removed. A sartorius muscle flap is used to cover the femoral vessels after ILND.

A modified ILND technique has also been described and can be recommended for patients with the normal inguinal exam but high-risk penile cancers. This technique uses a smaller skin incision and narrows the field of inguinal dissection by excluding the area lateral to the femoral artery and caudal to the fossa ovalis. It also preserves the saphenous vein and eliminates muscle flap transposition. This template allows for good oncologic control as it is targeting the most common site for metastases while decreasing morbidity by narrowing the incision and decreasing the amount of disruption of lymphatic drainage. Frozen sections should be obtained when using this template and if nodal involvement is identified the procedure should be converted to a full-template lymphadenectomy.

**Pelvic Lymph Node Dissection**

Ipsilateral pelvic LN dissection should be considered in men with 2 or greater inguinal ipsilateral nodal metastases, metastases in the node of Cloquet, tumor extension through the capsule of the inguinal LNs or presence of high-grade tumor in involved nodes.