There is a paucity of well-designed studies comparing the various CO2 and Er:YAG laser settings due to the heterogeneity of described laser protocols and the inconsistency in the definition of a successful treatment outcome.****Techniques employed are highly variable and are determined by physician preference, patient goals, and available devices. Therefore, the reader is left to explore which laser (CO2 vs. Er:YAG) and associated protocol best fits their skill level, experience, and patients' expected outcomes. A discussion on the numerous calibrations used for both the CO2 and the Er:YAG is beyond the scope of this article. With that being said, the following discussion will highlight some of the characteristics common to ablative laser skin resurfacing modalities, regardless of the laser or protocol employed.

Ablative laser resurfacing should proceed as follows:

- Obtain informed consent and review indications, intended outcomes, anticipated recovery course, and risks of the procedure with the patient.

- Administer antiviral +/- antibacterial prophylaxis.

- Patient position: supine position for the face and chest; the lateral decubitus position may help to target the sides of the face and neck.

- Laser-appropriate protective material (including eye protection) for both patient and healthcare personnel

- Cleanse the area to be lasered with a povidone-iodine 5% solution. Avoid alcohol-containing antiseptic solutions because they are inflammable.

- Anesthesia: general, intravenous sedation, nerve blocks, topical, or a combination thereof; cold air cooling during the procedure may improve patient comfort.

- Operating the laser:

- The foot pedal should be in a comfortable position.
- The handpiece should be held perpendicular to the target area. 
- A typical ablative skin resurfacing procedure involves the sequential treatment of several cosmetic units (e.g., forehead, temples, eyelids, nose, cheeks, lips, chin). For fractional ablative resurfacing, each treatment pass is performed perpendicular to the prior one to minimize bulk heating. These treatments may result in immediate edema, crusting, oozing, and pinpoint bleeding, which can be wiped gently with sterile gauze soaked in cool water.
- The visible clinical endpoint for non-fractional treatment is yellowing the wound bed (to a chamois color), which indicates the exposed papillary dermis. Resurfacing that does not reach this level will not produce as dramatic a result, and treatments that proceed beyond this level will likely result in scarring. The papillary dermis is also characterized by pinpoint bleeding, which may take up to one minute to appear.

- Post-procedure care:
- Immediate post-procedure period: ice-cold soaks and persistent petrolatum ointment are useful. The face must be kept moist at all times until the crusting has resolved. This should be applied initially in the recovery room.
- Sun protection with sunscreen, at least SPF 30, and sun-protective behavior: avoiding direct exposure, wearing wide-brimmed hats, avoiding midday outings in order to reduce risks of post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH).
- Edema, exudate, and skin sloughing: cool compresses, head elevation, saline or water soaks, petrolatum ointment (preferred over topical antibiotics), and occlusive dressings. Systemic steroids may be considered if significant edema is expected or develops (e.g., 30 mg of prednisone PO daily for two days following the procedure)
- Erythema: mild steroid (dexamethasone 0.1%), 0.1% tretinoin, and 5% hydroquinone in a cream base; patients should use cosmetics with green tints to reduce the appearance of erythema.
- Acne: responds to standard acne treatment. Isotretinoin is avoided for several weeks to months to avoid atypical scarring.
- Dermatitis: typically responds to topical steroids +/- oral doxycycline.
- Infection: depending on etiology (viral, bacterial, fungal), responds to valacyclovir, cephalexin, or fluconazole.
- Pruritus: provide topical steroids and oral antihistamines as necessary.