For the mild disease of the oral mucosa and skin, topical therapies can be effective. Moderate to high potency topical steroids, in gel or ointment form, can be used initially 2 to 3 times per day. The frequency of topical steroid application can be slowly tapered based on patient response. To improve the effectiveness of topical therapies, blotting the area with a disposable tissue to remove moisture before the application of medication may be helpful. Patients may apply the medication with a finger or cotton-swab and rub into the affected areas gently for 30 seconds. Patients should be advised to abstain from eating or drinking for 30 minutes after application to increase absorption.

For mild to moderate ocular involvement, systemic corticosteroids (prednisone 1 to 2 mg/kg/day) alone or in combination with dapsone can be considered. Proper ocular care is important. Since dry eyes are common with ocular pemphigoid, frequent use of lubricants is recommended in the form of artificial tear drops or petrolatum-based ointments. Cleansing away excess exudates from the eyes helps to prevent secondary bacterial infections.

For severe or rapidly progressive disease involving the ocular, nasopharyngeal, or anogenital mucosa, a combination of systemic corticosteroids (prednisone 1 to 2 mg/kg/day) plus an additional immunosuppressive agent has been recommended. Immunosuppressive agents that have shown efficacy include azathioprine (1 to 2 mg/kg/day), mycophenolate mofetil (2 to 2.5 g/day) or cyclophosphamide (1 to 2 mg/kg/day).