Poor glucose metabolism leads to diabetes mellitus. According to the American Diabetes Association, the prevalence of diabetes in the year 2015 was 9.4%, with people aging 65 and older forming the largest group. Every year, 1.5 million Americans receive a diagnosis of diabetes. As the seventh-highest cause of mortality in the United States, diabetes mellitus poses a concerning healthcare challenge with large amounts of yearly expenditures, morbidity, and death.

Diabetes classifies into two types-

Type 1 DM- due to deficient insulin secretion. Key features of this type are-

- Immune-mediated in over 90% cases.

- It can occur in any age group, but it is most common in children and young adults.

- Circulating insulin is virtually absent, leading to a catabolic state with exogenous insulin required for treatment.

Type 2 DM- due to insulin resistance with a defect in compensatory insulin secretion. Key features of this type are-

- This condition occurs predominantly in adults but now also increasingly presents in children and adolescents.

- Genetic and environmental factors combine, leading to both insulin resistance and beta-cell loss.

- Treatment entails lifestyle changes and oral anti-diabetic drugs.

Uncontrolled diabetes poses a significantly increased risk of developing macrovascular disease, especially coronary, cerebrovascular, and peripheral vascular disease. It also increases the chances of microvascular disease, including retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy.