**Pin Index Configurations for Commonly Used Medical Gases**

Each pin index safety system (PISS) has six possible pin placement sites, depending on the gas within the cylinder. The pins protrude from the gas tank yokes and fit corresponding holes in the cylinder valves, providing a mostly "fool-proof" way of connecting the appropriate gas to the appropriate valve. Two pins will be placed per cylinder, allowing for multiple, medically used gases that have been added to the standard formats. The following are examples of pin locations for gases:

- Oxygen: 2, 5

- Nitro Oxide: 3, 5

- Air: 1, 5 (Figure 1)

- Carbon Dioxide: 1, 6

- Nitrogen: 1, 4

These numbers describe the location of the pins in millimeters from the edge of the yoke,

**Improvements of the Pin Index Safety System**

Multiple documented cases of failure of the pin index safety system (PISS) have led to quality improvements in the system. An early flaw was noted by Pauling in 1983 when a patient died after crossed gas pipelines led to the intraoperative delivery of 100% nitrous oxide instead of oxygen.  In the weeks leading up to the case, a maintenance team in the hospital had stripped the gas line threads in an attempt to replace valves but did not independently test the gases that were able to flow through each line after the work was complete.

A second case report in 1995 documented an incident in which a woman undergoing a laparoscopic cholecystectomy sustained an intraabdominal fire after a trochar caught fire, leading to ignition of the insufflating gas within the abdomen. Post-incident analysis revealed that the company providing the gas had a policy that a canister with greater than 7% CO2 would be fitted with a CO2 pin index; however, this canister had a green stripe around the top to identify it as having majority O2, not CO2. This particular canister that was being used in the OR happened to be 14% CO2 and 86% O2, leading to the OR fire. This incident highlighted the potential for human error in the PISS as well as the potential downfalls in labeling cylinders with mixed gases.