Vitamin E or tocopherol is a fat-soluble vitamin that functions as an antioxidant, protecting the cell membrane. As with all vitamins, the body does not form vitamin E. It solely forms from the photosynthetic processes of plants and therefore must be consumed from outside sources in small quantities. It is found abundantly in olive and sunflower oils, as well as nuts, soybeans, avocados, wheat, and green leafy vegetables.

Vitamin E encompasses eight forms, including alpha, beta, gamma, and delta-tocopherol and alpha, beta, gamma, and delta-tocotrienol. However, only alpha-tocopherol is found in abundance and maintained well in human plasma.

As with all fat-soluble vitamins, transport and absorption require intact fat digestion mechanisms. Fat metabolism involves both lingual and gastric lipases, bile salts, pancreatic enzymes, and intestinal absorption. Pancreatic enzymes break down tocopheryl-ester bonds.

Of the fat-soluble vitamins, deficiency of vitamin E is uncommon. Disorders leading to disruption of fat metabolism are the usual causes of deficiency.

Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED) is a genetic disease caused by a mutation in the alpha-tocopherol transport protein, TTPA.

The use of alpha-tocopherol as a preventative antioxidant has been studied concerning cardiovascular disease, cancer, age-related macular degeneration, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and Alzheimer disease. The theory is that lipid oxidation plays a pivotal role in developing cardiovascular disease and that the use of antioxidants as adjunctive therapy is useful for prevention. However, studies of vitamin E in the prevention of cardiovascular disease have not proven beneficial, with inconsistent outcomes and inherent study limitations.

Antioxidant use of vitamin E in the prevention of cancers has also not been shown to be effective and may increase the risk of prostate cancer. In the SELECT trial, researchers studied selenium and vitamin E to see what role there was for supplementation in decreasing the incidence of prostate cancer. Participants were randomly assigned to either supplementation with selenium, vitamin E, both, or placebo. The study resulted in an increase in incidence in those in the vitamin E-only group. Other trials on the role of vitamin E and prostate cancer showed conflicting results.

The progression of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease has been shown to be decreased by high-dose supplementation of alpha-tocopherol.