The tricuspid valve has long been forgotten, and there is still some hesitation in treating sole tricuspid lesions. Severe tricuspid lesions are associated with a poor prognosis and should be repaired or replaced. Tricuspid valve repair or replacement procedures are usually performed in conjunction with the left-sided cardiac procedures during the same operative time. The current gold standard for surgical repair is ring annuloplasty with an incomplete semi-rigid annuloplasty ring for repair of tricuspid regurgitation. Transcatheter interventions for TR are becoming more popular due to the success of aortic and mitral valve repair/replacements via transcatheter intervention. Tricuspid stenosis is most commonly repaired with endovascular valvotomy or valvuloplasty.

Since a very small fraction of patients are considered surgical candidates, there has been a renewed interest in developing percutaneous transcatheter devices for tricuspid valve disorders. Percutaneous techniques are likely to increase in the future due to improved technology and increased awareness of the long-term effects of tricuspid regurgitation and stenosis. There are multiple endovascular techniques available for total replacement of the tricuspid valve or endovascular repair of TR or TS. The most important preoperative assessment prior to the intervention is appropriate patient selection. Post-procedure, the patients must all have repeat echocardiography, including measurement of the valve gradient. The ideal candidate to receive percutaneous catheter treatment has been receiving optimal medical treatment, has high surgical risk, and severe TR/TS.

**Transcatheter Replacement of Tricuspid Valve**

- Transcatheter tricuspid valve replacement is still in the early stages of development and requires much more clinical research and patient studies.

- There are several prosthetic tricuspid valves

- 
              
- Bioprosthetic xenopericardial valve
              
              
- 
                  
- The bioprosthetic valve is a xenopericardial leaflet bioprosthesis valve that has a self-expanding nitinol scaffold that can be inserted via a jugular approach or via a mini-thoracotomy. The placement of this valve allows full orthotopic transcatheter tricuspid valve replacements. The valve is available in multiple sizes, and it is recommended to oversize the prosthetic with respect to the annulus size. CT imaging is very important to measure the distance between the tricuspid valve annulus to the right coronary artery. This is a very important measurement as it helps to avoid damage to the right coronary artery. 
                  
                  
- As very few have been placed, this type of valve replacement is still under review. 
                  
                

              
              
- Nitinol Self Expanding Valve
              
              
- 
                  
- This nitinol self-expanding valve is another percutaneous transcatheter valve option. The valve is made of an elastic nitinol frame with an inner valve apparatus. The frame gets anchored into the TV annulus by multiple arms, which secures the new valve into the native TV leaflets. Anchoring the valve axially allows avoidance of the conducting system. The new valve functions with two leaflets. The two leaflets move to the center of the lumen during diastole, allowing the filling of the right ventricle. When the heart is in systole, the leaflets close and allow full coaptation of the TV annulus.

**Challenges**

- There are multiple challenges that stand in the way of transcatheter placement of the tricuspid valve. The femoral veins or internal jugular veins serve as the main access sites for placement of the venous sheath. The internal jugular vein serves as the best access site as it provides less curve for the sheath and valve to pass through.

- The tricuspid valve is not calcified like the aortic valve, so therefore the valve does not “seat” like a TAVR valve. Larger valves may be needed to help properly anchor the valve into place.

- The long durability of the TV is unknown. Patients will need to be followed closely to monitor the wear on the valve.

- Replacing the TV can lead to an abrupt change in the right ventricular afterload.

- The conduction system of the heart lies so close to the triangle of Koch, which is near the commissure between the septal and anterior leaflets of the tricuspid valve. Placement of the valve into this area can cause a complete AV block.

- Lifelong anticoagulation will be required due to the low flow on the right side of the heart and size of the TV prosthesis.

- Placement of a new TV may lead to residual regurgitation due to the anatomical sizing and shape of the valve.

**Transcatheter Treatment of Tricuspid Regurgitation**

- Functional TR is the most common reason for intervention for patients presenting with tricuspid pathology.

- There are multiple new techniques that are going through early trials for TR intervention. Many of the techniques remain preliminary but are making excellent progression.

- There are several percutaneous techniques available for repair or replacement of the TV.

- Percutaneous treatment for TR:

- 
              
- Coaptation Device- Tricuspid valve clipping system, Mitral valve clipping system, edge to edge valve repair system
              
              
- Annuloplasty Device- Tricuspif aligning system, Direct tricuspid valve annuloplasty device, Tricuspid valve anchoring system
              
              
- Vena Cava Valves

**Mitral Valve Clipping System**

- After such success for the repair of the mitral valve, the Mitral valve clipping system was used on the tricuspid valve. This system is now called the “triclip” and is available for use.

- The technique requires a percutaneous transjugular or transfemoral approach for access to the valve.

- The TRILUMINATE trial has shown excellent results for the placement of the Tricuspid clipping system.

- Viewing of the catheter and clip placement is done via 2D echo and 3D echo. Recent publications suggest transgastric views have excellent visualization of the anatomy.

- The technique is performed through the femoral vein with a 7 Fr catheter. The wire is advanced to gain access to the superior vena cava and right atrium. The mitral clipping system is inserted over the wire to the right atrium, and the wire is removed. The mitral clipping catheter is inserted misaligned by 90 degrees or 180 degrees. The catheter is then aspirated to avoid any form of an air embolism.  The misalignment allows for the straddling of the mitral clipping catheter on the guidewire. Once the straddling is completed, the device is activated to deflect the clip toward the TV. The goal of placing the clip is to be as perpendicular as possible to the leaflet without injuring the interatrial wall. Fluoroscopy and echo imaging is very important at this point in the procedure. When the correct imaging is obtained, the clip can be opened over the desired commissure. The device clip is then closed over the leaflet and pushed toward the right ventricle. Imaging will show the capture of the clip on the leaflets. Once the leaflets are captured, the placement of the clip should be performed through imaging. Once the clip has been released, the valve should be assessed for placement, the amount of regurgitation remaining, and possible new tricuspid stenosis.

**Edge to Edge Clipping System**

- This device is used for edge to edge repair of the TV for TR by using transfemoral access. This device is placed and guided into a position like the mitral clipping system. The device captures the TV leaflets by using metal clasps to grasp the leaflets and paddles to grasp the leaflets against the spacer. The spacer decreases leaflet stress while gaining the coaptation of the leaflets. Transesophageal echo and fluoroscopy are used for monitoring during the procedure. The device is steered in place, similar to the mitral clipping system.

**Tricuspid valve align the system**

- The Tricuspid aligning system was developed from the Mitral align system that is used for mitral valve repair. This system uses a transjugular approach and is a suture-based annuloplasty system used to reduce the tricuspid annular diameter by plicating the leaflet tissue. The procedure uses a pair of polyester sutures that are placed into the tricuspid annulus next to the anteroposterior and posterior-septal commissures using an over-the-wire technique. Once the wire is through the annulus, the pledget delivery system is used. The suture is then cinched using a polyester suture that closes the tricuspid posterior leaflet and fixates it to the atrial side. A suture can be placed into the anterior annulus to help add a closure of the space.

- This system produces bicuspidization of the TV.

- The SCOUT trial has shown safe results with a 37% mean reduction in the tricuspid annulus and a 59% reduction in the regurgitant orifice area.

**Direct Tricuspid Valve Annuloplasty system**

- This system uses a percutaneous approach with direct annuloplasty repair of the TV. The device is placed into the tricuspid annulus by a series of anchors that are passed through the TV annulus into the right ventricle myocardium. You must be sure to avoid the septal area to avoid injury to the AV node. After the anchors are placed, and the wires are set, the system is cinched under transesophageal echo guidance. This allows for closure of the annular septal lateral diameter.

- Over the course of 6 months, the TRI-REPAIR trial has shown a 9% reduction of the annular septal-lateral diameter and a 50% reduction of the proximal isovelocity surface area.

**Tricuspid valve anchoring system**

- This is another type of annuloplasty device. This device is designed for percutaneous use to help TV remodeling. A transfemoral approach is used for this system. A deflectable catheter with a stainless steel corkscrew and a coil system in the tip anchors to the tricuspid annulus. The corkscrew is then connected to a Dacron band. The annulus, after being anchored with the screw, is then connected to the band, which creates traction throughout the band and annulus. Fluoroscopy and TEE are used for proper placement of the fixation device into the anterior tricuspid annulus. Once in place, it is cinched further to improve coaptation. After the catheter is tightened, a self-expandable nitinol stent is placed into the inferior vena cava to help keep tension on the system.

- The PREVENT study is currently enrolling patients for studies.

**Valve Spacing System**

- This device is used as a valved spacer. The spacer is delivered through a subclavian venous approach and then anchored to the right ventricle apex. The valve spacer is placed into the area of TV regurgitation. Placing the spacer allows the area to act as a platform, which in turn helps to increase valve coaptation. An incision is made on the chest wall, and the device is placed into this pocket, the area of proximal fixation.

**Tricuspid Valve annular ring system**

- This system uses percutaneous access that places a TV annular ring to help remodel the native TV. The entire system is repositionable and retrievable before it is deployed.

**Vena Cava Valves**

- The vena cava valve is another transfemoral percutaneous approach to treat TR. This technique involves the placement of a valve into the inferior vena cava alone or into both the inferior and superior vena cavae. The placement of the valves is done to reduce the backward flow from the heart into the hepatic, abdominal, and other peripheral areas. The overall goal is to improve systemic venous congestion. The long term outcomes and complications are not known as this does not fix the problem of TR. This device may also increase thrombotic episodes, but the use of anticoagulation is not known, as further studies need to be performed.

**Bicaval Valve System**

- This is another valve concept very similar to the previously mentioned valve systems. The valve is placed percutaneously with placement into the bicaval position. The valve consists of a bicuspid valve covered stent with each end being in the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava. There is also a lateral bicuspid element made of porcine pericardium that has a low closing pressure. The bicaval valve aims to reduce retrograde flow. The device can be fully repositioned and retrieved before fully releasing the valve.

**Transcatheter Treatment of Tricuspid Stenosis**

- Percutaneous transcatheter repair of the TV with stenosis can be performed using double-balloon valvotomy or valvuloplasty.

- Intervention can be performed on native TV stenosis or on the stenosis of a bioprosthetic valve.

- There are multiple options for the intervention for TS. Double balloon valvotomy is a common treatment for TS, and single balloon valvuloplasty is another option.

- Severe TS treatment should have valve replacement as a first-line option. If the patient is too high risk for open surgical repair, then the percutaneous repair should be performed.

**Double Balloon Valvotomy**

- When performing a double-balloon valvotomy, access should be gained in each groin percutaneously. The area of insertion should be injected with an anesthetic. After proper anesthesia, the femoral veins should be accessed via ultrasound-guided placement of the needle and sheath. The wires are then passed into the right atrium. The angiocatheter is passed over the wire into the right ventricle. The valve gradient should be checked across the TV, and a right ventricular angiogram can be performed for pre and post balloon dilation findings. The curved end of the wires should be passed through the TV and placed into the proximal right ventricle. A 9 Fr balloon is then passed over the wires and placed through the TV under fluoroscopic guidance. Once the balloons are in the correct position, a right atrial angiogram under fluoroscopy with a slight inflation of the balloons can be performed for definitive placement.

**Balloon Valvuloplasty**

- Preoperative imaging is obtained with a measurement of the gradient across the tricuspid valve. The valve annulus diameter should be measured along with the size of the right atrium. Balloon valvuloplasty is performed by gaining right groin access via ultrasound guidance with anesthesia injected into the site. Proceed to perform a right heart cath. A 7 Fr sheath is used with the advancement of the wire into the right atrium. The balloon should be passed over the wire and stopped at the tricuspid valve to measure the diameter of the balloon on the TV annulus. The balloon size should be 80% to 110% of the valve annulus size. Once adequate measuring takes place, the wire is then advanced into the right or left pulmonary artery in order to achieve proper position. The balloon is then passed over the wire through the TV. The balloon is inflated and drawn back until the balloon is in the orifice of the TV. The balloon is held in place with small progressive dilations performed. This is done until the pressure gradient drops across the TV. Careful attention must be performed to avoid creating regurgitation across the valve. Once the desired mean drop in the gradient is achieved, the balloon and wire can be withdrawn with completion of the procedure. Post-procedure echocardiography should be performed.