Symptothermal contraception is a birth control method in which women collect information to inform themselves of their menstrual cycle. This method depends on observations during the menstrual cycle of signs and symptoms that correlate with different hormone levels as indicators for an approximate timeframe when ovulation is likely to occur.  Due to the data collection that is required by the patient, symptothermal contraception is commonly referred to as a "fertility-awareness" contraceptive method.

The woman measures her basal body temperature with a thermometer every morning upon awakening. Basal body temperature is defined as the lowest natural body temperature recorded after a period of rest in the absence of pathology. The temperature must be recorded at approximately the same time each day.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) states that most women experience an increase in their basal body temperature of 0.5 to 1.0 degree Fahrenheit shortly after ovulation. This increase in temperature is due to an increase in the release of both progesterone and estrogen by the corpus luteum during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. This increase in temperature persists until the end of the cycle.

The woman also evaluates their cervical mucus and its texture, consistency, and color every day. During the fertile period of the menstrual cycle, the cervical mucus is reported to be clear, stringy. It can be stretched between two fingers to a length of at least six centimeters long due to an increase in estrogen at the end of the follicular phase before ovulation.

To reliably predict the upcoming menstrual cycles, it has been suggested that data collection should be done for approximately six to twelve cycles.

Theoretically, the woman may prevent conception by avoiding sexual intercourse during this time period.