The alveolar macrophages are responsible for the repeated clean-up of excess blood. As the macrophages degrade the erythrocytes, the excess iron from heme degradation within the alveolar macrophages stimulates intracellular ferritin molecules. Further processing of the ferritin leads to hemosiderin complexes; unfortunately, this form of iron is unable to be used by the body and leads to iron-deficient states. Meanwhile, the increased iron load from repetitive bleeding quickly saturates the alveolar macrophages intra-cytoplasmic ferritin, and each macrophage is unable to synthesize any additional iron. Unbound free iron leads to oxidative stress on the alveoli, which can lead to pulmonary fibrosis. This has been demonstrated in prior studies of patients with hemochromatosis and concomitant idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Pulmonary hemosiderosis is typically grouped into three categories based on disease characteristics.

Group 1 pulmonary hemosiderosis is defined by pulmonary hemorrhage associated with circulating anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibodies. Anti-GBM diseases are small vessel vasculitis affecting the capillary system, where there is immunoglobulin and complement deposition along basement membranes of primarily the lungs and the kidneys such as in Goodpasture syndrome. A majority of these patients will develop glomerular crescent formation with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis; however, on average, 40%-60% of patients with anti-GBM diseases will develop an alveolar hemorrhage. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage presents clinically in these patients, and a diagnostic broncho-alveolar lavage may demonstrate hemosiderin-laden macrophages. Unlike idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis, group 1 pulmonary hemosiderosis is stratified based on kidney biopsy, showing linear deposits of IgG under direct immunofluorescence. Lung biopsy samples are not used in the diagnosis of anti-GBM disease and would likely have no specific information.

Group 2 pulmonary hemosiderosis is defined by pulmonary hemorrhage with immune complex disease. Immune complexes are antigen-antibody complexes formed by joining IgG or IgM to a soluble antigen, which triggers complement activation. The result of this immune complex formation is a break in the vascular-endothelial barrier and alveolar-epithelial barrier leading to alveolar edema, hemorrhage, and massive infiltration of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs). This activation of PMNs and macrophages release large amounts of oxidants and proteases, leading to damage to the alveolar wall leading to potential acute lung injury and alveolar hemorrhage, which may present itself as an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Recurrent episodes of these immune complex-mediated lung injuries inevitably lead to pulmonary scarring and fibrosis. Associated conditions, although rare, include systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Henoch-Schonlein purpura, Wegener’s granulomatosis, and mixed connective tissue disease.

Group 3 pulmonary hemosiderosis is defined as pulmonary hemorrhage without known immunologic association, also known as idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH). As previously noted, repeated episodes of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage result in the accumulation of iron in the form of hemosiderin inside pulmonary macrophages. These recurrent episodes also lead to the thickening of alveolar basement membranes and interstitial fibrosis. Therefore, IPH is considered a diagnosis of exclusion after having ruled out primary and secondary causes of pulmonary hemosiderosis.