The remainder of this discussion will focus on managing elevated intraocular pressure as a sequel to the traumatic event and assumes the acute injury has been treated; management of ocular trauma in the acute setting will not be discussed further.

**History**

A thorough history of the trauma should be elicited and carefully documented. The specific details of the trauma should be noted, including the time, nature, and setting of the trauma (for example, an alleged assault or accidental injury at home, workplace, or during leisure activities), any possibility of foreign body involvement as well as the distance, trajectory, and speed of a foreign body if this is relevant.

It is also important to record what treatment, and if applicable, what surgery has been carried out for the trauma. Determine the timing of the IOP elevation in relation to the injury and treatment given. Record any past ophthalmic and medical histories, such as a pre-existing history of glaucoma, previous eye surgery, bleeding disorders, sickle cell disease, the use of topical and systemic steroids, and the use of anticoagulation. A family history of sickle cell disease and blood dyscrasias should also be elicited.

Depending on the history, the possibility of traumatic optic neuropathy and traumatic brain injury needs to be considered as this may influence the interpretation of the physical examination and the results of visual field testing. Old correspondence from previous treating doctors, hospital discharge letters, and imaging reports (and the images themselves) may also require evaluation.

**Physical**

Visual acuity, intraocular pressure (ideally with Goldmann applanation tonometry), and pupillary reflexes (including for a relative afferent pupil defect) should be checked. Assessing for other features of optic nerve dysfunction with red and brightness desaturation, as well as for dyschromatopsia with color plate testing, may be helpful to determine whether a component of any optic nerve dysfunction can be attributed to non-glaucomatous causes such as traumatic optic neuropathy.

To make an appropriate adjustment for the intraocular pressure measurement, the central corneal thickness should be measured with ultrasound pachymetry, anterior segment optical coherence tomography, Schleimpflug (pentacam) tomography, or similar.

Depending on how recent the injury occurred, the anterior chamber may show the presence of a hyphema, inflammatory cells or fibrin in cases of traumatic iritis, lens protein particles or lens material in cases of phacolytic, lens particle and phacoantigenic glaucoma, brownish-colored cells corresponding to red blood cells found in hemolytic glaucoma, as well as Khaki-colored cells corresponding to ghost cells in ghost cell glaucoma.

The corneal endothelium may show keratic precipitates from uveitis and corneal blood staining from previous longstanding hyphema. Iris examination may show iridodialysis, transillumination defects due to foreign body entry, and epithelial pearls from downgrowth. There may be signs of posterior synechiae at the pupil margin, indicating previous inflammation. The AC may be shallow in secondary narrow-angle or angle-closure glaucoma. It may also show signs of epithelial and fibrous downgrowth in the form of an epithelial membrane or fibrovascular membrane, respectively.

Gonioscopy may show signs of trauma to the angle, including hemorrhage, trabecular meshwork hyperpigmentation from trabecular meshwork injury, peripheral anterior synechiae, and angle recession.

The lens may show signs of subluxation (iridodonesis, phacodonesis, asymmetric AC depth, visibility of parts of the lens equator when pupil is dilated, strands of vitreous at the pupil margin, or frank prolapse of vitreous into the AC), dislocation, enlarged lens thickness, and disrupted capsule in phacolytic and lens particle glaucoma.

Posterior segment examination may reveal the presence of ghost cells, retained foreign body, vitreous hemorrhage, retinal hemorrhage, commotio retinae, retinal breaks with or without associated rhegmatogenous detachment, suprachoroidal hemorrhage, or choroidal rupture. If glaucoma has already evolved, then, of course, the optic discs may have a cupped appearance.