Generally, hypoglycemia can be managed in non-diabetic patients by eating smaller meals more regularly, with one to two snacks. Patients should be advised to avoid foods rich in sugar and avoid alcohol and caffeine. Treatment of non-diabetic hypoglycemia depends on causative factors. Drugs causing hypoglycemia need to be discontinued. Reactive hypoglycemia post gastric bypass is controlled by dietary modification (low glycemic index diet) and acarbose (an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor). If disabling hypoglycemia persists post dietary and pharmacologic therapy, restoration of gastric constriction and subtotal pancreatectomy are recommended.

Surgical resection is the primary treatment modality for insulinomas. In patients with increased surgical risk, medical therapies, such as diazoxide, somatostatin analogs (octreotide, lanreotide), verapamil, phenytoin, and everolimus [an inhibitor of the mammalian (mechanistic) target of rapamycin (mTOR)], have been used with some success.

In one study, ultrasound-guided fine needle chemical ablation with alcohol has successfully resolved hypoglycemia.

In infants and children with inborn errors of metabolism, the following measures should be taken:

- Galactosemia: Milk-free diet

- Hereditary fructose intolerance: Eliminating fructose from the diet

- Glycogen storage disease: High protein with frequent low carbohydrate meals

- Hormone replacement in cortisol and growth hormone deficiency

- Nesidioblastosis: Diazoxide and surgical resection of the pancreas