**D****uring Embryogenesis (for normal development)**

The formation of the digits during embryogenesis in the fetus occurs by the apoptosis of interdigital tissues.

Loss of Mullerian structures in a male fetus by Mullerian inhibitory factor synthesized by Sertoli cells.

**During Menstrual Cycle**

The sloughing off the inner lining of the uterus (the endometrium) after withdrawal of estrogen and progesterone in the menstrual cycle.

**Required to Destroy Dangerous Cells(for organism well being)**

- Virus infected cells: Cytotoxic T cells kill the virus-infected cells by apoptosis.

- Cells with DNA damage: Cells whose DNA is damaged by radiation exposure or chemotherapeutic agents are arrested in the G1 phase of the cell cycle for repair by p53 activation. P53 is a tumor suppressor gene. P53 mutation inhibits apoptosis thus leading to the survival of abnormal cells and development of carcinomas.

- Autoreactive T cells: Autoreactive T cells in the thymus are killed by apoptosis.

**Required for Healthy Immune System**

Apoptosis is required for the development and maintenance of a healthy immune system. When B and T lymphocytes are first produced, they are tested to see if they react against any of the body’s own “self” components. Cells that react are killed by apoptosis. If these cells are not removed, then self-reactive cells may be released into the body which can attack tissues and cause autoimmune conditions.

Apoptosis is required to turn off the immune system after the offending pathogen is cleared from the body; for example, removal of acute inflammatory cells such as neutrophils from healing sites.

Also, Destruction of B and T lymphocytes by corticosteroids occurs by apoptosis.

**Removal of Misfolded Proteins**

It occurs by apoptosis; for example, amyloid, proteins in prion-related disease.