Most patients with theophylline toxicity are successfully managed with supportive care. Airway, breathing, circulation, and hemodynamic monitoring are essential to patient care with theophylline toxicity. Intubation with ventilator support may be required for airway protection.

GI decontamination: Activated charcoal (1 g/kg) by mouth or nasogastric tube is recommended in patients who present to the emergency department if there are no contraindications to activated charcoal. Gastric lavage or induced emesis is not recommended in theophylline toxicity. Whole bowel irrigation is controversial as animal models do not demonstrate that it is a beneficial therapy. Multiple-dose activated charcoal is recommended for acute theophylline toxicity if there are no contraindications.

Hypotension-isotonic saline (20 mL/kg): Hypotension refractory to IV fluid administration, an alpha agonist such as phenylephrine is recommended. Primarily alpha agonists such as norepinephrine can be used as well. Treatment of hypotension with a beta antagonist should only be used in consultation with a toxicologist.

Nausea and vomiting: Ondansetron is recommended. Metoclopramide can be used in cases that are refractory to ondansetron.

Cardiac arrhythmias: Treatment of cardiac arrhythmias should be managed according to advanced cardiac life support and pediatric advanced life support protocols.

Seizures: In adults, benzodiazepines (lorazepam, midazolam, diazepam) are the first-line treatment for theophylline-induced seizures.  Phenobarbital and continuous infusion of propofol or midazolam can be used for seizures refractory to benzodiazepines. In pediatrics, benzodiazepines are the first-line treatment for seizures. Phenobarbital or continuous infusion of midazolam or pentobarbital or propofol can be used for refractory seizures.

Hemodialysis: In acute overdose, hemodialysis is indicated for life-threatening arrhythmias and seizures, theophylline levels greater than 100 mcg/mL, clinical instability, or increased theophylline levels despite appropriate care. In chronic theophylline toxicity, hemodialysis is indicated with severe symptoms, such as life-threatening arrhythmias, seizures, and theophylline levels greater than 60 mcg/mL in patients between the ages of 6 months to 60 years, or levels greater than 50 mcg/mL in patients of age less than 6 months or greater than 60 years. Hemodialysis is preferred as opposed to hemoperfusion. However, if hemodialysis is not available, hemoperfusion may be used instead. Decisions to initiate hemodialysis or hemoperfusion should always be made in consultation with a medical toxicologist.

Hypokalemia: Potassium supplementation Is recommended for patients with ventricular arrhythmias or potassium levels less than 3 mEq/L.