The neck is a complex and dense anatomical area. A thorough understanding of the critical structures, fascial layers, and cervical lymph node drainage patterns in the neck is key to performing safe and oncologically sound surgery.

**Surgical Levels of the Neck**

The lymph nodes in the neck are divided into seven levels by anatomic landmarks. These are based on anatomic studies delineating drainage pathways from different head and neck subsites.

**Level: I (submental and submandibular nodes)**

Boundary:  Level Ia (a midline structure) is bordered by the bilateral anterior bellies of the digastric muscles laterally, the hyoid inferiorly, and the mandible superiorly. Level Ib is bordered by the anterior belly of the digastric muscle anteriorly, the posterior belly of the digastric muscle posteriorly, the posterior edge of the submandibular glands laterally, and the mandible superiorly.

Key structures and relationships: The lingual nerve, hypoglossal nerve, submandibular duct, and the facial artery and vein are all found in level I. The only significant structures found lateral to the posterior belly of the digastric are the facial vein and the marginal mandibular nerve. The marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve can be found in the fascia overlying the submandibular gland, superficial to the facial vessels and deep to the platysma.

**Level: II (upper jugular nodes)**

Boundary: Level IIa is bounded by CN XI posteriorly, the posterior edge of the submandibular gland anteriorly, the skull base superiorly, and the hyoid inferiorly. Level IIb is bounded by the posterior edge of the SCM laterally, CN XI anteriorly, the floor of the neck posteriorly, the skull base superiorly, and the hyoid inferiorly.

Critical structures and relationships: Level II is divided into two parts by CN XI. Cranial nerve XI runs deep to the posterior digastric muscle and the occipital artery. The majority of the time (approximately 85%), CN XI runs superficial to the IJV, but it may also run deep (~14%) or through (<1%) the IJV as well.

**Level: III (middle jugular nodes)**

Boundary:  Level III is bounded by the posterior border of the SCM laterally, the lateral border of the sternohyoid medially, the hyoid superiorly, and the inferior border of the cricoid cartilage inferiorly.

Key structures and relationships: The phrenic nerve runs deep to the cervical rootlets and superficial to the anterior scalene muscle beneath the deep layer of the deep cervical fascia.

**Level: IV (lower jugular nodes)**

Boundary:  Level IV is bounded by the posterior border of the SCM laterally, the lateral border of the sternohyoid medially, the inferior border of the cricoid superiorly, and the clavicle inferiorly.

Key structures and relationships: From superficial to deep, the structures encountered are the omohyoid, the carotid sheath, the thoracic duct (more commonly seen in the left neck, though accessory thoracic ducts can be seen in the right neck), transverse cervical artery, phrenic nerve, and anterior scalene muscle. The lung apices may also be present at the inferior aspect of level IV.

**Level: V (posterior triangle nodes)**

Boundary: Level V is bounded by the trapezius laterally, the lateral border of the SCM medially, and the clavicle inferiorly. A horizontal line extending from the inferior border of the cricoid divides levels Va (superior to cricoid) and Vb (inferior to cricoid).

Key structures and relationships: The phrenic nerve is embedded in the fascia overlying the anterior scalenes and can be protected by staying superficial to this plane. The brachial plexus can be found coursing on the floor of level Vb between the anterior and middle scalene muscles.

**Level: VI (central compartment nodes)**

Boundary: Level VI is bounded by the carotid sheaths laterally, the hyoid superiorly, and the sternum inferiorly. Level VI is divided into left and right by the trachea.

Critical structures and relationships: The recurrent laryngeal nerve runs through level VI. The right recurrent laryngeal nerve courses more obliquely due to coursing around the innominate artery, while the left nerve has a more vertically oriented course after looping around the aorta. The thyroid and parathyroid glands are also located in level VI.

**Level: VII (superior mediastinal nodes)**

Boundary: Level VII is bounded superiorly by the inferior border of the suprasternal notch and inferiorly by the innominate artery.

**Nodal Drainage Patterns by Head and Neck Subsite**

- Oral Cavity: I-III

- Oropharynx: II-IV

- Nasopharynx: II-IV

- Hypopharynx: II-IV

- Larynx: II-IV

- Thyroid: VI