In the case of planned vascularized fibular transfer, an evaluation of the perfusion of the donor's lower extremity should be performed before the day of surgery. Duplex ultrasonography and computed tomographic angiography are the most common methods of ensuring patency of the peroneal as well as anterior and posterior tibial arteries. In the event of peroneal insufficiency or dominance, a different donor site, such as iliac crest or scapula, should be chosen; if the peroneal artery is insufficient, the flap will not perfuse adequately after the transfer, and if the peroneal artery is dominant over the tibial arteries, the foot may not perfuse after a flap harvest that includes removal of the peroneal artery.

On the day of surgery, an informed consent discussion should occur, in which alternative options to fibular reconstruction should be enumerated, as well as the risks and the anticipated postoperative course. The risks of the operation include flap failure, foot drop, gait disturbance, ankle instability, pain, bleeding, infection, and need for additional surgery in the future.

The procedure is performed under general anesthesia, and antibiotic prophylaxis is administered prior to induction, with repeated doses at appropriate intervals throughout the surgery. The donor and recipient sites are prepared with a surgical antiseptic. An Esmarch bandage may be used to exsanguinate the lower extremity prior to tourniquet placement. The patient is positioned in the supine/lateral decubitus position with a sterile tourniquet on the affected limb set to 150 mmHg above the mean arterial pressure. All pressure points are carefully padded, including the contralateral fibular head (to protect the peroneal nerve), pelvis, heel, and contralateral axilla (to protect the brachial plexus), given that these operations often take 6 to 8 hours or longer to complete. Ideally, the procedure is performed by two surgical teams simultaneously; the first team works at the recipient site while the other addresses the donor site.