Dry/ischemic gangrene is most commonly secondary to atherosclerosis and progressive occlusion of the peripheral arterial blood supply to distal tissue. The risk factors of peripheral atherosclerosis overlap with the risk factors for coronary artery disease: diabetes, smoking, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. Conditions that increase blood demand, such as localized infection and trauma, may worsen limb ischemia.

Less common causes of ischemic gangrene are vascular occlusions from other pathology. Thromboembolic disease may rarely result in the cessation of arterial flow if thrombosis is transferred downstream, and arterial thromboses may develop in situ in a hypercoagulable state. Trauma to the limb or vascular system may result in ischemia and gangrene. Vasculitis, adventitial cystic disease, popliteal entrapment, and Buerger disease may also contribute to gangrene development.

Ischemic limb gangrene may also occur in limbs with intact peripheral pulses due to thromboses in the microcirculation. Venous limb gangrene is one possible cause where micro thrombosis happens in the same limb as an acute large-vein thrombosis, typically in a hypercoagulable state. Symmetric peripheral gangrene is another condition where multiple limbs may develop symmetric gangrene despite adequate perfusion; an example is purpura fulminans in patients with septicemia secondary to Neisseria meningitidis.

Wet gangrene occurs when tissue compromised by poor venous or arterial blood flow becomes infected. This is most commonly seen in areas prone to edema (lower extremities/feet), though it also can be seen in genitourinary and oral tissues. Diabetic patients are more susceptible to these infections due to poor wound healing and hyperglycemia.

Gas gangrene is historically caused by infection with Clostridium perfringens and other Clostridium species (C.septidum), resulting in clostridial myonecrosis. This organism can cause rapid development of localized tissue necrosis and systemic signs of illness in part due to its production of exotoxins and is characterized by the presence of gas in subcutaneous tissue. Additional bacterial infections may also result in gas production and the rapid spread of infection, including Escherichia coli, Bacteroides, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and streptococcal infections.