Patients with thymic hyperplasia can present differently. The patient could present with compressive symptoms such as dyspnea, dysphagia, cough, horner syndrome, superior vena cava syndrome, or systemic symptoms like weakness and blurry vision due to autoimmune disease like myasthenia gravis. But usually, the thymic hyperplasia is an incidental finding. The newly diagnosed patient should be given emotional support and detailed information about the condition, its treatment, prognosis, and effects on everyday life.

- **Asymptomatic patient:**If the thymic hyperplasia is asymptomatic, the patient should be guided about follow up, and observation until the condition remains asymptomatic and steps that will be taken if somehow the condition starts showing symptoms in the future.

- **Compressive symptoms:**The patients presenting with compressive symptoms should be informed about the cause of symptoms and the possibility of surgery, i.e., thymectomy, to relieve the symptoms.

- **Myasthenia gravis:**Myasthenia gravis patients should be informed about possible associated between thymic hyperplasia and their condition and the possible need for surgery, i.e., thymectomy in the future to improve their symptoms if the medications and plasma exchange therapy fail to improve the symptoms.

- **Thymic hyperplasia and Graves disease:**In the case of thymic hyperplasia associated with hyperthyroidism due to grave disease, the patient should be guided that the hyperplasia will subside if hyperthyroidism is controlled.

The patient should be provided with educational material about the disease. Flow charts, diagrams, and videos should be used to explain each and every aspect of the disease, treatment, and lifestyle changes. Until the patient fully understands everything and is satisfied with the provision of care.