**Blood Supply to the Brain**

The main blood supply to the brain includes the internal carotid arteries (anterior circulation) and the vertebral arteries (posterior circulation). The internal carotid arteries arise at the bifurcation of the common carotid arteries and branch into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries. The anterior and middle cerebral arteries are the anterior circulation of the brain and contribute to the blood circulation of the forebrain. These blood supplies further branch into numerous arteries, such as the lenticulostriate arteries that pass through the white matter and deeper structures, such as basal ganglia and thalamus. The posterior circulation of the brain includes posterior cerebral, basilar, and vertebral arteries. The two vertebral arteries join at the level of the pons and form the basilar artery at the midline of the brainstem. The circle of Willis is the name given to the anastomosing vessels that connect the anterior and posterior circulation of the brain.

**Blood Supply to the Spinal Cord**

The main blood supplies to the spinal cord arise from the vertebral arteries, which originate from the subclavian artery, and from ten to twelve medullary arteries, which arise from the segmental branches of the aorta. The anterior spinal artery is responsible for vascular supply to the ventral portion of the spinal cord, and it originates from the vertebral artery at the level of the medulla. From the vertebral artery at the level of the medulla, medullary arteries form and combine to become the anterior spinal artery. The posterior spinal artery is responsible for supplying the dorsal portion of the spinal cord, and it originates from the vertebral artery as paired arteries that course along the posterior surface of the spinal cord.

The anterior spinal artery branches into multiple sulcal arteries that supply the ventral two-thirds of the spinal cord. The posterior spinal artery is responsible for supplying the majority of dorsal horns and dorsal columns. The anastomosing arteries that connect the anterior and posterior spinal arteries are called the vasocorona. The vasocorona supplies the white matter in a ring-like fashion by surrounding the spinal cord peripherally.