The diagnosis of vasculitis needs a high index of suspicion because of the rarity of the disease and the multisystemic nature of vasculitis. A detailed history and physical examination are key in the management of vasculitis. A complete workup is required to establish the diagnosis, rule out other causes, and evaluate the severity of the disease and organ involvement. To establish the diagnosis, a combination of clinical assessment with serological testing is needed, and a tissue biopsy many times confirms the diagnosis.

Patients with GPA may demonstrate a C-ANCA pattern (with positive anti-PR3 antibodies) in addition to signs and symptoms of vasculitis. Although the presence of typical clinical signs and symptoms with positive serology is enough for diagnosis, physicians usually confirm with a tissue biopsy because of the high-risk nature of the treatment. Tissue biopsy in GPA shows vasculitis with necrotizing granulomas except for kidney biopsy, which only shows evidence of vasculitis without granulomas.

In MPA, the serology is often positive for anti-MPO antibodies with a P-ANCA pattern.

In EGPA, the serology can be positive for MPO or PR3. However, around 40% of patients are ANCA negative. Characteristics of EGPA is that patients have eosinophilia in peripheral blood and involved tissues. The absence of eosinophilia should cast doubt about the diagnosis.

In drug-induced ANCA-associated vasculitis, medication history is present. Many medications are linked with this condition, including propylthiouracil, methimazole, carbimazole, hydralazine, minocycline, allopurinol, penicillamine, procainamide, thiamazole, clozapine, phenytoin, rifampicin, cefotaxime, isoniazid, and indomethacin.

Patients should also undergo testing for antinuclear antibodies and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies because systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Goodpasture syndrome (anti-glomerular basement membrane disease) can present with similar clinical signs and symptoms. Infection also should be excluded as infective endocarditis and chronic hepatitis can present similarly as well.

The assessment of disease activity includes checking inflammatory markers, the persistence of ANCA antibodies, kidney function (urea and electrolytes, urine protein quantification, urine microscopy). Disease activity can be monitored by clinical tools such as the Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (BVAS), which helps to evaluate over time.