**Laboratory Investigations**

The initial tests should be directed at the suspected excess hormone. Additionally, the possible deficiencies of other pituitary hormones should also be considered, and relevant testing performed.

**Prolactin**

Basal levels of prolactin are useful with values of greater than 200 ng/mL associated with the presence of a prolactinoma. Prolactin levels generally correspond with the tumor size. Prolactin (PRL) may be increased due to other causes not related to the pituitary disease, as described above. MRI and basal PRL levels are sufficient for the diagnosis. Provocative tests are not indicated. If PRL levels are normal with clinical features, then it is possible that there is assay interference, the “hook effect,” and samples should be diluted to provide a reliable result since the excess antigen is causing a prozone effect. Rarely patients have an increase in PRL due to macroprolactinomas, which is a harmless condition and can be diagnosed by contacting the laboratory for precipitating the big PRL.

**Growth Hormone (Acromegaly/Gigantism)**

Random GH levels are usually not recommended due to the diurnal and pulsatile nature of secretion that occurs during a day. Dynamic function (suppression testing) forms the cornerstone of laboratory investigations of GH excess. The oral glucose suppression test involves an intake of 75 gm of glucose with measurement of GH  levels at zero, 60, and 120 minutes. A GH level of less than 1 ug/L usually excludes the diagnosis of acromegaly. The presence of increased IGF1 levels accompanies excessive GH production. IGF1 measurement does not require the use of fasting sample or suppression testing as a random sample adequately reflects the influence of GH excess/deficiency. Thus it is recommended as the initial screening test for acromegaly. It is vital that the relevant age and sex-matched reference intervals be used when interpreting IGF1 results. As the liver, under the action of GH, produces IGF1, significant liver disease may result in decreased IGF1 production. Other conditions affecting IGF1 results include renal failure, hypothyroidism, poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, and severe malnutrition. Around 30% of patients with acromegaly can have increased prolactin levels.

**Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (Cushing Disease)**

The laboratory investigations of Cushing syndrome include confirmation of excessive corticosteroid production followed by identification of ACTH dependent/independent production and determination of the site of ACTH production (whether ectopic production is present).

**Tests for Confirmation of Hypercortisolism**

- Midnight serum cortisol greater than 5 ug/dl or salivary cortisol greater than 0.15 ug/dl supports a diagnosis of Cushing syndrome. Cushing syndrome is associated with a loss of circadian rhythm of cortisol production, and there is a loss of the normal nadir of cortisol at midnight.

- Twenty-four-hour urine free cortisol measures unbound cortisol excreted in the urine. The unbound fraction is the active fraction in serum and comprises 5% to 10% of the total circulating cortisol. It cannot be used in patients with significant renal impairment.

- Overnight dexamethasone suppression test (ODST) is performed with 1 mg of dexamethasone administered between 11 pm and midnight, and the serum cortisol being measured the next morning between 8 am, and 9 am. In normal individuals, the cortisol is suppressed less than 1.8 ug/dl. This test has a high sensitivity, but specificity is comparatively low. Drugs affecting the absorption and metabolism of dexamethasone in the liver may affect results. False positives for the ODST may occur in individuals with obesity, depression, alcoholism, and high estrogen states (pseudo-Cushing syndrome). Also, phenytoin and phenobarbital therapy (both enhance the clearance of dexamethasone) can result in false positives.

- Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST) can also be done with 0.5 mg of dexamethasone taken orally every 6 hours for 48 hours from 9 am on day zero. The serum cortisol is measured between 8 am, and 9 am at 24 and 48 hours, respectively.

**Determination of ACTH Dependence/Independence**

- ACTH levels: Increased ACTH levels in the presence of elevated cortisol production indicate the presence of an ACTH dependent cause of Cushing syndrome. If ACTH is greater than 15 ng/L to 20 ng/L, it points to an ACTH dependent cause of Cushing syndrome. It has also been noted that patients with ectopic ACTH production usually have higher levels of ACTH than patients with Cushing disease (pituitary cause).

- High dose dexamethasone suppression test: 2 mg of dexamethasone is administered every 6 hours for 48 hours or with a single dose of 8 mg. Eighty percent of patients with Cushing Disease will suppress to less than 50% of baseline cortisol levels.

- Corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation test: CRH is produced by the hypothalamus and stimulates the production of ACTH by the pituitary. In this test, CRH is administered intravenously, and ACTH and cortisol are measured at baseline and short intervals after that. A rise in ACTH of greater than 40% and cortisol levels of greater than 20% indicate an ACTH dependent cause most likely Cushing's disease as ectopic sources of ACTH are not usually responsive to CRH stimulation.

The CRH stimulation test may be accompanied by bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling (BIPSS) to confirm the presence of a pituitary lesion, causing Cushing syndrome. During this invasive procedure, the inferior petrosal sinuses into which the pituitary venous blood drains are catheterized by a radiologist. ACTH is measured at baseline and following stimulation with 100 micrograms of CRH from both IPS and peripheral veins. Measurement of prolactin is also performed to confirm the catheter is in the correct position. A ratio of IPS to peripheral ACTH of 2:1 before CRH stimulation and 3:1 after stimulation indicates the pituitary cause of ACTH production consistent with Cushing's disease. This modality has also been used to assist in the lateralization of the pituitary lesion.

**Thyroid Stimulating Hormone**

Secondary hyperthyroidism presents with increased or unsuppressed TSH levels and elevated thyroid hormone (free and total T4 and T3) levels. This picture is also seen in the presence of laboratory interference and thyroid hormone resistance, both of which are more commonly encountered than TSH producing pituitary tumors. Since glycoprotein hormones have alpha and beta subunits, tumors can produce an excess of alpha subunits in TSHoma.

Thyroid releasing hormone (TRH), if available, can be used for a stimulation test to verify if the TSH is of pituitary origin. Following the administration of TRH, TSH is measured. Patients with a TSH producing tumor have an impaired response.

**Gonadotropins**

FSH, LH, estradiol, and testosterone levels may be useful in ascertaining the deficiency of these hormones secondary to a pituitary tumor. Rarely elevated FSH and LH may be associated with a gonadotropin secreting adenoma.

**Imaging Studies**

Pituitary imaging studies using unenhanced or gadolinium-enhanced  MRI are preferred to CT scans for visualization of pituitary adenomas. Often pituitary adenomas are discovered incidentally when imaging studies have been done for other reasons.

Adenomas are slow to take up gadolinium as opposed to the normal pituitary tissue; therefore, they tend to appear as hypoenhancing lesions.