Pars interarticularis injury, a condition characterized by a fracture in the pars isthmus, is a common cause of low back pain, mainly among young athletes. This condition must be promptly diagnosed to avoid chronic pain, increase the rate of healing as it is a time depending stage pathology, and improve clinical outcomes. The spectrum of pathologies in the pars interarticularis ranges from bone stress and pars fracture (spondylolysis) to isthmic spondylolisthesis, representing an anterior vertebral slippage. Bone stress is considered the earliest sign of disease. Repetitive bone stress causes bone remodeling and may result in spondylolysis, a non-displaced fracture of the pars interarticularis. This activity is intended to enhance healthcare providers' knowledge in evaluating and treating pars interarticularis injury, highlighting the role of interprofessional teamwork in assessing and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of pars interarticularis injury.
- Summarize key points in evaluating pars interarticularis injury, including medical history and physical examination.
- Review the appropriate management options available for each stage of pars interarticularis injury.
- Outline the necessity of good communication between general health care practitioners and specialists and between these two and the physical therapist, improving care coordination, collaboration, and information sharing between interprofessional team members to enhance outcomes for patients affected by pars injury and rapid return to daily living activities.