Prostate-specific antigen is a serine protease enzyme produced by the columnar epithelium of prostatic tissue. The proenzymatic intracellular form of PSA is pro-PSA.

Following cellular production, pro-PSA passes through the basal and endothelial cell layers before entering the prostatic ducts, where it is converted to active PSA, finally penetrating the capillary membranes to enter the systemic circulation.

PSA decreases seminal viscosity by chemically breaking down the proteins (semenogelin and fibronectin) responsible for the initial gel-like consistency of normal semen. This decreased viscosity allows for easier sperm migration into the cervix and promotes overall fertility.

As men age, spermatozoa production is altered, with a resultant adverse effect on sperm count and quality, which impairs reproductive function.

PSA levels also increase with age. This increase is thought to be an evolutionary adaptation that confers genetic fitness and promotes fertility over other competing males. This may partly explain the increasing prevalence of conditions such as benign prostatic hyperplasia in the general population and the need for age-specific normal ranges for serum PSA levels. (See below.)

Prostate cancer cells do not produce more PSA than benign cells; in fact, they tend to manufacture less. However, malignant cells will more easily allow PSA to pass through the cell wall into the surrounding extracellular fluid and eventually reach the bloodstream. This is because malignant prostate cells lack a basal layer that would otherwise restrict the passage of PSA outside the cell. Very high Gleason score cancer cells that are highly undifferentiated may not produce a significant amount of PSA.