In the United States, 15% of HIV positive patients who are unaware of their status account for up to 40% of new HIV transmissions. In 2015, the estimated median diagnosis delay of HIV was 3 years. Two-thirds of HIV positive patients who did not receive an HIV test in the 12 months before diagnosis had been seen by a healthcare provider.

These statistics are a reminder that every healthcare provider should consider HIV testing for every patient. Opt-out testing improves the ease of screening for HIV. All patients 13 to 65 years of age should be screened at least once, regardless of risk. Patients with risk factors for contracting HIV should be tested as frequently as every 3 to 6 months. The fourth-generation HIV test is the recommended test and can detect HIV as early as 14 days following transmission by detecting HIV p24 Ag. HIV RNA viral load can be performed if an acute infection is suspected (less than 2 weeks after possible exposure to HIV).

Early identification of HIV is important to reduce related illnesses and improve mortality. Detecting HIV early also reduces HIV transmission. In acute HIV, the viral load is especially high, making the patient more likely to transmit the virus to partners. Risk reduction counseling at the time of diagnosis, as well as antiretroviral therapy, decreases the chances of transmission.

The HIV care continuum is a reminder that providers need to continue to expand HIV screening and linkage to care to improve HIV outcomes in the United States.