Septic thrombophlebitis should be suspected in patients who continue to spike fevers despite 72 hours of adequate antibiotic coverage, especially in the setting of an endovascular catheter.

The best available test remains a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan. The CT scan allows for the evaluation of any filling defects within a vessel that may potentially contain a clot and may additionally demonstrate any surrounding inflammation. Diagnosis is then made based on this radiographic evidence of thrombosis, taken together with results from blood cultures or cultures of purulent material obtained from a suspected site (e.g., tip culture in the case of catheter-associated thrombophlebitis, or Gram stain and culture of purulent material from a soft-tissue site). Tip cultures from both peripheral and central sites should be sent for comparison, if available. Diagnosis can be microbiologic with culture results together with radiographic evidence of disease.

If CT scanning is unavailable, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may also be used for the diagnosis of most cases of STP. MRI combined with MR venography is the most sensitive, non-invasive test for evaluating the dural sinuses.

Ultrasound may be useful in some cases of STP (e.g., if there is an abscess present very close to the involved vessel). It can also be diagnostic if a thrombus is revealed in the setting of positive blood culture. In the cases of pelvic or dural vein thrombophlebitis, however, ultrasound will not provide an adequate study (due to poor penetration).

Additional laboratory studies may include a complete blood count, blood chemistries, hepatic enzymes, liver function tests, international normalized ratio/prothrombin time, and if dural sinuses are involved, consider obtaining cerebrospinal fluid cultures.