In a randomized study of dorsal root lesioning by Slappendel et al., lesions made at 40 degrees Celsius and 67 degrees Celsius showed no clinical significance. The authors surmised that perhaps the electrical currents, as opposed to the temperature, led to the clinical benefits. This prompted the development of pulsed radiofrequency (PRF). They theorized that neurodestructive temperatures could be avoided using higher voltage radiofrequency currents in a pulsatile manner—this allowed time for the heat to dissipate, minimizing the risk of thermal tissue injury. Lab studies showed evidence of neural stress and cellular substructure damage after PRF application. However, later studies established that a slow response time of temperature-measuring devices could not dependably exclude the possibility of brief temperature spikes, deflating the role of electrical currents causing tissue injury.

Currently, no clear evidence of pain pathway disruption in response to solely high-frequency electrical current exists. It is held that there is a combined role of electrical and thermal destruction that leads to the clinical benefits observed. Due to the perceived safety and clinical efficacy of PRF, it has grown in popularity and utility over conventional radiofrequency ablation. PRF has been used to treat the dorsal root ganglion at all spinal levels in multiple pain syndromes, including radicular pain, discogenic pain, facetogenic pain, post-herpetic neuralgia, post-amputation pain, and post inguinal herniorrhaphy pain. It also can be applied to various locations along with more peripheral nerves, including medial branch nerve, suprascapular nerve, intercostal nerve, and pudendal nerve. This allows for the treatment of syndromes that span from shoulder pain to meralgia paresthetica. Other non-intuitive uses include the splanchnic nerves for pancreatic pain and dorsal penile nerves for premature ejaculation. Its utility also reaches the central nervous system and autonomic ganglia for trigeminal neuralgia, the sphenopalatine ganglion for head and neck pain, and the lumbar sympathetic chain for complex regional pain syndrome.

Another variation of radiofrequency ablation is water-cooled radiofrequency (WCRF) ablation. This technique was adopted from previous methods in cardiac electrophysiology and tumor ablation. While the premise remains largely the same, in WCRF, a multichannel electrode is cooled by the continuous flow of water. This active cooling measure prevents the electrode itself from attaining high tissue temperatures. Consequently, this allows a continuous flow of the RF current to create a larger thermal lesion. Additionally, the WCRF lesion creates a characteristic lesion with a relatively cooler immediate spherical area, called an isotherm, around the probe. Subsequently, there is a hotter isotherm surrounding that, with sequentially lower temperature, isotherms following as distance from the probe is increased. Like conventional radiofrequency ablation, lesion size is also dependent on probe size, electrode temperature, and duration of the current. Other factors that can contribute to the size and shape of the lesion include active and passive heat sinks. Active heat sinks include blood flow in the epidural venous plexus and cerebrospinal fluid flow in the thecal sac. Passive heat sinks include muscular and boney structures. Currently, the use of WCRF is limited to clinical presentations in which the pain generator is considered to have numerous and variable sources of innervation. There are two distinct forms of WCRF techniques. Monopolar is used for sacroiliac joint dysfunction, and the bipolar technique is used for discogenic pain. Due to its ability to distribute thermal energy to larger areas, WCRF may be effective where more conventional forms of neuroablation have failed.

In the realm of thermal neurolytic therapy, there is an alternative technique known as cryoneurolysis. The benefits of this modality are that it is not associated with neuroma formation or hyperalgesia, which can be aspects of surgical sectioning, radiofrequency ablation, or chemical neurolysis. The mechanism behind cryoneurolysis appears to stem from the damage to the vasa nervorum and subsequent endoneurial edema, pressure, and consequent axonal destruction. Nerves regenerate at a rate of about 1 to 1.5 millimeters per week from spared connective tissue elements and Schwann cell basal laminal. The duration of analgesia depends on the time taken by the proximal axons to reinnervate their targeted tissues and typically ranges from weeks to months. The described use of cryoneurolysis in the literature is most prevalent for the treatment of post-thoracotomy pain. This experience led to its utilization in other chronic pain syndromes, including trigeminal neuralgia, atypical facial pain, spinal and extremity pains, abdominal pain syndromes, and atypical perineal pain. The wide breadth of the utility of cryoablation seems to be limited only by the experience of the proceduralist.