There are many ways to perform a laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. An example is provided below and detailed in a step-wise fashion.

- Insufflation and trocar placementInsufflation is achieved with the Veress needle technique and direct entrance to the peritoneal cavity. A camera port is placed near the umbilicus. The remaining ports are placed under direct visualization as follows: 5 mm right subcostal anterior axillary line, 10 mm left subcostal anterior axillary line, and a 5 mm left subcostal mid axillary line. A liver retractor is placed in the subxiphoid position. The patient is then placed in a steep reverse Trendelenburg position. The primary surgeon will utilize the right and left anterior axillary line subcostal ports. The assistant will use the umbilical camera port as well as the far left subcostal port.

- Left crural dissection and division of the short gastric vesselsExposure of the phrenogastric ligament is facilitated by traction of the gastroesophageal junction fat pad. The phrenogastric ligament is then divided. The surgeon's left-handed instrument grasps the greater curvature and traction is placed on the stomach anteriorly to expose the short gastric vessels. The assistant grasps the lateral gastrosplenic ligament and provides left lateral traction. An ultrasonic dissector is used to sequentially divide the short gastric vessels approximately 1 cm lateral to the stomach wall. This action is completed superiorly to the angle of His, which will facilitate complete visualization of the left crus.

- Right crural dissectionThe gastrohepatic ligament is opened beginning at the pars flaccida. It is divided superiorly, taking care to avoid injury to the vagal branches as well as any aberrant left hepatic artery if present. The right phrenoesophageal membrane is then incised to expose the right crural fibers underneath it. A retroesophageal window is made while taking care to avoid the left and right vagus nerves that run on the anterior and posterior walls of the esophagus at the gastroesophageal junction. A Penrose drain is placed around the esophagus at the level of the hiatus and used to facilitate caudal retraction.

- Esophageal mobilizationThe distal esophagus is first mobilized in the posterior mediastinum and then anteriorly/posteriorly in the intra-abdominal cavity. Take care to avoid injury to the vagus nerves and the pleura. This must be done until a minimum of 3 cm of esophagus lies in the abdominal cavity without traction. Particularly in cases of a large hiatal hernia or a para-esophageal hernia, there can be adhesions from the posterior mediastinum to the esophagus. These can result in the shortening of the intra-abdominal esophagus. The first step to correct this is to perform extensive mobilization of the esophagus up to the level of the inferior pulmonary veins. If a short esophagus persists despite maximal mediastinal mobilization, one can gain more length with the transection of the vagal trunks. Typically, a unilateral vagotomy yields 1 to 2 cm of additional length, and bilateral vagotomies will yield 3 to 4 cm of additional length. There are theoretical disadvantages of vagotomy in fundoplication patients. However, a study of 102 patients receiving a vagotomy versus no vagotomy revealed little difference concerning postoperative pain, bloating, diarrhea, and early satiety.

- Crural approximationThe right and left crura are reapproximated posteriorly, utilizing 2 to 3 heavy (0) permanent sutures.

- Preparation for wrap creationThe orogastric tube should be replaced with a 52 to 60 French bougie. A marking stitch is placed in the posterior fundus. This stitch is done by grasping the greater curvature of the stomach and reflecting it to the patient’s right side, exposing the posterior fundus. The suture should be placed 3 cm distal to the gastroesophageal junction and 2 cm from the grasped greater curvature.

- Creation of the wrapThe posterior fundus is passed behind the esophagus from left to right. The anterior fundus is grasped 2 cm from the greater curvature and 3 cm distal to the gastroesophageal junction. It is then brought in front of the esophagus to join the posterior fundus at the 10 o'clock position on the anterior aspect of the esophagus. The fundus must be grasped anteriorly and posteriorly at a position equidistant from the greater curvature to avoid incorporation of the gastric body into the wrap. Three to 4 seromuscular sutures are placed from left to right in 3 structures. First is the anterior fundus, second is a seromuscular bite of the esophagus, and lastly is the posterior fundus. The first stitch is the most cephalad placed suture; the formerly-placed marking stitch determines its location. The remaining sutures are placed sequentially to cover a total of 3 cm of the intra-abdominal esophagus.

- Anchoring the wrapThe bougie is removed. The wrap is secured to the diaphragm in three places: the right lateral, left lateral, and posterior positions. Securing the wrap prevents herniation into the posterior mediastinum. It also prevents distal wrap migration around the gastric cardia.

- ClosureA fascial closure is done at the 10-mm port sites. Skin closure is done at all sites.

- Postoperative carePatients are admitted to the general surgical ward and given a clear liquid diet on the day of surgery. The diet is advanced to full liquids on postoperative day 1. As long as the patient is tolerating a diet and can maintain hydration, they can be discharged. The patient will slowly introduce soft foods into their diet, and will usually resume a regular diet at 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively.