In patients presenting with the above clinical findings in pregnancy, suspected of having acute fatty liver of pregnancy, require a thorough workup, including a complete blood count, liver function tests, aspartate and alanine aminotransferase levels, creatinine, and urine protein assessment.

Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), are always elevated in patients with AFLP. Other laboratory abnormalities can include elevated serum bilirubin, hypoglycemia, and low platelets. Elevated ammonia and white blood cell count may be present. Coagulopathy may be present, which manifests as prolonged prothrombin time and international normalized ratio, and low fibrinogen.

Radiological examinations are usually non-diagnostic. Imaging may support the diagnosis but is not required to diagnose AFLP. Ultrasound examination of the liver may be non-specific or may reveal fatty infiltration in some cases.

Liver biopsy is generally not necessary or indicated. In patients with clinical and laboratory findings consistent with AFLP, prompt resuscitation, and management, as discussed below, should be initiated without confirming the diagnosis with a biopsy. It may rarely be necessary in cases where the liver function does not normalize post-partum, or rarely in very early stages of AFLP in cases of a questionable diagnosis to make a definitive diagnosis which would justify prompt delivery.

In patients who are found to have liver dysfunction, other causes of liver dysfunction, including viral hepatitis, drug-induced liver dysfunction, and acetaminophen poisoning should be ruled out. A presumptive diagnosis of AFLP is possible in a pregnant female with characteristic symptoms who found to have significant liver dysfunction after ruling out other etiologies. It may be challenging to differentiate AFLP from HELLP syndrome or severe preeclampsia in some cases, but the clinical management is largely the same for these disorders, so the management should not be delayed to form a definitive diagnosis.

The “Swansea criteria” have been proposed and validated in a large cohort in the United Kingdom for the diagnosis of ACLF.

- Vomiting

- Encephalopathy

- Polydipsia/polyuria

- Abdominal pain

- Elevated bilirubin (over 0.8 mg/dL or 14 micromol/L)

- Hypoglycemia (less than 72 mg/dL or 4 mmol/L)

- Leukocytosis (over 11000 cells/microL)

- Elevated transaminases (AST or ALT) (greater than 42 international unit/L)

- Elevated ammonia (over 47 micromol/L)

- Elevated uric acid (above 5.7 mg/dL or 340 micromol/L)

- Acute kidney injury, or creatinine over 1.7 mg/dL or 150 micromol/L

- Coagulopathy or prothrombin time greater than 14 seconds

- Ascites or bright liver on ultrasound scan

- Microvesicular steatosis on liver biopsy