The macula is characterized histologically by an area with more than one layer of ganglion cell layers, and the ganglion cell layer is thick at the macula. In diseases causing loss of transparency (whitening or opacification) of the inner retina, the reddish color of the vascular choroid and pigmentation of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is not seen through the opacified retina. However, the foveola is devoid of the inner retinal layer. The retinal layers present at the foveola are (from inside outwards)- the internal limiting membrane, outer nuclear layer, external limiting membrane, photoreceptor layer, and RPE. Inner retinal layers are absent in mature foveola. The vascular supply of the fovea is from the choroid, and in the occlusion of retinal vessels, it does not get hampered. Thus foveola, the thinnest part of the central retina, does not lose its transparency in inner retinal ischemia.

Thus, when there is inner retinal opacification, the reddish color of the vascular choroid and the RPE is still seen through the foveola, which is surrounded by an area of the white/opacified retina; this gives rise to the typical cherry-red spot. The size of the cherry-red spot depends on the size of the foveola.

As the color of choroid and RPE varies with racial variation, the color of the foveola or the central dot may change according to race. A true cherry-red spot presents in whites. The color of foveola was brown, causing a cherry brown spot in a Canadian aboriginal child with Sandhoff disease, and black in a patient of east Indian race creating a cherry black spot in Sandhoff disease.

Therefore for a cherry-red spot to be seen, the vascularity of the choroid needs to be intact. In cases of ophthalmic artery occlusion, there is a compromise to the vascular supply to the eye, and even the choroid is not perfused. In such cases, a cherry red spot at the macula may not be seen.

The opacification of inner retinal may be due to the following:

- Retinal ischemia due to occlusion of the central retinal artery- The retinal whitening is typically most prominent in the posterior pole, and the opaque retina obscures the details of the choroidal vessels. The whitening of the retina becomes less prominent a little peripheral to the arcades, which may be related to the reduced inner retinal thickness at the peripheral retina. There is a cessation of axoplasmic transport and the opacification of both the ganglion cell and the nerve fiber layer in a CRAO.

- Deposition or accumulation of material in the ganglion cell layer- In Tay-Sachs disease and other lipid storage disorders (sphingolipidoses), there is a progressive abnormal excessive intracellular accumulation of various glycolipids/phospholipids in the ganglion cell layer leading to opacification of the inner retina. The foveola is devoid of the ganglion cell layer and hence remains transparent and allows transmission of the color of the choroid and the RPE. However, the damaged ganglion cells are lost with increasing age, and the cherry-red spot becomes less prominent. In such cases, the optic disc has consecutive optic atrophy and pallor due to the degeneration of the ganglion cell layer and nerve fiber layer.

Other causes of retinal whitening include retinitis and trauma (commotion retinae). Sphingolipidoses are disorders of lysosomal metabolism, which involve conjugated products of ceramide and sugar or phospholipids. Sphingolipidoses include gangliosidosis, Niemann-Pick disease, Farber disease, and metachromatic leukodystrophy.