Treatment options include conservative management, cervical orthosis, halo-vest orthosis, and surgical procedures.

**External Fixation**

A rigid cervical collar represents the immediate first treatment. For type-I and type-III odontoid fractures, this is generally adequate. This is also true for 90% of hangman’s fractures. Halo-vest orthosis can be used as well for external fixation in certain cases of type-II odontoid fractures or angulated/displaced Hangman’s fractures but is not very well tolerated in the elderly population.

**Internal Fixation**

Internal fixation can be achieved via anterior fixation or by a variety of posterior constructs.

**Anterior**

An odontoid screw can be placed for type-II odontoid fractures in good alignment with an intact transverse ligament in the acute setting.  There is concern about the placement of the odontoid screw in the elderly population and instances of delayed non-union.

**Posterior**

- C1 to C2 transarticular screws

- C1 lateral mass and C2 pedicle screws

- C1 lateral mass and C2 pars interarticularis screws

- C1 to C2 wiring (also as an adjunct technique)

Posterior fixation technique selection requires significant review by a neurosurgeon or orthopedic spine surgeon. It takes into consideration a variety of factors, including surgeon experience, fracture location, vertebral artery location, biomechanical suitability, and anatomical variations. Vascular imaging is mandatory to illustrate the location of the vertebral artery in the V2 and V3 segments. The patient’s overall functional status, medical optimization, and bone health must be evaluated in the operative decision-making. This includes consideration for type-II odontoid fractures.