Assessment of renal function and respiratory function is important to provide immediate supportive medical care. Resuscitation and management plans should be addressed according to the further associated anomalies of cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal systems. Early prenatal diagnosis prevents the need for caesarian section delivery.

**Management of Renal Failure**

Electrolytes imbalances should be corrected, such as hyponatremia, hypernatremia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, etc. Calcium and phosphate abnormalities can be treated with calcium carbonate and vitamin D. Anemia due to renal tubular insufficiency, and lack of erythropoietin production can be treated with iron and erythropoietin stimulating agents. Symptomatic treatments of hypertensive children due to activation of the renin-angiotensin system can be achieved with diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, beta-blockers. Growth hormone supplementation in growth retardation cases and nasogastric feeding may be required for adequate nutrition supplements. Excessive fluids and salt intake are restricted in cases of severe renal failure and hypertensive, respectively.

**Pulmonary Hypoplasia**

Infants with associated pulmonary hypoplasia show pulmonary distress. Ventilatory support is provided with mechanical ventilation and chest tube placement. Oxygenation may be required, but oxygen saturation should be between 90-95%.

**Surgical Management**

Various structural anomalies of urinary and renal systems necessitate surgical manipulation. Peritoneal or central venous line dialysis is indicated in renal failure. Valve ablation or vesicostomy provides a good alternative in the obstructive posterior urethral valve that decreases the hydronephrosis and improves renal function.

Regular follow-up and careful monitoring of renal function, respiratory function, and effects of drugs are required. Genetic counseling is needed because of unpreventable disease. In cases of bilateral renal agenesis and recurrence with positive family history, meticulous examinations of fetuses and routine ultrasonographic examinations should be followed in future pregnancies and relevant relatives.