**General Concepts**

The elderly population often presents with femoral neck fractures in the setting of multiple medical comorbidities. Thus, this patient population requires a comprehensive and interprofessional approach to address all comorbidities and all mental and physical impairments.

Surgery is nearly always indicated for patients presenting with an FNF. The goals of surgery include:

- Pain control

- Restoration of mobility and function

- Achieve restoration of alignment and osseous healing (following surgical fixation techniques)

**Nonoperative Management Considerations**

In the setting of femoral neck fractures, nonoperative management is rarely indicated, given the devastatingly highly-associated complication rates. Nonoperative management is reserved only for a select subgroup of nonambulatory patients with significant medical comorbidities.

Patients managed definitively with nonoperative treatment modalities are treated with pain control modalities. Patients often experience pain for several weeks, indicating the formation of a functional girdle stone. The goal of care is always based on a delicate balance in weighing the overall risks and benefits of surgical versus nonoperative management. In select patients that are deemed critically ill and at significant risk for perioperative complications with surgical management, the phases of patient care include initial pain/symptomatic control followed by attempts at mobilization once some callous formation is noted after a few weeks.

The risks associated with nonoperative management include increased rates of related complications, such as pulmonary dysfunction, pneumonia, urinary tract infections (UTIs), pressure sores (e.g., sacral decubitus ulcers), and venous thromboembolic events.

**Indications for Specific Surgical Techniques**

**Hemiarthroplasty and Total Hip Arthroplasty (THA)**

Replacement of the femoral head is indicated in displaced intracapsular femoral neck fractures, particularly in low-demand elderly patients. A THA is recommended for patients with these injuries in independent baseline ambulatory function or in patients with prior evidence of hip pain and/or radiographic evidence of degenerative arthritis. Due to increased chances of hip dislocation seen after THA is done for FNFs, advances in the implant type and modifications in the surgical technique have been described.

**Cannulated Screws**

Cannulated screw fixation is indicated in nondisplaced, intracapsular femoral neck fractures in elderly patients and displaced fractures in younger patients with ideal bone quality. The technique consists of inserting 3 or 4 cannulated screws in an inverted triangle or diamond configuration, respectively. While no difference in outcomes has been demonstrated comparing the utilization of three versus four screws, the literature notes superior results in surgical fixation configurations utilizing the inverted triangle placement compared to fractures fixed with only two cannulated screws. Recently, the biplane double-supported screw fixation (BDSF) method has been described for femoral neck fractures.

Critical utilization of partially threaded (long or short thread options) screw options should be pre-operatively planned before the commencement of the procedure. The surgeon should plan on optimizing the "lag by design" technique. Recently, a femoral neck system (FNS) implant has been described for the internal fixation of FNFs in young patients with theoretical biomechanical advantages compared to other implants.

**Sliding Hip Screw (SHS)**

The sliding hip screw fixation construct is comprised of a large, cancellous lag screw that passes from the lateral, proximal femur across the fracture site and ends near the apex position of the femoral head. The lag screw dynamically slides inside an incorporated metal sleeve, with the latter being connected to a fixation plate that subsequently is secured with multiple screws to the proximal femur. The compression mechanism is amenable for utilization for the following types of injuries:

- Stable, intertrochanteric hip fractures

- Basicervical FNF patterns

- Vertical FNF patterns

- SHS fixation is superior to cannulated screw fixation in younger patients with vertical fracture patterns

The fracture is amenable to compression as the transfer of weight-bearing forces propagates from the appendicular skeleton, through the pelvis, and through the femoral head and neck before the forces transmit distally. Thus, the SHS fixation construct allows for longitudinal sliding and compression as the patient ambulates postoperatively. Thus, the fracture compresses down as the lag screw slides into the barrel and further promotes healing.

**Intramedullary Nail (IMN)**

Similar to the SHS in that one or multiple screw fixation elements extend from the lateral, proximal femur through the neck and end near the apex of the femoral head. Depending on the specific implant type, there are options to promote varying degrees of dynamic compression versus fixed angle constructs that can be tailored to the specific type of fracture pattern.

Critical differences in the indications for IMN versus SHS construct utilization include a shorter lever arm generated by using the IMN constructs, which are often favored in the setting of comminuted IT or subtrochanteric fracture patterns. Fractures involving the lateral wall of the proximal femur are, by definition, either reverse obliquity or transtrochanteric fracture patterns. These fracture patterns preclude the use of an SHS fixation device.

Other potential benefits of IMN over SHS include the possible use of a smaller incision (assuming an open incision is not required to achieve an acceptable reduction of the fracture) and the maintenance of hip offset and lever arm as the IMN fixation results in a reduced sliding distance compared to the SHS.