**Acquired DE**

Most patients with diaphragmatic eventration are asymptomatic. These patients are often unaware of their condition, and the diagnosis is typically an incidental finding on chest imaging. After a thorough history and physical examination, symptomatic patients should undergo chest imaging. Radiographic findings on chest x-rays confirm the diagnosis of diaphragmatic eventration.

Chest x-ray imaging should include both posterior-anterior (PA) and lateral (LAT) views. X-ray images will show an elevation of the affected portion of the hemidiaphragm and normal cardiomediastinal contours. Computed tomography (CT) chest may be done if the diagnosis is unclear or if the intrathoracic or intraabdominal abnormalities are suspected. CT of the chest will show elevation of the affected portion of the hemidiaphragm as well as a sharp edge of the eventration. Diaphragmatic eventration can be differentiated from hernia due to the normal attachment sites of the diaphragm.

Further evaluation is often reserved for assessing lung volumes and diaphragm function. These tests include pulmonary function testing along with maximum inspiratory pressure (MIP), maximum expiratory pressure (MEP), fluoroscopic sniff testing, and ultrasonography. Laboratory testing may be necessary if there is suspicion for associated congenital diseases or infectious etiologies.

Pulmonary function testing shows a restrictive pattern with a reduction in forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1). This restrictive pattern is more commonly seen when eventration is bilateral. This has shown to improve with diaphragm plication, which is further discussed in the next section.

The MIP and MEP are a measure of the pressure generated during maximal inspiratory or expiratory effort and are indicative of the strength of the respiratory muscles involved. As the diaphragm plays a role in the inspiratory phase, the MIP is reduced in patients with diaphragm eventration. The MEP is generally normal.

Fluoroscopic sniff testing is used to examine diaphragm function and is done under continuous fluoroscopy. The patient is asked to take hard and fast inspirations (sniffs) and assess the direction and motion of each hemidiaphragm. In diaphragm eventration, only a portion of the hemidiaphragm may show abnormal movement. Sniff testing may aid in distinguishing diaphragm paralysis from eventration as paralysis may have paradoxical motion during sniffing. This is of limited value as diaphragm eventration and paralysis are both treated with plication when conservative measures fail. In infants, the sniff test may be difficult to obtain. Ultrasonography of the diaphragm is often used in place of fluoroscopy to evaluate diaphragm function due to its lack of exposing radiation to patients.

**Congenital DE**

Diagnosis can be made prenatally with a high-resolution fetal ultrasound, CT, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Prenatally, diaphragm eventration is difficult to differentiate from congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) as the lung appears hypoplastic and the fetal stomach or liver is visualized in the same transverse plane as the heart. Postnatally, eventration is suspected when there is an elevation of a portion of the diaphragm on chest radiography when evaluating for respiratory distress.  Confirmatory testing for DE includes fluoroscopy, dynamic MRI, or ultrasound to evaluate diaphragm function. Further evaluation should be tailored to the patient's clinical history and physical findings to determine the underlying etiology (e.g., infections, malignancy, developmental and degenerative diseases).