**Safe Triangle**

Also known as subpedicular or supraneural, the safe triangle is formed by the inferior margin of the pedicle (superiorly), a line drawn inferiorly from the anterior margin of the pedicle (anteriorly), and the exiting nerve (as the hypotenuse). The traditional needle target for a transforaminal approach is the epidural space just caudal to the inferior margin of the pedicle, referred to as the 6 o'clock position. Positioning more medially increases the risk of dural puncture, and placement too laterally will not achieve retrograde epidural flow demonstrated with contrast injection. It will only perform achieve selective nerve root block. This approach was initially described as a method to theoretically minimize the risk of nerve injury, intrathecal puncture, or vascular injection.

**Posterolateral Approach**

This approach is also referred to as the modified, safe triangle approach with the tip in the posterior portion of the neural foramen and slightly inferior to the safe triangle needle position.

**Kambin Triangle**

The triangle is bounded by the superior endplate or the inferior vertebral body (inferiorly), the exiting nerve (hypotenuse), and by the superior articulating process (posteriorly). Initially, this technique was described as a safe and convenient method to perform discectomy and discograms.

**Interlaminar Approach**

The interlaminar approach can be preferable to the transforaminal approach in cases of severe neuroforaminal stenosis or in the cervical spine where the risk of intravascular injection is higher and the consequences severe. The patient is typically positioned prone. Sedation is restricted to cases of severe anxiety to allow the patient to alarm the physician in cases of pain or paresthesias, which can be a warning of a malpositioned needle. The segmental level is identified in the AP view. After appropriate local anesthesia, an 18- to 22-gauge Tuohy needle is introduced using a paramedian approach targeting the superior lamina of the lower vertebra in the segment. A loss of resistance syringe containing air, saline, or contrast is used while advancing the needle tip millimeters at a time until the loss of resistance is felt, signaling penetration through the ligamentum flavum into the epidural space. A lateral view then confirms the depth of insertion.

The obvious risk in this approach is the advancement of the needle too far anterior, puncturing the dura, or damaging the cord directly. This may also introduce the possible complication of an epidural hematoma or abscess, which may compress the cord. When possible, avoiding sedation allows the patient to alarm the physician of pain or paresthesias from needle advancement into the cord. The epidural space is narrow in the cervical spine compared to the lumbar spine and continues to narrow significantly in the "cervicogenic bulge." Therefore interlaminar injections are preferentially performed below C6, which can be sufficient for pathology above the level due to the cephalo-caudal spread of medication of about 2 levels.