The orbicularis muscle is located just underneath the skin of the eyelid. In general, the muscle attaches to the medial canthal region medially and the lateral canthal region laterally. The orbicularis oculi muscle is divided into two sections, the orbital and palpebral sections. The palpebral section is further subdivided into the preseptal and pretarsal sections. These sections have a complex arrangement of attachments to the surrounding structures.

The orbital section of the orbicularis oculi muscle attaches medially to the anterior limb of the medial canthal tendon and the surrounding periosteum. Laterally, the orbital section attaches to the lateral palpebral raphe. At the muscle’s peripheral borders, it interdigitates into the surrounding muscles, such as the frontalis muscle superiorly.

The preseptal orbicularis oculi muscle divides medially into a deep head and a superficial head. The deep head of the muscle attaches to the fascia around the lacrimal sac as well as the posterior lacrimal crest, while the superficial head of the muscle attaches to the anterior limb of the medial canthal ligament. Laterally, the preseptal orbicularis oculi muscle attaches to Whitnall’s lateral orbital tubercle, which is deep to the lateral palpebral raphe.

The pretarsal orbicularis oculi muscle also divides medially into a deep head and a superficial head. The deep head of the muscle attaches behind the posterior lacrimal crest and to the medial canthal tendon, while the superficial head of the muscle attaches to the anterior lacrimal crest. The deep or posterior head of the pretarsal orbicularis oculi muscle is also known as Horner’s muscle. Laterally, the muscle attaches to the lateral canthal tendon. The superior and inferior pretarsal orbicularis oculi muscles are overlain the respective upper and lower eyelid tarsi. The muscle is firmly adherent the underlying tarsus.

The marginal portion of the palpebral orbicularis muscle adjacent to the eyelid margin is known as the muscle of Riolan or pars ciliaris. This superficial portion of the muscle can be seen along the length of the upper and lower eyelid margins as a colored line and is a surface anatomic landmark known as the gray line. The gray line is a clinical landmark often used in the surgical repair of lacerations of the eyelid margin to help surgeons realign the margins precisely.