The average human is made up of between 50 to 60 percent water. Total body water divides into two main compartments: intracellular and extracellular comprising two-thirds and one-third total body water, respectively. Of these compartments, the extracellular space is subdivided into two additional categories: interstitial and intravascular, making up sixty and forty percent of extracellular space, respectively. Fluid maintenance in the human body is a delicate balance of fluid intake and output. The interstitial fluid, the fluid between cells, is derived from capillaries with a similar solute content to plasma except for protein content.

Several factors control the direction of flow of interstitial fluid including hydrostatic pressure, oncotic pressure, endothelial integrity, and lymphatic systems. These factors are thought to be driven by Starling’s law, which describes fluid movement across capillaries being proportional to capillary permeability, trans-capillary hydrostatic pressure differences, and trans-capillary oncotic pressure differences. The equation for Starling’s law is as follows: Filtration= Kf x (Pc – Pif – Oc + Oif). Where Pc is the hydrostatic capillary pressure, Pif is the interstitial fluid hydrostatic pressure, Oc is the capillary plasma colloid osmotic pressure, Oif is the interstitial fluid colloid osmotic pressure, and Kf is the capillary filtration coefficient (permeability x surface area).

Capillary pressure forces fluid from the capillaries into the interstitium where the arterial end pressure is higher than the venous end. The interstitial fluid pressure varies partly based on the density of tissues, with higher values in dense connective tissue. The value of interstitial fluid pressure can be a positive or negative value, with positive values being due to fluid forced into the capillary and negative values being fluid forced into the interstitium. Plasma oncotic pressure is due to proteins, which do not pass freely between the interstitium and plasma, and therefore the proteins exert an osmotic effect across capillary walls. Albumin is the most abundant plasma protein. A small amount of protein exists in the interstitium and forces some fluid out of capillary walls. This force is the interstitial oncotic pressure. Together, these factors contribute independently or cooperatively to form edema.