The heart rate can be obtained through many devices routinely applied to the body in most medical encounters, anywhere from the prehospital setting to the intensive care unit. While obtaining a heart rate is valuable, there are many instances in which recording the peripheral pulse is desirable and increases the quality of patient care. Peripheral pulses are clinically helpful in identifying specific vascular pathologies, including peripheral arterial disease, vasculitis, congenital abnormalities, and others.

Lower extremity peripheral pulses can effectively screen for peripheral arterial disease (PAD). Traditionally, the screening tool for PAD is the ankle-brachial index (ABI), which compares the systolic blood pressure in the ankle to that in the arm. This test is somewhat time-consuming and requires specific equipment and training. However, a study has shown that when screening for PAD, if a patient has both pedal pulses intact bilaterally, the clinician could forgo ABI testing, as the likelihood of the patient having PAD, in that case, was less than 3.5%.

One important clinical use of peripheral pulse assessment occurs during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) when the pulse is used to quickly estimate systolic blood pressure. Palpable pulses in various locations probably relate to systolic blood pressure. The belief is that they are only palpable above certain systolic thresholds, with bigger and more central vessels having lower thresholds. One previous estimation was that the radial pulse is no longer palpable below 80 mm Hg systolic blood pressure, the femoral unpalpable below 70 mm Hg, and the carotid unpalpable below 60 mm Hg.

A general concept to bear in mind is that anything impinging the vessel can decrease peripheral pulses; impingements may be due to chronic changes, such as tumors growing in close proximity to the vessel, or may occur acutely in the setting of trauma. Peripheral pulses distal to an injury are routinely checked after extremity trauma to ensure that the distal limb is still receiving adequate blood supply and to evaluate for anatomical disturbance of flow. They require examination in cases of suspected compartment syndrome, with impingement occurring secondary to high pressures in the fascial compartment through which the vessel runs. It is crucial to note that pulselessness is an unreliable sign of compartment syndrome, although clinicians commonly use it for this purpose.

The last two categories of pathology affecting peripheral pulses include vasospasm, as in the Raynaud phenomenon, and congenital anatomic abnormalities.