When appropriate, small superficial defects may be amenable to split-thickness skin grafting. This is reliant on a well-vascularized wound bed and in the absence of preoperative radiation.

Please refer to the basic flap design StatPearls for an overview before continuing.

The flap selected for perineal reconstruction depends on the size and location of the defect, functional goals of reconstruction, prior radiation field, and other coexisting factors such as previous abdominal surgery. We will discuss different defects and different ways to reconstruct them in this section. Regardless of defect and location, the chosen flap should have a reliable blood supply and provide enough tissue to close the defect.

**Vulvar Defects**

Like any area on the body, reconstruction of the vulva depends on the location and depth of the defect. Small areas of excision may be closed primarily without loss of form or function, but larger areas will need adjacent tissue transfer or flap reconstruction. The vestibule of the vulva can be divided into three subunits, each with its own unique anatomy. The upper third consists of the mons and upper labia, the middle third is the labia proper, and the lower third consists of the vaginal orifice and perineum.

The perineum’s blood supply rivals that of the face, allowing the reconstructive surgeon many options for reconstruction with adjacent tissue transfer. The blood supply to the perineum was first described in 1889 by Car Manchot. The anterior portion of the vulva’s blood supply stems from the superficial external pudendal artery, while the posterior section is supplied by the deep external pudendal artery. The internal pudendal artery also supplies this area and gives rise to cutaneous perforators for which adjacent tissue transfer flaps are based on. These arteries have a vast anastomosis with each other and the contralateral side. Small to medium-sized shallow defects of the vulva and vagina may be reconstructed with rotational flaps. This has also been described as a lotus flap because the design of these flaps is similar to that of lotus leaves. The lotus flap is based on cutaneous perforators from the internal pudendal artery with the pivot point near the midline of the perineum. This allows for easy translocation of the flap to the defect. With a maximum size of 18x6 cm and mirrored anatomy, it can be used for unilateral or bilateral defects.

When designing the flap, suitable perforators of the internal pudendal artery are found using a pencil Doppler. The flap is then dissected from the tip to the base in either an adipocutaneous or fasciocutaneous manner. The flap is transposed into the defect, and the donor site is closed primarily.

Superior vulvar defects may be amenable to a mons pubis or suprapubic flap. These flaps obtain their blood supply from the Superficial external pudendal artery and the superficial inferior epigastric artery and their respective veins. These flaps have a maximum dimension of 10x4cm and are used primarily for defects of the superior, anterior vulva, anterior commissure, and labia minora/majora. The mons pubis flap may be used as a transposition flap or a V-Y advancement because of its reliable vascular pedicle. A line drawn from the anterior commissure of the labia provides guidance for the base of this flap. The flap is then drawn similar to the defect. An incision is made and dissected deep beneath the Scarpa fascia but superficial to the inguinal ligament. The flap is raised and transposed into the defect, with the donor site closed primarily. A V-Y advancement may also be created for superior oval defects of the anterior commissure.

**Vaginal Defects**

Vaginal defects can be generally classified as partial (Type 1) or circumferential (Type 2). Type 1 defects can be further classified as anterior or lateral defects (Type 1A), which come from resection of primary vaginal or bladder cancers, and posterior defects (Type 1B), which usually arise from invading rectal or anal cancers and are more common than Type 1A. Type 2 circumferential defects can be further divided into upper two-thirds (Type 2A) or total vaginal defects (Type 2B). Type 2A defects are frequently caused by uterine or cervical cancers, while Type 2B is most commonly caused by total pelvic exoneration.

The majority of vaginal defects can be reconstructed using three different pedicled flaps: Pudendal (Singapore or lotus) flaps, gracilis flaps, and rectus flaps. Type 1A defects without a large amount of missing tissue are amenable to pudendal flaps, unilateral or bilateral myocutaneous gracilis flaps. Type 1B posterior wall defects are best reconstructed with rectus flaps. Type 2A upper two-thirds vaginal defects are best reconstructed with tubed rectus flaps, and Type 2B total vaginal defects are best reconstructed with bilateral myocutaneous gracilis flaps.

The myocutaneous gracilis flap used for vaginal or vulvar reconstruction can be unilateral or bilateral. The gracilis muscle is the most superficial of the adductor muscles originating from the pubic symphysis and inserts on the medial surface of the tibia within the pes anserinus. This flap is based on the descending branch of the medial femoral circumflex artery. The perforating vessel is found approximately 10cm inferior to the pubic tubercle in between the adductor longus and adductor magnus. After the muscle is divided from its insertion and origin, it may be translocated to the defect.

The rectus flap is an excellent choice for type 1B and 2B defects. It is based on the deep inferior epigastric artery, a branch of the external iliac artery. For open procedures, the skin paddle can be incorporated into the original incision, and the long pedicle length allows the reconstructive surgeon to reach the pelvic defect. The skin paddle can be designed for a multitude of defects and even tubed for circumferential defects. After designing the skin paddle over the rectus muscle, the superior epigastric artery and vein are ligated, and the flap is flipped through the abdomen into the pelvis.