Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is the result of an X-linked genetic defect in the WAS gene located on short arm of the X-chromosome at Xp 11.22-23 position. The gene product Wiskott-Aldrich protein (WASp) is a 502 amino acid protein expressed in the cytoplasm of non-erythroid hematopoietic cells.  More than 300 gene mutations have been identified leading to impaired protein configuration. The most common mutations are missense mutations followed by non-sense, splice site and short deletion mutations. Because of the wide range of genetic mutations, the disease itself has phenotypic variability ranging from severe (classic WAS) to mild disease X linked thrombocytopenia and X linked neutropenia.

As mentioned earlier, the WAS protein expresses in non-erythroid hematopoietic cells where it functions as a bridge between signaling and movement of actin filaments in the cytoskeleton. This ultrastructural component of the cellular architecture is primarily responsible for intracellular and cell-substrate interactions and signaling because of its role in cell morphology and movements.

WASp-deficient myeloid lineage cells exhibit impaired phagocytosis and chemotaxis. Also, monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells from WASp-deficient patients demonstrate almost completely abrogated assembly of actin-rich structures responsible for cellular migration leading to impaired chemotaxis to specific chemoattractants.

Whereas "loss-of-function" mutations in the WAS gene cause either XLT or WAS, unique "gain-of-function" missense mutations impair the autoinhibitory conformation of the molecule and lead to increased actin polymerization, resulting in congenital neutropenia.