Iron binding studies are important for the diagnosis of iron deficiency and iron overload conditions. In iron-deficient conditions, the relative transferrin content compared to iron content increases, and thus the TIBC values are high. The opposite happens in iron overloaded states of the body; the quantity of free transferrin in blood decreases, and consequently, TIBC values are low. Iron binding capacity also decreases in liver diseases, like cirrhosis, as transferrin is synthesized by the liver. TIBC levels may be low in multifactorial anemias or anemias of chronic inflammation. In such cases, additional information regarding a component of iron deficiency can be obtained through the calculation of iron or transferrin saturation.

Treatment of iron deficiency anemia involves correction of the underlying source of blood loss along with correction of iron deficiency state with iron supplementation. Iron supplementation can be done via oral route or intravenous formulations, depending on the rapidity of iron correction needed. Various intravenous iron formulations are available and are similar in efficacy when compared in studies, with varying adverse effects profiles.

In iron-deficiency anemia, another interesting finding noted on complete blood count analysis is the reactive elevation of platelets (reactive thrombocytosis). There is evolving literature on the increased risk of thrombosis (more so venous than arterial) associated with elevated platelets and iron deficiency.

In iron-overload states including hereditary hemochromatosis, conditions associated with transfusion dependency seen in myeloid disorders, or thalassemias (which can present in later years with increased ability to absorb and store iron) TIBC levels are low with proportional increases in iron saturation levels. For hereditary hemochromatosis, the initial treatment of choice is therapeutic phlebotomy to keep ferritin levels under 50 to 100 ng/ml, while keeping hemoglobin levels above 11 g/dL. In other cases of iron overload and coexisting anemia, where therapeutic phlebotomies are not safe to perform, iron chelators are employed. Iron chelators are available as oral or parenteral formulations.