Treatment of ischemic gangrene is focused on restoring blood flow to help reduce rest pain and heal ischemic wounds. Once ulcers have progressed to dry gangrene, it is unlikely that the tissue will recover completely, but tissue loss can be minimized by medical and surgical management.

Surgical treatment of limb ischemia is focused on revascularization to improve pain and prevent limb loss. In the setting of acute ischemia, catheter-based intravascular thrombolysis can be used. Otherwise, revascularization can be pursued with endovascular intervention with balloon angioplasty (with or without stent), and surgical therapy can bypass a stenotic area or directly remove a blockage. The decision to pursue bypass or endovascular treatment is dependent on the lesion and the patient’s comorbidities, and early involvement in a multi-disciplinary vascular team, if available, is recommended.

Primary amputation (amputation before an attempt at revascularization) is recommended if there is significant necrosis of the weight-bearing portion of the foot, refractory pain, sepsis/uncontrolled infection, paresis of the extremity, or limited life expectancy.

Treatment with hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been proposed as a method to increase oxygen tension in ischemic tissue. There has not been a demonstrated benefit with critical limb ischemia (CLI). Other potential experimental treatments include the use of growth factors and stem cell therapy to promote angiogenesis; however, there is a lack of clinical data. This treatment is currently limited to clinical trials.

If an infection is suspected as wet gangrene, either based on systemic signs of infection, localized erythema/drainage, or plantar foot pain, urgent surgical drainage and debridement (possibly with minor amputation) are indicated. Antibiotic treatment should be started for all patients with suspected chronic limb-threatening ischemia (CLTI) and additional deep foot infection or wet gangrene. The appropriate dressing should be used to retain moisture without adding maceration.

Gas gangrene, with associated exotoxins, can be very aggressive with a high mortality rate when treatment is delayed. Therefore surgical exploration and debridement are recommended as soon as possible to gauge the extent of infection and obtain specimens for culture/Gram stain. The initial surgical site often will need to be re-evaluated and debrided multiple times. Surgery within 24 hours of admission is associated with increased survival.

Antibiotic treatment of gas gangrene and necrotizing soft tissue infections should be tailored to the causative organism as soon as possible; however, in the immediate initial evaluation, broad-spectrum treatment with coverage for gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic bacteria should be used. If group A streptococci or Clostridium are identified, the recommended treatment is penicillin with clindamycin for 10 to 14 days; clindamycin is especially recommended to reduce toxin production monotherapy with clindamycin is not recommended due to increased inducible resistance rates. Patients with necrotizing infections are often systemically ill and should be managed based on sepsis guidelines for fluid resuscitation and treatment of associated organ damage.