**Antenatal Evaluation**

On antenatal ultrasound, an empty renal fossa would be seen, and an ectopic kidney would be the most common cause of this finding, especially if the amniotic fluid is normal.

**Postnatal Evaluation**

Investigation and evaluation of pelvic kidneys vary somewhat depending on the center. However, ectopic kidneys should always have initial, postnatal imaging to assess for hydronephrosis and to visualize the anatomy of the contralateral kidney. If there are no further positive radiological findings, such as hydronephrosis and normal renal biochemistry (creatinine), further action may not be needed. However, some advocate for serial ultrasounds to investigate renal growth as well as for the early detection of hydronephrosis and calculi.

In the event of severe hydronephrosis or urinary tract infections, a voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) may be indicated. If this is normal, further evaluation with a mercaptoacetyltriglycine-3 (MAG-3) or diethylentriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) renal nuclear scan imaging should be considered, especially if the serum creatinine is elevated as an obstruction is likely. However, if there is only mild to moderate hydronephrosis, a follow-up study in 3 to 6 months to determine if there is a progression in the hydronephrosis and adequate renal tissue growth is reasonable and recommended. If abnormal progression is found, additional imaging and nuclear scans should be done to look for a ureteric obstruction.

If the contralateral kidney is anatomically abnormal or if there is impaired renal biochemistry, then the differential renal function should be assessed with a DMSA scan and specialist advice sought. Guardino et al. found that in 82 cases of a simple ectopic kidney, 74 exhibited reduced function in the ectopic kidney relative to the contralateral kidney on DMSA imaging.

Given that pelvic kidneys are associated with additional pathology both inside and outside the urinary tract, such as VACTERL anomalies, it is important to assess patients for this and other congenital defects once the ectopic kidney diagnosis is made.