Hyposplenism correlates with a long list of different disorders. The most common causes are post-splenectomy, sepsis, congenital disorders (congenital asplenia, Ivemark’s syndrome, Stormorken syndrome, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy [APECED] syndrome, cyanotic heart disease, prematurity), sickle hemoglobinopathies, alcoholism, lupus, and post-bone marrow transplantation. Other less common causes are gastrointestinal diseases (celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease), other autoimmune disorders, neoplastic disorders, splenic vascular thrombosis, amyloidosis, elderly, post-methyldopa treatment, and post-high-dose corticosteroid treatment.Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis) because splenic macrophages are responsible for removing encapsulated bacteria. They should receive prophylactic vaccines (pneumococcal, Hib, meningococcal).

Two of the most common ways of measuring splenic function are liver-spleen scintigraphy and measuring/counting of Howell-Jolly bodies on peripheral smears. Studies show that there is discordance between the two tests, and there is considerable variation in results when considering several diseases. There is no clear answer for which test is better for qualifying splenic function, but taking spleen size into account has been shown to add concordance between the results of the two tests.

Howell-Jolly bodies are pathognomonic for splenic dysfunction. The nuclear remnants do not have a specific function or role. However, they only act as a clue to an underlying pathological process. Howell-Jolly bodies are one of many types of inclusions found in circulating erythrocytes. They appear to look similar to Heinz bodies, which present in patients with G6PD deficiency, or other hemolytic anemias. They are also confused with basophilic stippling, which is a process most attributed to lead toxicity, but can occur in other conditions such as thalassemia, sickle cell disease, vitamin B12/folate deficiency, and myelodysplastic syndrome. More recent studies have found Howell-Jolly body-like inclusions in neutrophils and other important immune cells. They occur in immunocompromised states such as HIV, post-transplant immunosuppression, and post-chemotherapy.

Another crucial clinical fact to consider is that several studies have shown that Howell-Jolly bodies can interfere with calculating reticulocyte count. This factor is important in the evaluation of bone marrow erythropoiesis and hemolytic anemias.