Upon initial assessment of a patient presenting with priapism, the exact duration of the abnormal erection should be elicited. The history and duration of the condition are beneficial in determining its underlying etiology and help identify the specific type of priapism the patient is experiencing. Important clinical questions include the duration of symptoms, any treatments or injection therapy utilized, erectile function before the priapism episode, prior episodes of priapism and treatments, current medications, and any history of underlying disorders known to precipitate priapism, such as sickle cell disease or trauma to the penis, pelvis or perineum. Illicit drug use and alcoholic intoxication are contributing factors in up to 21% of cases of ischemic priapism.

On physical examination, the penis should be palpated to determine the presence of any pulsations that might represent arterial high-flow priapism and is usually absent in ischemic conditions. In ischemic priapism, the corpora cavernosa are rigid and fully erect. They are usually somewhat tender to palpation. The glans will tend to be soft or only partially engorged but will not be rigid. The absence of tenderness or partially tumescent cavernosa tends to favor a diagnosis of non-ischemic disease.

Non-ischemic or high flow priapism will typically demonstrate reduced rigidity and much less pain than ischemic priapism. A corporal needle stick, traumatic injury to the perineum, or a recent urologic procedure can be the key precipitating event. Besides the genitalia, the perineum and abdomen should be carefully examined for signs of trauma, bruising, or possible malignancy. A comprehensive history and physical exam will help determine the underlying etiology.