Captopril should be taken 1 hour before meals. Therapy initiation requires analysis of recent antihypertensive drug treatment, the extent of blood pressure elevation, and salt restriction. If possible, the previous antihypertensive drug regimen should be stopped one week before starting captopril. The daily dose of captopril may be increased every 24 hours under continuous medical supervision. For patients with significant renal impairment, the initial daily dosage should be reduced and smaller increments utilized for titration.

**Hypertension**

- Initial dose: 25 mg twice per day (BID) or three times per day (TID)

- Unsatisfactory reduction of blood pressure after one to two weeks: Increase the dose to 50 mg BID or TID.

- The dose of captopril may increase to 100 mg BID or TID and, if necessary, to 150 mg BID or TID if further blood pressure reduction is required.

- The usual dose range is 25 to 150 mg BID or TID. The maximum daily dose of 450 mg should not be exceeded.

**Heart Failure**

- Initial dose in patients vigorously treated with diuretics, hyponatremic and hypovolemic patients: 6.25 or 12.5 mg TID with titration to the usual daily dosage within several days.

- The initial dose in most patients: 25 mg TID

- After a dose of 50 mg TID, further increases in dosage should delay for at least two weeks.

**Left Ventricular Dysfunction after Myocardial Infarction**

- After a single dose of 6.25 mg, captopril therapy should be initiated at 12.5 mg TID and then increased to 25 mg TID during several days

- Long-term use: target maintenance dose of 50 mg TID

- Therapy can be initiated as early as three days following myocardial infarction.

**Diabetic Nephropathy**

- Long-term use: 25 mg TID

**Acute Hypertensive Crisis**

- Dosed orally, sublingually 25 mg; consider alternative therapy if blood pressure is nonresponsive within 20 to 30 minutes.

**Raynaud Phenomenon**

- Initial dose 12.5 mg twice daily; may be gradually increased to 25 mg TID.

- Neutropenia is a common adverse event with captopril administration in patients with the Raynaud phenomenon.

**Specific Patient Population**

- **Pregnancy:**Category D
- Drug use that acts on the renin-angiotensin system during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy reduces fetal renal function and increases fetal and neonatal morbidity and death.
- Potential neonatal adverse effects include skull hypoplasia, anuria, hypotension, renal failure, and death.
- Captopril must be discontinued as soon as possible when pregnancy is confirmed.

- **Breastfeeding Patients**
- Present in breast milk at an approximate concentration of 1% of those in maternal blood.
- It may consider acceptable for use in breastfeeding.
- Monitor the weight of the breastfeeding child for the first four weeks.