In the majority of cases, general reassurance that these pain episodes are not associated with breast cancer or any other grave pathology helps alleviate patient symptoms, and they no longer seek medical assistance. However, a few, about 15% to 20%, still require treatment because of either the negative impact this disease has on their life or increased intensity and frequency of pain episodes after the first visit.

The initial step in the management of such a patient is to search for the exact etiology of mastalgia and focusing on alleviating their pain with conservative treatment.

**Conservative Management**

**Using****well-fitting sports bra:**

This helps to contain and provide support to the heavy, pendulous painful breasts during strenuous physical activities of the day. 60% to 70% of women report pain relief with the use of adequately fitted breast garments.

**Use hot and cold compresses:**

This might provide relief when applied, especially during the night before sleep.

**Relaxation therapy:**

It helps to relieve high levels of anxiety and depression associated with mastalgia.

**Dietary modification:**

Reducing the intake of tea, coffee, chocolate, and carbonated soft drink while using a low-fat diet high in vitamin and fiber has shown beneficial effects. Inculcation of exercise regime within the routine also provides pain relief as physical activity decreases estrogen release and increases its breakdown, thus proving beneficial.

**Using over the counter pain medications:**

Oral or topical administration of ibuprofen or the use of acetaminophen and NSAIDs have shown promising results. However, these are temporary acute pain managing agents,  and there should be monitored and tailored to prevent the development of serious side effects with their use in toxic amounts.

**Pharmacological Management**

Generally, breast pain resolves on its own in 3 to 6 months. If it doesn't, then pharmacological treatment provides promising results in the majority of cases.

**Topical or Oral NSAID use:**

Symptomatic treatment with adequate analgesia is achieved with the use of NSAID when the pain is intense. Oral NSAID, acetaminophen, or ibuprofen and topical (diclofenac in patch or gel form) are the best available modalities in this regard.

**Evening Primrose Oil and vitamin E:**

Literature has shown promising results with the use of these supplements. The use of primrose oil is documented to maintain a favorable balance of fatty acid in our cells, while the use of vitamin E as an antioxidant also plays a vital role in alleviating breast pain. Using 200 IU of vitamin E twice daily with evening primrose oil for three months showed progressive improvement in symptoms of premenopausal women with cyclic breast pain. However, it is recommended to stop its use if no improvement is observed after 4 to 6 months period.

**Prescription Medication use**

**Tamoxifen:**

In cases of severe refractory mastalgia, tamoxifen is considered the first-line treatment, a prescription medication for breast cancer. It is administered during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle in a low dose to avoid side effects. Treatment should be stopped after a period of 3 to 4 months if no favorable results are obtained.  Close monitoring is required as this drug is associated with side effects like headache, nausea, vaginal dryness, hot flashes, and joint pain.

**Danazol:**

The only FDA approved drug for the treatment of mastalgia. This is also not free from side effects, which include acne, voice changes, weight gain, hot flashes, and menstrual irregularities. The majority of the patients tend to lose adherence because of such an intolerable side effect profile.

A thorough discussion should be conducted with the patient regarding the benefit and risk profile before the start of these medications.