Parathyroid glands can have inconsistent locations between individuals and these locations can vary widely. Due to these variants, damage to the glands can occur during neck surgery, especially thyroidectomy. An essential component of a safe thyroidectomy is the identification and preservation of as many parathyroid glands as possible. While, in theory, a portion of a single parathyroid gland should be sufficient to maintain serum calcium homeostasis, it is prudent to identify and preserve all glands. If this is not possible, such as in thyroid cancer surgery for very advanced disease, where oncologic safety requires a comprehensive, en bloc, resection, patients must be counseled preoperatively that lifelong calcium and vitamin D supplementation may be required. Thankfully this is very rare, and experienced surgeons can routinely identify and preserve the glands. Removal of both pairs of the parathyroid gland is extremely uncommon and would cause a decrease in the serum calcium levels, leading to the development of tetany, cardiac arrhythmias, and a host of other untoward effects if left untreated.

**Removal of Parathyroid Gland Due to Pathologies**

A hyperfunctioning parathyroid gland often requires surgical intervention. When the parathyroid over-secretes PTH, there are risks associated with elevated serum calcium. However, many patients present with incidentally discovered hypercalcemia. These patients may only require monitoring, and even mild symptoms can be medically manageable. These "biochemically" hyperparathyroid patients (who are otherwise asymptomatic) present an ongoing conundrum: some nephrologists recommend parathyroidectomy, while others recommend medical management. However, when there are symptoms present due to hypercalcemia, surgical intervention is definitely indicated.

Bilateral Neck Exploration

When surgery is considered the most traditional technique is bilateral neck exploration. During this procedure, the surgeon will locate all four of the glands and based on appearance will determine if partial or complete glandular removal is necessary. This is especially important in cases of secondary hyperparathyroidism in patients with renal failure. Intra-operative rapid PTH monitoring is a useful tool if it is available.

Focused Parathyroidectomy

Another less invasive approach can potentially allow a more limited operation of the diseased gland. This allows the surgeon to target the gland that has been identified after pre-operative localizing tests. Radiographic parathyroidectomy can be considered as a type of focused parathyroidectomy.  The patient receives a small injection of Tc-99m sestamibi the morning of the surgery. A handheld gamma probe is employed in the operating theater by the surgeon to detect the hyperactive gland. After excision of the diseased tissue, the probe can be used again to detect if any overactive tissue remains. The rate of non-localizing scans is hugely variable and is dependent on the underlying pathophysiology. Thus, the prudent surgeon will always discuss with the patient the potential need for formal, four-gland exploration.  Additionally, while a solitary parathyroid adenoma is the most common cause of localizable hyperparathyroidism, undetected double adenomas are reported in as many as 10% of individuals