The research done by Blacher et al. has shown that pulse pressure is a significant risk factor in the development of heart disease. It has even been shown to be more of a determinant than the mean arterial pressure, which is the average blood pressure that a patient experiences in a single cardiac cycle. In fact, as little as a 10 mmHg increase in the pulse pressure increases the cardiovascular risk by as much as 20%. This finding was consistent in both Caucasian and Asian populations.

Pulse pressure is also independently associated with an increased risk of developing atrial fibrillation. A study done by Mitchell et al. showed that patients with a pulse pressure of 40 mmHg or less developed atrial fibrillation at a rate of 5.6%, whereas patients with a pulse pressure greater than 61 mmHg developed atrial fibrillation at a rate of 23.3%. In fact, for every 20 mmHg increase in pulse pressure, the adjusted hazard ratio for developing atrial fibrillation is 1.28. This risk is independent of mean arterial pressure.

Other research has focused on helping to maintain normal pulse pressure. One of the most effective ways to do this is to increase arterial compliance. According to Thorin-Trescases et al., endurance aerobic exercise is the only intervention that has been shown to help mitigate age-related arterial stiffening by reducing age-related increases in collagen I and III and calcification. These same benefits were not seen with resistance training, such as bench press, as this decreases arterial compliance and increases the pulse pressure.

In addition to aerobic exercise training, Rajkumar et al. demonstrated that one could also increase arterial compliance by increasing estrogen compounds (as in hormone replacement in post-menopausal women), increasing the consumption of n-3 fatty acids, and decreasing salt intake. There has also been some evidence that supports the notion that ACE inhibitors have beneficial arterial wall effects and may be of use.

Narrowed pulse pressures are seen in dysautonomia/postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS). Some patients drop to pulse pressure to 0 on standing. They are pulseless standing and many cannot stand which causes extremely high morbidity. Conventional non-prescription measures fail most of these patients.