Neomycin plays an important role in the management of hepatic encephalopathy, as well as for perioperative prophylaxis. Due to its potential for various toxicities, it is essential to gather a thorough medical history focusing on renal, otologic, and neurologic conditions before prescribing neomycin. Patients must understand well the benefits and possible risks associated with the medication. Additionally, baseline and recurrent laboratory workups are necessary to monitor for any signs of end-organ damage. Hence, recommended course of action for the patient receiving neomycin is as follows:

- Clinicians(MD, NP, PA) usually prescribe the medicine.

- The internist is responsible for identifying the proper indication of neomycin in hepatic coma.

- The surgeon is responsible for identifying the proper indication of neomycin in surgical prophylaxis.

- Consultation with a nephrologist if the patient develops nephrotoxicity.

- Consultation with otorhinolaryngologist if the patient develops ototoxicity.

- Consultation with a neurologist if the patient develops neurotoxicity and neuromuscular blockade.

- Consultation with the intensivist is required for ICU care and need for mechanical ventilation in severe toxicity.

- Pharmacists are accountable for medication reconciliation, checking for potential drug-drug interactions, and ensuring proper drug dosing.

- Specially trained nurses administer neomycin at appropriate timing and ensure proper charting and care of the hospitalized patients.

- Residents play an important role in the continuity of care and patient education.

- Nocturnists should receive all the important information during the signout process.

As illustrated above, communication between clinicians (MDs, NPs, PAs), hospital pharmacists and nursing staff, and other healthcare professionals is required. Therefore, an interprofessional team approach is essential for patients receiving neomycin therapy to maximize efficacy and minimize adverse drug reactions associated with neomycin use, enhancing patient outcomes. [Level 5]