A precordial thump is performable by a variety of healthcare professionals, including physicians in hospital settings or paramedics in prehospital settings. Following the administration of a precordial thump, the healthcare team needs to prepare for the next steps of caring for the patient. If the precordial thump fails, the team needs to be ready to perform advanced cardiac life support. Intravenous or intraosseous access will need to be established to administer medications. The patient may need to be intubated. Defibrillator pads will need to be applied and shocks may need to be given. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation may need to be performed by experienced team members. The pharmacist will need to be available to verify medications that may be needed such as vasopressors. Following patient stabilization, the patient will likely need to be transferred to an intensive care unit if they are not already at this level of care. Precordial thump may be attempted in patients with an observed, monitored, unstable ventricular tachycardia when a defibrillator is not immediately available.

Nursing staff will need to be prepared to help manage the patient in the event of both a successful or unsuccessful precordial thump. Intravenous access will be necessary, as well as vital signs. Nursing staff will need to be familiar with advanced life support techniques and protocols and assist the clinicians in performing the procedure as well as post-procedure monitoring. All healthcare team members should be aware of potential complications from the precordial thump and be watchful for signs of any adverse effect and communicate untoward complications to the team leader. [Level 5]