P. ovale malaria-like other types of malaria infection begins when female Anopheles mosquito bites and inoculates plasmodial sporozoites from its salivary gland during feeding. P. ovale may be composed of two coexisting species: Plasmodium ovale curtisi and Plasmodium ovale wallikeri.

Malaria is acquired after a bite from a mosquito. The mosquito transmits plasmodia from its saliva into the host while ingesting a blood meal. The plasmodia then enter the red blood cells and feed on the hemoglobin. Some parasites will become dormant, and others will remain active, and thus the synchronous pattern of clinical patterns in patients with malaria. The anopheles mosquitoes carrying the plasmodia only bites between dusk to dawn.  Both P ovale and P vivax have a dormant phase that resides in the liver and emerges at a later time. Thus, when treating these species, one also needs to have treatment to kill the dormant protozoa. The malaria parasites breakdown hemoglobin and other proteins, including glucose, which can result in lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia. The plasmodia can also lyse both infected and uninfected red blood cells, leading to anemia and splenomegaly.

The risk of infection depends on the use of precautions (nets, DEET) and the intensity of transmission. Most healthy individuals can clear the parasite, but in those with immunosuppression, the parasites may continue to multiply. A small number of parasites will become gametocytes, which have the ability to undergo sexual reproduction when ingested by the mosquito. They can then develop into infective sporozoites, which will allow for the continuation of the cycle transmission after the mosquito has a blood meal in a new host.

The incubation period for P. falciparum is 30 days, which allows for continued antimalarial prophylaxis for at least four weeks after return from an endemic area. Rare reports of P. falciparum infections occurring 12 months later have also been reported. The incubation period for P. ovale and P. vivax varies from a few weeks to several months.

Protective Factors

Individuals with the sickle cell trait, hemoglobin C, thalassemias, and G6PD deficiency are protected against death from P. falciparum malaria. However, the degree of protection is variable. Some individuals living in endemic areas may develop partial immunity following repeated exposure to mosquitoes. This partial immunity lessens the symptoms and intensity of the infection. However, this immunity is lost when the individual moves away from the area.