The management of pituitary adenomas requires an endocrinologist and a neurosurgeon to work closely together and develop an "individualized patient-centric" approach.

**Treatment of Non-Functioning Adenomas**

Transsphenoidal resection is recommended in patients with macroadenomas and the following scenarios:

- Visual field deficit due to tumor

- Other visual abnormalities as ophthalmoplegia

- Compression of the optic nerves or chiasm on imaging

- Pituitary apoplexy with visual disturbance

- Loss of endocrine function

- Significant growth of pituitary tumor over time

After surgery there is usually an improvement in visual symptoms and hormonal dysfunction in most patients. Radiotherapy is a consideration in patients with persistent residual or recurrent tumor.

In nonfunctional adenomas that do not require surgical management, annual follow-up with endocrinology is important to assess for tumoral growth and development of hypopituitarism. MRI of head is obtained annually for three years and if stable, thereafter less frequently.

**Treatment of Individual Functioning Tumors**

- **Prolactin-Secreting Adenoma:**The goal of treatment is to restore gonadal function and decrease tumor size. Observation with periodic monitoring of prolactin levels can be an option in patients who are asymptomatic with microadenoma.

**Medical Therapy**

Dopamine agonists (DA) are the first-line treatment for prolactin-secreting tumors. The currently available DAs are cabergoline and bromocriptine. Cabergoline is more than 90% effective in normalizing prolactin levels and decreasing tumor size. The adverse effects of DA are dizziness due to postural hypotension,  valvular heart abnormalities, and the development of compulsive behavior or mood changes. DA could be discontinued after two years of treatment if the MRI of head did not show a visible tumor. Monitoring serum prolactin levels annually is needed in these patients as there is some risk of recurrence or growth after stopping DA.

**Surgery**

Transsphenoidal surgery is often reserved for prolactin-secreting tumors which are resistant to medical treatment, patients who develop adverse effects to dopamine agonists and, in patients desiring pregnancy with tumor size of more than one centimeter.

**Radiation Therapy**

Radiotherapy is seldom used in cases of aggressive prolactinomas, where frequent surgeries and medical therapy have failed to control the size of the adenoma.

- **GH Secreting adenoma:**The goal is to decrease growth hormone levels to less than 1ug/L and get IGF-1 levels to the normal age-adjusted range.

**Surgery:**Trans-sphenoidal surgery is the first-line treatment for GH-secreting tumors. In the hands of an experienced surgeon, normalization of IGF-1 is achieved in 80% to 90% of patients with microadenomas and 40% to 60%  of patients with macroadenomas.

**Medical therapy:**Medical treatment is considered in patients with persistently elevated IGF-1 and GH levels at three months after surgery or in non-surgical candidates with invasive tumors. Somatostatin analogs (SSA)  are the first-line treatment for acromegaly. Current available SSAs are octreotide, lanreotide, and pasireotide. The adverse effects of SSA include gallbladder sludge and stones, abdominal cramps, flatulence, diarrhea, and alopecia. Pasireotide can lead to hyperglycemia in 50 to 70% of patients. DA, like cabergoline, is also used for mildly elevated IGF-1 level post-surgery or as an adjunct therapy with SSA. If the GH remains elevated, pegvisomant, a GH receptor blocker, can be used in combination with SSA or alone for the treatment of acromegaly.

**Radiotherapy**: Radiation treatment may be used as an adjunct in patients with elevated IGF-1 levels after surgery, but it will take several years to be effective.

- **ACTH secreting adenoma:**The goal of treatment is to decrease cortisol levels rapidly and to reduce the associated complications and mortality.

**Surgery:**Trans-sphenoidal surgery is the first-line treatment for Cushing's disease. The cure rate is 70% to 90 % in the hands of an expert surgeon with initial and repeated surgeries.

**Medical therapy:**DA (cabergoline) and SSA (pasireotide, pasireotide LAR) are the drugs directed at the pituitary to decrease ACTH secretion. Ketoconazole, metyrapone, mitotane, and etomidate also decrease adrenal cortisol production. Ketoconazole can lead to liver toxicity and prolongation of the QT interval. Metyrapone is 50 to 60% effective in reducing the cortisol level. Mitotane is an adrenolytic drug, mostly used in patients with adrenocortical cancer.  Etomidate is given intravenously in critically ill patients with severe hypercortisolemia as a bridge to work on other treatment interventions. The glucocorticoid receptor blocker, Mifepristone, can be used in selected patients with hypercortisolemia and diabetes.

**Bilateral adrenalectomy**can lead to an immediate cure of hypercortisolemia with resultant adrenal insufficiency requiring lifelong treatment. Nelson syndrome, which is radiological pituitary tumor enlargement, can occur in 50 % of patients after adrenalectomy.

**Radiotherapy:**Radiation treatment serves as an adjunct after surgery and medical therapy.

- **TSH secreting adenoma:**Trans-sphenoidal surgery is the initial preferred treatment option leading to a cure in 50% to 90% of patients. It is crucial to control hyperthyroidism before surgery to avoid thyroid storm. Presurgical euthyroidism is achieved by using anti-thyroidal medical therapy like methimazole or SSA. Patients who are not cured by surgery can be treated with SSA alone to decrease TSH levels and tumor size, or in combination with radiation treatment.