**Umbilical Cord Coiling Patterns**

One of the most common morphological variations of the umbilical cord is its different helical coiling patterns. The degree of coiling is measured by the umbilical cord index (UCI). Commonly, the umbilical cord coiling pattern has a UCI of 0.2 coil/cm. The rope model is considered the most common pattern of umbilical cord coiling. On the other hand, hyper-coiling of the umbilical cord is defined as having a UCI greater than 0.3 coil/cm and a relatively high incidence of about 6% to 21% of all pregnancies.

**False Knots of the Umbilical Cord**

False knots are bulging masses located on the surface of the umbilical cord. Sometimes, excessive torsion of the umbilical cord inside the uterus can cause these bulging masses to appear as knots on uterine ultrasonography grossly. The knot appearance of this condition forms via the excessive accumulation of Wharton's Jelly bulks alternating with areas with relatively less amount of jelly composing constrictions after each bulging. Hence, they were identified as false knots of the umbilical cord. This physiologic variation does not affect the stability of the fetal position, nor does it affect umbilical blood flow and pressure. Thus, false knots do not represent a considerable risk to the fetus.

**Single Umbilical Artery**

The incidence of having a single umbilical artery is very low overall. However, It is known to be more common in multiparous females compared to nulliparous ones. Many studies have reported that the left umbilical artery is more often absent than the right.