Tumors of the pineal area are rare and account for 1% of all intracranial tumors in adults. However, they account for up to 8% in children. Due to the diversity of tumors in this area, the characteristics and epidemiology vary greatly. Will describe each according to the WHO 2016 classification.

**Pineocytoma**

Pineocytomas can be seen at any age, but mostly occur in adults from 20 to 60 years of age.

WHO grade 1

**Pineal Parenchymal Tumor with Intermediate Differentiation**

These tumors are mainly seen in middle-aged adults from 20 to 70 years of age. They have a slight female preference, similar to that of pineocytomas.

WHO grade 2/3

**Papillary Tumor of the Pineal Region**

Papillary tumors have the broadest range of ages in the pineal parenchymal tumors, seen from 1-70 years of age, with most cases in mid-age.

WHO grade 2/3

**Pineoblastoma**

Pioneoblastoma is the most aggressive pineal parenchymal tumor. They account for 24 to 50% of all pineal parenchymal tumors.

WHO grade 4

**Germinoma**

It can account for 50% of pineal parenchymal tumors. It is much more common in males (M:F of 13 to 1). Most are 20 years or younger at the time of evaluation. They are commonly diagnosed with CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) tumor markers. They have elevated placental alkaline phosphatase and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (b-HCG).

WHO Classification (9064/3) - Malignant

**Choriocarcinoma**

The uncommon tumor which accounts for 5% of pineal region masses and 10% of intracranial germ cell tumors.

WHO Classification (9100/3) - Malignant

**Embryonal Carcinoma**

The uncommon tumor which accounts for less than 5% of pineal region masses and 10% of intracranial germ cell tumors.

Who Classification (9070/3) - Malignant

**Yolk Sac Carcinoma (Endodermal Sinus)**

Pineal yolk sac tumors are a rare manifestation of extragonadal yolk sac tumor. They make one of the smallest fractions of intracranial germ cell tumors. They sometimes have an association with Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome).

WHO Classification (9071/3) - Malignant

**Immature/Mature Teratoma**

An uncommon tumor; however, it is the most common fetal intracranial neoplasms (26 to 50% of fetal brain tumors).

Immature: WHO Classification (9080/3) - Malignant