**Airway Management**

Examination of the burn patient presenting for anesthesia in the acute setting should involve proper airway assessment to look for any signs of airway edema that could pose the challenge of a difficult airway.  Decreased mandibular mobility from burn contractures or glottic edema from airway swelling may make laryngoscopy difficult.  The most accepted and safest way to handle a suspected difficult airway after thermal injury to supraglottic structures is fiberoptic intubation using topical anesthetic and minimal general anesthetics.

If fiberoptic intubation is chosen, ketamine-induced sedation/anesthesia can create ideal intubation conditions due to the maintenance of pharyngeal muscle tone.  Ketamine is associated with the preservation of hemodynamic stability, hypercapnia responses, and decreased airway resistance, making it an ideal agent for individuals with supraglottic swelling.  Utilizing anesthetic agents that disrupt airway tones, such as propofol and paralytic agents, may further obstruct the airway creating much more difficult intubating conditions.

**Intravascular Access**

Patients with severe burns can have difficult intravenous access due to direct damage to the most common areas for intravenous access (i.e., limbs, neck, groin, etc.) and edema from the burn shock phase or fluid creep from excessive fluid infusion overcompensate for intravascular loss. Delay of fluid resuscitation for more than 2 hours after the initial injury is associated with an increased risk of mortality, therefore, making vascular access an essential and critical component of burn management. When intravascular access proves to be too difficult via conventional means, peripheral intravenous or central venous access, intraosseous access can prove to be overly beneficial. Intraosseous access is typically faster than peripheral intravenous and central venous line placement, with a much higher chance of first-time attempt success.

The caveat of intraosseous access is that it is more likely to cause insertion and infusion pain compared to conventional methods. Despite its faster and easier placement, it is still not as common of an access tool as one would surmise. The most common cause of failure for intraosseous access is placement failure, so familiarizing oneself with the device before critical times is paramount. The most common placement location of an intraosseous needle is typically the proximal tibia, but the proximal humerus is just as effective of a location. The proximal tibia is an advantageous location as it does not interfere with cardiopulmonary resuscitation.

**Thermoregulation**

Patients suffering from severe burns lose their principal barrier to preventing heat loss. Thus, hypothermia becomes a major anesthetic consideration. Evaporative heat and water loss from the burn wounds create a direct means of heat loss. The cerebral mechanisms that combat hypothermia become dysregulated in severe burns. The critical temperature is the temperature at which a physiologic response to hypothermia occurs to produce heat generating/conserving activity (i.e., shivering, teeth chattering, vasoconstriction, cellular non-shivering thermogenesis).

With severe burns, the critical temperature is decreased. When the innate mechanisms of combating hypothermia are combined with a general anesthetic, patients are significantly predisposed to hypothermia. General anesthesia is associated with both redistribution of heat from the core to the periphery as well as inhibiting the central thermoregulatory control making even healthy patients prone to hypothermia from the subsequent vasodilation. The critical means to ensure optimal thermoregulation for burn patients include forced-air warming, fluid warming, and raising the operating room temperature for all burn patients. An accurate means of temperature measurement such as a distal esophageal or rectal temperature probe becomes an essential tool for the peri-operative management of severely burned patients.