# Introduction

The thorax is the region between the abdomen inferiorly and the root of the neck superiorly.

A thorough comprehension of the anatomy and function of the thorax will help identify, differentiate, and treat the plethora of pathology that can occur within the thorax. This article will go through the gross anatomy of the thorax while touching on some clinical implications.

# Structure and Function

**Thoracic Wall**

The thoracic wall is formed by 12 ribs, 12 thoracic vertebrae, cartilage, sternum, and five muscles.

The thoracic vertebral bodies and intervertebral discs make the posterior thoracic wall.

From superficial to deep, muscles of the thoracic wall are the external intercostal, internal intercostal, innermost intercostal, subcostalis (posteriorly), and transversus thoracis muscle (anteriorly).

Breast tissue is present over the anterior thoracic wall superficial to the pectoralis major muscle.

**Thoracic Cavity**

The thoracic cavity is found deep to the thoracic wall, superior to the diaphragm, and inferior to the root of the neck (thoracic aperture).

The thoracic cavity can typically be divided into well-established compartments.

A horizontal plane (also known as the thoracic plane) through the angle of the sternum (the junction of the manubrium and the body of the sternum) crossing the T4-T5 vertebral junction divides the superior and inferior mediastinum.

Gross contents of each mediastinal compartment are as follows:

- Pleural cavities - lungs and pleura

- Superior mediastinum - great vessels, trachea, esophagus, vagus nerve, phrenic nerve, sympathetic nerves, thoracic lymphatic duct, thymus

- Anterior mediastinum - connective tissue, thymus, and lymph nodes

- Middle mediastinum - heart, roots of great vessels, phrenic nerve, and pericardium

- Posterior mediastinum - descending aorta, azygos veins, esophagus, vagus nerve, sympathetic nerves, bronchi, and thoracic lymphatic duct

# Embryology

The development of the embryo undergoes the formation of three distinct layers (the trilaminar disc). These layers are known as the outer ectoderm, middle mesoderm, and inner endoderm. Along the midline, differentiation of neural cells forms the neural tube, which continues development within the mesoderm. Folding in such a way that endoderm becomes internalized produces a three-layered tubular structure from which all the structures of the thorax originate.

**Thoracic Wall**

During development, paraxial mesoderm somites form on opposite sides of the neural tube.

**Thoracic Cavity**

The cardiovascular system originates from the mesoderm layer as a coalescence of cardiac myoblasts what is known as the cardiogenic field.

The respiratory system originates from the ventral wall of the primitive foregut endoderm as a diverticulum at 3 to 6 weeks.

The thymus develops in the thoracic cavity with origins from the ventral third pharyngeal pouch.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

**Thoracic Wall**

The thoracic wall has an abundant collateral blood supply.

The deep neurovascular plane of the thoracic wall is between the innermost intercostal muscle and internal intercostal muscle. Here, the posterior intercostal arteries (branches of the subclavian and aorta) travel just inferior to each rib and give off collateral intercostal branches that are smaller and travel just superior to each rib.

Anteriorly, the blood supply of the thoracic wall is predominantly from the internal mammary (thoracic) arteries, which travel deep to the costal cartilages from the subclavian artery.

Lateral thoracic wall blood supply is from branches of the axillary artery (the thoracodorsal, lateral thoracic, and thoracoacromial arteries).

Posterior thoracic wall blood supply is from dorsal branches of the posterior intercostal arteries and the dorsal scapular artery.

Inferiorly, blood collateralization is from the superficial and deep inferior epigastric arteries.

**Thoracic Cavity**

The great vessels are predominantly situated in the superior and posterior mediastinum, although they originate/terminate at the heart (middle mediastinum).

The aorta arises from the left ventricle of the heart and arches superiorly and posteriorly. Near the origin of the aorta (superior to the aortic valve), the aorta supplies the heart through the left and right coronary arteries. Three branches split off at the aortic arch that ultimately supply the head, upper limb, and thoracic wall. These arteries are the brachiocephalic trunk, left common carotid, and left subclavian arteries. As the aorta descends posterior to the heart in the left paravertebral gutter, the 3rd to 11th posterior intercostal arteries split off and supply the thoracic wall. The aorta leaves the thorax by piercing the diaphragm at the level of T12.

The venous system generally follows the arterial system apart from some differences.

The azygos venous system consists of the hemiazygos, accessory azygos, and azygos veins.

The lymphatic system of the whole body apart from the right upper limb and right side of the head drains through the thoracic duct.

# Nerves

**Thoracic Wall**

T1 to T12 thoracic spinal nerves exit through the intervertebral foramina and branch into anterior and posterior ramus branches.

The brachial plexus originates from C5 to T1 spinal nerves and is situated superior to the thorax.

**Thoracic Cavity**

The sympathetic nervous system of the body is formed by two preganglionic neurons and one postganglionic neuron from T1 to L2.

The vagus nerve is responsible for the parasympathetic innervation of the thoracic cavity.

The left recurrent laryngeal nerve branches off the left vagus nerve at the level of the aortic arch.

The phrenic nerve originates from the C3 to C5 spinal nerves bilaterally.

# Muscles

There are five muscles of the thoracic wall.

Superficial muscles to the thoracic wall function in the movement of the shoulder girdle, thoracic wall, and spine.

The diaphragm is an important muscle for respiratory function. It forms the inferior border of the thoracic cavity separating the abdomen from the thorax. As it contracts, it increases the volume of the thoracic cavity resulting in inspiration.

Other muscles that have attachments to the thoracic wall but act predominantly as extensions to the thorax include the scalene, sternocleidomastoid, and subclavius muscles superiorly. Muscles extending inferiorly include quadratus lumburum, psoas major/minor, external oblique, internal oblique, transversus abdominis, and rectus abdominis muscles.

# Physiologic Variants

Situs inversus is a rare congenital condition where the visceral thoracic and abdominal organs are flipped in the vertical axis.

Dextrocardia is a rare congenital condition where only the heart has flipped in the vertical axis. Although dextrocardia usually does not present with symptoms, other heart abnormalities are commonly present.

90% of congenital abnormalities of the thoracic wall include pectus excavatum (depressed sternum) and pectus carinatum (protrusion of the sternum).

# Surgical Considerations

The thoracic wall may be punctured or incised due to a variety of indications.

Percutaneous intervention provides access to the heart and vessels of the heart and lungs.

# Clinical Significance

A mediastinal mass can arise from a variety of diseases, commonly from lymphoma, bronchogenic carcinoma, tuberculosis, germ cell carcinoma, thymoma, and metastasis.

Rib fractures can affect the surrounding anatomical structures in numerous ways. Multiple rib fractures resulting in a flail chest alters the normal physiology of the thoracic wall; the flail segment moves paradoxically during respiration, reducing the efficacy of ventilation.

Fluid collecting within the pericardial space (pericardial effusion) ultimately limits the space the heart has within the middle mediastinum.

Aortic aneurysm and dissection can occur at different regions within the thoracic cavity; this will ultimately affect different arterial branches changing the severity of the disease.