**DNA Viruses**

**Herpesviridae**

The viruses that belong to the Herpesviridae family are the most common cause of viral infections of the oral cavity.

**Primary Herpetic Gingivostomatitis (PHGS)**

Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis is the primary form of infection with herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2). Both HSV-1 and HSV-2 are double-stranded DNA viruses that cause mucocutaneous lesions on the oral and genital mucosa.

**Herpes Labialis**

Herpes labialis is the secondary infection with herpes simplex viruses, occurring in about 40% of infected individuals.

**Chicken Pox**

Chickenpox is the primary infection associated with the varicella-zoster virus (VZV or HHV-3).

**Shingles**

Shingles is caused by a secondary infection with the varicella-zoster virus. It occurs due to the reactivation of the dormant virus at the dorsal root ganglion of the spinal nerves, which may occur in immunosuppressed states.

**Infectious Mononucleosis**

Mononucleosis is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV or HHV-4). The Epstein-Barr virus is associated with primary infections but also neoplastic processes.

The primary transmission mode is via close contact with oral secretions due to viral shedding in saliva.

**Oral Hairy Leukoplakia**

Oral hairy leukoplakia is the most common oral lesion caused by the Epstein-Barr virus in patients with AIDS - usually observed with CD4 counts lower than 200 to 300/mm^3.

**Cytomegalovirus**

Cytomegalovirus is also a member of the Herpesviridae family and is otherwise known as HHV-5.

**Kaposi Sarcoma**

Kaposi sarcoma is the most prevalent malignancy seen in untreated HIV patients, and it is associated with the human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8).

**Papillomaviridae**

**Human Papilloma Virus**

The human papillomavirus (HPV) is a double-stranded DNA virus that may lead to benign, premalignant, or malignant manifestations in the oral mucosa.

**Verruca Vulgaris**

Verruca vulgaris is a benign lesion also referred to as the common wart, and it is often caused by HPV subtypes 2 and 57.

**Oral Squamous Papilloma**

Oral squamous papillomas are the most common growth in the oral cavity.

**Condyloma Acuminatum**

Condyloma acuminata, also known as genital warts, are caused by the human papillomavirus, mainly subtypes 6 and 11.

**Heck Disease**

Heck disease, also known as focal or multifocal epithelial hyperplasia, is caused by HPV infection with subtypes 13 and 32.

**Poxviridae**

**Molluscum Contagiosum**

Molluscum contagiosum is caused by a DNA virus known as Poxvirus.

**RNA Viruses**

**Enteroviruses**

Enteroviruses, particularly coxsackievirus A and B, are the most common cause of viral infections of the oropharynx.

**Herpangina**

Herpangina is caused by coxsackievirus A, serotypes explicitly 1-10, 16, and 22.

**Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease**

Hand, foot, and mouth disease is caused by the coxsackie virus A16 or enterovirus 71 and is most often found in children younger than ten.

**Acute Lymphonodular Pharyngitis**

Acute lymphonodular pharyngitis is caused by the coxsackie virus type A serotype 10.

**Paramyxoviruses**

**Measles or Rubeola**

Measles, also known as rubeola, is caused by an enveloped RNA virus whose transmission occurs through respiratory droplets. However, the prevalence of measles has significantly decreased due to widespread vaccination.