Low back pain is common, often multifactorial, and takes an interprofessional team for the best patient outcomes. CN can be a challenging diagnosis, with many other etiologies frequently considered first. Primary care providers, advanced practitioners, pain medicine clinicians, neurologists, rheumatologists, and spine surgeons may all be involved in the patient's treatment; therefore, communication is imperative. Additionally, rehabilitation services like physical and occupational therapists are integral to the team and help improve function and quality of life. Chiropractors may also have a role in case management and can be the patient's first point of contact with the healthcare system.

All interprofessional team members must utilize open communication and document all interactions and evaluations of the patient so that everyone involved in care has access to the same updated, accurate patient information.

As in most chronic pain conditions, a pain psychologist can address the psychological manifestations of a disease process that cannot be easily explained by anatomic abnormalities. A formal evaluation by a pain psychologist is often required for implantable devices used in neuromodulation.

The interventions used for diagnosing and treating CN involve multiple healthcare professionals working together to perform a procedure safely and effectively. Proper informed consent must be obtained. The procedural room staff, including nursing and radiation technologists, must be competent and present a reassuring environment for the patient.

Lastly, patient-centered care requires interdisciplinary team members to listen carefully to a patient's concerns and treatment goals. Most of the interventions for CN are elective, and all discussions should involve shared decision-making between the provider and patient. [Level 5]