Cyclic stress loading on native heart valves contributes to eventual wear and subsequent pathology.  A diseased valve, whether it is stenosis or regurgitant, has impaired hemodynamic performance compared to a non-diseased valve.  Placement of a prosthetic never entirely duplicates the natural hemodynamics of the native heart valve. Anticoagulation therapy is essential for the management of heart valve prosthetic patients.  As of date, warfarin (with heparin bridging) is the most widely used anticoagulant for mechanical valves.  The direct factor Xa inhibitors such as apixaban, rivaroxaban, and dabigatran currently have no approved indications for anticoagulation therapy with mechanical valves.  The 2013 RE-ALIGN trial was an open-label study which compared dabigatran vs. standard of care warfarin as anticoagulant therapy for mechanical valves. Conclusions of the study determined that dabigatran conveyed a greater thromboembolic risk and risk of bleeding complications compared to warfarin.

Pregnancy with concurrent heart valve disease poses its share of medical challenges.  Physiologic changes accompanying pregnancy include increased glomerular filtration rate and increased intravascular response.  Subsequently, there is an increased elimination of pharmacological agents and an increased volume of distribution, respectively. The lack of larger randomized clinical trials addressing anticoagulation and pregnancy leave very few evidence-based options. Although VKA therapy is the gold standard for anticoagulation in patients with mechanical valves, warfarin is a well-known teratogen and is contraindicated in pregnancy.  In one 2018 study, there was an observed increased in the rate of pregnancy loss in mechanical versus bioprosthetic (61% vs. 15%) and an increased rate of hemorrhage in those receiving mechanical valves (16% vs. 6%, p < 0.01).