Patients with neurosyphilis and syphilis during pregnancy who are penicillin allergic should consider skin testing with a follow-up oral amoxicillin challenge unless contraindicated. Penicillin desensitization can be considered in selected individuals.

Always test for HIV and other STDs as appropriate in syphilis patients.

Remember that a positive result from both a nontreponemal and a treponemal test is required to make a definitive diagnosis of syphilis.

Nontreponemal tests (VDRL, RPR) can be quantified and used for disease tracking, while treponemal tests are typically positive for life and do not correlate well with disease status.

Syphilis can cause a gamut of systemic manifestations, and for this reason, it has been called the "great mimicker." Despite its discovery centuries ago, it continues to be a significant public health problem, especially in poorer populations in undeveloped countries with poor healthcare systems. Because of its varied manifestations, the diagnosis can be challenging. Physicians need to maintain an increased level of suspicion for screening high-risk populations, such as men who have sex with men, pregnant women with syphilis, sex trade workers, and HIV-infected patients. Penicillin remains the primary treatment based on the stage of infection and whether CNS involvement occurs.

Treated patients need to be followed up with non-treponemal antibody titers (VDRL, RPR) to evaluate the response to therapy.

For more details on specific syphilis complications, please consult our companion reference StatPearls articles on:

- "Congenital Syphilis"

- "Jarisch Herxheimer Reaction"

- "Neurosyphilis"

- "Syphilis Ocular Manifestations"

- "Tabes Dorsalis"

- "TORCH Complex"