Start by obtaining a thorough history and physical. If the patient complains of GI symptoms, a barium study or endoscopy may be needed. If a patient complains of bone pain or fractures a radiographic skeletal survey or bone scan may be needed. On physical exam look for lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. If you suspect an abnormality, order a liver ultrasound or CT scan to investigate. If there are abnormal findings in any of the tests, a biopsy of the bone marrow should be considered. A complete blood count (CBC), serum tryptase level, LFTs, and KIT gene analysis can be ordered. However, it is considered by some to be optional in the pediatric population. If there are any abnormalities, a bone marrow biopsy should be considered. Bone marrow involvement is not very common in children with cutaneous mastocytosis, as opposed to adults, and a bone marrow biopsy is not recommended for them. Although this paper focuses on urticaria pigmentosa, it is important to learn the criteria for systemic mastocytosis in case a patient progresses.

The WHO criterion for the diagnosis of systemic mastocytosis states that you need 1 major and 1 minor criteria or 3 minor criteria. Criteria are listed below:

Major criteria

- Having multifocal, dense infiltrates of mast cells (aggregates of greater than or equal to 15 mast cells) in bone marrow or extracutaneous tissues

Minor criteria

- Greater than 25% of mast cells in bone marrow samples or extracutaneous tissues are spindle-shaped or otherwise atypical

- Expression of CD25 and/or CD2 by extracutaneous mast cells (often determined by bone marrow flow cytometry)

- Presence of activating KIT codon 816 mutation in blood, bone marrow, or extracutaneous tissues

- Serum total tryptase level greater than 20 ng/ml (exception would be an associated clonal myeloid disorder, then this is not valid)

The criterion for diagnosing cutaneous mastocytosis is not well defined. Cutaneous mastocytosis is usually diagnosed by visual evaluation of typical skin lesions, particularly in children. However, there is a stepwise approach to diagnose mastocytosis in the skin. Must have 1 major and 1 minor criterion.

Major criteria

- Must have the typical skin lesions.

Minor criteria

- Histology (monomorphic mast cell infiltrate with aggregates of greater than 15 mast cells per cluster or scattered mast cells with greater than 20 per high microscopic power field)

- Molecular criterion (detection of a KIT mutation at codon 816 in the affected skin)