In X-linked CGD, increased sedimentation rate, C-reagent protein, and hypergammaglobulinemia are expected due to chronic inflammation in the laboratory investigation. Furthermore, chronic disease anemia and hypoalbuminemia, especially in patients with gastrointestinal involvement, can be experienced. Reduced memory B-cells and CD4 (+) T cell lymphopenia are frequently observed in the flow cytometry analysis. Male patients with a history of frequent and recurrent infections, especially in cases of abscesses and infections with CGD-related pathogens, X-linked CGD should be suspected and patients should be tested for neutrophil function.

B-cell defect is experienced in the entire X-linked Hyper IgM syndromes. CD40 ligand deficiency is also coexistent with T-cell defect and dendritic cell/monocyte defect. Levels of IgG, IgM, and IgE are distinctively lower. IgM levels are normal or high. Antibody response to protein and polysaccharide antigens is insufficient. B-cell count is normal, however, memory B-cell count is low and significantly lower for switched memory B-cell count.

T-cells with reduced count and function, insufficient antibody response to vaccines, abnormal immunoglobulin isotypes, normal or increased NK cell count but decreased NK cell function have been observed in the laboratory examination. Treg functions can also be reduced accordingly.

X-SCID should be suspected in all male patients with the T-B + NK-SCID phenotype. The diagnosis is confirmed by the demonstration of a heterozygous mutation in the IL2RG gene by means of next-generation sequencing. X-SCID can also be diagnosed by demonstration of the absence of a common gamma chain (CD132) on the lymphocytes by flow cytometry. This method can yield faster results based on genetic analysis.

In XLA, hypogammaglobulinemia/agammaglobulinemia, insufficiency of antibody response to vaccines, lower or absence of B-cell count in peripheral blood is available in the laboratory examination. The entire antibodies are reduced in XLA and the mature B-cell rate is below 2%.

IPEX is required to be regarded in the entire male patients with chronic persistent diarrhea, growth retardation, and/or infantile-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus. The existence of dermatitis, autoimmune cytopenia, or thyroiditis support the diagnosis, however, are not a requirement for the diagnosis. The definitive diagnosis in patients suspected to be with IPEX is ensured by the mutation analysis of the FOXP3 gene.