Folates and folic acid are not biologically active and must be converted into tetrahydrofolate through dihydrofolate reductase. Folinic acid does not require dihydrofolate reductase for conversion into tetrahydrofolate.

The two main roles of folinic acid in pharmacology are to counteract the effects of folic acid antagonists and to enhance the effects of fluoropyrimidines.

Most folic acid antagonists share a similar mechanism of action that includes the inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase: the enzyme responsible for generating the functional tetrahydrofolate molecule. As mentioned earlier, folinic acid does not require dihydrofolate reductase to convert into its functional derivatives. In this setting, folinic acid functions as an antidote by rescuing these cells from the chemotherapeutic toxicities of folate antagonists such as methotrexate.

While counteracting the side effects of methotrexate, folinic acid functions to enhance the effects of 5-FU. In the cell, 5-FU converts to fluoro-deoxy uridylic acid, a molecule that functions to inhibit thymidylate synthase. Thymidylate synthase is an enzyme that is important in DNA repair and replication. The functional derivative of folinic acid, 5,10 methylenetetrahydrofolate, stabilizes the bound fluoro-deoxy uridylic acid to thymidylate synthase. This interaction yields a ternary complex known as the thymidylate synthase 5-fluorodeoxyuridine monophosphate-methylenetetrahydrofolate complex, which ultimately functions to inhibit thymidylate synthase. Increased cellular amounts of functional folinic acid derivatives lead to increased stability of the aforementioned inhibitory complex, which leads to a depletion of thymidylate synthesis and disrupts DNA synthesis and repair.