The superior vena cava is formed mainly from the proximal right anterior cardinal veins and right common cardinal vein. The inferior vena cava forms from the fusion of the remaining cardinal veins, the subcardinal veins, and later the supracardinal veins. The separation between the subcardinal vein and the right posterior cardinal vein joins with the hepatic vein forming the inferior vena cava, which delivers deoxygenated blood from the lower limbs and abdominal viscera to the right atrium

The formation of the aorta and the pulmonary trunk is dependent upon the truncus arteriosus. During development, the right and left conotruncal ridges grow in a spiral, twisted fashion forming the great vessels. This formation of the ridges is under the guidance of the combination of the mesenchymal cells that are going to create the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary semilunar valves) and the endocardial cells that are anteriorly and posteriorly conjoining to separate the ventricles. Eventually, from the fifth through eighth weeks, an aorticopulmonary septum will result in the separation of the Aorta and pulmonary trunk

The pulmonary veins become incorporated into the left atrium through the dorsal mesocardiac and mesenchymal guidance of the pulmonary venous plexus. The sinus venosus is responsible for the formation of the crista terminalis. Some of these physiological changes take place as the hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction effect on the cardiac right side won't keep the fossa ovale patent, and the left atrial pressure will cause its closure alongside the degradation of the ductus arteriosus between the pulmonary trunk and aortic arch. Therefore, it results in a full separation of the four atrioventricular chambers, forming the fetal heart and great vessels