The evaluation should be directed by a detailed history and physical exam, focusing on the type of abuse suspected and injuries seen. It is essential to take into account the patient’s medical history, functional capacity, mechanism of injury, exam findings, laboratory findings, and imaging results to determine whether the injury is suspicious for abuse.

Unlike child abuse, there are limited data to identify specific radiologic patterns pathognomonic for elder abuse. Some radiologic findings suggested as potential signs of abuse include posterior rib fractures, fractures of varying chronicity, distal ulnar diaphysis fractures, skull fractures, subdural hematomas, small bowel hematomas, and high energy fractures in the setting of a low energy mechanism.

If imaging is obtained, it is important to communicate with the radiologist. Things that may be helpful for the radiologist include knowing the functional capacity of the patient, pertinent medical history, and the mechanism of injury to help them determine if the injury is consistent with the mechanism described.

Another aspect of the evaluation is determining the individual’s capacity to make their own decisions. If a person has the capacity to make their own decisions, even in the setting of abuse, they can remain in their abusive environment if desired.

Screening tools such as the Elder Abuse Suspicion Index or the Elder Abuse Vulnerability Index may also be useful. These tools help identify older adults currently being abused as well as those at risk of becoming abused, which can guide the utilization of education and resources.