**Material for Contact Lenses**

Earlier contact lenses were made of glass, but they remained unpopular due to the weight, brittleness of the material, and manufacturing problems. Obrig and Muller launched the first true methyl methacrylate transparent lenses in 1938, and later in 1948, plastic lenses were made by Kevin Tuchy. Wichterle, in 1961, launched the first soft hydrophilic contact lenses, thus changing the management of contact lens prescriptions and outcomes.

**Classification**

- **Filcons**- These are hydrophilic non-rigid lens materials. These are actually silicon rubber elastomers and have been grouped as Group 1a, 1b, 2a, 2b, 3a, 3b, 4a, 4b, and 5

- **Focons**- These are hydrophobic rigid lens materials. These are PMMA and RGP lenses. These are grouped as 1a, 1b, 2, 3, 4, and 5.

**Ideal Contact Lens Material**

An ideal contact lens material should have the following properties

**Biocompatibility**

This means that the contact lens material should not be harmful to the eye and should not contain any harmful material potentially dangerous to the eye.

**Stability**

The curvature and thickness of the contact lens should be stable to provide an excellent visual function.

**Molding**

The contact lens material should be amenable to reshaping and duplication to be manufactured easily.

**Sterility**

The contact lens material should be sterilizable or should be resistant to contamination.

**Tolerance**

The tolerance of contact lenses depends on the design and oxygen permeability.

**Surface Chemistry**

The contact lens material should be wettable so that tear film can cover it and stay over it.

**Gas Permeability**

The contact lens material should have good gas permeability so that it doesn't interfere with corneal oxygen transmission. In this way, the contact lens can be worn for a more extended period, and its contact time and tolerance can be increased.

**Optical Property**

The contact lens material should be transparent, and its refractive index should be near the tear film.

**Lens Material**

**Silicone Hydrogel Lenses**

These are lenses with high DK and low water content. The silicon content of the lens determines its oxygen transmission capacity.

**Hydrogel Lenses**

- 
**Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA)**

These are the soft contact lenses that are highly prevalent and widely used. These are resistant to any chemical or enzymatic reaction biodegradation and can tolerate chemical and thermal sterilization.

- 
**Hydroxyethyl methacrylate with vinyl pyrrolidone (HEMA-VP)**

These lenses were designed to attain higher hydration as normal HEMA lenses have a hydration capacity of only 40%. Copolymerisation of HEMA with VP and cross-linkage with ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDM) yields PHP. Examples include hydrocure, hydro flex, and flexicon, with a hydration of 45%. These lenses change color with age.

- 
**MMA-PVD**

These lenses are made up of PVP (polymer), VP (monomer), and MMA (hydrophilic). Examples include Sauflen 70, Medigel 70 and Vizilen 70

- 
**Glycidyl Methacrylate**

These are combinations of HEMA with VP or MMA with VP. These are usually hydrophobic monomers.

**Hydrophilic Soft Contact Lenses**

Soft contact lenses are made up of hydrogels. These contain a hydrophilic moiety such as the hydroxyl group. These have a large number of cross-linked polymers that can retain a large quantity of water. These can change shape and swell to form labile soft lenses. The polymerization of hydrophilic monomers creates these by cross-linking with EGDM.

**High Water Content Contact Lenses**

These lenses are helpful and are preferred because of increased exposure of the cornea to atmospheric gases. Increased water content and reduction in lens thickness result in a much larger delivery of oxygen to the lenses. However, too thin lenses may be fragile and may be damaged by the blinking movement of the eye.

**Rigid Gas Permeable Lenses**

They are also called semisoft lenses. They are more permeable to oxygen than PMMA lenses. Examples of RGP lenses used earlier include cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB), Silicon, and Styrene.

**Cellulose Acetate Butyrate (CAB)**

They are made up of thermoplastic material, a derivative of wood cellulose. These were the first RGP lenses to be used. The advantage of these lenses includes good wetting ability, but the disadvantage includes the tendency to wrap. Because of this disadvantage, these lenses became unpopular.

**Silicon**

These have high oxygen permeability, but these also became unpopular because of a lack of wetting ability.

**Styrene**

The material used for lens manufacture is T-Butyl styrene, but these lenses were brittle and had less surface durability; hence became unpopular and are not used now.

**Currently used RGP Lenses**

**Silicon Acrylate**

These are copolymers of PMMA lenses and silicon vinyl monomers. The combination is known as siloxanyl methacrylate lenses. The MMA helps in wetting ability, and silicon helps in oxygen transfer. By altering the silicon content, a variety of lenses can be manufactured with varying DK values and oxygen permeability. If the silicon content is high along with oxygen permeability, there will be increased difficulty with the surface properties of lenses.

**Fluoropolymers**

These are RGP lenses with a copolymer containing fluorine. Due to high oxygen permeability and suitable surface properties, they are used for extended wear. There are no surface deposits in these lenses as they occur with silicon lenses. The three types of fluorinated lenses are

- Pure fluoropolymer - cast molded

- Fluorosiloxanyl methacrylate - lathe-cut contact lenses

- Perfluoroalkyl itaconate siloxane - Alberta N lenses from Canada

**Rigid Non-Gas Permeable Lenses**

These are hard lenses made of plastic and thermoplastic. PMMA lenses were the first commercially available plastic contact lenses. They are a derivate of acrylic acids hence also labeled as acrylic. PMMA lenses are stable, light in weight, good optical quality, and easily mouldable and non-toxic. PMMA lenses have reduced tolerance, can cause corneal abrasions, and resists wetting. PMMA hard contact lenses are not available these days.