Due to the increasing support for the use of medicinal cannabis, it is essential to understand the federal and state policies related to the legalization of marijuana. As of 2021, a total of 36 states have legalized marijuana for medical purposes. Accessibility to medicinal cannabis for chronic pain patients varies as different states regulate the number of dispensaries and restrict the proximities of dispensaries within each state. Although medical marijuana is legal in more than half of the United States and is considered a possible treatment for chronic pain, it is still classified as a Schedule 1 drug.

Schedule 1 drugs are considered to have a high potential for abuse and are not FDA approved for medical use due to lack of safety and universal medical acceptance. As with any other medication, there are several adverse effects associated with medicinal cannabis. Acute adverse effects related to THC include anxiety, panic, disorientation, impaired attention, short-term memory, and driving performance. Hence, it is prudent to avoid medicinal cannabis in patients with psychiatric illnesses, such as schizophrenia, as it may exacerbate the condition. Additionally, in one study, about 50% of patients with cannabis-induced psychosis converted to schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.

The most common acute side effect of CBD is diarrhea. Additionally, CBD has potential drug interactions with conventional pharmacotherapies as it interacts with cytochrome P450 (CYP 450) enzymes involved in drug metabolism.