- With shortening or destruction of the small intestine, there can be a decrease in the absorption of essential vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients for the body that can cause a myriad of problems that can interfere with other systems of the body.

- Duodenal ulcers can be a serious health risk. They most commonly occur on the posterior wall of the superior portion of the duodenum. Complete ulceration of an ulcer through the wall of the duodenum can result in peritonitis and damage to the surrounding organs. The most common risk factor in developing these ulcers is infection with Helicobacter pylori.

- Wilke's syndrome, also known as SMA syndrome, occurs due to compression of the duodenum between the superior mesenteric artery and the abdominal aorta. This condition creates an obstruction and often leads to nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. It most commonly presents in individuals who lack intra-abdominal fat, such as those suffering from anorexia nervosa or cancer.

- The ileocecal valve is an important landmark for Meckel disease, an ileal diverticulum that, when present, is often located close to the valve. A common mnemonic device to remember the details of this pathology is by using the "Rules of 2's" (Two years old, 2 feet from the ileocecal valve, 2% of the population). It classically presents in a young male patient with hematochezia and periumbilical pain. However, it can often be asymptomatic.

- Crohn disease is a chronic inflammatory disease that most often affects the ileum but can be found throughout the GI tract (except for the rectum, which is generally spared).