The lymphatic system is prone to disorders like the venous and arterial circulatory systems. Developmental or functional defects of the lymphatic system cause lymphedema. When this occurs, the lymphatic system is unable to sufficiently drain lymphatic fluid resulting in its accumulation and swelling of the territory. Lymphedema, this swelling due to the accumulation of lymph, is classified as primary or secondary.

Primary lymphedema is an inherited disorder where the lymphatic system development has been disrupted, causing absent or malformed lymphatic tissues. This condition often presents soon after birth, but some conditions may present later in life (e.g., at puberty or later adulthood). There are no effective treatments for primary lymphedema. Past surgical treatments were found to be mutilating and are no longer implemented. The present-day treatment revolves around compression stockings, pumps, and constrictive garments.

Secondary lymphedema is an acquired disorder involving lymphatic system dysfunction that may result from many causes, including cancer, infection, trauma, or surgery. The treatment of secondary lymphedema depends on the cause. Oncological and other surgeries may result in secondary lymphedema due to the removal or biopsy of lymph nodes or lymphatic vessels. Non-surgical lymphedema may result from malignancies, obstruction within the lymphatic system, infection, or deep vein thrombosis. In most cases of obstructive secondary lymphedema, the drainage will resume if the inciting cause is removed, although some individuals may need to wear compressive stockings permanently. Also, physical therapy may help alleviate lymphedema when the extremities are involved. There is no absolute cure for lymphedema, but diagnosis and careful management can help to minimize complications.

Lymphomas are cancers that arise from the cells of the lymphatic system. There are numerous types of lymphoma, but they are grouped into Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Cancers originating outside of the lymphatic system often spread via the lymphatic vessels and may involve regional lymph nodes serving the impacted organs or tissues.

Lymphadenitis occurs when the lymph nodes become inflamed or enlarged. The cause is usually an adjacent bacterial infection but may also involve viruses or fungi. The lymph nodes usually enlarge and become tender.

Lymphatic filariasis, or elephantiasis, is a very common mosquito-borne disorder caused by a parasite found in tropical and subtropical areas of the world, including Africa, Asia, the Pacific, the Caribbean, and South America. This condition involves parasitic microscopic nematodes (roundworms) that infect the lymphatic system and rapidly multiply and disrupt lymphatic function.