Younger athletes should undergo a comprehensive physical examination by a physician prior to participating in competitive sports or any intense physical activity.

All athletes should have an assessment for any history of syncope, presyncope, dizziness, palpitations, chest pain, shortness of breath, seizures, severe fatigue, and inability to palpate their pulse. The clinician should ask the athlete about whether these symptoms occur during exercise and/or during rest. While presyncope and syncope are most commonly a result of a vasovagal event and/or due to extreme heat, they are often the initial indication of existing cardiac disease in younger age groups. Palpitations will generally be due to benign ectopic ventricular or atrial heartbeats, but a high burden may be a result of existing structural heart disease. Chest pain and dyspnea can be expected in structural heart disease: specifically obstructive cardiomyopathy. Seizures and the inability to palpate one's pulse may suggest episodes of torsades de pointes, which occurs in those with long QT syndrome. It also points towards the occurrence of an unstable rhythm, such as catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.

Family history is also essential to assess the existence of genetic heart disorders. Given that these genetic disorders are all inherited and potentially fatal, they may have gone undiagnosed among family members and relatives. Hence, it is vital to ask about any relatives who unexpectedly passed away.

Athletes should be questioned about the usage of performance-enhancing drugs (PEDs), specifically anabolic steroids and stimulants. These agents induce the risk of sudden cardiac death through multiple mechanisms. The most common mechanism is left ventricular hypertrophy in anabolic steroid users, while arrhythmias and vascular injury also occur. High doses of testosterone, use of growth factors, classic agents such as stanozolol, and commonly used injectable drugs like trenbolone; all induce severe left ventricular hypertrophy. Different athletes experience this to variable degrees, and hence knowledge of this history is critical. Also, the usage of stimulants increases the likelihood of arrhythmias, especially in those with existing cardiac illnesses. Some pre-workout supplements contain potentially dangerous compounds that induce a high burden of ectopic heartbeats, prolong QT, and can produce clinical symptoms. Examples of such compounds include 1,3-dimethylamylamine (DMAA), which has been banned in numerous countries. Lastly, blood doping and erythropoietin (EPO) use is of concern, particularly in endurance athletes, and has correlated with sudden cardiac arrest.

A physical examination is necessary for all young athletes. A general full-body exam should be done, including a neurological assessment, a musculoskeletal examination, and a thorough cardiovascular assessment. A thorough cardiac exam consists of listening to rate and rhythm, S1 and S2, the presence of S3 or S4, and/or any palpable heaves, lifts, or thrills. The existence of any murmurs should be noted and evaluated while increasing or decreasing the preload and afterload using physical maneuvers.