**Mastopexy**

Mastopexy is indicated for patients with ptosis, who desire only to change the breast shape but not the volume and gain upper pole fullness and a youthful, lifted appearance. It is contraindicated in active smokers or patients wanting volume change as well. There are different types of mastopexies, which are used based on the degree of ptosis and tissue quality.

**Periareolar Mastopexy**

Periareolar mastopexy****is indicated for patients with mild or moderate ptosis, or nipple asymmetry, with little lower pole skin redundancy, who possess reasonable skin and parenchyma quality. This technique is mainly used to reposition the nipple, at most 2 cm.

The traditional mastopexy technique re-drapes the circumareolar skin to buttress the parenchyma. An eccentric oval is drawn around the areola, including more skin superiorly to elevate the nipple. The skin in between the nipple edge and the outline is de-epithelialized, and the incision is then closed around the nipple. Although this technique has the advantage to hide the scar at the areolar border, it also has a high rate of patient dissatisfaction and revision, secondary to loss of breast projection, nipple widening, and flattening by seeking to reduce postoperative scar and nipple widening, some advocate for a superior crescent-shaped marking instead of the traditional circumareolar oval, as well as the use of barbed or permanent suture purse-string closure, with various degrees of success.

The Benelli periareolar mastopexy has gained popularity over the traditional technique because it also redistributes the parenchyma to buttress the breast.  In this technique, a slightly larger ellipse is drawn, the parenchyma is then incised inferiorly, and the resulting medial and lateral edges are crossed or invaginated in the midline. By doing so, the breast shape gains projection and a narrower width. An important consideration is that after the parenchyma is incised, the normal blood supply to the nipple is disrupted, and it becomes dependent on the superomedial vessels. So in patients undergoing augmentation/mastopexy (see below), an implant placed in the submuscular plane would be safer

**Vertical Mastopexy**

Vertical Mastopexy****is indicated for any degree of ptosis. In general, all vertical mastopexies combine small amounts of parenchymal excision and skin envelope redraping, so they all have the potential to reduce the breast size modestly. The traditional vertical mastopexy with and without undermining (Lejour and Lassus techniques, respectively) has evolved into the current techniques, namely the SPAIR mammaplasty by Hammond and the Hall-Findlay Mastopexy.

The Short-scar Periareolar Inferior Pedicle Reduction Mammaplasty (SPAIR) was developed by Dennis C. Hammond and is performed via a circumareolar elliptical incision. The nipple is left on an inferior pedicle with the parenchyma trimmed and redistributed superiorly. The pedicle is then tacked to the superior chest wall by suspension sutures so that the nipple can maintain its new position. Subsequently, the lower pole redundancy is tailor-tacked and excised vertically, sometimes in a slight lateral J-pattern to avoid dog ears. The drawbacks are changes in the nipple sensation and periareolar pleating, as well as periareolar widening, despite the use of a pin-wheel or interlocking periareolar closure pattern. One caveat is that the nipple will depend on an inferior pedicle, which is considered to increase the risk of bottoming-out, despite the use of suspension sutures. An inferior pedicle based technique also dissuades surgeons from using this technique when combining augmentation and mastopexy, as the implant weight over the pedicle could attenuate the blood supply to the nipple.

The Hall-Findlay vertical mastopexy uses a medial or superomedial based pedicle.  It is also performed via a circumareolar elliptical incision, but the parenchyma is trimmed and redistributed inferolaterally instead of superiorly.  The lower pole skin redundancy is tailor-tacked and excised vertically, just as it would be carried out with the SPAIR technique. One caveat is that the native inframammary fold tends to rise with this technique, so the most inferior portion of the incision must end above the native fold to avoid potentially extending the scar onto the abdomen as the breast settles down. Theoretically, the breast is constantly being pulled downward by its own lower pole’s weight. So, by excising parts of the lower pole parenchyma, adjoining the medial and lateral edges inferiorly, and narrowing the breast, this technique provides structural support, counteracts the downward forces, and decreases ptosis recurrence. The superomedial pedicle used in this approach is based on the main arterial supply to the nipple (second or third IMA perforator), so a subglandular or submuscular augmentation/mastopexy is possible, as the implant does not exert pressure on the pedicle.

Immediately after all vertical mastopexies, the breast has a characteristic inverted shape, with a sloped lower pole and an exaggerated upper pole fullness.  It takes months for the final shape to be appreciated by the patient, as the breast tissue slowly settles and the lower pole regains its fullness. Hence, reassurance is essential during the immediate postoperative period.

**Inverted-T Mastopexy**

Inverted-T Mastopexy****is indicated for patients with severe ptosis because these patients have an excessive skin envelope to parenchyma ratio.  Another indication is any grade ptosis patient with fatty parenchyma or poor skin quality.   Similar to the vertical mastopexy, the inverted-T mastopexy has periareolar and vertical incisions, but it also has an added horizontal incision within the inframammary fold itself.

The most popular skin incision approach has been the traditional Wise-pattern, as plastic surgeons widely use it for reduction mammaplasty.  Other skin excision patterns with various degrees of favor seeking to reduce the horizontal scar burden. Regardless of the incision pattern used to excise the redundant skin, the parenchyma is then trimmed and redistributed. Commonly, the inferior crossing of the lateral and medial parenchymal edges lends longevity to the mastopexy. To improve upper pole fullness, the lower pole parenchyma can be suspended from the pectoralis fascia. Different pedicle types and parenchymal manipulations can be used with vertical mastopexies depending on the surgeon’s preference. The only caveat is that inferior pedicles are associated with bottoming out (see SPAIR mammaplasty).  Although inverted-T mastopexy has a considerable scar burden, it is widely used because of the predictable results and the surgeon's familiarity with it.

**Augmentation/Mastopexy**

Breast augmentation can be obtained using autologous breast tissue, fat, or, more commonly, implants. It increases the size of the breast, stretches the skin envelope, and exerts pressure on the lower pole’s parenchyma. On the other hand, mastopexy aims to reposition the nipple and reshape the breast by excising redundant skin and redistributing the parenchyma to reinforce the lower pole. So by definition, the two procedures have forces working against each other.

Augmentation alone is adequate in patients with hypomastia without ptosis or with minimal ptosis (N-IMF distance less than 10cm, or skin stretch less than 4 cm).

The type of mastopexy combined with augmentation depends on the degree of ptosis. Periareolar mastopexy is used for patients with nipples less than 2 cm below the fold and not pointing inferiorly. Vertical or inverted-T mastopexies are used for more severe ptosis.

The most disputed aspect of this approach is when to do a single-stage versus a two-stage approach. Traditionally, the single-stage approach has been considered more unpredictable and with a higher revision rate, which translated into being one of the most frequent sources of malpractice claims. After the publication of the editorial “Augmentation/Mastopexy: Surgeon, beware” by Spear in 2003, the topic became even more controversial, generating more and more literature about the safety and revision rate of the single-stage approach.

Eric Swanson demonstrated that tissue perfusion is not affected when vertical mastopexy and implant augmentation are performed at the same time, specifically when the nipple is based on a medial pedicle.

Ultimately, appropriate patient selection will dictate the type of approach. The ideal candidate for a single-stage procedure would have mild or moderate ptosis, a flaccid and soft breast with good skin elasticity, not need large parenchymal or skin resection, and only wish for a moderate augmentation (<360cc). In contrast, patients with severe ptosis, a vertical excess greater than 6cm, attenuated nipple vascularity, or desire a marked augmentation would benefit from a two-stage approach.

**Postoperative Care**

Drains are rarely used. Adequate pain control is usually achieved with oral narcotics; muscle relaxants are added to patients with subpectoral implant placement. There is no data supporting oral antibiotics beyond the standard perioperative period. A supportive bra is placed at the end of the case, used for the next 4 to 6 weeks, and then switched to an underwire bra. It offers mechanical support while the breast tissue regains tensile strength. Scar treatment routinely begins after 3 weeks. Intense physical activity can be resumed by week 4 to 6.