A behavior modification chart is frequently used when implementing a behavior modification plan. Behavior charts require specific, objective, quantifiable tasks that are rewarded in a previously agreed upon way, be it points, stickers, or tally marks.

(Table 2, Scott and Cogburn, 2017)

- 3 points per day equal 30 min of screen time

- 6 points per day equal 1 hour of screen time

- 20 points per week equal picking a toy worth $5 to $10 at the store

- 25 points per week equal the toy plus getting to stay up 2 hours later on Saturday night.

(The above behavior chart with the subsequent rewards would be appropriate for a five to ten-year-old)

A “token economy” is synonymous with a behavior modification plan. A token (sticker, chip, point, tally) is anything that can be earned by exhibiting the desired behavior that can then be exchanged for reinforcers.

Reinforcers or rewards are a key part of a behavior plan but are unique to each child. The reinforcement has to be of value to the child for the program to be effective. A child may be motivated to make her bed every day if she gets a sucker every time she does it, but she may not make her bed if she gets extra reading time. She has to value the reward for the reward to be valued.

Reinforcers and punishments must happen at the time of the behavior to increase the likelihood of success of a behavior modification plan. The more immediate to the behavior the better. For example, praising a child for using the toilet while he is using it versus later that day. The reinforcer must be appropriate, e.g., giving a child a sticker every time he says please, or giving a teenager extra screen time for a good attitude. And lastly, the reinforcer must be consistent where the behavior is rewarded by all caretakers as previously agreed upon and not to avoid punishment due to caretaker guilt or inconvenience.