Contrary to public perception, the FDA does not have the authority to mandate a drug's withdrawal from the market directly. Instead, the FDA can only request that a manufacturer recalls a drug. In the rare case that a manufacturer refuses to do so, then the FDA can force the manufacturer to recall the product by statute. This legal action is pursued via the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. An injunction is issued to halt further manufacture or distribution.

Drug recalls are grouped into class I, class II, or class III in order of decreasing severity. Class I recalls indicate the drug could potentially cause death. Class II recalls are the most common and indicate the drug product or device has reversible side effects or an exceedingly small probability of serious adverse effects. Class III recalls are due to innocuous defects in something such as container design.

Because this software defect only causes sporadic errors within a given treatment session, this is a class II recall. Class III recalls are the most benign. These are primarily products that are extremely unlikely to cause any harm to patients, but they violate FDA standards for packaging, labeling, documentation, etc. For example, if a drug is produced, labeled, and distributed safely and correctly, but a small detail in one of these steps was not documented, the FDA may request a class III recall out of an abundance of caution. In addition to medications, medical devices and vaccines are also under the FDA’s regulatory purview and thus subject to recall. In addition to the aforementioned implantable cardioverter defibrillators, recent examples of recalled medical devices include radiology equipment, ophthalmology devices, and orthopedic devices.