Imaging studies in which dAVFs may be identified are computed tomography angiography (CTA) or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), demonstrating dilated tortuous vessels corresponding to abnormal arteries and veins, sinus enlargement, or sinus occlusion. In addition, MRA may reveal associated early prominent sinus filling, dilated pial vessels, and associated edema from venous hypertension seen as T2-weighted hyperintensity. This venous hypertension leptomeningeal edema may occur in up to half of the patients even if they do not have a cortical retrograde filling. Hydrocephalus can also be identified if there is hypertension in the venous sinuses.

A six-vessel cerebral digital subtraction angiogram (DSA) is required to establish the diagnosis and plan treatment. It defines the fistula, the external carotid circulation involvement, sinus patency or blockage, and affected dilated veins.

The Borden classification system describes lesions as the following types based on the direction of flow and presence of cortical venous drainage:

- Type I: anterograde flow into a dural venous sinus or meningeal vein. Usually have a benign natural history.

- Type II: anterograde flow into a dural venous sinus. However, they also have retrograde cortical venous reflux. These are considered high-grade lesions with aggressive behavior in 39%.

- Type III: direct retrograde flow from the fistula into cortical veins, thereby causing venous hypertension. They have aggressive behavior in 79%.

The Cognard classification, dAVFs are divided into the following seven categories based on the location, the direction of flow, presence of cortical venous drainage, and presence of venous ectasia:

- Type I: confined to sinus, antegrade flow, and no cortical drainage. They have a benign clinical course.

- Type IIa: confined to the sinus, retrograde flow into the sinus, no cortical drainage. These have a 20% risk of intracranial hypertension.

- Type IIb: drainage into a venous sinus, anterograde flow, reflux into cortical veins. These have a 10% risk of hemorrhage induced by venous reflux.

- Type IIa+b: drainage into a venous sinus, retrograde flow, reflux into cortical veins. These have a 66% risk of hemorrhage with or without intracranial hypertension.

- Type III: direct drainage into a cortical vein without venous ectasia. These have a 40% risk of hemorrhage.

- Type IV: direct drainage into a cortical vein with venous ectasia. These have a  65% risk of hemorrhage.

- Type V: direct drainage into spinal perimedullary veins. They present with progressive myelopathy in 50% of cases.