Cell bodies of these neurons are situated mainly in the Broadman’s areas number 4, 6. The organization of the motor cortex is in a somatotopic manner. Cortical homunculus is a map of the representation of different parts of the body in specific areas of the motor cortex with face situated most laterally.

From the cerebral cortex, the corticobulbar fiber passes into the corona radiata. Most of the fibers of corona radiata arrange themselves into a compact bundle called the internal capsule, which is situated between caudate nucleus and thalamus medially and lentiform nucleus laterally. Corticobulbar fibers pass through the genu or bend of the internal capsule. From the internal capsule, these fibers enter into crus cerebri of the cerebral peduncles in the midbrain. Corticobulbar fibers pass through middle 1/3 of crus cerebri and then enter the pons and medulla to terminate at corresponding nerve nuclei.

The corticobulbar tract provides input to the nuclei innervating muscles of the face, muscles of mastication, muscles of the tongue, muscles of the pharynx, muscles of larynx, sternocleidomastoid, and trapezius, etc. This innervation is bilateral for most of the cranial nerves, with the exception of corticobulbar fibers providing input to the lower facial nucleus, which receives contralateral innervation. Both right and left half of the motor cortex of the brain gives fibers to the dorsal division of the motor nucleus of the facial nerve ( bilateral innervation), but the lower division of facial nerve nucleus receives unilateral upper motor neuron fibers. The dorsal division of the facial nerve nucleus gives lower motor neuron fibers to the upper half of the face, and the lower half of the face receives fibers from the ventral division of the facial nerve nucleus.