The blood supply and lymphatics of any bone are vital to its nourishment and development. Given the variability in the development of most sesamoid bones, the blood supply and lymphatics primarily depend on the location of the specific bone and its development. These bones have limited blood supply and are susceptible to potential avascular necrosis, leading to complications.

However, the patella is an exception due to its significance, size, and consistent function in the human body. Its early development during gestation and critical role in supporting the lower extremity requires a rich blood supply. An extensive extraosseous and intraosseous network of blood vessels nourishes the patella.

While the patella is unique among sesamoid bones, others, like the hallux sesamoids, can present with a varied blood supply. A study of 29 dissected human feet was analyzed, showing the medial plantar artery branching into the digital plantar arteries of the hallux before giving rise to the sesamoid arteries. The study concluded that the number of sesamoid arteries to the bone increased with increasing sesamoid bone size between different-sized feet.

Other vasculature of sesamoid bones includes the palmar metacarpal arteries that arise from the deep palmar arch supplying the first and second metacarpals. The pisiform receives its blood supply from the ulnar artery. The ossicular branch of the anterior tympanic artery supplies the lenticular process of the incus. In addition, the fabella receives its blood supply primarily from the articular external branches of the popliteal artery. Similarly, the cyamella receives its arterial supply from the medial inferior genicular branch of the popliteal artery. Most often, the os peroneum receives its blood supply from the peroneal artery and anterior tibial artery.