The structures of the thoracic wall protect the heart, lungs, and great vessels as well as some abdominal organs. Additionally, the bony structures provide attachment points for muscles and allow for the mechanical function of ventilation.

Ribs are curved, flat bones that attach posteriorly to vertebrae and anteriorly to the sternum. Ribs originate at each thoracic vertebra. The head of each rib has 1 or 2 facets for articulation with the costal facets on the bodies of thoracic vertebrae. Ribs 1, 10, 11, and 12 have a single facet on their head that only articulates with its respective vertebra. Ribs 2 through 9 all have 2 facets on their heads; the superior facet articulates with the vertebra above the rib, while the inferior facet articulates with the respectively named vertebra. In addition, ribs 1 through 10 have tubercles with facets that articulate with the costal facet of the transverse process of each respective vertebra.

The sternum is composed of 3 parts: the manubrium, body, and xiphoid process.

Ribs 1 through 7 are considered true, or vertebrocostal, ribs and attach directly to the sternum. Ribs 8 through 10 are considered false, or vertebrochondral, ribs in which the cartilage of each rib attaches to the cartilage of the rib above it which terminates where the seventh rib attaches to the sternum. Ribs 11 and 12 are considered floating, vertebral, or free, ribs because they terminate in the posterior abdominal musculature and do not attach to the sternum. The costal cartilage of ribs 1 through 10 facilitates the elastic recoil of the thoracic wall which contributes to passive exhalation.