Calcium is naturally present in the body. Most of the body's stored calcium is within the bones and teeth, as hydroxyapatite. The rest of the body's calcium is in blood, extracellular fluid, muscle, and other body tissues.

Calcium absorption occurs in the small intestine by active transport dependent on Vitamin D and diffusion.

Calcium carbonate has three separate mechanisms of action that have pharmacologic effects. Calcium affects the stomach, small intestine, and blood.

As an antacid, calcium carbonate neutralizes gastric acid by acting as a buffer in the stomach's acidic environment. When CaCO3 enters the stomach, it dissociates into ionized calcium (Ca2+) and a carbonate anion (CO32-). The carbonate anion will then bind to the free protons (H+) found in the stomach to increase the pH by decreasing the concentration of hydrogen ions. By increasing the pH in the stomach, pepsin, bile acids, and the toxins of Helicobacter pylori become inhibited.

The inhibition of pepsin, an enzyme that can degrade tissue protein, and inhibition of bile acid helps reduce damage to and promote the healing of ulcers in the mucosal lining of the stomach and duodenum and injury to the esophagus caused by GERD.

As an antacid, calcium carbonate also increases gastrointestinal motility and initiates peristalsis.

As a phosphate binder and drug chelator, calcium carbonate works in the small intestines. In individuals with hyperphosphatemia or overdose, calcium will bind to form an insoluble compound blocking dietary phosphate or excess drug absorption and excreting it in feces.

Lastly, calcium carbonate also works in the blood to treat or prevent negative calcium balance seen in low serum calcium conditions.