Radioactive iodine treatment is indicated in patients with DTC who had a total thyroidectomy. Post-operative disease status needs to be assessed to optimize proper patient selection and determine the dose for therapy.

The three primary goals of RAI therapy in well-differentiated thyroid cancers are remnant ablation, adjuvant therapy, or treatment of known disease.

Remnant ablation refers to the destruction of the functioning remnants of presumably benign thyroid tissue remaining after total or subtotal thyroidectomy in patients at low risk of recurrence. Ablation of the residual tissue allows better interpretation of the follow-up I-131 whole-body imaging, avoiding confusion between residual remnant versus local recurrence or lymph node metastases. Remnant ablation also helps keep the thyroglobulin level low and aids in follow-up for recurrence. Typically ablation is completed in 4 to 6 months when a follow-up I-131 whole-body diagnostic scan could be obtained to determine whether the patient had a successful ablation. Retreatment is recommended if there is a persistent disease.

Adjuvant treatment refers to additional therapy after surgery to lower the risk of cancer recurrence in patients with an intermediate or high risk of recurrence. Adjuvant therapy improves the progression-free survival in patients with no obvious evidence of disease but the possible presence of subclinical micrometastases.

Treatment of known disease refers to destroying known residual cancer or recurrent structural or biochemical disease. This shall be done with curative or palliative intent. The therapy improves progression-free and overall survival.

RAI therapy is appropriate in patients with tumor size more than 2 cm and has one or more risk factors, including obvious extrathyroidal extension, patients more than 45 years of age, lymph node metastases, and distant metastases. RAI therapy is recommended if the tumor is less than 2 cm and there are distant metastases.

Based on the available data, choosing low or intermediate-risk patients for remnant ablation or adjuvant treatment is challenging. Patients are grossly classified into low risk, intermediate-risk, and high-risk categories, as indicated below.

**Low Risk**

- Papillary carcinoma with gross total thyroidectomy and no distant metastases, no lymph node involvement, no invasion of adjacent structures, no vascular invasion, no aggressive histology, no RAI uptake outside the thyroid bed, no palpable lymph nodes, and five or fewer pathologic nodal micrometastases

- Encapsulated intrathyroidal follicular variant of PTC

- Well-differentiated intrathyroidal follicular carcinoma with capsular invasion with or without less than four foci of vascular invasion

**Intermediate Risk**

- Aggressive histology (Hurthle cell cancer, FTC, columnar cell or tall cell variants, insular carcinoma)

- Multifocal papillary microcarcinoma with extrathyroidal extension

- Clinically positive lymph node/nodes less than 3 cm in the largest dimension or more than five pathologically positive lymph nodes less than 3 cm in the largest dimension

**High Risk**

- Incomplete resection

- Gross extrathyroidal extension

- Pathologically positive lymph nodes with at least one node equal to more than 3 cm in the largest dimension

- Distant metastasis

- Follicular carcinoma with more than four foci of vascular invasion

The RAI dose should be determined based on a multidisciplinary approach. Patients with no imaging, biochemical, pathological, or clinical evidence of disease after initial definitive curative surgery shall be observed or could undergo RAI treatment for remnant ablation or adjuvant treatment, depending on the institutional protocol.