**PTSD**

The etiology of PTSD is yet to be fully elucidated. Progress in neuroscience and genetics have helped characterize it as biological, not just psychological, disease. Current research points include fear conditioning, neural circuit dysregulation, memory reconsolidation, genetics, and epigenetics, especially childhood trauma on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis regulation. Like other complex disorders, it is thought to be highly polygenic and influenced by external exposures.

Several risk factors exist before, during, and after inciting traumas. Childhood trauma places patients at higher risk for subsequent development of PTSD.

**Depression**

Despite decades of research on major depressive disorder (MDD), its etiology is still not fully understood. There is a clear neurobiological link that exists for this mood disorder. However, exactly which markers and processes play the most critical role is still debated. Patients with major depressive episodes have shown increased responses to cortisol in the HPA axis, which could explain how stress is a substantial risk factor.

Many factors predispose individuals to major depressive episodes. Some common risk factors in the general population include unemployment, financial stress, female gender, and personal or parental history of mental health concerns. The military brings additional risk factors that providers should consider, for example:

- Uniformed code of military justice actions (legal concerns)

- Rank and promotion complications

- Deployments

- Combat exposure

- Physical fitness concerns

- Permanent changes of station (frequent relocations)

- Command/leadership discord

**Suicide**

Studies on veterans and service members have attempted to characterize factors correlating military operations and suicide in an attempt to identify vulnerable patients and provide early intervention. While serving in the military, members may have stressors such as disciplinary actions, physical problems including pain, leadership conflicts, transferring duty stations, reductions in rank, or administrative separation from service.

Several protective factors may exist in military cohorts, such as a sense of duty to others, belonging or identity, strong interpersonal bonds, and access to healthcare. In particular, service members with family and friends with whom they can discuss deployments are less likely to experience suicidal ideation (SI). Another identified protective factor is a sense of purpose or control of one's life.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Neuroscientific advances have provided an increased understanding of drug effects on the brain. Addiction is a chronic relapsing disorder triggered by repeat drug exposures in those vulnerable due to genetics, development, and psychosocial conditions, including accessibility, drug use norms, and social support (or lack thereof). Drug use is driven by a substance’s pharmacological effects, which provide rewarding experiences. Its reinforcing effects depend largely on dopamine signaling at the nucleus accumbens. Chronic exposure triggers glutamate-mediated adaptations in the striato-thalamo-cortical pathway, primarily in the prefrontal cortex at the orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate cortices. Another identified pathway is the limbic system, which consists of the amygdala and hippocampus. Drugs cause changes in the extended amygdala, producing negative baseline emotional states, which the drug helps temporarily alleviate. Counterintuitively, drug use is associated with blunted dopamine release in brain reward regions. The drug use experience does not meet the expectations of reward triggered by conditioning to drug cues. Altogether, the substance creates enhanced motivations for drug seeking and impaired self-regulation through effects on the prefrontal cortex.

Significant genetic influences contribute to SUDs, such as neurotransmission pathways, most importantly within the dopaminergic system. Other genetic influence points include drug processing and metabolism. Research on the gene-environment interaction has shed light on potential mechanisms of how the environment influences substance use biology. Epigenetic studies have demonstrated drug-induced changes in gene expression, which differ by stage of disease (substance initiation versus chronic use). Studies on epigenetic mechanisms such as methylation and microRNA with substance use are ongoing.