An isolated cuboid stress reaction/fracture is typically manageable by a primary care clinician (who is****knowledgeable and comfortable with fracture management), podiatry, sports medicine, or orthopedics. Appropriately managed, these stress fractures are among the quickest to heal, as the cuboid has a generous vascular supply. Treatment generally begins with a general evaluation, ice, and painkillers such as NSAIDs or acetaminophen.

A conservative staged treatment approach is recommended starting with non-weight bearing (NWB) with crutches for the initial two weeks. Once the patient is pain-free, they move into protected weight bearing (sufficient weight-bearing to ensure the patient is pain-free). Once the patient is pain-free, the athlete can transition into a CAM boot or short-leg walking cast for another two weeks. The next few weeks are spent in a gradual return to activity of daily living (ADL), walking plus swimming, walking plus stationary cycling, walking plus the elliptical trainer. A zero-gravity treadmill is also an option for high-level athletes. Once a patient can make it through pain-free, a 6-week walk-to-run program follows. Formal physical therapy may include strengthening, range of motion, and proprioception exercises to offset any deconditioning from the period of non-weight bearing. Some patients quickly make it through the staged rehabilitation, while others may spend 1 to 2 weeks in each stage. At any point in the rehabilitation, if the pain returns, they should step back to a previous pain-free stage for 1 to 2 weeks, then gradually advance to the next stage.

Some adjunctive oral medications are found in the literature, including bisphosphonates, oral contraceptive pills, and vitamin D supplementation. With bisphosphonates, the pharmacology is the inhibition of osteoclast activity, reducing bone resorption and turnover. Bisphosphonates are primarily indicated in the treatment of osteoporosis. The role of bisphosphonates in the prevention and treatment of stress fractures is unclear. A major prospective, randomized study conducted on 324 young military recruits did not show a decreased incidence of stress fractures with the bisphosphonates group versus placebo.

Evaluating possible vitamin D deficiency in athletes diagnosed with a stress fracture, especially in female patients, is a common question in practice.   A recent study of 5201 U.S. Navy female recruits, which evaluated a daily vitamin D (800 international units) combined with calcium (2000 mg) vs. placebo, confirmed decreased stress fracture rates in the vitamin D/calcium group.

Reduced calories in athletes, which requires a low BMI, such as gymnasts, dancers, and track-and-field, should undergo evaluation and treatment. In some cases, eating disorders must be ruled out, and a referral to a nutritionist or psychiatrist may be warranted. Restricted calories decrease the body of vital nutrients needed for bone metabolism, which can lead to an increased incidence of stress fractures and prolonged healing.

Bone stimulators have achieved attention in the last few years. There are currently two types of devices on the market. The first type uses electromagnetic energy that generates magnetic fields over the fracture site. The premise is that this energy can open calcium channels in cell membranes, which increase calmodulin, thus increasing cell proliferation and healing. However, no conclusive data demonstrate that electromagnetic bone stimulators enhance healing.

Extracorporeal shockwave therapy (ESWT) stimulates osteogenesis and angiogenesis and has been shown to be an effective treatment option for stress fractures.