Images of the growing fetus within the uterus are obtainable in the transverse and sagittal planes from both the curvilinear and the endocavitary probes.  Once the gestation is identified and images are obtained, there are several methods to determine gestational age, utilizing the estimated age based on last-menstrual cycle dates or physical exam.

**First Trimester**

The most accurate time to determine the gestational age is in the first trimester, more specifically between 8 to 12 weeks.

Gestational sac:  The gestational sac can first be seen at around 5 weeks on a transvaginal examination and 6 weeks on a transabdominal examination. It grows approximately 1 mm per day, and measurements become less accurate once it reaches a size of 14 mm.

Crown-rump length: Of the first trimester methods, the crown-rump length is the most accurate for determining gestational age.

**Second Trimester**

Changes in growth, genetic variations, and differences in attributes of the growing fetus make the determination of gestational age within the second and third trimesters less accurate.  Using multiple methods appears to be more accurate than using a single measurement. There are five methods commonly used during these stages of development.

Crown-rump length:  Crown-rump length can be measured up to about 14 weeks of gestation.  Between weeks 12 through 14, this measurement is equivalent to biparietal measurements.

Biparietal Diameter:  This form of measurement is accurate to within 3 to 8 days in the first trimester and 7 to 12 days in the second and is influenced by different skull shapes.

Head Circumference:  Head circumference is accurate within 7 to 12 days, and in the second trimester may be the most accurate. The circumference is obtained in the same plane as the Biparietal Diameter, measuring the circumference of the skull.

Abdominal circumference: In the second trimester, this measurement is accurate to about 7 to 15 days. It is obtained in an axial, transverse plane at the point the portal vein bifurcates and should include the stomach.

Femur length: In the second trimester, this measurement is accurate to about 7 to 17 days.

**Third Trimester**

Abdominal circumference and femur length are used in the third trimester to determine gestational age.

Abdominal Circumference: During the third trimester, the abdominal circumference is accurate to between 18 to 35 days and measured using the same method as in the second trimester.

Femur length: During this trimester, the femur length is accurate to about 21 days and measured using the same method as in the second trimester.