CT angiography (CTA) is the imaging test of choice for suspected pulmonary embolism (PE). It is reported to have sensitivity and specificity ranging from 83% to 100% and 89% to 96%, respectively, and a high negative predictive value of 96% to 99%.

The patient is scanned in a supine position, usually in a 16-64 slice MDCT scanner in the craniocaudal direction. Reformatted images are also obtained in the sagittal and coronal planes to help differentiate artifacts from a true finding. PE studies are graded on their quality based on the opacification of the main pulmonary artery, with greater than or equal to 211 HU an excellent study, 100-211 HU adequate, and less than 100 HU suboptimal. Higher intraluminal density is essential, especially when looking for chronic thrombi.

Acute clots appear as central filling defects in a well-opacified vessel giving rise to the polo mint sign. Eccentric clots form an acute angle with the vessel wall. Saddle PEs are large emboli that obstruct the entire main pulmonary artery. Chronic pulmonary emboli can manifest as thin and tapering vessels often completely cut off beyond the clot, eccentric clots forming obtuse angles with the vessel wall, webs, and bands within the vessel and pulmonary hypertension. Acute PEs can also be associated with a pulmonary infarct, which appears as a peripheral wedge-shaped opacity. Areas with chronic PEs may have mosaic attenuation and bronchial dilatation.

Imaging is also important for determining the severity of pulmonary emboli. Right heart strain, seen as straightening or bowing of the septum into the left ventricle and enlargement of the pulmonary artery greater than the aortic diameter, is more important in prognostication than the clot burden itself. There are also many indices, such as the Qanadli and Mastor scores, that can be used to grade the severity of PEs based on CT findings.

There has been a lot of research and debate regarding the role of magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), both enhanced and unenhanced, and with or without MR venography (MRV) in the evaluation of pulmonary vasculature. The distinct advantage being the absence of iodinated contrast and ionizing radiation. The Prospective Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis III (PIOPED III) study found CR-MRA technically inadequate for PE evaluation with a low sensitivity of 78% that did increase to 92% with the addition of MRV.