**Parotid Gland**

The external carotid artery provides the blood supply to the parotid gland, which flows superiorly from the carotid bifurcation alongside the posterior aspect of the digastric muscle. This artery courses medially to the parotid, bifurcating into the superficial temporal artery, which runs superior to the parotid to the scalp, and the maxillary artery, which travels from the medial side of the parotid to carry blood to the infratemporal fossa and the pterygopalatine fossa. Lastly, the transverse facial artery branches off the superficial temporal artery, projecting anteriorly between the zygoma and parotid duct to provide blood to both the parotid gland and parotid duct, as well as the masseter muscle.

Blood from the maxillary vein and the superficial temporal vein join together to form the retromandibular vein, which runs through the parotid anterior to the facial nerve to join the external jugular vein. The retromandibular vein displays significant variation in its anatomy, and in some cases, splits into an anterior and posterior branch. The anterior branch can form a union with the posterior facial vein, forming the common facial vein. The posterior facial vein lies directly inferior to the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve and is often used as a landmark for pinpointing the nerve branch. By contrast, the posterior branch of the retromandibular vein can join with the post-auricular vein to drain into the external jugular vein

The lymphatic system of the parotid gland differs from the other major salivary glands in that there is a high density of lymph nodes in and around it. In this way, it contains two nodal layers, draining into both the superficial and deep cervical lymph systems. Roughly 90% of the nodes are found in the superficial layer between the glandular tissue and capsule

**Submandibular Gland**

Blood to the submandibular gland is supplied mainly from the facial artery, a branch of the external carotid artery. This artery runs medial to the posterior belly of the digastric muscle to project deep through the gland capsule before crossing the inferior margin of the mandible, referred to as the facial notch. After this point, it travels superiorly adjacent to the inferior branches of the facial nerve and into the face

Unlike the parotid, the submandibular gland's pre-vascular and post-vascular lymph nodes are found between the gland and its fascia instead of being located within the glandular tissue. These nodes are closely associated with the facial artery and vein at the superior portion of the gland and exit into the deep cervical and jugular chains

**Sublingual Gland**

The sublingual gland receives blood from the submental and sublingual arteries, which are branches of the lingual and facial arteries. While deoxygenated blood is carried away by veins parallel to the arteries mentioned above, drainage occurs predominantly through the submandibular lymph nodes