A complete blood count on a patient with pulmonary hemosiderosis will show varying degrees of anemia in the absence of quantitative or qualitative platelet defects, liver or kidney disease, other coagulopathies, or any inflammatory syndromes.

Prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) are done to evaluate for bleeding disorders.

Urinalysis for hematuria and proteinuria to rule out secondary pulmonary hemosiderosis is mandatory.

Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, antinuclear and anti-DNA antibodies are also done.

Sputum testing with hematoxylin-eosin and Prussian blue stains may demonstrate erythrocytes and hemosiderin-laden macrophages, indicating intra-alveolar bleeding. Stains and cultures for mycobacteria, bacteria, and fungus are done to rule out the infective cause.

Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) has a higher diagnostic yield than sputum testing. BAL will demonstrate alveolar macrophages filled with hemosiderin and intact erythrocytes and occasionally neutrophils.

Pulmonary function testing generally shows a restrictive pattern of varying severity. The carbon monoxide diffusing capacity (DLCO) can be elevated during the acute phase. Still, it will most likely be low or normal during the chronic period of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH).

Plain film chest radiographs taken during an acute phase of IPH exacerbation may show diffuse alveolar infiltrates greatest at the lung bases. Computed tomography (CT) scans will demonstrate corresponding ground-glass attenuation in a similar distribution, as seen in a standard chest x-ray. During remission, the pulmonary infiltrate tends to be absorbed, leading to an interstitial reticular and micronodular pattern of opacities in the same areas with variable degrees of fibrosis.

Chromium and technetium-based perfusion scans will show intra-alveolar bleeding; however, their use in clinical practice is limited. The lungs of healthy patients do not take up red blood cells labeled with chromium isotope or technetium Tc 99 pertechnetate. Scans with abnormal pulmonary uptake 12-24 hours after the injection have been observed in patients with pulmonary hemorrhage.