Just as knowledge gained from scientific research needs to be applied and implemented into clinical practice, so too does the knowledge from medical simulation activities. Simulation activities should include the collection of data as well as information related to the practice changes needed of clinicians, again with the ultimate goal of improving patient care. Although all areas of the translational spectrum need continued research, a larger focus on the translational nature of research done in the simulation lab can improve the flow of information along the continuum.

There needs to be an intentional focus of the training activities beginning with the initial planning of simulation activities. This should include consideration in the planning phase of how information gained from each simulation will be used to inform stakeholders of the translational continuum. For example, when preparing a skills session for medical students, the information obtained from the session can be shared with the clinical supervisory staff to inform them of the skills in which the learners are competent. Then, learners can demonstrate and "do" the skills during patient care in the clinical environment.

On the clinical side, when the clinical supervisory staff notices a student who is not able to perform skills adequately, they could be directed back to the simulation lab for additional training. Training, feedback, and competency can be completed at the student level, and a parallel process can be used for practicing healthcare professionals. Through this bi-directional process, more stakeholders are involved to ensure the knowledge is translated into practice.