To obtain local control of colonic lesions and prevent lymphatic spread, radical en bloc resection is accompanied by excision of the supplying lymphovascular pedicle. Lymphatic supply to a region of the colon follows the arterial supply, and hence for oncological reasons division of supplying arteries close to the superior or inferior mesenteric arteries is essential. Right hemicolectomy involves the division of the ileocolic and right colic arteries as they branch from the superior mesenteric artery. The marginal artery of Drummond is also divided. In a formal left hemicolectomy to treat descending or sigmoid colon tumors, the inferior mesenteric artery is divided.

Tumors of the splenic flexure are most commonly managed by extended right hemicolectomy, dividing the ileocolic, right colic arteries, middle colic artery, and right branch of the left colic artery. An extended right hemicolectomy allows an ileo-sigmoid anastomosis, which can be formed tension-free, whereas the anastomosis in a left hemicolectomy would likely be formed under considerable tension between the rectum and right colon. There is debate amongst experts in the field, and a consensus is not yet reached as the best way to manage splenic flexure tumors.

**Right Hemicolectomy**

A technique for laparoscopic right hemicolectomy will be described below. Open or robotic approaches follow similar fundamental steps.

Patient positioning is in the Trendelenburg position with a left lateral tilt. Following chlorhexidine preparation of the skin, careful sterile draping of the entire abdomen should be performed. A 10 mm port should be inserted infra-umbilically, using an open cut down technique and a Hasson trocar. Common sites include the suprapubic, epigastric, and left lumbar position for an additional 10-12 mm ports. A 30-degree endoscope should be used to acquire the views necessary during the procedure.

Step 1: Mobilization of the Right Colon

The mesentery of the terminal ileum is dissected using diathermy or harmonic device. Medial tension placed on the right colon allows careful dissection of the peritoneum layer covering the right paracolic gutter. The dissection is extended cephalad to mobilize the right colon from caecum to hepatic flexure. Exposure of Gerota fascia encapsulating the kidney occurs and allows dissection along this avascular plane. Further dissection into the retro-peritoneum should be avoided to prevent damage to ureter/kidney/great vessels. As the hepatic flexure is approached the 2 and 3 part of the duodenum is visible. Returning the colon to its' original position facilitates surgeon orientation.

Step 2: Mobilization of the Transverse Colon

The bed is tilted to adopt the reverse Trendelenburg position. The gastrocolic ligament is dissected, and the left upper quadrant (LUQ) port is used to elevate the stomach with a Nathanson retractor allowing further dissection and entry into the lesser sac. As the dissection is continued towards the hepatic flexure, the previous plane of dissection is encountered and met.

Step 3: Control of Mesentery

The right colon is retracted laterally, and the proximal transverse colon is elevated, revealing the mesocolon. The mesocolon is dissected initially at the hepatic flexure between the right colic and middle colic pedicles. The mesocolon overlying the ileocolic and right colic pedicles is dissected, and these arteries are then clipped and divided close to their source.

Step 4: Anastomosis

The extracorporeal anastomosis can be achieved with relative ease compared to the intracorporeal anastomosis and without increasing the size of the wound required for specimen extraction. It further allows for a more accurate assessment of margins. Once the wound is extended and the wound protector inserted, the specimen is brought out with terminal ileum. Commonly a functional end-to-end ileocolic anastomosis is performed. The terminal ileum is divided with linear stapler proximal to the ligament of Treves. The colon is similarly dissected distally to the specimen with a stapling device. Two enterotomies are performed at the ends of the colon and ileum to permit the insertion of the stapling arms. Then a side-to-side anastomosis is achieved with anastomotic stapler, taking care not to include any mesentery. The remaining defect is closed with a linear stapler. Careful inspection of the integrity of anastomosis is crucial, with any deficits requiring oversewing. The "crotch" of the anastomosis is the commonest site of a leak.

Step 5: Closure and Re-inspection

The rectus sheath is closed en mass, insufflation of the abdomen allows laparoscopic visualization of the anastomosis, hemostasis, and irrigation is performed before trochar removal under vision. Many surgeons leave an intra-peritoneal drain near the anastomotic site; however, the evidence fails to identify an advantage to doing so in this type of surgery.

**Left Hemicolectomy**

Step 1: Mobilization of the Sigmoid Colon:

A medial to lateral approach is taken, dividing the sigmoid mesentery at its border with the retroperitoneum. The IMA becomes visible, and dissection of avascular planes cranial and caudal to this artery is dissected, allowing circumferential isolation. Care is taken to identify the ureter lying adjacent to the IMA and avoid damage to this structure. For oncological purposes as described above, the IMA is divided close to its junction with the aorta.

Step 2: Mobilization of the Descending Colon:

The ascending colon is mobilized using electro-cautery or ultrasonic dissection techniques up to the splenic flexure. Minimal bleeding should be encountered in the avascular plane between the mesentery and retroperitoneum as above.

Step 3: Mobilization of the Splenic Flexure:

The splenic flexure is mobilized by transecting the gastrocolic ligament gaining access to the lesser sac. This dissection is extended superiorly up to the inferior pole of the spleen, avoiding dissection close to the splenic hilum. Planes medial and lateral to the left branch of the middle colic vessels are dissected, allowing division of this branch. Preservation of the marginal artery of Drummond and the remaining branches of the middle colic artery is ensured while allowing further mesenteric dissection to allow the transverse colon to form an anastomosis in the pelvis.

Step 4: Extracorporeal Anastomosis:

The most common method of anastomosis in left hemicolectomy is an end to end anastomosis via transanal circular stapler. In this technique, the staples are cut from the transverse colon, and the anvil is placed inside the colon, locked in place by a purse-string suture. The stapling device is then inserted per rectum and inserted to pierce the staple line of the rectum. The anvil is locked into the stapling device, and the stapler is deployed. A side-to-end anastomosis or side to side anastomosis as described above can be performed in certain circumstances.

Step 5: Closure and Re-inspection:

The extraction site wound is closed, and the abdomen re-insufflated for inspection of the anastomosis and thorough hemostasis of the surgical field. For both right and left hemicolectomy, to facilitate anastomotic healing, a defunctioning loop ileostomy can be performed.