There are many indications for inspiratory muscle training, including but not limited to the following.

- **Any general surgery requiring hospital admission beyond one day**

- **Prolonged bed rest**: Prolonged immobilization affects almost every organ system in the body. Respiratory complications include decreased ventilation, atelectasis, and pneumonia. Atelectasis is the collapse of the entire lung or part of the lung. It occurs when the alveoli within the lungs become deflated or possibly filled with fluid. Atelectasis is one of the most common respiratory complications after surgery.

- **Patients with neuromuscular disease or spinal cord injury**: Cervical and upper thoracic spinal cord injury cause impairments in respiratory muscle performance, leading to pulmonary dysfunction and making deep breathing difficult for affected individuals. Patients with tetraplegia have a more compromised pulmonary function as compared with patients with paraplegia. Respiratory muscle training should be a focus in all spinal cord injury rehabilitation programs, especially for patients with tetraplegia, as well as those with chronic spinal cord injury.

- **Children with cerebral palsy**: Incentive spirometry has been shown to enhance pulmonary function and breath control for speech production in children with cerebral palsy.

- **Rib fractures**: Several complications can follow rib fracture, including hemothorax, pneumothorax, lung contusion, atelectasis, respiratory failure, flail chest, and even death. Patients suffering from rib fractures frequently complain of chest pain, which can be caused by obstruction of the lower airway or damaged lung hygiene. This can lead to atelectasis and hypoventilation. Atelectasis is the most common complication following rib fractures. Incentive spirometry has been shown to decrease pulmonary complications in patients with rib fractures and improve pulmonary function.

- **Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)**: COPD is a common, preventable lung disease characterized by progressive difficulty with breathing, often with systemic manifestations, in response to tobacco smoke and/or other harmful exposures to the lungs.

- **Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) for lung cancer**: The use of incentive spirometry and inspiratory muscle training for patients with lung cancer that choose to undergo surgical resection via VATS has been shown to assist with lowering hospitalization costs and decreasing the prevalence of pneumonia incidents.

- **Sickle Cell Disease**: Acute chest syndrome is a frequent cause of acute lung dysfunction in children with sickle cell disease. Management of acute chest syndrome includes immediate diagnosis, intravenous fluids, incentive spirometry, analgesics, supplemental oxygen or respiratory support, antibiotics, and transfusion therapy.

- **Ankylosing Spondylitis:**Incentive spirometry may improve pulmonary function and arterial blood gases in patients with ankylosing spondylitis.

- **Parkinson's disease**: Respiratory dysfunction is not a well-known feature of Parkinson's disease. Inspiratory muscle weakness may be present early in the course of the disease. In the more advanced stages, limited chest mobility, poor posture, and lung expansion contribute to less effective coughing. This could lead to the occurrence of aspiration pneumonia, which is among the highest risk factors for mortality for patients in the advanced stages of Parkinson's disease.  Inspiratory muscle training can be helpful when people with Parkinson's disease are experiencing respiratory dysfunction.

- **Mild to moderate asthma:**Breathing exercises may positively affect the quality of life, hyperventilation symptoms, and lung function in adults with mild to moderate asthma.

- **Cystic Fibrosis:**The incentive spirometer may aid airway clearance and improve lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis.

- **COVID-19:**Pulmonary rehabilitation, including inspiratory muscle training, is indicated in patients with mild to severe COVID-19 symptoms, including pneumonia and difficulties with secretion clearance. Training of inspiratory musculature also has significant benefits in patients who have been treated with mechanical ventilation. In patients with a dry, nonproductive cough, fever, and/or demonstrate no changes in thorax radiography, breathing techniques are not indicated.

- **Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis**: Pulmonary rehabilitation has been shown to alleviate respiratory symptoms and improve exercise tolerance. The improvements may be related to the chest expansion during deep-breathing exercises and the stretching of the thoracic muscles resulting in a more efficient breathing pattern, improved respiratory muscle strength, and pulmonary compliance. Most studies on pulmonary rehabilitation in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis combine aerobic activity (walking and/or cycling) with resistance and flexibility exercises for peripheral skeletal muscles. Pulmonary rehabilitation should be considered at any stage of the idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis disease process and in patients awaiting lung transplantation.

- **Interstitial Lung Disease**: Interstitial lung disease is one of the most serious pulmonary complications of connective tissue diseases. Non-pharmacological interventions include exercises such as walking, strength training, inspiratory muscle training, and breathing exercises.

- **Multiple Sclerosis:**Resistive inspiratory muscle training may effectively improve maximal inspiratory pressure in people with mild to moderate multiple sclerosis.