Unless there is evidence from the history or physical exam to suggest alternative causes, evaluation with laboratory or imaging is not necessary for patients with dementia who present with gradually worsening BPSD. Acute or subacute onset of symptoms should prompt basic studies (typically, complete blood count, electrolytes, evaluation of liver and kidney function, urinalysis, thyroid function tests, toxicology screen, and head CT) to evaluate for causes of delirium. Long term care staff members often attribute BPSD to urinary tract infections; however, the prevalence of bacteriuria is up to 50% in institutional settings, and routine testing may, therefore, lead to over-diagnosis, unnecessary antimicrobial treatment, and development of antibiotic resistance. According to the revised McGeer criteria, diagnostic evaluation and empiric therapy should be limited to patients who present with fever, dysuria, suprapubic pain, or new/increased urinary frequency, urgency, or incontinence, although other authors have suggested that culture and treatment could be initiated on the basis of an acute mental status change together with both change in the character of the urine and positive dipstick for either leukocyte esterase or nitrite.

**Establish Priorities**

The first priority is characterizing the severity and nature of the symptoms – patients who are endangering themselves or others with aggressive behaviors or refusal of basic care will warrant more intensive management such as hospitalization. Therefore, the history should begin with an assessment of safety: has the patient been aggressive toward others, and if so, has this caused injury? Have they caused damage to property? Are they risking their health or safety by refusing basic hygiene, food, or fluids? Another priority is identifying delirium, which by definition is caused by a medical condition, medication, or non-prescribed CNS-active substance intoxication or withdrawal because this will require prompt medical evaluation and treatment (see Differential Diagnosis section). If delirium is identified, the patient will need a thorough medical evaluation, which is usually best accomplished in an inpatient setting.

**Characterize Symptoms**

Caregivers should be prompted to describe what they are seeing, rather than using generic terms such as “agitation” or “depression,” which can have different meanings to different observers. Other essential elements of the history include the onset (i.e., acute, sub-acute, or chronic/progressive), frequency, timing, and trajectory of the disturbances, and any relationship to environmental changes or medication changes. There may be a temporal relationship with events such as a change in environment (e.g., moving from home to nursing facility), or symptoms might worsen in the evenings, following family visits, or when providing personal care.

**Review Medications**

Clinicians should ask caregivers about any changes in medications in the weeks preceding the onset or worsening of BPSD. Patients with dementia are susceptible to the CNS effects of medications, and not all culprit medications are easily recognized. In addition to the well-recognized adverse effects of bladder antispasmodics and histamine antagonists on cognition and behavior, antibiotics (especially trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones in the outpatient setting, and penicillins and most cephalosporins [excluding ceftriaxone] in the inpatient setting), antidepressants, benzodiazepines, digoxin, levetiracetam, and muscle relaxants can contribute to both agitation and apathy. Medication withdrawal, especially from antidepressants, benzodiazepines, or opioids, can also contribute to BPSD. Akathisia from antipsychotics, including second-generation antipsychotics, should be considered, especially in patients whose symptoms worsen despite increasing doses of these medications.

**Assess Comfort**

The review of systems should address uncomfortable physical symptoms, including pain, constipation, and urinary retention. Because pain is present in 46 to 56% of patients with dementia and the presence of pain is associated with increased BPSD, the past medical history should have a review for painful conditions (e.g., neuropathy, osteoarthritis, peripheral vascular disease), and caregivers should be asked about both the patient’s self-report about pain and nonverbal signs of pain, because patients with dementia may demonstrate nonverbal signs of pain even though they do not report it.

Review psychiatric history and substance use: Caregivers should be questioned about the past medical history of psychiatric disorders, especially psychotic, mood, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorders, and whether the patient could be using alcohol, cannabis, non-prescribed medications, or illicit drugs.

**Create a Baseline**

Since BPSD can fluctuate and their assessment is subjective, establishing a clear baseline for assessing the effects of treatment is critically important. For overall BPSD, clinicians can use a standardized instrument such as the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) or the Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease rating scale (BEHAVE-AD). Both are based on structured interviews with caregivers and have seen extensive use in research, with similar performance in detecting global changes. The NPI evaluates delusions, hallucinations, agitation/aggression, depression/dysphoria, anxiety, elation/euphoria, apathy/indifference, disinhibition, irritability/emotional lability, aberrant motor behavior, sleep disturbances, and disorders of appetite/eating; for each domain, caregivers are asked to rate frequency, severity, and the degree of distress it causes, over a time period specified by the interviewer. The BEHAVE-AD domains comprise delusions, hallucinations, activity disturbances, aggression, diurnal rhythm disturbances, tearfulness, depression, and anxiety; caregivers are asked to rate each symptom's severity over the past two weeks, provide a global rating of symptom severity, and identify the most troublesome symptom. The Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) specifically evaluates agitated behaviors only, dividing them into four categories depending upon whether they are physical, verbal, aggressive, or non-aggressive.

While the NPI, BEHAVE-AD, and CMAI are gold standards for evaluating BPSD, they are time-consuming, and a reasonable alternative in clinical practice is to ask caregivers to very specifically describe a problematic symptom, quantify its frequency, and assess the degree of distress it causes. For example, a symptom might be described as "pushing me away when I try to give her a shower," and then quantified by the percentage of showering time that this occurs (e.g., 75% of the time) and the level of distress it causes for the caregiver (e.g., 7 on a scale of 0 to 10). Having caregivers use a calendar or notebook to keep a daily prospective diary is the best way to get accurate information; ideally, this should occur before any intervention for at least three days, and then be repeated after the intervention.