Metastatic melanoma can carry a poor prognosis. The 5- year survival rate is estimated to be 10 percent, and distant metastases have an even less favorable prognosis than local spread. Sites of metastases include skin, lungs, liver, and CNS. Prognosis can be affected by the site of clinical metastases.

After a melanoma is diagnosed based on clinical findings and histopathologic confirmation, staging is performed based on guidelines established by AJCC. AJCC uses the TNM system to categorize melanoma from early stage to late stage. in situ, while stage IV is metastatic melanoma. Metastatic melanoma is the spread of primary melanoma cells to distant organs such as lymph nodes, lungs, liver, brain, and bones.

**Screening for Metastases**

**Subcutaneous Tissue**

- Subcutaneous nodules can be the first sign of hematogenous spread of melanoma.

- CT of the subcutaneous tissue can reveal radiodense areas which are sharply contrasted against the radiolucent fat.

- The nodules enhance with contrast and may invade both surrounding muscle and soft tissue.

- A PET scan is superior to a CT scan for determining metastases to the subcutaneous tissue.

- Increased metabolism of melanoma metastases allows for its easy detection

**Lymph Nodes**

- Regional lymph nodes are most commonly involved

- Incidence of lymphadenopathy consists of involvement of sentinel nodes correlates with Breslows thickness of the primary tumor.
- <0.8 mm - the risk of nodal involvement is <1% 
- 0.8-1.5 mm - the risk of nodal involvement is 8% 
- 1.5-4.0 mm - the risk of nodal involvement is 23% 
- >0.4 mm - the risk of nodal involvement is 36 %

- A PET scan is superior to a CT scan for identifying lymph node involvement

**Pulmonary Involvement**

- The most common cause of death in metastatic melanoma is pulmonary metastases causing respiratory failure.

- Solitary metastases are resectable and considered potentially curable in up to 50 % of cases.

- CT with contrast is used for screening pulmonary involvement. Metastatic nodules are distributed in the periphery, often well defined. Most are 1-2 cm in size. This can be followed by bronchoscopy followed by surgical resection.

**CNS Involvement**

- This is the second most common cause of metastatic melanoma-related deaths.

- Hemorrhage is found in patients with brain metastases from melanoma.

- MRI with contrast is more valuable than CT because of its remarkable ability to see acute, chronic, and subacute hemorrhages. In addition, Mri has higher sensitivity when imaging the brain stem, meninges, and spinal cord.

**Liver**

- The liver is the most common visceral organ affected by melanoma metastasis. Incidence correlates with Clark's level of the primary tumor.

- CT is considered the imaging of choice

- Metastases appearance on CT with contrast

When suspicion is high for cutaneous melanoma, the best biopsy technique is an excisional biopsy, which allows a dermatopathologist to visualize the melanoma entirely and provide accurate staging, guiding treatment decisions and prognosis. The presence of multiple cutaneous melanomas should raise the possibility of metastatic disease. In extensive lesions that are difficult to completely excise, "scouting" biopsies within several areas of the lesion can be performed, although staging may depend on the excision specimen.

**Histopathology Findings**

- The asymmetric proliferation of atypical melanocytes with poorly circumscribed borders

- Atypical melanocytes demonstrate pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli, and mitoses (dermal melanocytes in mitosis are an indication of a worse prognosis)

- Ulceration, if present, is associated with a worse prognosis

- Loss of melanocyte maturation (deeper cells are large and atypical as more superficial cells)

- Pagetoid melanocytes

- A lymphocytic response can be variable

- Depth of invasion is the most important prognostic indicator.

- Breslow depth is measured from the top of the granular layer or ulcer base to the deepest melanoma cell measured in millimeters.

Clark level- reported with staging but no longer used commonly.

- Level I: in situ (limited to within the epidermis)

- Level II: invades the papillary dermis

- Level III: fills the papillary dermis and reaches the reticular dermis.

- Level IV: invades the reticular dermis

- Level V: invades the subcutaneous fat

**Features That Do Not Have a Role in the Current Staging**

- Regression (vascular fibrous tissue in the papillary dermis with or without melanophages)

- Precursor nevus

- Lymphatic or vascular invasion, usually in deeply invasive lesions

- Melanoma subtypes are characterized by location, architecture, cell morphology, and associated background of solar damage

**American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Primary Tumor Staging (2018)****Tumor**

- T1: ≤ 1 mm (a: < 0.8 mm without ulceration; b < 0.8 mm with ulceration, or 0.8 to 1 mm with or without ulceration)

- T2: 1.1-2 mm (a: without ulceration; b: with ulceration)

- T3: 2.1-4 mm (a: without ulceration; b: with ulceration)

- T4: > 4 mm (a: without ulceration; b: with ulceration)

**Node**

- N0: 0 metastatic nodes

- N1: 1 metastatic node or any number of in-transit, satellite, and/or microsatellite metastases

- a: clinically occult, detected by sentinel lymph node [SLN] biopsy
- b: clinically detected
- c: no regional lymph node disease, but in-transit, satellite, and/or microsatellite metastases present

- N2: 2-3 metastatic nodes or any number of in-transit, satellite, and/or microsatellite metastases with one tumor-involved node

- a: clinically occult, detected by SLN biopsy
- b: at least one node clinically detected
- c: one clinically occult or clinically detected node and in-transit, satellite, and/or microsatellite metastases present

- N3: 4+ metastatic nodes or any number of in-transit, satellite, and/or microsatellite metastases with two or more tumor-involved nodes, or any number of matted nodes without or with in-transit, satellite, and/or microsatellite metastases

- a: clinically occult, detected by SLN biopsy
- b: at least one node clinically detected or any number of matted nodes
- c: 2 or more clinically occult or clinically detected nodes and/or presence of any number of matted nodes and in-transit, satellite, and/or microsatellite metastases present

**Metastasis**

- M0: No distant metastasis

- M1a: Distant skin, soft tissue including muscle, and/or nonregional nodal metastasis (0: normal lactate dehydrogenase [LDH]; 1: elevated LDH)

- M1b: Lung metastasis (0: normal LDH; 1: elevated LDH)

- M1c: Distant Metastasis to non-CNS visceral sites (0: normal LDH; 1: elevated LDH)

- M1d: Distant Metastasis to CNS (0: normal LDH; 1: elevated LDH)

**Sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy:**Used only for staging and prognosis. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) and the 2018 American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) guidelines recommend that, in general, SLN biopsy should be discussed and considered when the risk of metastasis is 5% or greater. Melanoma of T1b or higher grade, certain high-risk T1a melanomas (e.g., mitotic rate > two when associated with young age, lymphovascular invasion, or multiple adverse prognostic features), or when staging is uncertain (e.g., transected melanomas that may be T1b or higher). If the risk of metastasis is < 5%, NCCN guidelines do not recommend SLN biopsy. This procedure has not been shown to improve survival.

**Follow-up and surveillance:**According to the 2018 AAD clinical practice guidelines, imaging and laboratory studies are not recommended for stage 0-II primary cutaneous melanomas. The use of lymph node (LN) ultrasound is appropriate when the SLN biopsy criteria are not met, when SLN biopsy cannot be performed or fails, when complete dissection of the LN is not performed with SLN biopsy results positive, or when an expert in the use of ultrasound for nodal surveillance is available.