# Continuing Education Activity

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FED) is a progressive hereditary disease of the cornea characterized by the slow deterioration of endothelial cells and, in most cases, development of guttae, which are excrescences of Descemet’s membrane. As the disease progresses, loss of a majority of corneal endothelial cells can lead to corneal edema, scarring, and significantly decreased visual acuity. This activity reviews the etiology, epidemiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, evaluation, management, and prognosis of FED, and highlights the role of the healthcare team in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the etiology of Fuchs endothelial dystrophy.
- Review the appropriate history, physical, and evaluation of Fuchs endothelial dystrophy.
- Outline the treatment and management options available for Fuchs endothelial dystrophy.
- Explain interprofessional team strategies for improving care coordination and communication to advance Fuchs endothelial dystrophy and improve outcomes.

# Introduction

Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FED) is a bilateral, slowly progressive, often asymmetric corneal disease characterized by deterioration of endothelial cells and development of guttata, which are excrescences of Descemet’s membrane.

FED was first documented in 1910 when Viennese ophthalmologist Ernst Fuchs reported 13 elderly patients with bilateral central clouding.

# Etiology

FED inheritance is in an autosomal dominant manner with variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance**.**

There are several factors that correlate with FED which contribute to its complex pathophysiology. Early-onset FED has heavy influence of genetic factors and is often a familial autosomal dominant disease.

The SLC4A11 gene encodes the ion channel that facilitates water resorption through the endothelium layer and is an important mediator of deturgescence of the cornea. Mutations in this gene can lead to corneal edema and have correlated with FED. Similarly, mutations in the ZEB1 gene, which encodes the transcription factor Zinc finger E-Box binding homeodomain 1, have been associated with late-onset FED and posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy. The AGBL1 gene encodes the deglutamylase enzyme ATP/GTP binding protein-like 1, and mutations in the gene are associated with FED. Missense mutations in the LOXHD1 gene are associated with progressive hearing loss and corneal endothelial cell dysfunction in FED.

# Epidemiology

The incidence and prevalence of FED are challenging to determine, since many patients present with corneal guttata that never progress to FED, and most patients with FED have signs and symptoms that manifest only after several decades. FED initially presents with corneal guttata in the fourth decade of life, but most patients do not require surgical intervention until the sixth or seventh decades.

Although guttata may occur in up to 4% of patients older than 40 years old in the U.S., they less commonly co-occur with corneal edema, and therefore, many patients with guttata do not receive the diagnosis of FED.

There are several risk factors associated with FED that are not heritable. Age and gender are important factors that influence the development of FED. People older than 40 years old and women have a higher risk of developing FED.

# Pathophysiology

The endothelial barrier and pumps are essential in maintaining corneal deturgescence and transparency. Endothelial cell dysfunction plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of FED.

The endothelial layer of the cornea is composed of a monolayer of hexagonal cells that acts as a regulator of water flow, balancing inflow and outflow to prevent corneal swelling. Embryologically, the endothelial cells are derived from neural crest cells and therefore rest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The functional endothelium contains around 400 to 500 cells per square millimeter. The aqueous humor provides the cornea with solutes and nutrients, which diffuse through the barrier of endothelial cells via intraocular pressure gradients.

Tight junctions between endothelial cells limit water diffusion paracellularly; therefore, sodium-potassium ATPase pumps are the primary driver for fluid movement out of the cornea and into the aqueous humor. The sodium-potassium pump is generally considered the endothelial pump; however, it works along with aquaporins, and the SLC4A11 encoded sodium-borate cotransporter. Due to a large number of active transporters, the endothelial cells are extremely metabolically demanding and dependent on ATP, chloride ions, bicarbonate ions, and carbonic anhydrase. For the cornea to remain transparent, the corneal stroma must have less than 3.5 mg of water per mg of dry tissue. Therefore, if the corneal endothelium becomes disrupted, such as if the number of endothelial pumps significantly decreases, the cornea absorbs an uncontrolled amount of water and swells, which results in hazy vision and decreases visual acuity.

The pathophysiology of FED involves several proposed mechanisms involving channelopathies, oxidative stress, apoptosis, and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Although several proposals for several mechanisms exist, the underlying pathophysiology remains unknown. One of the primary causes of the development of FED is channelopathies in the corneal endothelium, characterized by malfunctions due to mutations in the genes of ion channels, like mutations in SLC4A11, for example.

There is also a possibility that FED is associated with the unfolded protein response (UPR) of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), in which after unfolded, abnormal proteins accumulate in the ER, a pathway of cellular mechanisms are activated to halt translation, degrading misfolded proteins, and ultimately trigger apoptosis. Few studies have demonstrated that the ER enlarges and several markers of the UPR are overactivated in FED.

In FED, degenerating endothelial cells produce a pathologic secretion product called hyaline excrescences. These excrescences are called “guttata” and can be seen on Descemet’s membrane, both histologically and clinically.

# Histopathology

Specular microscopy relies on a smooth, transparent cornea to generate specular reflection; therefore, it is less useful for diseased corneas with significant edema, as in FED.

Confocal microscopy provides a superior view of the corneal endothelium compared to specular microscopy. Although it is more useful for evaluation of FED, confocal microscopy not all clinics perform it.

Light microscopy will show intracellular epithelial edema, bullous separation, stromal thickening, endothelial loss, and Descemet membrane thickening with posterior nodules, a common finding. Patients with FED only are not expected to have inflammatory cell infiltrates. Electron microscopy will show degenerating keratocytes in the corneal stroma and lipid keratopathy in the majority of cases. Degenerating keratocytes will show vacuolization, dissolution of cytoplasm, loss of intracellular organelles, and nuclear chromatin clumping. The endothelium is attenuated, particularly over the posterior nodules.

Non-guttate forms of Fuchs dystrophy will show many of the same corneal changes as the guttate forms, including endothelial cell pleomorphism and polymegethism, as well as reduced endothelial cell density. However, guttata will be absent. Often, specular microscopy (or confocal microscopy) will be the only way to determine whether a patient has a non-guttate form of FED.

# History and Physical

FED usually manifests around the fourth decade of life and can be divided into four stages, which span 20 to 30 years. In the early stages, the majority of patients with FED are asymptomatic,

Stage 1 is indistinguishable from central corneal guttata (without FED), and it is therefore only identified after the patient progresses to later stages of the disease. In the second stage, the cornea decompensates, and corneal edema occurs. Patients may present with complaints of painless blurry vision and glare that is worse upon waking up in the morning, due to increased corneal hydration that occurs overnight from closed eyelids.

Slit-lamp examination is used to assess the extent of guttata, the confluence of guttata (indicating later stages of disease), and the degree of corneal edema, which becomes present at severe stages.

Slit-lamp examination in FED can also reveal anterior corneal epithelial changes that correlate with disease progression. In stage 2, microcysts will appear on the corneal surface that may be visualized with topical fluorescein and cobalt blue lighting. In stage 3, as extracellular fluid collects beneath the epithelium, epithelial defects may be seen. Subepithelial scarring occurs, and connective tissue pannus forms in stage 4. Over time, the peripheral cornea becomes vascularized, and stromal and epithelial edema decline.

In the few cases of non-guttate FED, guttata will not be present on slit lamp exam; however, marked edema and bullous keratopathy may be apparent.

Pachymetry measurement of central corneal thickness (CCT) is often used to aid in decision-making, as a CCT greater than 640 micrometers generally indicates corneal edema. However, patients with physiologically thinner corneas may present with advanced FED and CCT less than 600 micrometers.

# Evaluation

History, physical examination, pachymetry, and microscopy are key features in evaluating a patient with FED. The first step is to take a thorough history. FED symptoms will typically begin in the sixth to seventh decades of life, and patients will have complaints of blurry vision, glare, and corneal haze. Guttata and corneal edema will be apparent on slit-lamp examination, and later stages may show pathologic changes such as epithelial bullae, scarring, and vascularization.

Specular or confocal microscopy will show endothelial cell loss, and CCT will increase as a result of corneal edema. CCT and endothelial cell count and morphology can be used to monitor disease progression.

Clinicians and patients should monitor FED progression with routine eye exams every six months, and early FED may be managed medically. It is important to note that if patients are scheduled in the morning, their vision will likely be worse compared to afternoon hours. Surgical options may be a consideration for patients with advanced disease associated with decreased function and quality of life.

Patients with FED are typically elderly and therefore may present with several comorbid conditions, including cataracts, age-related macular degeneration, and cardiovascular disease, which can complicate surgical management.

# Treatment / Management

There are a number of treatments used to treat FED symptoms of blurry vision and ocular pain. Medical treatments such as hyperosmotic saline drops or ointment can facilitate corneal dehydration. For symptomatic blurry vision in the mornings, some patients find it useful to use a hairdryer to place warm, dry air gently onto the cornea. Other supportive treatments and surgical procedures such as phototherapeutic keratectomy, amniotic membrane transplants, anterior stromal puncture, and conjunctival flaps can be used to relieve painful symptoms, especially those associated with ruptured bullae in later stages of the disease.

FED is the primary indication for corneal transplantation in the U.S., and FED accounted for 36% of the nearly 47000 corneal transplants performed in the United States in 2016.

More recent potential approaches to managing corneal endothelial cell dysfunction include the use of Rho kinase (ROCK) inhibitor Y-27632, which promotes cell adhesion and proliferation of endothelial cells.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of FED includes

- Primary central corneal guttata

- Aphakic bullous keratopathy (especially with a history of cataract surgery)

- Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy (especially with a history of cataract surgery)

- Recurrent corneal erosions

- Chandler’s syndrome

- Posterior polymorphous dystrophy (PPMD)

- Congenital hereditary endothelial dystrophy (CHED)

- Congenital hereditary stromal dystrophy

- Toxic anterior segment syndrome

- Iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome

- Hassall-Henle bodies

- Herpetic disciform keratitis

- Pigment dispersion syndrome

- Anterior uveitis

- Interstitial keratitis

- Herpetic stromal keratitis

# Staging

Traditionally, staging has its basis on the extent of guttata and presence of corneal edema

**Krachmer Scale 
**



**:
**

- Grade 0 (G0): Negative; no apparent disease

- Grade 1 (G1): definitive onset of the disease 0-12 central, non-confluent guttata in at least one eye; typically asymptomatic

- Grade 2 (G2): more than 12 central nonconfluent guttata in at least one eye

- Grade 3 (G3): zone of central confluent central guttata 1-2mm in the horizontal plane

- Grade 4 (G4): zone of central confluent central guttata 2-5mm in the horizontal plane

- Grade 5 (G5): zone of central confluent central guttata >5mm with or without edema of the corneal stroma and/or epithelium layer

Additionally, four distinct stages have been defined that span the FED course by two to three decades.

A description of the **four stages** appears below:

- Stage 1: asymptomatic; however, slit-lamp examination exhibits central nonconfluent guttata and a thickened Descemet’s membrane

- Stage 2: guttata coalesce; corneal endothelial polymegathism (variation in cell size), pleomorphism (variation in cell shape), and cell loss are present; symptoms of blurry vision and glare, especially when awakening

- Stage 3: dysfunction of the endothelial pump; formation of bullae in epithelial and subepithelial layers; development of corneal edema

- Stage 4: corneal edema results in haziness, scarring, and decreased vision

These staging scales may be losing clinical relevance due to the advent of non-surgical treatments and techniques, allowing for earlier surgical intervention.

# Prognosis

FED is a progressive disease, and many patients report significant visual impairment in the sixth or seventh decades of life that requires surgical management. FED is the most common reason for corneal transplant in the United States.

Most FED patients who receive keratoplasty have significant visual improvement.

# Complications

There are several complications directly associated with FED, including corneal scarring and decreased visual acuity. Additionally, there are several potential complications of surgical management: graft detachment, rejection, and failure; aqueous leakage; postoperative infection; secondary ocular hypertension from steroid use; cataract formation; wound healing defects; and vitreoretinal complications. PK has significant complications and risks, as patients may develop postoperative astigmatism and wound rupture.

Graft detachment rates are reported to range from 0.9% to 36.4% after DSAEK,

# Deterrence and Patient Education

FED is not preventable, and in many cases, the cause is unknown. Patients should return for follow-up appointments to monitor disease progression with routine eye exams. Clinicians should work with their patients to determine when is the appropriate time for medical and surgical intervention. In early stages with corneal decompensation, medical treatment may suffice. Hypertonic saline drops may be used in the mornings to dehydrate the cornea. Some patients find that gently blowing warm air over their corneas with a hairdryer in the mornings is useful to reduce blurry vision. Patients should understand that their disease is progressive, and FED will eventually require surgical intervention.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

The management of patients with FED is challenging and complex, and it requires collaboration between ophthalmologists and optometrists on the patient’s care team. FED is a progressive disease, and a patient’s quality of vision and quality of life should be a major consideration when selecting management approaches. Routine eye exams are crucial. Although surgical options are available for advanced disease, there is a possibility of graft failure. In early stages during medical management, the pharmacist can assist with instructing the patients on the use of hyperosmotic eye drops or ointments. If there is a concern with patient compliance, the pharmacist should contact the prescribing as well as provide further patient education. Nursing can also help in this regard, as well as ascertaining and encouraging medication compliance. When the condition progresses to a surgical solution, the ophthalmic surgeon should coordinate with nursing for follow-up care after surgery, so that post-operative care expectations are set and met. Since the FED patient population is typically elderly, patients may benefit from social workers and low vision therapists.

Given the challenge of FED management, it is crucial to employ an interprofessional healthcare team approach, so that collaborative care and information sharing lead to optimal patient outcomes through each stage of the condition. [Level 5]