Performing a colonoscopy requires practice and is a skill that is difficult to master. While watching an experienced clinician perform a colonoscopy may appear simple, the technique is something that requires time, patience, and a lot of practice. Navigating through a cylindrical tube that can flex, dilated, contract, and move is not an easy task. In addition, patient factors such as obesity, redundant colonic tissue, surgical history, compliance with bowel preparation, and underweight individuals all need to be accounted for when preparing for a colonoscopy. For a clinician to become proficient in colonoscopy, this requires several hours on a simulator, as well as proctored colonoscopies with an experienced surgeon or gastrointestinal specialist.

It is crucial that the clinician is familiar with the equipment and tests it before starting the colonoscopy. As mentioned before, there are many components to the colonoscope. Manipulating all elements (up, down, right, left, clockwise, and counterclockwise rotation) of the scope adds to the complexity of the procedure.

The patient should be positioned in the left lateral decubitus position. Although, some clinicians may prefer the patient on their back or right side if circumstances require. On the left-sided position, the patient's legs should be flexed, and pillows should be placed around their back, head, and between their knees to help prevent injury to the bony prominence and to help maintain position. The technician or nurse is there to assist with preserving stability and preventing the patient from rolling forward or backward. Also, they are there to help provide counter pressure to the abdomen to assist the endoscopist in navigating corners and turns. The legs being flexed toward the chest help to relax the puborectalis and pubococcygeus muscles. This allows for easier entry and traversing past the angle at the sacral prominence. Failure to achieve this position makes navigation past the rectum at the level of the sacrum more difficult.

The endoscopist should be standing behind the patient. Before inserting the scope, it is essential to perform a digital rectal exam (DRE) with a water-soluble lubricant. At this time, the clinician should be feeling for any lumps, bulges, rectocele, or masses. In addition, they should take note of the rectal tone but must also take into account the level of sedation the patient has achieved, as this may affect the tone of the anus. Following the DRE, The handle of the scope should be in the left hand of the clinician, and the endoscope should be placed in the right hand about 10 cm to 20 cm from the working end or lense of the scope. A generous amount of water-soluble lubricant should again be used to help prevent injury to the sensitive tissue of the anus. Using all components of the scope (up, down, left, right, and rotation), the endoscope is navigated through the different levels of the rectum, colon, and terminal ileum.

Specific landmarks can be used to help the clinician know where they are in the colon. While generalized distances of the anatomy are useful, using the scope to measure these out is not always reliable, it is important to remember that the scope can twist and turn on itself and will not provide an accurate measurement farther into the colon.

Important landmarks to remember and consider while performing a colonoscopy:

- The first portion of the rectum has three different larger outpouchings. This is important for acting as a compartment for fecal storage and allows the human body to go more extended periods without having to defecate. It is easily identified through the anus at the beginning of the colonoscopy.

- The second landmark begins at the sacral prominence. This signifies the proximal end of the rectum. It can be more difficult to traverse because the sacrum presses up against the colon, however over time and experience, it becomes easier to traverse.

- The taenia coli, as previously discussed, travels the length of the colon, it is at the end of the sigmoid colon and the beginning of the rectum that these fibers splay out and are no longer clustered in a longitudinal bandlike fashion. These Taenia coli, while not directly seen within the colon, can generally be identified secondary to the tensile forces they place on a distended bowel. They can help delineate location from rectum to sigmoid colon. This is the third landmark that can be used to identify the location.

- The descending colon contains a more round appearance to it than it does any other component of the colon. Its diameter is smaller than that of the transverse and ascending colon, approximately 3 cm to 5 cm. Continuing into the transverse colon, not only does the diameter change and increase in size, the shape of the colon becomes more triangular than round. This is primarily due to the taenia coli.

- Navigating past the splenic flexure can be another landmark that provides difficulty in traversing. Having the assistant provide counterpressure to the right upper quadrant and right lower quadrant of the abdomen can help push the endoscope past the flexure and into the transverse colon. Two techniques have been described and safe to utilize, the Prechel pressure technique, pressing the forearm into the abdomen, and the two forearm technique, both forearms are pressed into the patients' belly, should be utilized by the assistant. The open hand technique, pressing with the palm of the hand, is not recommended as it can cause injury to the assistant.

- At the hepatic flexure, it can be noticed that the colon takes on a bluish hue. This is the liver reflecting into the colon and can help the clinician identify that he is near the hepatic flexure and starting to traverse into the ascending colon. It is important to note that injury to the liver can occur from too much pressure in this region, although this is rare.

- The ascending colon is much more dilated than the descending and transverse colon. It will continue to enlarge towards the cecum. A few characteristics that help to determine this location include; the opening to the appendix, the opening to the ileocecal valve and the convergence of the taenia coli into one focal spot at the end of the cecum, this is also known as the Mercedes sign and is self-explanatory. These landmarks should be utilized to help identify the cecum. While using transillumination can help to provide more information, it should not be used as a measure to come to this conclusion.

It is important that the endoscopist feels for any tension or difficulty with advancing the colonoscope. The scope should never be progressed if the view is not clear, and the lumen is not visualized. This increases the risk of injury. Should the clinician find it difficult to advance the scope, it is possible; they have developed an Alpha loop. This occurs more commonly in the sigmoid colon. Should this happen, the endoscopist may also find that the patient is becoming more uncomfortable. This is another clue that a loop has formed. To remove the loop, suction is applied, the scope is withdrawn while rotating the shaft of the scope clockwise. This will help to remove the loop and allow for further advancement of the scope. It is important to remember that sometimes to advance further, the scope must be withdrawn.

To help complete the colonoscopy and prevent any missed lesions, as well as help, provide more data that the cecum has been reached, the endoscopist should try to intubate the ileocecal valve. Not only does this help to give more information that the cecum was indeed entered, but it is also used to visualize the ilium and help diagnose inflammatory bowel disease.

While entering the colon and traversing toward the cecum, the endoscopist is examining the mucosa and looking for any lesions that are concerning. Should a polyp be identified, it should be removed, if possible, at that time. If the lesion is too large to remove, a biopsy should be obtained, and the lesion should be tattoed using India ink or methylene blue, and the location noted. However, it is not during the entrance of the colon that the bulk of the procedure is performed. Withdrawl of the colonoscope has been identified as the most important component of the procedure. It is during withdrawal that the clinician should be examining all components of the colon and looking behind all haustral folds.

Even the smallest of polyps can be identified within one of these folds, and if not appropriately identified, can result in a false negative colonoscopy and result in potentially missed cancer. As mentioned before, there are certain markers that are used to define a successful colonoscopy. It is recommended that a clinician spend no less than six to eight minutes withdrawing from the colon for it to be considered a successful colonoscopy and provide appropriate screening for the patient. Removing the scope faster than this has been found to increase the risk of missed polyps and early cancer.

While withdrawing from the colon, it is vital to aspirate some of the insufflation to provide better patient recovery, less flatulence, and distention discomfort. Near the end of the colonoscopy, the anus and the dentate line should be examined for lesions or hemorrhoids via retroflection of the scope. To retroflex, the scope is brought back just past the edge of the proximal end of the anus. Using the anal canal, the scope should be advanced while rotating both wheels fully back; this allows the scope to fully retroflex in the rectum and allow for visualization of the anus. Following this maneuver, both wheels are returned to neutral, the rectum suctioned, the scope is withdrawn, and the procedure complete.