The history and physical exam should focus on determining the etiology of AKI and the timeline of progression. If the history points towards hypovolemia or hypotension, then the treatment is guided towards volume repletion. The providers need to look for inciting events such as diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, which may have caused volume loss, or any over-the-counter drugs such as NSAIDs or other nephrotoxins. Differentiating between AKI and chronic kidney disease (CKD) is essential as CKD itself is not an uncommon risk factor for AKI. This can be achieved with the help of history in which one may find features suggestive of CKD such as chronic fatigue, anorexia, nocturia, disturbed sleep-wake cycle, polyuria, and pruritis. Moreover, a careful review of past medical history to reveal any co-morbid conditions can also help narrow down the etiology of AKI, for instance, cirrhosis and history of blood clots requiring anticoagulation. History and physical examination are essential in AKI because, more often than not, labs are unable to provide a clear answer as to the etiology of AKI.

The most common causes of AKI in hospitalized patients are in this order:

- ATN – 45%

- Prerenal disease – 21%

- Acute superimposed on CKD – 13%

- Urinary tract obstruction – 10% (most often due to Benign prostatic hypertrophy in older men)

- Glomerulonephritis or vasculitis – 4%

- AIN – 2%

- Atheroemboli – 1%

A history of urine output is important, which may give clues to the cause of AKI. Following are some associations:

- Oliguria - favors AKI.

- Sudden anuria - suggests acute urinary tract obstruction, acute glomerulonephritis, or vascular catastrophe.

- Gradually diminishing urine output - may be secondary to urethral stricture or bladder outlet obstruction due to causes such as prostate enlargement.

Performing a detailed examination is imperative as it provides extremely valuable information in establishing the etiology of AKI. A crucial part of the physical exam should be orthostatic vital signs since they are an important clue for hypovolemia and, in an appropriate clinical context, would guide treatment. Several organ systems need to be examined to find clues regarding the cause of AKI. Some of them are given below:

- Skin - livedo reticularis, digital ischemia, butterfly rash, and purpuras to suggest vasculitis. Track marks to suggest endocarditis in an IV drug abuser.

- Eyes and ears - jaundice in liver disease, band keratopathy in multiple myeloma, signs of diabetes mellitus, atheroemboli in retinopathy, and signs of hypertension. Keratitis, iritis, and uveitis in autoimmune vasculitis. Hearing loss in Alport disease.

- Cardiovascular system - pulse rate, blood pressure, and jugulovenous pulse in establishing volume status. Irregular rhythm may indicate electrolyte imbalance-related arrhythmias. Pericardial friction rub in uremic pericarditis.