Clinical presentation and physical exam allow diagnosis in most cases of torticollis. Indications for imaging should be individualized, as deemed appropriate.

Diagnostic exams include radiography (X-ray), computed tomography (CT), ultrasound imaging, and laboratory analysis of blood (screening for metabolic or genetic factors).

In cases of spasmodic torticollis, the pain is unilateral and can radiate to the shoulder, and there is muscle stiffness. Proper observation of the cervical spine and scapular girdle should be done by assessing the active mobility of the spine and evaluating for pain in muscle movement. Passive mobility should undergo assessment sitting with and with caution due to the possibility of atlantoaxial subluxation. X-ray and CT imaging may be necessary to identify any anatomic abnormality (fracture, subluxation, etc.)

In persistent torticollis, it is essential to check for strabismus, nystagmus, signs of intracranial hypertension, or other focal neurological signs. Persistent torticollis in the presence of recurrent vomiting is a warning sign, and a thorough neurological examination is essential. In these cases, neuroimaging examinations are imperative to exclude intracranial injury. Ophthalmology consultation should be a consideration with abnormal extraocular movements of the eyes.

The presence of fever should lead to consideration of an infectious or inflammatory etiology. Excluding a septic otolaryngological focus or an osteoarticular infection is essential.

Examination to determine the presence of cervical adenopathy, an examination of the oropharynx, and otoscopy are important areas of focus on the physical examination. CT imaging should take place if there is suspicion of a retropharyngeal abscess. The presence of tenderness in the cervical spine may suggest osteomyelitis or spondylodiscitis. Laboratory testing has an auxiliary role in the diagnosis. MRI and scintigraphy are additional imaging studies that can aid in diagnosis.