Musculoskeletal amyloidosis (MA) is a complex disease process that tends to be systemic but sporadic in involvement and frequently poses a diagnostic challenge. MA usually manifests as a secondary disease process but can also present as a primary process. The most common primary disease states predisposing a patient to MA include long-term dialysis treatment, multiple myeloma, insulin dependence, and occasionally rheumatoid arthritis. Disease processes such as rheumatoid arthritis, myopathy, chondrosarcoma, and several spondyloarthropathies may mimic the signs and symptoms of MA.

The imaging characteristics of MA are frequently nonspecific and must be appropriately contextualized with the patient's medical history. Many imaging findings related to MA may appear quite similar to other musculoskeletal pathologies, such as tenosynovial giant cell tumors, idiopathic carpal tunnel syndrome, and bone mineral loss. Although specific imaging characteristics (in conjunction with anatomical involvement and patient history) may obviate the need for tissue sampling, pathologic confirmation remains the gold standard for diagnosing musculoskeletal amyloidosis. Despite the associated diagnostic challenge, amyloidosis must be identified and treated as soon as possible to preserve the patient's quality of life; therefore, strong attention to detail, a high index of suspicion, and effective interprofessional cooperation are required.

One of the earliest signs of amyloidosis is declining renal function. The internal medicine physician and nephrologist are essential in correlating the patient's current functional renal status to their medical history. The nephrologist is also critical in the context of long-term dialysis treatment, considering the onset of beta-2 microglobulin amyloidosis approaches near certainty by the second decade of dialysis treatment. The family medicine physician and endocrinologist can provide helpful guidance and surveillance for those patients requiring injectable insulin to ensure that injection site rotation mitigates the risk of insulin-derived amyloidosis and its mimics. The diagnosis of transthyretin amyloidosis prognosticates cardiac involvement, which necessitates cardiologic intervention.

A consultation with the rheumatologic physician will provide diagnostic clarity regarding arthritides and spondyloarthropathies that mimic amyloidosis. Frequent coexisting anemia and the need for therapeutic intervention with chemotherapy and plasmapheresis will require the expertise of the Hematology/Oncology physician in conjunction with the pharmacist. The involvement of surgical specialties, such as orthopedic surgery and general surgery, is critical in the identification and surgical palliation of the various manifestations and complications of musculoskeletal amyloidosis. Nursing specialties can assist in patient monitoring, provide education, and ensure patient comfort in inpatient and outpatient settings.

Finally, the radiologist plays a pivotal role in reducing the diagnostic uncertainty of musculoskeletal amyloidosis by correlating the imaging findings and extent of the disease with the patient's medical history and obtaining tissue samples for diagnosis and monitoring disease response following an intervention. Early involvement of the radiologist regarding the most appropriate imaging study for the clinical scenario will increase diagnostic efficiency while reducing the patient's exposure to unnecessary radiation. As such, the ACR appropriateness criteria provides ordering guidance for the healthcare provider and represents a meta-analysis of over 6,200 articles and 8,800 recommendations of the most suitable study for the given clinical scenario.

Although musculoskeletal amyloidosis frequently presents a diagnostic dilemma for the treating physician, rapid diagnosis and treatment will improve patient outcomes and quality of life. A multidisciplinary treatment strategy to address the systemic nature of amyloidosis is recommended.

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Defense Health Agency, Brooke Army Medical Center, the Department of Defense, nor any agencies under the U.S. Government.