Sertoli cell-only syndrome is a condition in which there is a complete absence of germ cells within the testes resulting in male infertility. It is seen mostly with Klinefelter syndrome and Yq microdeletions patients.

In Klinefelter syndrome, a primary hypergonadotropic hypogonadism disorder is characterized by trisomy 47 XXY, and patients will present with very typical characteristics. These include gynecomastia, tall long extremities, a feminized body type, and lastly, dysfunction of the gonadal processes. Because there are no functional Leydig or Sertoli cells, there will be low testosterone levels due to lack of Leydig cells, and there will be no inhibin released by the Sertoli cells. Because there is no inhibin to shut down GnRH release, GnRH levels will typically be high, and this subsequently leads to high LH and FSH levels. It is important to note that testicular histology will often show fibrosis and connective tissue damage of the interstitial space and the seminiferous tubules.

Sertoli cell pathology can also occur in Sertoli cell tumors or Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors. These are sex-cord-stromal cancers and can occur in men and women. However, Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors most commonly occur in the older women demographic. It is also essential to note that in patients with Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors, there will often be elevated hormone levels, such as increased androgens in Sertoli-Leydig tumors. This condition would present clinically as a significant painless mass in the ovaries or testes, and cause possible virilization, hirsutism, clitoromegaly, increased lean muscle mass, etc.

A disruption in the normal development of the Sertoli cell results in a condition known as testicular dysgenesis syndrome. It is a condition in which the patient will have hypospadias, cryptorchidism, poor quality of semen, and going into testicular germ cell cancer.