Effective education on the treatment of substance use disorders among healthcare providers can help to improve outcomes. Unfortunately, training in substance-related/addictive disorders is frequently limited, leaving providers ill-equipped to meet the demand after training. Additionally, a lack of adequate curriculum for healthcare provider training and a negative view of patients with substance use disorders plays a role in poor healthcare outcomes.

Unless emergency treatment requires it, prescribing potentially addictive medications should be limited to healthcare providers specifically trained in substance-related/addictive disorders. When utilizing medications in the treatment of substance use disorders, healthcare providers should not place arbitrary limits on treatment duration. All treatment decisions should be patient-centered and based on the unique risk/benefit analysis.  The American Academy of Addiction Psychiatry (AAAP), along with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), sponsors Providers Clinical Support System (PCSS), a training program for physicians and other healthcare providers. This program offers training, mentorship, and other support for individuals interested in preventing, identifying, and treating opioid use disorders.

Dealing with substance use disorder requires the efforts of all members of the interprofessional healthcare team, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nursing staff, and pharmacists, who can coordinate their activities and engage in open communication to help identify substance use disorder, streamline treatment, and watch for signs of relapse once therapy has been initiated. This interprofessional approach stands the best chance of patient success in recovering from substance use disorder. [Level 5]