Generally, the middle cranial fossa is described as having a “butterfly” appearance when viewed from above. The middle cranial fossa is a paired structure that fuses medially to form the sella turcica. Each side of the middle cranial fossa consists of the sphenoid and one temporal bone.

The structure and function of the middle cranial fossa center around the foramina that transmit a variety of cranial nerves and vessels. In the anterior midline of the middle fossa within the sphenoid bone, the optic foramina open into the optic canals which ultimately terminate into the orbital cavities. Of clinical and surgical importance, the prechiasmatic sulcus is a depressed groove between the optic foramina and plays a role in skull base surgery due to its predisposition to hiding cranial base meningiomas. Due to this reason, extensive research has been conducted to establish the anatomic and radiological morphology of the sulcus.

Within the medial aspect of the middle cranial fossa, from medial to lateral, there are four foramina: the superior orbital fissure, pterygoid canal, foramen rotundum, foramen ovale, and foramen spinosum. These foramina are in the sphenoid bone. The lateral portions of the middle cranial fossa form by the temporal bones and are defined by three important foramina: the carotid canal, hiatus of the greater petrosal nerve, and the hiatus of the lesser petrosal nerve. At the intersection of the sphenoid, temporal, and occipital bones, there is a foramen pierced by small vessels called the foramen lacerum.