Presbyopia is defined as the insufficiency of accommodation to focus on near objects due to reduced amplitude of accommodation. Presbyopia usually begins by the age of 40 to 45—the amplitude of accommodation. Working knowledge of the amplitude of accommodation is necessary to understand the pathophysiology of presbyopia. The amplitude of accommodation is 14 D at ten years of age and reduces to 4 D. In other words, the condition of failing near vision due to age-related reduction in amplitude of accommodation or increase in punctum proximum is labeled as presbyopia. Presbyopia is related to age-related in the lens and age-related decreases in ciliary muscle power. Premature presbyopia can result from uncorrected hypermetropia, premature nuclear sclerosis, chronic simple glaucoma, and presenile weakness of the ciliary muscle. The common symptoms of presbyopia include difficulty in near vision, asthenopic symptoms, and intermittent diplopia. The treatment of presbyopia includes spectacles, contact lenses, and surgical correction. The focus of interest here is presbyopia-correcting contact lenses. Fienbloom first described bifocal contact lenses in 1938. Williamson described the contact lenses with a small biconvex curve portion near the portion on the front surface. The most common presbyopic lenses available bifocal, diffractive, monofocal, multifocal, and simultaneous vision lenses. This activity focuses on types of contact lenses for presbyopia, indications, contraindications, techniques, complications, and clinical significance of presbyopia-correcting lenses.

**Objectives:**
- Review the types of presbyopia-correcting contact lenses.
- Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of presbyopia-correcting contact lenses.
- Outline the clinical significance of presbyopia-correcting contact lenses.
- Explain the complications associated with presbyopia-correcting contact lenses.