Tizanidine is generally well-tolerated. However, reports exist of potential adverse effects on several organs, such as cutaneous, gastrointestinal, neurologic, cardiovascular, endocrine, and respiratory systems.

**Common Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Drowsiness

- Blurred vision

- Asthenia

- Constipation

- Dyskinesia

- Nervousness

- Hallucination

- Rhinitis

- Xerostomia

- Dizziness

**Severe Adverse Drug Reactions**

- Severe hepatotoxicity and liver failure

- Anaphylaxis

- Exfoliative dermatitis

- Severe hypotension

- QT interval prolongation

- Severe bradycardia

- Stevens-Johnson syndrome

- Refractory hypokalemia and potassium wasting nephropathy

**Withdrawal Symptoms**

- Tachycardia

- Rebound hypertension

- Increased spasticity

- Withdrawal symptoms are more likely to occur when discontinuing the drug abruptly.

**Drug Interactions**

- Concomitant use of tizanidine with fluvoxamine or ciprofloxacin is contraindicated due to significant hypotension and increased psychomotor impairment.

- Because of potential drug interactions, using tizanidine with other CYP1A2 inhibitors such as oral contraceptives containing Ethinyl estradiol and gestodene, dronedarone, pimozide, saquinavir, cimetidine, famotidine, acyclovir, and ticlopidine should be avoided due to decreased clearance of tizanidine.

- If tizanidine is clinically necessary, therapy should be initiated with 2 mg and increased to 2 to 4 mg daily based on patient response to therapy.

- Adverse reactions such as hypotension, bradycardia, or excessive sedation require gradual dose reduction or stopping therapy.

- Tizanidine should be used cautiously in patients on other alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists.

- Patients should avoid alcohol and benzodiazepines with tizanidine as it can lead to excessive sedation and myocardial toxicity in rare instances.

- Vemurafenib used in BRAF mutation-positive malignancy is an inhibitor of CYP1A2 and can increase plasma concentration of tizanidine, leading to potential toxicity.