As with any clinical encounter, it is essential to gather a detailed history and perform a thorough physical examination. The clinician will integrate these two aspects of the encounter to determine a proper diagnosis and subsequent management for the patient. A newborn’s birth history may be unremarkable; thus, the physical examination will be of greater significance.  Each component of the physical exam: observation, palpation, percussion, and auscultation can yield important findings. Observation of the infant’s skull should be performed first during the physical examination. It should be evaluated for its morphology, including size and shape, as well as its circumference and related sutures, noting any abnormalities. Many conditions are associated with a large anterior fontanelle or a delay in its closure

- **Most Common**
- Achondroplasia
- Congenital hypothyroidism 
- Down syndrome
- Increased intracranial pressure
- Rickets

- **Less Common**
- Osteogenesis imperfecta
- Hypophosphatasia
- Trisomy 13
- Trisomy 18
- Congenital rubella
- Syphilis
- Amphoterin-induced malformation
- Fetal hydantoin
- Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
- Zellweger syndrome
- VATER Association
- Malnutrition 
- Hydranencephaly
- Intrauterine growth retardation

Next, the anterior and posterior fontanelles merit special attention, documenting their size and shape by direct observation and palpation. Optimal results occur when the infant is pleasant and agreeable, as the fontanelle can appear to be bulging or full in an angry or crying infant. The clinician should also examine the infant in both the supine and upright positions. A normal soft pulsation may be palpable at the anterior fontanelle. If the fontanelle feels tense and protuberant, it may be an indication of underlying pathology. Palpation of a bulging fontanelle often correlates palpating an osseous structure. Several medical conditions that are associated with a bulging fontanelle are the following categorized by organ systems:

- **Neurological**
- Hydrocephalus, brain tumors, intracranial hemorrhage

- **Cardiovascular**
- Congestive heart failure, dural sinus thrombosis

-  **Hematologic**
- Polycythemia, anemia, leukemia

- **Infectious**
- Meningitis, encephalitis, roseola, shigella, mononucleosis, poliomyelitis, abscess

- **Endocrine**
- Hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, pseudohypoparathyroidism

- **Metabolic**
- Diabetic ketoacidosis, electrolyte abnormalities, uremia, galactosemia, hypophosphatasia, osteoporosis

- **Miscellaneous**
- Trauma, hypoxemia, dermoid cysts, lead encephalopathy, aluminum toxicity, hypervitaminosis A, coronal synostosis

During the physical examination of the infant with increased intracranial pressure, the percussion of the fontanelle may produce a dull acoustic note that lacks resonance; this is the Macewen sign. Macewen sign is an auditory sign that resembles the sound of percussing a cracked pot when the examiner percusses the fontanelle; hence it was also termed the “cracked pot” sign.