The mechanism of action of raloxifene occurs through binding to estrogen receptors. This binding results in activation of estrogenic pathways (estrogen-agonistic effect) and blockade (estrogen-antagonistic effect) in tissues that express estrogen receptors. These receptors express as two different isoforms, the alpha estrogen receptor (activating effect) and the beta estrogen receptor (inhibiting effect). Therefore, the expression of these receptors will modify cellular and tissue responses to estrogens.

In postmenopausal osteoporosis, bone turnover dramatically increases. The bone resorption develops at a faster rate than bone formation, leading to a progressive loss of bone mass and bone mineral density. This disease represents an elevated risk for developing fractures. Raloxifene can inhibit accelerated bone resorption both short and long-term, increasing bone mineral density (BMD) and enhancing bone strength. Other pharmacologic agents for the management of osteoporosis are estrogen, bisphosphonates, selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), parathyroid hormone (PTH), and calcium and vitamin D.

It has an estrogen-antagonistic effect in the uterus and breast, in contrast with tamoxifen (a first-generation selective estrogen receptor modulator), which has an estrogen-agonistic effect over the uterus. In addition, raloxifene modifies cardiovascular risk markers by decreasing LDL-C, fibrinogen, lipoprotein A and increasing HDL2-C without modifying triglyceride levels. There are no recommendations for raloxifene use in BRCA1 and BRCA2 positive mutations; there are no reports of apparent effectiveness. This drug is not intended for use in treating patients with an established diagnosis of breast cancer.

Raloxifene bioavailability is approximately 2%, with an absorption of 60%. The onset of action is eight weeks, and distribution is mainly protein-bound (more than 95%). Metabolism of the drug occurs in the liver, excreted primarily in the feces (more than 93%) and urine (less than 0.2%).