Since the definition of neonatal respiratory distress syndrome is imprecise, prompt diagnosis and treatment require an overall assessment of prenatal and delivery history to identify perinatal risk factors, clinical presentation, radiographic findings, and evidence of hypoxemia on blood gas analysis. As described above, the clinical presentation consists of non-specific respiratory symptoms, including tachypnea, nasal flaring, grunting, retractions, and cyanosis, with decreased air entry on auscultation.

**Chest Radiography**

Chest radiography findings pathognomonic of RDS include homogenous lung disease with diffuse atelectasis, classically described as having a ground-glass reticulo-granular appearance with air bronchograms, as well as low lung volumes. The air-tissue interface formed between microalveolar collapse in the background with the air-filled larger airways in the foreground creates the classic appearance of air bronchograms.

**Arterial Blood Gas Analysis**

Arterial blood gas analysis may show hypoxemia that responds to increased oxygen supplementation and hypercapnia. Serial blood gases may show evidence of worsening respiratory and metabolic acidosis, including lactic acidemia in infants with worsening RDS.

**Other Investigations**

An echocardiogram may show the presence of a patent ductus arteriosus that might complicate the clinical course of RDS. Complete blood counts may show evidence of anemia and abnormal leukocyte counts, suggesting infection. At times, a workup for infectious etiologies may be necessary, including blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and tracheal cultures (when appropriate).