Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is a combination of two medications with distinct mechanisms of action. Nirmatrelvir, the first component, is a peptidomimetic inhibitor of Mpro, the SARS-CoV-2 main protease. Inhibiting Mpro prevents the virus from processing the polyprotein precursors it requires for viral replication.

Ritonavir, the second component, is a human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) protease inhibitor with CYP3A-inhibiting effects. The latter effect allows it to be used as a pharmacokinetic boosting agent to decrease the CYP3A-mediated metabolism of nirmatrelvir. Coadministration of nirmatrelvir with ritonavir is needed to increase the plasma concentration of nirmatrelvir enough to achieve the targeted therapeutic range.

Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir is effective against major variants of SARS-CoV-2, including omicron variants.

**Pharmacokinetics**

**Absorption:**The time to maximum plasma concentration (Tmax) for nirmatrelvir(coadministered with ritonavir) is approximately 3 hours. Administering high-fat meals with nirmatrelvir/ritonavir increases the rate and extent of absorption.

**Distribution:**Plasma protein binding (PPB) for nirmatrelvir is 69% (coadministered with ritonavir), PPB of ritonavir 98-99%. The mean volume of Distribution for nirmatrelvir is 104.7 L (coadministered with ritonavir).

**Metabolism:**Nirmatrelvir is a human cytochrome CYP3A4 substrate, but when administered with ritonavir, the metabolic clearance is minimal. Ritonavir inhibits the metabolism of nirmatrelvir, leading to increased plasma concentrations of nirmatrelvir. Ritonavir is also metabolized by CYP2D6(minor).

**Excretion:**The primary route of elimination for nirmatrelvir is renal, whereas ritonavir is eliminated primarily by hepatic metabolism in feces.