**Complications**

The most likely cause of complications from lasers is accidental exposure to reflected beams.

Outside of accidental exposure to reflective beams, complications of laser damage can depend on the procedure used and the type of laser used. For example, adverse effects of PRP (pan-retinal photocoagulation) include macular edema, Bruch membrane ruptures, subretinal or vitreous hemorrhage, retinal or choroidal scarring, secondary angle-closure glaucoma due to choroidal and ciliary effusion, and exudative retinal detachments.

Finally, another common source of laser injuries is those that pertain to laser pointers. There has been a significant increase in laser pointer-related injuries. It has been hypothesized that due to the increase in accessibility of laser pointers, even high-end lasers, over the internet. Patients have been shown to have symptoms ranging from focal photoreceptor defects to loss of visual acuity and central scotoma.

If the patient has symptoms or findings suspicious of accidental laser exposure or procedural complications, a thorough dilated ophthalmoscopy exam should be done to visualize and characterize the damage done to the eye. It may be necessary to use imaging such as OCT (optical coherence tomography), fluorescein angiography, or fundus autofluorescence to document the injury.

**Hazard Risk**

As outlined in the ANSI Z136.1, lasers can be grouped into classes based on their hazard risk. This is based on if the laser's maximum permissible emission (MPE), which determines how long an unprotected eye can be exposed to a laser before damage occurs, is shorter or longer than the human aversion response.

The aversion response is the autonomic blinking and moving away of the eye from the stimulus. Lasers are placed into four classes, with the lower classes generally do not need protective eyewear because the eye can avert from the light before damage occurs, but higher classes, such as 3 and 4, require eye protection at all times.

There are several classes for lasers.

- Class 1: safe under all conceivable uses, 1M: safe but potentially hazardous with magnification

- CD-ROM players, diagnostic lasers such as those used in OCT

- Class 2: laser must emit a visible beam and are safe if viewed for less than 0.25 seconds, 2M: same as for Class 2 but not safe with optical viewing aids

- Supermarket scanners

- Class 3R: potentially hazardous under direct and reflective beams but does not pose either a fire hazard or diffuse-reflection hazard, 3B: hazardous under direct and reflective beams and not normally a fire hazard

- Laser pointers

- Class 4: laser systems whose output exceeds class 3 and are either a fire or skin hazard

- Medical and research lasers include the double frequency Nd: YAG laser 532 nm.