# Continuing Education Activity

Myopic foveoschisis is a relatively rare entity that manifests in patients with pathological myopia. The schisis, or break, in the layers of the retina, occurs because of the increase in the size of the eyeball and a consequent stretching in the layers of the choroid and the retina. This activity illustrates the evaluation and management of myopic foveoschisis and explains the role of the interprofessional team in the care of patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the etiology of myopic foveoschisis.
- Describe the pathophysiology of myopic foveoschisis.
- Identify the management consideration for patients with myopic foveoschisis.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration amongst an interprofessional team to improve communication and enhance the care of patients with myopic foveoschisis.

# Introduction

Myopic foveoschisis, also known as myopic traction maculopathy (MTM) or myopic macular schisis, is a relatively rare entity that affects eyes with pathological myopia (-6.00 diopters or more of myopia).

Foveoschisis was first described by Takano and Kishi in 1999, as a split in the layers of retina at the fovea, in eyes with posterior staphyloma.

# Etiology

Myopic foveoschisis, as the name suggests, is almost always seen in eyes with high myopia and posterior staphyloma.

Apart from posterior staphyloma and elongation of the eyeball, other factors contributing to etiology may be traction exerted by pre-macular cortical vitreous, stiff retinal vasculature, or internal limiting membrane rigidity. Multiple consequences of high myopia such as lacquer cracks produced by breaks in the choroid due to ectasia, choroidal atrophy, and choroidal neovascularization, can also co-exist in eyes with myopic foveoschisis.

# Epidemiology

Pathologic myopia is defined as myopia of more than -6D or if the axial length is more than 26mm.

# Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of myopic traction maculopathy is complex. In the eyes, having pathologic myopia and ectasia of the posterior scleral wall leads to posterior staphyloma, which is also called scleroconus. This ectasia causes a stretch in the posterior scleral wall, choroid, and the retina. Due to different stretch responses of the retina and choroid, differential stretching causes the retina to split up into layers. The elongation of the myopic eye not only occurs along the axial length but also in a plane tangential to the retina at the posterior pole.

Myopic traction maculopathy is a dynamic disease that gradually progresses over the years. The disease begins with schisis in the inner retinal layers, slowly progressing over the years, to lead to schisis in the outer retinal layers as well. With the progression of the disease, in many cases, there can be the development of an inner and/or outer lamellar macular hole.

Myopic foveoschisis is believed to be multifactorial in origin, and other causes of anteroposterior traction on the retina include internal limiting membrane (ILM) rigidity, vitreomacular traction, and presence of epiretinal membranes. Based on this etiology, some people believe that a mere peel of ILM in the temporal part of the macula might resolve the foveoschisis. However, reports on such management are quite limited.

Myopic foveoschisis is not a single entity but a broad spectrum consisting of many clinical pictures. To date, there is no single comprehensive classification available that fits all scenarios. Based on the OCT picture, four retinal "types" of MTM are recognized:

- Inner schisis or inner-outer schisis

- Outer schisis

- Schisis detachment

- Detachment

OCT also delineates features of the fovea, and 3 foveal patterns are recognized:

- Intact fovea

- Inner lamellar macular hole

- Full-thickness macular hole

There may be present, associated epiretinal anomalies, and/or outer lamellar macular hole.

# History and Physical

Patients with myopic traction maculopathy can present from early adulthood to the later years of life. Most commonly, they present in the 5th or 6th decade of their life. But presentation in the 3rd or even 2nd decade of life is not unusual. The chief complaint is usually a unilateral or bilateral diminution of vision in a high myopic patient. Rarely, the patients may be completely asymptomatic with no visual complaints at all.

The onset of symptoms is insidious, and the progression is gradual. Both eyes may be affected either simultaneously or at a gap of a few months or years. Patients may also give a history of floaters, flashes of light, metamorphopsia, or scotoma.

On examination, there may be visible areas of scleral thinning. The cornea may have tell-tale signs of prior refractive surgery if the patient has undergone any. Myopic eyes usually have a deep anterior chamber. The crystalline lens may have signs of cataractogenesis, especially in older patients. On indirect ophthalmoscopy examination of the fundus with a 20D lens, posterior vitreous detachment may be seen. There may be evidence of lattice degeneration, with or without holes, in the retinal periphery.

The disc is generally large with a physiologically large cup. Background tesselations due to chorioretinal degeneration are noted. The macula may not show anything remarkable other than prominent tesselations on examination. Lacquer cracks, Forster-Fuch spots, myopic choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM), and posterior staphyloma may be noted to be coexistent in these eyes.

The clinician may note diffuse atrophic patches in the retina, which appear whitish-yellow in appearance. Peripapillary atrophy, which appears as well-defined atrophic areas around the disc or at the posterior pole, may also be noted. Fundus examination with a 90D lens can make the clinician suspicious of myopic foveoschisis. Shallow macular retinal detachments and macular holes may be picked up on slit-lamp biomicroscopy.

# Evaluation

A good fundus evaluation with a 20D and a 90D lens is indispensable. Detailed ophthalmoscopic examination elicits the various pathological lesions present in a myopic eye. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy with a 90D lens alerts the clinician about the possibility of myopic traction maculopathy and makes them probe thoroughly into the disease.

Spectral-domain OCT (SD-OCT) is an essential tool in the diagnosis of myopic traction maculopathy. It delineates the retina layer by layer and provides detailed information about the pathology. The OCT shows the formation of cystic cavities within the retina, which causes a split in the layers of the retina, giving rise to a thicker inner layer and a thinner outer layer.

Since myopic eyes are large, large OCT scans (12 mm) are preferred. It is imperative to scan the entire posterior pole. OCT scans should be done both along the horizontal and along the vertical axis. Myopic traction maculopathy cannot be judged solely on the basis of OCT. Fundus photographs are essential for the evaluation of the eye. Conventional 30-degree photographs do not help in the proper evaluation of the staphyloma, and therefore, wide-field fundus photos are preferred. They give the full extent and the location of the staphyloma.

# Treatment / Management

Myopic traction maculopathy can only be managed surgically. However, there is no consensus on the plan of management. Owing to the rarity of the disease, there are very few studies in the literature quoting specific principles of treatment. Surgeons in different parts of the world have been developing protocols of management based on their clinical experience.

Pars plana vitrectomy along with internal limiting membrane (ILM) peeling has shown good results in eyes with myopic traction maculopathy. It has been hypothesized that peeling the ILM not only relieves traction on the macula but decreases recurrence by removing the scaffold for the proliferation of cells. However, due to the need for superior surgical skills and complications of an iatrogenic macular hole, it may not be a preferred entity for some surgeons. Scleral buckling is another modality that helps relieve traction on the macula by providing external compressive force. It has the advantage of being extraocular and hence decreases the risk of cataract formation and iatrogenic holes. Additionally, it might help in early resolution when compared to ILM peeling.

Before deciding on the treatment plan, the surgeon needs to identify the tractional forces operating on the retina of the patient. Both forces, tangential or perpendicular to the plane of the retina, need to be taken into account. Once the nature of force has been ascertained, then a surgical modality needs to be chosen that applies the force parallel to it, but in the opposite direction.

For eyes having a macular hole, due to tangential traction applied by the internal limiting membrane, the surgery of choice is pars plana vitrectomy with internal limiting membrane peeling.

Sometimes myopic eyes may have a combination of perpendicular and tangential tractional forces, as in the case of macular detachment with a macular hole. The surgery of choice in such cases is a pars plana vitrectomy with internal limiting membrane peeling and macular buckling.

If the force isn't correctly identified and countered, like providing counter perpendicular traction in an eye with tangential traction, or vice versa, the problem may not only persist, but it may also get aggravated, and the surgeon may end up doing more harm than providing benefit to the patient. Therefore, MTM retinal pattern (schisis and detachment) should be treated with a buckle while MTM foveal pattern (macular hole) should be treated with a vitrectomy and ILM peeling, and the MTM retinal with foveal pattern (schisis and detachment combined with macular hole) should be given a combined treatment of vitrectomy with macular buckle.

# Differential Diagnosis

Myopic foveoschisis is a cause of gradual progressive loss of vision in high myopic eyes. Other causes of such diminution of vision in myopic eyes need to be ruled out. Such causes include:

- Myopic choroidal neovascularization

- Retinal detachment

- Lamellar/full-thickness macular hole

- Forster-Fuch spots at the fovea

Elaborate history taking, detailed clinical examination, and judicious use of investigative modalities usually help to make the correct diagnosis.

# Staging

To date, there is no classification system for myopic foveoschisis, which is universally accepted. Two classification systems are commonly used.

In 2015, the meta-analysis for pathologic myopia study group published the "International Photographic Classification and Grading System for Myopic Maculopathy" based on the color view of the fundus. The classification system is as follows:

- Category 1: Tessellated fundus (well-defined choroidal vessels)

- Category 2: Diffuse atrophy (whitish-yellow appearance)

- Category 3: Patchy atrophy (well-defined atrophic areas around the disc or at the posterior pole)

- Category 4: Macular atrophy

Recently, Barabara Parolini and colleagues have presented the MTM staging system (MSS) based on the OCT features of the retina.

- Stage1a: Inner-outer macular schisis with a normal foveal profile

- Stage1b: Inner-outer macular schisis with a lamellar macular hole

- Stage1c: Inner-outer macular schisis with a full-thickness macular hole

- Stage2a: Predominantly outer macular schisis with a normal foveal profile

- Stage2b: Predominantly outer macular schisis with a lamellar macular hole

- Stage2c: Predominantly outer macular schisis with a full-thickness macular hole

- Stage3a: Macular schisis detachment with a normal foveal profile

- Stage3b: Macular schisis detachment with a lamellar macular hole

- Stage3c: Macular schisis detachment with a full-thickness macular hole

- Stage4a: Macular detachment with a normal foveal profile

- Stage4b: Macular detachment with a lamellar macular hole

- Stage4c: Macular detachment with a full-thickness macular hole

Each stage can have epiretinal abnormalities, and a "+" sign can be added to indicate its presence.This classification system standardizes the nomenclature, gives an insight into the natural progression of the disease, and helps plan the management.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of surgery depends on the preoperative visual acuity of the patient. The lower the visual acuity, the poorer the surgical outcome. If the visual symptoms have been present for a long time, the likelihood of complete visual recovery is remote. The presence of foveal detachment and a full-thickness macular hole worsens the prognosis. High axial length, deep staphyloma, and the presence of choroidal thinning all make the surgical outcome less favorable with poor recovery of visual acuity and incomplete anatomical resolution.

# Complications

Surgery for MTM is technically challenging. The visual contrast in high myopic eyes is poor, and ILM peeling becomes difficult. The thin ILM in such eyes is extremely fragile and is very difficult to grasp and peel. Therefore, an iatrogenic tear of ILM and the formation of a macular hole post-surgery is not uncommon. For fear of forming a macular hole, some surgeons advocate fovea-sparing ILM peeling. Cataract formation is quite common following pars plana vitrectomy and gas tamponade. Macular buckling is technically challenging and may have complications like an incomplete resolution or recurrence of MTM, choroidal detachment, subretinal hemorrhage, or extrusion of the buckle in the post-operative phase.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

High myopic eyes are plagued with a plethora of complications, and such patients are urged to have regular check-ups with a retina specialist. Any new visual complaints such as diminution of vision, floaters, flashes of light, metamorphosis, or scotoma should be immediately reported to a qualified retina specialist. Annual/biannual retina screening for myopic patients is mandatory to look for the development of a new lattice degeneration or a break in the retina.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Patients with high myopia are prone to develop complications in their eyes that may happen at any age. These patients are best managed by an interprofessional team that includes optometrists, ophthalmologists, and retinal specialists.