Ipilimumab may only be administered intravenously (IV), specifically with an IV line containing a sterile, low protein binding filter to minimize protein medication loss. It should be infused over 30 to 90 minutes.

Dosing by indication is as follows:

**Melanoma**

- As adjuvant treatment: 10 mg/kg/dose IV every three weeks for 4 doses, then commencing with the 24th week, the dose changes to 10 mg/kg/dose IV every 12 weeks for up to three years.

- For metastatic or unresectable disease: 3 mg/kg/dose IV every 3 weeks for up to 4 doses; treatment must be completed within 16 weeks following the first dose. It can be used as monotherapy or with nivolumab.

**Advanced Renal Cell Carcinoma**

- 1 mg/kg/dose IV every 3 weeks for up to 4 doses. In patients with previously untreated disease or who have poor risk profiles, use with nivolumab.

**Metastatic Microsatellite Instability-high or Mismatch Repair-deficient Colorectal Cancer**

- 1 mg/kg/dose IV every 3 weeks for up to 4 doses. In patients with relapsing or refractory disease, use in conjunction with nivolumab.

**Hepatocellular Carcinoma**

- 3 mg/kg/dose IV every 3 weeks for up to 4 doses. In patients with disease that is refractory to treatment with sorafenib or who cannot tolerate sorafenib, use with nivolumab.

**Non-small Cell Cancer**

- For metastatic PD-L1-expressing disease: 1 mg/kg/dose IV every 6 weeks for up to 2 years. This is a first-line treatment, along with nivolumab, for patients without EGFR or ALK genomic tumor defects.

- Recurring or metastatic disease: 1 mg/kg/dose IV every 6 weeks for up to 2 years. This is a first-line treatment, along with nivolumab plus two cycles of histology-based platinum-doublet chemotherapy, for patients without EGFR or ALK genomic tumor defects.

**Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma**

- 1 mg/kg/dose IV every 6 weeks for up to 2 years; used with nivolumab.

If the patient's creatinine clearance is above 15, no dose adjustment is necessary. Dosing is undefined for patients with renal disease and creatinine clearance of 15 and lower. Patients with hepatic impairment with an AST reading between 1 to 1.5 times the upper normal limit require no dose adjustment. Dosing is undefined for patients with bilirubin values over 1.5 of the upper normal limit irrespective of AST value.

For pediatric dosing, refer to institutional protocols; ipilimumab is only approved for children aged 12 and older.