# Continuing Education Activity

Etoposide is a medication used in the management and treatment of various cancers such as testicular, prostate, bladder, stomach, and lung cancer. It is in the topoisomerase II inhibitor class of medications. This activity outlines the indications, action, and contraindications for etoposide as a valuable agent in managing various cancers listed above, Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma and brain tumors. (and other disorders when applicable). This activity will highlight the mechanism of action, adverse event profile, and other key factors (e.g., off-label uses, dosing, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, monitoring, relevant interactions) pertinent for members of the healthcare team in the treatment of patients with various cancers, lymphomas, leukemias, and related conditions.

**Objectives:**
- Identify the common indications for the use of etoposide.
- Describe the typical adverse effects of etoposide.
- Review the risk factors for developing toxicity with etoposide.

- Summarize the importance of improving care coordination amongst the interprofessional team to enhance care coordination for patients receiving etoposide chemotherapy.

# Indications

Etoposide, a topoisomerase II inhibitor, was first synthesized in 1966 and then approved in 1983 by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for cancer therapy.Podophyllum peltatum, and the Indian species Podophyllum emodi.

Etoposide has proven effective when administered through multiple dosings over three to five consecutive days rather than a single weekly dose.

Etoposide is also one of the most active chemotherapeutic drugs for other cancers, such as refractory pediatric neoplasms, hepatocellular carcinomas, acute nonlymphocytic leukemia (ANLL), prostatic carcinomas, ovarian carcinomas, and non-small cell lung cancer.

Etoposide is inactive against malignant melanoma, colorectal cancer, and cancer of the head and neck.

# Mechanism of Action

Etoposide is a topoisomerase II inhibitor. Its mechanism of action is primarily in the late S and G2 phases of the cell cycle.

# Administration

Etoposide is available as an oral or IV preparation chemotherapy agent.

Common dosing regimens for approved indications include:

- For refractory testicular cancer

- 50 to 100 mg/m^2 per daily single dose on days 1 through 5 of a 21-day cycle. Alternately, dosing can be 100 mg/m^2 daily on days 1, 3, and 5 of a 21-day cycle.

- For small cell lung cancer:

- Oral dosing: 70 mg/m^2 orally each day for the first 4 days, up to 100 mg/m^2 orally for the first 5 days of a 21 or 28-day cycle.
- IV dosing: 35 mg/m^2 IV for the first 4 days, up to 50 mg/m^2 for the first 5 days of a 21 or 28-day cycle.

Renal dosing adjustments: for CrCl of 15 to 50, decrease the typical dose 25%, CrCl under 15 cut dose by 50%. For peritoneal or hemodialysis patients, cut the dose by 50%.

As part of the bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin (BEP) therapy, etoposide has been proven effective for metastatic non-seminomatous testicular cancer and malignant ovarian germ cell tumors.

# Adverse Effects

Etoposide is a relatively well-tolerated chemotherapeutic agent.

Although the mechanism is unknown, acute hypersensitivity reactions can occur with the use of etoposide. During intravenous administration, patients can experience flushing, bronchospasm, cyanosis, hypertension, or hypotension.

Patients on warfarin require close monitoring when using etoposide because of the potential side effects of bleeding.

Different mechanisms have noted resistance to etoposide. Those cells with low levels of topoisomerase II are resistant to etoposide. The multiple drug resistance efflux pump also removes etoposide from cells. Some malignant cells have even deactivated etoposide.

# Contraindications

Etoposide is relatively contraindicated during breastfeeding.

# Monitoring

While administering etoposide, the healthcare team members must consider the different factors that could affect a patient's side effect profile. There was a noted correlation between age and leukopenia/neutropenia risk in patients with normal organ function. An increase in age was also associated with a decrease in drug clearance, as well as an increase in drug AUC.

Patients with low serum albumin concentrations may have worsening hematological adverse reactions. Patients with normal albumin levels that had elevated liver enzyme levels could demonstrate an increase in the incidence of neutropenia.

# Toxicity

Myelosuppression is the dose-limiting toxicity of etoposide.

It can also be involved in drug-induced secondary malignancies, such as acute myelocytic leukemia (t-AML).

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Etoposide is a strong chemotherapeutic agent that has a proven record of working against various human malignancies. As the drug's list of expanding clinical uses grows, the healthcare teams should find strategies to improve its administration and effectiveness for patients.

Additional research is necessary to consider etoposide as initial therapy in several cancers.

As research has shown, etoposide is a potent chemotherapeutic agent that is schedule-dependent.