The history and physical exam are a vital component of the management of hypertensive heart disease because most patients with hypertension do not have symptoms until late in the course when complications arise. Patients with left ventricular hypertrophy are asymptomatic; however, left ventricular hypertrophy can lead to anginal/ischemic chest pain due to increased oxygen demand required by the hypertrophied myocardiocytes. Patients may present with exertional chest pain due to angina or coronary artery disease. Some patients may initially present with shortness of breath in the setting of acutely decompensated heart failure. Hypertensive patients are at risk for the development of atrial fibrillation. Patients may develop conduction anomalies which may present with palpitations, stroke, dizziness, syncope, or even sudden cardiac death.

History should focus on the severity, duration of hypertension, and current treatment. Hypertension is one of the predominant risk factors for the development of several cardiovascular diseases such as coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral arterial disease, aortic aneurysm, and chronic kidney disease. Patients should undergo assessment for the presence of other major modifiable cardiovascular risk factors such as hyperlipidemia, diabetes, alcohol use, smoking, drug usage, and other comorbid conditions such as chronic kidney disease or pulmonary disease. Diabetes is very common in this patient population and is a cardiovascular equivalent for the development of cardiovascular disease or chronic kidney disease. Hemoglobin A1C can be used to determine glycemic control. Sleep apnea, certain medications, tobacco, obesity, and alcohol use exacerbate hypertension and if uncontrolled may lead to treatment-resistant hypertension. A thorough family history should always be conducted assessing for premature cardiovascular death, sudden cardiac death, valvular disease, metabolic disease, stroke, or heart failure.

The physical exam is most often regular except in the setting of advanced cardiovascular disease. Auscultation of the heart may reveal an S3 or S4. An abnormal S4 sound denotes stiff, hypertrophic ventricles and is very specific to hypertensive heart disease. An abnormal S3 indicates thin, eccentric hypertrophy associated with systolic heart failure. Patients at risk of atherosclerotic disease may have carotid bruits or decreased peripheral pulses. Bilateral blood pressure reading should be conducted particularly in patients presenting with acute symptomatic disease to evaluate for aortic dissection. Blood pressure reading should be assessed at every visit, and ambulatory home blood pressure monitoring is recommended.

The ophthalmic exam is often underutilized in clinical practice but can provide insight into the extent and duration of hypertension. The ophthalmic exam should evaluate for the presence of AV narrowing or nicking, cotton wool spots, exudate and hemorrhage, and papilledema. Hypertensive retinopathy is often graded using the Keith-Wagener-Barker classification.

- Grade 1 - Mild nonproliferative retinopathy: mild narrowing or tortuosity of the retinal arterioles which indicates mild, asymptomatic hypertension

- Grade 2 - Moderate nonproliferative retinopathy: definite narrowing or constriction with AV nicking or sclerosis present which often indicates more elevated but likely asymptomatic chronic hypertension

- Grade 3 - Severe nonproliferative retinopathy: shows hemorrhage and exudative, cotton wool spots - blood pressure is often significantly elevated and symptomatic, but end-organ damage is minimal and usually reversible

- Grade 4 - Severe proliferative retinopathy: additionally demonstrates papilledema and retinal edema - blood pressure is persistently elevated, and patients will present with symptoms such as headache, visual disturbances, malaise, or dyspnea; these patients need urgent evaluation and close follow up as they have significant cardiovascular mortality

- Grade 3 and 4 retinopathy require immediate referral to an ophthalmologist for evaluation and treatment of retinal disease