The function of the sartorius is unique in that it can serve as both a hip and knee flexor. The origin of the sartorius is the anterior superior iliac spine, sharing this origin with the tensor fascia lata. At the hip, it acts to both flex the hip as well as externally rotate. Other hip flexors include, most dramatically, the iliopsoas muscle and, to a lesser degree, the rectus femoris, tensor fascia lata, pectineus, adductor longus, adductor brevis, and gracilis. Antagonists to flexion at the hip include the gluteus maximus, the hamstrings (specifically the long head of biceps femoris), and the semimembranosus and semitendinosus, which all act to extend at the hip.

The primary muscles responsible for internal rotation at the hip are the gluteus medius and gluteus minimus, but the tensor fascia lata also assists. Antagonists and external rotators of the hip include the piriformis, the superior and inferior gemelli, the obturator internus and obturator externus, and the quadratus femoris.

The insertion of the sartorius muscle is the superior medial aspect of the tibial shaft, near the tibial tubercle. Two other tendons join it at its insertion: the gracilis and semitendinosus, to create the conjoined tendons known as the pes anserinus. At the knee, it acts to flex as well as internally rotate. Other knee flexors include the hamstrings, which are composed of the long and short heads of the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and semimembranosus.

Along with the popliteus, as mentioned above, other internal rotators of the knee acting in concert with sartorius include the semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and gracilis. These muscles are opposed by the long and short heads of the biceps femoris, which act to rotate the knee externally.

These synergistic movements of the muscles mentioned above performing with sartorius allow the leg to be moved into the figure-4 position, much like a tailor would position him or herself while working as described earlier.