The basis of the structure of the lateral geniculate nucleus is mostly in terms of its three distinct cell types: magnocellular (M), parvocellular (P), and koniocellular (K). P and M cells are arranged in six different layers (four dorsal P layers and two ventral M layers), with retinal ganglion signals from the ipsilateral eye synapsing on layers 2, 3, and 5, and signals from the contralateral eye synapsing on layers 1, 4, and 6. M cells in the LGN receive input from the large-field, motion-sensitive Y-type retinal ganglion cells, while P cells receive input from the small-field, color-sensitive X-type retinal ganglion cells. Koniocellular cells project into regions ventral to each of the P and M laminae.

The lateral geniculate nucleus is also the point of origin for the optic radiations (Meyer's loop, central bundle, and Baum’s loop) that project via the internal capsule to the primary visual cortex (V1), primarily synapsing onto spiny stellate neurons in layers 4C-alpha and 4C-beta. Analysis of LGN-dependent fMRI activity in non-V1 extrastriate cortex suggests that the LGN also projects to regions further downstream in the visual pathway (e.g., V2-5).

The extracellular matrix of the lateral geniculate nucleus is characterized by a decreased presence of the traditional aggrecan-based matrix phenotype, perineuronal nets. It instead displays a high density of axonal coats, a related structure with a more localized matrix at dendrites, suggesting a different organizational strategy possibly specialized for rapid sensory processing.

The lateral geniculate nucleus also contains a distinct section between its dorsal and ventral regions known as the intergeniculate leaflet (IGL). The IGL projects to the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus via the geniculohypothalamic tract and to the pineal gland via the geniculopineal tract, implicating the LGN in the modulation of circadian/diurnal rhythms.

Historically, the lateral geniculate nucleus was highlighted for its role as little more than a signal repeater, following the early conclusions of Glees and LeGros Clark, who argued that "... the geniculate cells probably serve the single function of a relay between the retinal fibers and the visual cortex."