Current therapeutic agents available for idiopathic orbital inflammation are:

- Corticosteroids

- Radiation therapy

- (3) nonspecific steroid-sparing agents such as  (a) methotrexate; (b) cyclosporin-A; (c) mycophenolate mofetil; (d) cyclophosphamide; (e) rituximab and

- (4) biologic agents such as (a) infliximab; (b) adalimumab; (c) etanercept; (d) daclizumab; (e) abatacept; (f) tocilizumab.

While a modest proportion of patients experienced resolution of their symptoms without treatment, orbital pseudotumor responds dramatically to steroids.corticosteroid response is a dramatic improvement of signs and symptoms within 48 hours after the administration of systemic prednisolone.

For adults, initial steroid treatment doses are typically 1 mg/kg of prednisone. For children, high-dose oral corticosteroids of 1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg/day are the preferred protocol.

There is no consensus on the treatment protocol for cases that do not respond to steroid treatment. The reported cure rate is only 37% and a recurrence rate of 52% with corticosteroid therapy. Long-term use of steroids leads to systemic side effects, including insomnia, hyperglycemia, weight gain, and cataracts. Local corticosteroid injections for periorbital and orbital inflammation are also options.

For patients who are non-responsive to steroid treatment or suffer relapses despite steroid treatment, antimetabolites, alkylating agents, T-cell/calcineurin inhibitors, lymphocyte inhibitors, tumor necrosis factor-a inhibitors, and surgical debulking may be employed.

Immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory therapy may be an option in selected cases. Cyclosporin-A (CsA) suppresses the lymphocyte-mediated responses. It inhibits T-cell activation via decreased production of interleukin-1 and interleukin-2. Renal function requires monitoring while on CsA.

Antimetabolites like methotrexate, which inhibits dihydrofolate reductase needed for DNA and RNA synthesis, result in the suppression of rapidly dividing B-cells and T-cells.

Infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody that works against tumor necrosis factor-a, has been used for autoimmune diseases such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Other therapeutic agents and immunomodulators in use for recalcitrant OIP are interferon-A, tacrolimus, rituximab (a B-lymphocyte inhibitor monoclonal antibody), daclizumab (T-lymphocyte inhibitor monoclonal antibody), and leflunomide.

While idiopathic orbital inflammation is benign, its course can be clinically fulminant with vision loss and severe oculomotor dysfunction. Patients with optic nerve involvement may require admission for aggressive IV steroid therapy to prevent long-term visual impairment.