There is no single diagnostic finding for spondyloarthritis and other HLA-B27 associated syndromes.  Evaluation of axial spondyloarthritis by plain radiographic imaging of the sacroiliac joints can detect characteristic changes, including erosions, sclerosis, and joint ankyloses. These changes may not be present in early disease. Additionally, patients may develop non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, with symptom severity equal to radiographically evident disease.  The presence of inflammatory features, including an elevated C reactive protein and abnormal MRI short tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging, is used to detect inflammatory changes, particularly in patients with non-diagnostic plain film imaging.  Imaging results must be interpreted in correlation with the clinical context, as inflammatory changes on imaging, including bone marrow edema, is not specific and may be seen in athletes and healthy individuals.

Lumbar spine imaging in axial spondyloarthritis may display squaring of the vertebral bodies as an early radiographic sign.  More specific later findings include syndesmophytes and facet joint ankyloses. A classic late presentation is a “bamboo” spine with advanced spinal fusion.

The presence of enthesitis may be further demonstrated by the use of power Doppler ultrasound, which can confirm inflammatory activity in the tendon and assess for erosive changes at sites of tendon insertion.

Arthrocentesis of involved peripheral joints yield synovial fluid findings typical for inflammatory arthritis with leukocyte counts over 2000 cells/mm3.

HLA-B27 positivity increases the likelihood of spondyloarthritis in patients with a high pretest probability.  In patients with acute anterior uveitis, HLA-B27 requires testing. In patients with red-eye, which is concerning for uveitis, a prompt ophthalmology referral and slit lamp evaluation are indicated to confirm the diagnosis and exclude infectious processes.

All patients with reactive arthritis should be tested for HIV infection as well as undergo evaluation for triggering enteropathic and venereal disease.