The breasts develop from the embryologic mammary ridges/milk lines, which extend from the axilla to the groin. During fetal development, the caudal portions of the milk lines regress with the persistence of the cranial portions, which overlie the pectoralis muscle groups. The nipple-areolar complex begins to form around 12 weeks of gestational age when mesenchymal cells differentiate into smooth muscles and form Montgomery glands and the mammary ducts. Breast development becomes quiescent until puberty when the breast mound and areola increase in size in response to sex hormones.

The skin overlying the breast is made up of the avascular epidermis and the dermis, which contains dermal appendages, such as sebaceous glands, sweat glands, hair follicles, as well as small blood vessels, lymphatic channels, and nerve endings. Below the dermis, the hypodermal layer contains larger blood vessels, lymphatic channels, nerve cells, and adipose tissue.

The breast parenchyma is a collection of sac-like dilations known as ductules or acini that are lined by the specialized cuboidal cell that produces milk in response to hormonal control. Collection of ductules are known as a lobule; ductules within a single lobule communicate with each other via the intralobular terminal duct. The intralobular terminal duct communicates with an extralobular duct, and together the lobule and extralobular duct are termed the terminal ductal lobular unit (TDLU). The TDLU is generally the smallest functional unit discussed in breast imaging and is the primary site of breast cancer. Multiple TDLUs coalesce to form a breast lobe. There are approximately 12-20 breast lobes per female breast. These lobes are identified by a single main draining duct that communicates with the nipple-areolar complex. Prior to communicating with the nipple-areolar complex, the main duct focally dilates to form the lactiferous sinus, the site where breast milk is stored.

Blood supply to the breast is provided via perforating arteries from the internal mammary arteries, intercostal perforators, and branches of the axillary artery. The venous draining of the breast is variable. Generally, deeper draining veins accompany the deeper arteries while the superficial venous drainage is variable. The lymphatic drainage is primarily to the ipsilateral axilla and less so to the internal mammary/infra-clavicular system.

The lymphatic drainage is very important from a breast imaging standpoint, and evaluation of the ipsilateral axilla should be performed on any exam with findings that are suspicious for breast cancer. Anatomically, the axilla is triangular to pyramidal shaped space adjacent to the thorax and upper extremity. The margins of the axilla are loosely defined as the lateral wall of the chest, medial wall of the humerus, one rib, and scapula. This space primarily serves as a conduit for traversing neurovascular and lymphatic structures of the chest with the upper extremity.