The diagnosis of molluscum contagiosum is based on clinical examination. Lesions are firm, white to flesh-colored, dome-shaped, pearly papules, having a central umbilication from which one can express a cheesy material. Mollusca is usually one millimeter to one centimeter in diameter.

In children, mollusca are located on the face, trunk, limbs, and axillary areas. Palms and soles are not involved. In sexually transmitted forms, lesions are mainly observed in the anogenital area, abdomen, and inner thighs. There are rarely more than 20 to 30 elements over the skin and are usually grouped together. However, molluscum contagiosum may be extensive, mostly in immunocompromised persons.

The differential diagnosis of molluscum contagiosum in children includes syringoma, closed comedones (whiteheads), and warts (including anogenital ones).

In immunocompromised persons, molluscum contagiosum lesions may be atypical, have a greater size, and/or mimic malignancies, such as basal cell carcinoma or keratoacanthoma (for single lesions), or other infectious diseases, such as cryptococcosis and histoplasmosis (for extensive lesions).

In the case of a diagnosis difficulty, dermoscopy, reflectance confocal microscopy, and histopathology may be useful.

Dermoscopy of a molluscum shows a central white to a yellow amorphous area, with peripheral linear or branched vessels.

Reflectance confocal microscopy also shows a well-defined central area, which contains septa separating hypo-refractive roundish lobules. Histopathologically, these lobules consist of enlarged keratinocytes having an abundant cytoplasm containing viral inclusions (also called Henderson Paterson bodies) and a peripheral nucleus. The nearby epidermis shows marked acanthosis.