**Clinical features:**

A comprehensive ocular examination should be performed. This includes visual acuity, refraction, intraocular pressure, ocular motility, the examination of the ocular adnexa, lacrimal system, cornea, anterior chamber, iris, pupillary reaction including a relative afferent pupillary defect, lens, and fundus.

Clinically, angioid streaks are characterized by:

- Jagged irregular lines approximately of the caliber of a retinal vessel radiating from the optic disc

- Serrated margins of the streaks

- Variable caliber (50–500 micrometers)

- Subretinal location (the retinal vessels are superficial to the angioid streaks)

- The streaks may be interconnected at places (usually forming a ring around the optic disc)

- Gray, black, reddish or pink, depending on the pigmentation of the choroid visible through the thin RPE and gap in the Bruch's membrane

- Possible association with pigmentation resulting in a black area which is wider than the usual angioid streaks

- The tendency to involve the macula.

- Usually located behind the equator

- Abrupt tapering at the end away from the optic disc (towards the peripheral retina)

- In eyes with media haze, the angioid streak may be ve subtle and overlooked

- On cursory examination, the angioid streak may be confused with retinal blood vessels.

- With age, the number, width, and length of angioid streaks may increase

- Usually, angioid streaks are bilateral. However, the fundus changes may be asymmetric.

- Some cases may have depigmentation around angioid streak, which is equally spread on either side of the angioid streak. The width of this depigmented area may vary, extending up to 3 times the width of the angioid streak on either side.

Associated features include:

- Peau d'orange appearance of fundus- There is pigmentary mottling (small areas of pigmentation which are sometimes confluent at the level of retinal pigment epithelium interspersed with normal fundus color) specifically temporal to the fovea sometimes reaching the equator, giving an appearance of the skin of an orange. Rarely, the changes may be extensive, and retina nasal to the optic disc may also be involved. It is less common in angioid streaks associated with Sickle cell disease or Paget disease of bone.

- Optic disc drusen- The disc is hyperautofluorescent and shows hyperechoic lesion with acoustic shadow on ultrasound of the optic nerve head

- Peripapillary chorioretinal degeneration

- Macular thinning or pigmentary changes- The changes are usually bilateral, and there is no hemorrhage or hard exudates.

- CNV or disciform scar- Usually, an associated angioid streak in noted in the vicinity of the CNV. The CNV may be characterized by subretinal fluid, hard exudates, or blood.  The incidence of CNV in angioid streak may be up to 86%, and bilateral involvement is seen in up to 71% cases.

- Subretinal/submacular hemorrhage- Usually, the patient presents with visual decline due to subfoveal hemorrhage.

- Peripheral chorioretinal scar- This may simulate presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS)

- Crystalline bodies and comet-shaped lesions

- Pattern dystrophy of the macula

- The end-stage of the angioid streak is "disciform macular degeneration, helicoid peripapillary atrophy, or diffuse choroidal sclerosis with obscuration of the angioid streaks"

**Investigations:**

Infrared imaging may detect subtle angioid streaks missed in color fundus photo.

Hypo-autofluorescence is usually noted in the area of the angioid streak, and the area of abnormality on autofluorescence may be larger than abnormality visible in color fundus photo or clinical examination.

FFA usually shows window defect corresponding to the area of angioid streaks. FFA is very important to detect choroidal neovascularization.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) reveals the retinal/subretinal/sub-RPE changes in CNV, and also hyper-reflectivity at the Bruch's membrane level due to calcification. The en-face OCT may reveal the areas of angioid streaks. The choroid may be thinner in eyes with angioid streaks and CNV compared to angioid streaks without CNV.

OCT-angiogram may be used to demonstrate the CNV in the angioid streak.

Indocyanine green angiogram (ICGA) may reveal a speckled pattern of cyanescence at the region of Peau d'orange appearance and reveals the CNV. The angioid streaks may show hypercyanescehce or hypocyanescence or mixed pattern.