The most widely accepted hypothesis for the pathogenesis of Meige syndrome is dopaminergic and cholinergic hyperactivity, as explained earlier, but it may also be caused by decreased functioning of inhibitory neurons (for example, GABAergic neurons) in the cortex; moreover, various environmental and genetic factors make the patient prone to craniocervical dystonia. Some researchers postulate that there is abnormal sensorimotor processing in these patients, as a positron emission tomographic scans in the patients have shown decreased blood flow to the sensorimotor area in response to lower face vibrations. Silent functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has shown decreased activation of the primary motor cortex (Brodmann Area 4) and premotor cortex (Brodmann Area 6) in the mouth representing areas in the patients of Meige syndrome having isolated blepharospasm. It might be caused by abnormal control of cranial nerve nuclei in the brain stem by basal ganglia.

Brain imaging identifies a grey matter volume reduction in the cerebellum, superior frontal gyrus, insular cortex, and calcarine fissure in patients with craniocervical dystonia.

Focal dystonias also share the genetic component in their etiopathogenesis. At a cellular level, mutation of the torsinA gene appears to cause disturbed exchange of vesicles into and out of the nucleus, which in turn causes transcriptional dysregulation. A related mechanism is found to be the cause of other primary focal dystonias, for example, mutations in central nervous system (CNS) transcriptional factors (TAF1, THAP1). The studies on animal and human models show evidence on the above mentioned genetic mutations that may lead to the disrupted development of the neuronal network.

In 33% of patients with Meige syndrome, emotional stress may be a factor as their primary symptoms are anxiety, depression, and sleep problems.