All patients on chronic opioid therapy regimens require monitoring for continued efficacy as well as an indication for treatment. Monitoring includes a thorough pain assessment that accounts for pain levels, changes in the quality of pain, pain recurrence, and side effects from analgesics. When a decision is made to rotate to a different opioid, there are essential pharmacokinetic principles to consider: equianalgesia and incomplete cross-tolerance.

**Equianalgesia and Incomplete Cross-tolerance**

The term equianalgesia, meaning “approximately equal analgesia,” refers to the doses of various opioid analgesics that are estimated to provide the same pain relief. Equianalgesic dose calculations are a means for selecting the appropriate initial dosing when changing from one opioid agent or route of administration to another. An equianalgesic chart provides a list of analgesic doses, both oral and parenteral, which approximate each other in their ability to provide pain relief (i.e., the equianalgesic units). The equianalgesic chart (Table 1) lists rough estimates; individual patients may vary. Morphine is considered the gold standard; hence all calculations occur in Oral Morphine Equivalents (OME).

Most patients on chronic opioids develop tolerance to analgesic and non-analgesic effects of opioids such that a previously effective dose gradually loses efficacy. This is usually manifested as a shortened duration of action and often requires dose escalation to maintain adequate analgesia. Cross-tolerance is the development of tolerance to the effects of pharmacologically related drugs, particularly those that act on the same receptor site. However, when switching to another opioid, clinicians need to assume that cross-tolerance is incomplete, which means that the starting dose of the new opioid must be reduced by at least 50% of the calculated equianalgesic dose to prevent overdosing.