There are many types of repair that are specific to certain types of damage inflicted on a DNA molecule and focus on ssDNA or dsDNA.

Single strand DNA (ssDNA) repair mechanisms include mismatch repair, base excision repair, and nucleotide excision repair.

- Mismatch repair is a type of correcting mechanism that fixes mistakes in DNA after replication or transcription that remain uncorrected by the exonuclease function of DNA pol III, specifically bases that incorrectly match with the wrong base on the complementary strand. Mismatch repair proteins correct this by locating incorrectly matched nucleotides and excising them via its own exonuclease system before placing the correct nucleotide in its place with DNA polymerase and sealing the nick created from the excision with DNA ligase. This process is a common repair mechanism for endogenous damage, as replication errors fall under this category. Mutations in genes for proteins responsible for mismatch repairs such as MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 can result in certain cancers such as hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (also known as Lynch Syndrome) and ovarian cancers.

- Base excision repair works by excising a single damaged base or nucleotide; this is under the mediation of DNA glycosylases cutting the bond between the nitrogenous base and the deoxyribose sugars. When the glycosylases remove the base, it creates an apurinic site if the removed base was a purine (adenine, guanine), or an apyrimidinic site if the excised base was a pyrimidine (cytosine, thymine). The phosphodiester backbone of the DNA strand is then nicked by endonucleases and DNA polymerase removes the damaged nucleotide and replaces it with the correct one. Spontaneous deamination of cytosine frequently occurs in human DNA and, if left unrepaired, causes mutations.

- Nucleotide excision repair is most common when exposure to UV radiation has caused the formation of thymine or cytosine dimers. It usually involves localized DNA problems such as mismatched bases or adducts (as happens with benzopyrene exposure). These dimers can be extremely harmful to a DNA molecule and usually lead to cell death or cancerous developments. These are the leading cause of melanomas. Nucleotide excision repair differs from the repairs mentioned above as it excises a large swath of nucleotides upstream and downstream of the dimerized bases and resynthesizes the whole region with the polymerase. Specific repair endonucleases excise the problem area, and deoxyribonucleotides fill the gap with the help of DNA polymerase. A DNA ligase ligates the newly synthesized fragment to the original DNA strand. Xeroderma pigmentosum is a condition where the nucleotide excision repair mechanism is defective due to mutation in the genes that encode these repair proteins.

Double strand DNA (dsDNA)  damage is much harder to repair because the damaged helix has no template from which to copy and replace the afflicted bases and nucleotides. Two major pathways can alleviate issues involving double-stranded breaks: homologous recombination and non-homologous end-joining.

- Homologous recombination is a useful mechanism for a double-stranded break as it takes advantage of the homologous sister chromatid or chromosome that has a DNA sequence that is identical to the damaged strand. This identical sequence serves as the template for repair and enzymes similar to those used in crossover during meiosis act to repair the broken strands.

- Non-homologous end-joining is essential before the broken DNA replicates, as a double-strand break usually leads to cell death. It uses micro homologies, which are short homologous sequences on the end of individual strands of DNA, to join the two fractured ends back together by translocation. However, if there are base deletions at the break site, the rejoining of the strands can lead to mutations in the genome. Harmful X-rays or carcinogens can cause such breaks, resulting in the gross rearrangement of chromosomes. Burkitt’s lymphoma is an example of cancer arising due to translocation. BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins are involved in the homologous repair, and mutations in these genes are known to cause breast cancer.