A patient may present with new-onset spasticity after suffering from a stroke, SCI, or TBI. On the other hand, they may have been diagnosed with MS years ago or have had CP since infancy and present with new or worsening of pre-existing spasticity. On physical exam, hallmark findings include high muscle tone in muscle groups such as the shoulder adductors; elbow, wrist, and finger flexors; and forearm pronators.

Spasticity is frequently graded using the modified Ashworth scale, which is graded 0 to 4.

**Ashworth Scale**

- Zero is defined as no increase in tone.

- 1 is a “catch and release,” or minimal resistance towards end-of-range of motion (ROM).

- 1+ is similar to a grade of 1, but with a catch that is followed by resistance through less than half of ROM.

- 2 is increased muscle tone through the majority of ROM while still able to move the affected part.

- 3 is difficult passive movement throughout the majority of ROM.

- 4 presents with the affected part in rigid flexion or extension.

**Tardieu Scale**

- Velocity to stretch is graded from V1 (as slow as possible) to V3 (as fast as possible).

- Muscle reaction is graded from 0 (no resistance through passive movement) to 5 (joint being immobile).

- The spasticity angle is graded as R1 (angle of catch at velocity V2 or 3) or R2 (full range of motion when the muscle is at rest and tested at V1 velocity).

**Penn Spasm Frequency Scale**

- 0 is no spasms.

- 1 is no spontaneous spasms; only elicited through vigorous sensory and motor stimulation.

- 2 is occasional spontaneous spasms and easily induced spasms, occurring less than once per hour.

- 3 is spasms occurring between 1 and 10 times per hour.

- 4 is more than 10 spasms per hour.