The strength of the role of PET/CT in the management of thyroid cancer resides in the evaluation of recurrent or metastatic disease, especially in poorly differentiated subtypes.  Once identified by pathology, the aggressive behavior of this subtype increases the risk for metastatic disease, worsening the patient’s prognosis. PET/CT is greatly superior to radioiodide scan in identifying aggressive tumor cells with decreased or lack of iodide uptake.

Despite the limited role in the surveillance of differentiated carcinomas, there’s an identifiable benefit in patients with negative radioiodine scans. Meta-analysis studies revealed that PET/CT has a sensitivity and specificity of more than 80% in detecting extensive disease.

The use of other radiotracers like 18 F DOPA for detection of thyroid cancer seems promising, especially in the case of well-differentiated medullary carcinoma with a sensitivity ranging between 70 and 80% and has described an improved ability to detect distant metastatic disease when compared to FDG.

Finally, opportunistic detection of incidentalomas in studies aimed for other oncologic purposes is an important advantage of PET/CT. The detection of focal avid uptake has a considerable risk of 24% to 36% for malignancy and triggers warning signs for additional diagnostic workup with tissue sampling. Conversely, diffuse thyroid uptake suggests a benign inflammatory process like thyroiditis and should not prompt further investigation. (level 3, ATA guidelines).