Caspofungin acetate is administered solely by the intravenous (IV) route. Because the echinocandins have a large molecular weight, they are poorly bioavailable for oral use. The IV infusion should take place slowly over an hour, and it should not be given by IV bolus administration nor mixed or co-infused with other medications. Do not use diluents containing dextrose (alpha-D-glucose).

The dosage forms include 50 mg and 70 mg.

**Adult Patients (18 years of age and older)**

For all indications except esophageal candidiasis - administer an initial dose of 70 mg (loading dose) followed by 50 mg once IV daily. The daily dose may be increased to 70 mg if there is no response or if cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) inducers such as rifampin, nevirapine, efavirenz, carbamazepine, dexamethasone, and phenytoin are coadministered. The maximum daily dose should not exceed 70 mg.

For esophageal candidiasis, the dose is 50 mg once daily with no loading dose.

**Pediatric Patients (3 months to 17 years of age)**

The basis for dosing is on the patient’s body surface area.

For all indications - a single 70 mg/m^2 loading dose on day 1, followed by 50 mg/m^2 once daily

**Hepatic Impairment**

The dosage for adult patients with moderate hepatic impairment is reduced: 35 mg once daily, with a 70 mg loading dose on day one where appropriate.

**Drug Interactions**

Use of caspofungin with cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers (see above), the daily dose may be increased to 70 mg. The maximum daily dose should not exceed 70 mg.

For patients not showing any improvement, the daily dose may increase to 70 mg. The maximum daily dose should not exceed 70 mg.