The mainstay of treatment for NPC is radiotherapy, with the addition of chemotherapy for advanced-stage disease. Surgical intervention is limited to extremely small primary lesions or small recurrences, as the morbidity of large-scale surgical resection is often significantly more than the morbidity associated with radiotherapy to the region.

**Radiotherapy**

Radiation therapy is the management of choice for primary lesions and cervical metastases. NPC often metastasizes early to the cervical lymph nodes, and this is frequently a presenting complaint. The tumor also grows locally, involving the paranasopharyngeal spaces and musculature, and may do so with little to no symptoms present. Consequently, a dose of approximately 65 Gy for primary tumors with 50 to 55 Gy is also necessary for node-negative necks.

A recent innovation in the delivery system employed for radiation is intensity modulation or intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT). The system comes equipped with a CT taking slices of the area involved. The physician specifies the targeted area of the beam and modulates the intensity of the beam employed.

Brachytherapy is another innovative technique for targeted radiotherapy. The technique used is the implantation of gold grains or iridium implants, jacketed for localized radiotherapy, via a split incision of the soft palate. In the modern era of IMRT, this technique is very infrequently used.

Radiotherapy is also employed for recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma, though repeat radiation to the same area with curative intent will depend on the time elapsed since initial treatment and may fall into the realm of clinical trials. Radiation therapy can be used for palliative intent as well.

**Chemotherapy**

In locally advanced regional disease, concomitant chemoradiotherapy is the mainstay of management, either via induction or concurrent therapy protocols. The most frequently used initial agent is cisplatin. The standard of care is a dose of 100 mg every third week.

Chemotherapy is also the option of choice when distant metastasis is involved. NPC with distant poly-metastasis is offered palliative chemotherapy. The agents of choice are cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil. With recent advances, several chemotherapeutic agents are available for the continuation of therapy. However, the median survival rate is not more than a year.

**Surgical Intervention**

Surgical intervention is employed primarily as a salvage option. The nasopharynx is a small and deep area that is hard to access, thus making the surgical approach to it sometimes difficult and inappropriate. However, when encountering locally recurring disease, patients should be given the option of surgical intervention.

Nasopharyngectomies are carried out by several approaches, and the approach decided should be tailored in accordance with the expertise of the surgeon and the general condition of the patient. The following are some of the popular approaches to the cavity.

- Inferior approach- via transpalatal incision

- Lateral approach- via the lateral skull base

- Inferolateral approach

- Midfacial degloving

- Endoscopic approach

Neck dissections often accompany the procedures mentioned above, where extensive neck involvement is present. Neck dissection is frequently a component of surgical salvage, particularly in the case of regional recurrence.