Taking a thorough history and completing a good physical examination is paramount to narrowing down the differential diagnosis for postural instability. Essential information to gain from patients who may have postural instability include associated symptoms and both modifiable and nonmodifiable factors. Modifiable factors include environmental factors, lifestyle changes, chemical exposures, and stress. Age is an example of a nonmodifiable risk factor.

Risk factors for Parkinson disease should be considered, including smoking cigarettes, drinking alcohol, coffee consumption, pesticide exposure, and living in rural areas. Some food agents such as docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and vitamin D have been shown to have neuroprotective effects. Therefore, screening for vitamin D deficiency might help estimate postural instability risk in patients with Parkinson disease. Old age is a contributing factor for all the motor symptoms of Parkinson disease, including postural instability.

Patients with postural instability may describe falling when rising from a chair or bed, or falling backward while sitting. It is important to ask about any frequent history of falls, the mechanism of falls and any expressed fearfulness about walking. A proper physical exam for postural instability includes the retropulsion test, which is widely used. In this test, a sudden jolt or pull is applied to the shoulders of the patient from behind as an external perturbation.

Patients with normal postural reflexes should be able to take no more than one step backward, indicating that balance is maintained, and postural reflexes are normal. Patients with postural instability will take two or more corrected steps backward, which is an abnormal result. There are variations to this test, and currently no agreed-upon method for scoring. Other clinical examinations for postural instability include the functional reach test (in which the patient keeps the feet in place and tries to reach as far forward as possible) and the timed up and go test.