An important differential when approaching the neurological presentation that is classically present in subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord is a copper deficiency.

Patients with copper deficiency present with dorsal column involvement manifesting as loss of vibration sense, proprioception, spastic paraparesis, and neuropathies. Neurological symptoms are similar to subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord, and the diagnosis is established if there is no response to vitamin B12 supplementation alone. These deficiencies may coexist in patients who have undergone bariatric surgery. Copper deficiency can be documented with low levels of copper and ceruloplasmin.

Methotrexate-induced myelopathy and vitamin E deficiency can mimic subacute combined degeneration. Neurological symptoms are similar to subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord, and the diagnosis is based on a history of methotrexate use or with serum measurements of vitamin E, B12, MMA, and homocysteine levels.

Other differentials for disease localized to the spinal cord are diverse. The most common non-traumatic causes include transverse myelitis, multiple sclerosis, tabes dorsalis, epidural tumors, cervical spondylosis myelopathy. Neurological symptoms are similar to subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord, but imaging with an MRI should be sufficient to rule out these differential diagnoses.

Transverse myelitis is segmental, and inflammation usually affects one or two segments of the spinal cords and is not exclusively in the dorsal columns. Patients may present with symptoms such a tight band or girdle like sensation around the trunk. A gadolinium-enhanced spine MRI would confirm the diagnosis by revealing enhancement involving one or more cord segments that are not limited to the dorsal or lateral columns of the cord.

Multiple sclerosis generally presents with asymmetric involvement of the spinal cord and can involve numerous areas. Multiple sclerosis is further characterized by neurological symptoms that are distributed over time. Patients also show many other general neurological symptoms, including bowel and bladder involvement and cerebellar involvement. These symptoms are not typical of subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord.

Tabes dorsalis is a manifestation of tertiary syphilis. As this disease also affects the dorsal columns of the spinal cord, it can be included in the differential diagnosis. However, tabes dorsalis is characterized by sensory ataxia and lancinating pain along with the limbs and a positive history of syphilis. This differential can be ruled out from a thorough history and examination. If deemed necessary, laboratory tests for syphilis can be included as a part of the workup.

Epidural tumors and cervical spondylosis myelopathy can be effectively ruled out by a spine MRI and the absence of classic findings found in subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord.