A detailed history and physical examination are paramount for every child presenting with petechiae. Key features in the history include the time of onset, anatomical pattern and a detailed chronological account of any other symptoms, e.g., fever, coughing, vomiting, any recent URTI or gastroenteritis, and any sick contacts. A rapidly spreading rash is more concerning for IMD in an unwell child with a fever. A recent viral infection (URTI or gastroenteritis) is common in ITP, HSP, and HUS. Petechiae confined to above the nipple line are associated with bouts of vomiting or coughing. It is also important to ask about any bleeding from mucosal surfaces such as gingival bleeding, epistaxis, melena, among others. As always, the clinician should confirm vaccination status.

On examination, a complete set of observations and neurological status requires monitoring. A full systemic examination should be completed, including cardiac, respiratory, abdominal, otorhinolaryngological, and neurological (if concerns of IMD). The skin should undergo thorough examination from head to toe, and the pattern of rash requires clear documentation. Demarcating areas of petechiae with a skin marker can help monitor the progression of the rash in clinical practice.

The age of the child can be useful in reaching the most likely diagnosis, for example, a neonate with petechiae could have a NAIT or a TORCH infection, and HSP is more common in the 2 to 5 year age range.

Patterns of concerning symptoms and signs presenting with petechiae include but are not limited to:

- Pyrexia, tachycardia, reduced level of consciousness and rapidly spreading petechiae: IMD

- Pallor, bruising, weight loss, lymphadenopathy: Malignancy

- Hypertension: Renal disease associated with HUS, HSP or SLE

- Unusual patterns of petechiae with bruising, an inconsistent history or signs of injury or neglect: NAI