**Dosage**

Gemfibrozil is available in 600 mg oral tablets. The recommended dose for hypertriglyceridemia is 600 mg orally every 12 hours. It is recommended to take the medication 30 minutes before morning and evening meals. According to the manufacturer's prescribing information maximum recommended dose for adults is 1200 mg per day. If the therapeutic response to gemfibrozil is incompetent after three months of treatment, it is recommended to suspend gemfibrozil.

**Specific Patient Population**

**Patients with Renal Impairment or Hepatic Impairment:**In mild to moderate renal impairment, it is recommended to use this drug with caution if the baseline creatinine is higher than 2 mg/dL. There were cases reported for deterioration of renal function in some patients. This medication is contraindicated in patients with hepatic impairment and severe renal impairment.**Pregnant Women:**Gemfibrozil is pregnancy category C. It is suggested to use it with caution. Consider usage if benefits exceed risks.

**Breastfeeding Women:**There is no relevant literature on the use of gemfibrozil in breastfeeding women. It is unknown whether gemfibrozil is excreted in human milk, and there is a concern about disrupting infant lipid metabolism with the maternal use of gemfibrozil. Since many drugs are excreted in milk and the potential for tumorigenicity of gemfibrozil in animal trials, it should be avoided during breastfeeding. An alternate drug is preferred if a woman is planning to breastfeed especially preterm infants or newborns. If needed to continue gemfibrozil, breastfeeding should be discouraged.**Dose Modification:**Simultaneous administration of gemfibrozil with bile acid resin binding agents reduces the body exposure to the drug after administration of a dose by roughly 30%. Gemfibrozil represses CYP2C8 enzyme action; may enhance the presentation of CYP2C8 substrates. Analyze the dose modification of these substrates when supplied with gemfibrozil. This medication can improve the concentration of OATP1B1 drug substrates when given concurrently. Analyze dose modification of the substrates when given with gemfibrozil.