Barbiturates are administered in oral and parenteral forms (IM and IV). Intramuscular injections of solutions of the sodium salts such as phenobarbital or amobarbital should be administered in large muscle masses to avoid potential necrosis at superficial sites.

- **Phenobarbital:**According to the American Epilepsy Society guidelines, phenobarbital 15 mg/kg in a single dose is suggested for status epilepticus (parenteral benzodiazepines are the first line choice).****When administered as an antiepileptic drug for pediatric patients, phenobarbital may be given as an IV loading dose, followed by IV or oral administration.

- **Methohexital**: Methohexital and thiopental may be administered rectally in pediatrics, particularly if the child cannot cooperate with IV needle administration. This method is best suited in procedures of short duration, such as radiology or dentistry. The usual dose for methohexital is 1 to 1.5 mg/kg for induction. Barbiturates administered for the induction of anesthesia in adults are most commonly given as an IV bolus for a rapid and pleasant loss of consciousness.

- **Thiopental:**When using the IV route of administration in pediatrics, wide variation in the required dose has been noted. Cote recommended a higher dose range for unpremeditated children.

- **Pentobarbital:**Pentobarbital is administered by IM and IV routes. Pentobarbital is administered by intramuscular route 150 to 200 mg as a single dose pre-anesthetic medication. For status epilepticus, pentobarbital is given as a 5 to 15 mg/kg IV loading dose followed by a continuous infusion of 0.5 to 5 mg/kg/hour. It is important to recognize that continuous infusion dosing of pentobarbital is titrated to EEG (Neurocritical Care Society guidelines).

- **Butalbital:**Butalbital is used with aspirin/acetaminophen/caffeine for migraine and tension headaches. American academy of neurology doesn't endorse its use for a long time due to the risk of dependence and medication overuse headaches.

- **Primidone:**The usual starting dose of primidone is 100 to 125 mg at bedtime for seizure control in treatment-naive patients. The regular maintenance beyond ten days is 250 mg three times a day. The total daily dose of primidone should not exceed 2000 mg. Primidone is also used to treat essential tremors; the suggested starting dose is 25 mg daily, increasing by 25 or 50 mg per month as tolerated.

- **Amobarbital:**The sedative dose of amobarbital is 30 mg to 50 mg, given 2 or 3 times daily. The hypnotic dose is 65 mg to 200 mg at bedtime. Amobarbital is a DEA-scheduled II substance, and agents with better safety profiles should be used due to misuse potential.

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

- **Patients with Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment has been provided for methohexital. The use of thiopental is relatively contraindicated in renal disease. Dose reduction is recommended in phenobarbital. Nephrotoxicity is reported with an overdose of phenobarbital.

- **Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustment has been provided for methohexital. As phenobarbital undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism, dose reduction is advised.

- **Pregnancy Considerations:**The placental transfer occurs within 1 minute of administration.

- **Breastfeeding Considerations:**Clinical data on the effects of phenobarbital indicates that there is inter and intrapatient variability of excretion in breast milk. Phenobarbital can cause drowsiness in infants, especially when used with other sedating drugs. In a series of breastfeeding infants, for each mg/kg of phenobarbital taken by mothers, the infant's serum concentration increased by 2 to 5 mg/L. Several case reports exist of infant sedation occurring in mothers treated with phenobarbital.