In its various forms, melanin fulfills a variety of biological functions, including skin and hair pigmentation and photoprotection of the skin and eye.

Pigmentation of the skin results from the accumulation of melanin-containing melanosomes in the basal layer of the epidermis. Differences in skin pigmentation result both from the relative ratio of eumelanin (brown–black) to pheomelanin (yellow–red), as well as the number of melanosomes within melanocytes. Pheomelanin accounts for the pinkish skin constituting the lips, nipples, vagina, and glans of the penis. In general, lightly pigmented skin tends to contain melanocytes with clusters of two to three melanosomes, whereas darkly pigmented skin tends to contain individual melanosomes which can melanize neighboring keratinocytes more readily. The overall melanin density correlates with the darkness of skin as well as Fitzpatrick skin type.

The interplay between melanin and UV radiation is complex. Researchers widely believe that melanin production in melanocytes increased as an evolutionary adaptation to the widespread loss of human body hair more than a million years ago. Populations living closer to the equator tended to develop a greater proportion of eumelanin, which is a UV–absorbent, antioxidant, and free radical scavenger. Conversely, populations living further from the equator are relatively richer in pheomelanin, which produces free radicals in response to UV radiation, accelerating carcinogenesis. As the main stimulus for cutaneous vitamin D production is UV light exposure, it follows that dark-skinned individuals also tend to have lower levels of vitamin D and should be screened accordingly.

Less clear is the link between melanin, the sun, and cutaneous immunology. Both acute and chronic UV light exposure induces immunosuppression; UVA light is used therapeutically for a large number of skin conditions, including psoriasis. Intriguingly, melanin is believed to have immunomodulatory and even anti-bacterial properties, although the underlying mechanisms have not yet been fully elucidated. Malignant melanocytes rich in melanin are less sensitive to chemo-, radio-, or photodynamic therapy, and amelanotic melanomas have longer disease-free and overall survival than melanotic ones. Therefore, some have suggested inhibition of melanogenesis as a therapy for malignant melanoma.

Just as melanin protects the skin from photodamage, it also protects the eye. Melanin is concentrated in the iris and choroid, and those with grey, blue, and green eye colors, as well as albinos, have more sun-related ocular issues.

Hair color is determined by the relative proportion of various forms of melanin:

- Black and brown hair results from varying degrees of black and brown eumelanin

- Blonde hair results from a small amount of brown eumelanin in the absence of black eumelanin

- Red hair results from roughly equal amounts of pheomelanin as eumelanin. Strawberry blonde hair results from brown eumelanin in the presence of pheomelanin.