An understanding of the ear's anatomy is imperative if the clinician wishes to repair an ear laceration adequately. Most ear lacerations occur on the exposed auricle, also known as the pinna. This is the area of skin-covered cartilage that forms the vast majority of the external ear and which is most prone to injury, although lacerations sometimes extend into the external auditory canal or preauricular areas. The lobule does not have underlying cartilage but rather is made up of fibro adipose tissue surrounded by skin. The cartilage that makes up the auricle is relatively avascular, dependent upon a watershed blood supply, and in continuity with the cartilage of the external auditory canal. The cartilage relies on the perichondrium, the connective tissue that covers the cartilage, for its blood supply. In the absence of trauma, the perichondrium is tightly adherent to the underlying cartilage but has an areolar layer allowing some motion between the perichondrium and overlying skin. The skin of the ear has a dual blood supply, with the anterior portion of the auricle supplied by branches of the superficial temporal artery while the posterior auricular artery supplies the posterior aspect of the pinna as well as the skin overlying the mastoid. Both arteries branch off of the external carotid artery. The posterior auricle also receives some blood supply from collateral branches of the occipital artery. The innervation of the ear is slightly more complicated. The superior and anterior/medial aspects of the auricle are innervated by the auriculotemporal nerve, which is a branch of the trigeminal nerve. The inferior and posterior/lateral aspects of the auricle are dually innervated by the lesser occipital and greater auricular nerves, which arise from the C2 and C3 roots of the cervical plexus. The vagus nerve innervates the majority of the concha with some scattered innervation from the facial nerve. The external auditory canal, including the tympanic membrane, is innervated by branches of the auriculotemporal nerve, the facial nerve, the glossopharyngeal nerve, and the vagus nerve.