Preoperative patient preparation is of major importance as it contributes to minimizing postoperative complications. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols call for optimizing the patients’ functioning status before undergoing surgery as a proven means of decreasing post-surgical morbidity. Alcohol, smoking, and recreational drug consumption should be reduced to a minimum or preferably ceased. The metabolic state of the patient should also be assessed and optimized.

Patient education and psychological support play an important role in improving long-term surgical outcomes as it has been proven to reduce poorly defined psychosocial complications -anxiety, depression, and agoraphobia are some of the most common- as well as promote the ostomate’s quality of life and independence.

The necessity of preoperative bowel preparation in elective bowel surgery settings is unquestionable. Common surgical practice includes administering mechanical bowel preparation (MBP) in conjunction with oral antibiotics, aiming to reduce the microbial load of the intestine and consequently minimalize surgical site infections (SSI). The most commonly used cathartics for mechanical bowel preparation are sodium phosphate and polyethylene glycol. In contrast, oral aminoglycosides with an anaerobic coverage profile(metronidazole or erythromycin) are the most frequently combined oral antibiotics. Although there has been much controversy over the use of the MBP routinely in patients undergoing colorectal surgery, recent guidelines by the society for healthcare epidemiology of America (SHEA) and the infectious diseases society of America (IDSA) recommend the use of a combination of parenteral antimicrobial agents and oral antibiotics to reduce the risk of SSI following colorectal operations. Besides, it is emphasized that MBP without oral antibiotics does not decrease the risk of SSI.

Preoperative preparation might include pre-operative shaving of the abdominal wall, Folley catheter insertion, nasogastric tube placement, and adequate fluid and electrolyte resuscitation.