Although previously thought to have limited virulence, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia has shown to possess different powerful virulence factors that are believed to be present in all environmental isolates without any specific evolutionary branching, similar to Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

The first noteworthy virulence factor is its ability to form a biofilm, which was demonstrated around 1996.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia to firmly adhere to both animate surfaces such as the respiratory epithelial tissue and inanimate surfaces such as ventilation tubes and circuits.

Often, the biofilms are polymicrobial and contain other organisms that benefit from the same advantages. The spgM gene was recognized to promote high biofilm production by isolates, along with several other genes.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia in biofilms was also shown to tolerate a wide range of pH, nutrient scarcity, and exposure to free radicals.

Second, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is typically intrinsically resistant to multiple and broad-spectrum antibiotic agents.

Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole resistance is mediated through the target site modification genes sul1 and dfrA through class 1 integrons, as well as sul2 gene through insertion sequence common region elements.Stenotrophomonas maltophilia can both acquire and transfer antibiotic and heavy metal resistance mechanisms with other pathogens if they co-exist, such as the transfer of the beta-lactamases to previously susceptible Pseudomonas isolates.

Third, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia utilizes different virulence exoenzymes, such as elastase, gelatinase, hyaluronidase, proteases, lipases, DNase, RNase, and mucinase, for tissue invasion and escaping the host immunity.

Fourth, in chronic infections, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is capable of forming small-colony variants, which are slowly growing and sometimes challenging to detect.