There are many different categories of HIV antiretroviral therapy:

- Medications that prevent entry of the virus into the cell by inhibiting CCR5 or GP41 are called fusion or entry inhibitors.

- Medications that prevent transcription of viral RNA into DNA are called nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI).

- Medication that inhibits the integration of transcribed viral DNA into the host's DNA is called integrase inhibitors.

- Finally, medications that prevent protein cleavage from forming a virion are called protease inhibitors.

**Who and How to treat?**

Based on recent multicenter-multinational randomized controlled trials the latest guidelines indicate that HIV antiretroviral therapy should be initiated early in the disease process regardless of CD4 cell count in all adult and adolescent patients. This strategy has been shown to decrease morbidity and mortality related to HIV infection as well as HIV transmission.

HIV antiretroviral therapy should always be done with combination regimens. Initial treatment usually consists of two NRTIs (usually abacavir/lamivudine or tenofovir/emtricitabine) in combination with a third antiviral drug from one of the following classes: integrase inhibitor, NNRTI or protease inhibitor plus an enhancer (cobicistat or ritonavir). This is based on the proven efficacy of this regimen and more favorable side effect profile. Alternative treatments may be considered in special patients.

Recommended initial regimens include four integrase inhibitor-based regimens (Dolutegravir/Tenofovir Fumarate/Emcitrabine; Raltegravir/Tenofovir Fumarate/Emcitrabine; Dolutegravir/abacavir/lamivudine (for HLA-B*5701 negative patients); Elitegravir-cobicistat/Tenofovir Fumarate/Emcitrabine, Elitegravir-cobicistat/Tenofovir Alafenamide/Emcitrabine) and one protease inhibitor-based regimen (Darunavir-ritonavir/Tenofovir Fumarate/Emcitrabine).

Listed integrase inhibitor-based regimens have high efficacy, safety, and tolerability, as well as low drug interactions for Raltegravir/Tenofovir Fumarate/Emtricitabine.

Although not as well tolerated, listed protease inhibitor regimen (Darunavir-ritonavir/Tenofovir Fumarate/Emcitrabine) is recommended for patients who are suspected will be relatively incompliant or patients with NRTI resistance, this is because of the high genetic barrier to resistance that protease inhibitors confer. Nevertheless, because it is somewhat lower efficacy, this regimen should be avoided in individuals with CD4 count less than 200 or HIV RNA greater than 100000).

Consideration should be taken to make treatment as comfortable as possible for the patient. Listed once a day regimens include Dolutegravir/abacavir/lamivudine and Elvitegravir-Cobicistat/Tenofovir Fumarate/Emtricitabine.

Other important considerations to take when starting HIV antiretroviral therapy:

- In patients with CKD Elvitegravir-cobicistat/Tenofovir Fumarate/Emtricitabine (CrCl greater than 70), and Elvitegravir-cobicistat/Tenofovir Alafenamide/Emtricitabine (CrCl greater than 30) should be avoided.

- In osteoporotic patients, regimens containing Tenofovir Fumarate should be avoided. Dolutegravir/Abacavir/Lamivudine is a good regimen option for these patients.

- For patients with HIV dementia and psychiatric illness, as well as patients on methadone, Efavirenz should be avoided.

- Dolutegravir is to be avoided on high cardiac risk patients.

- Dolutegravir, Efavirenz, Elvitegravir/cobicistat and protease inhibitors may cause or worsen dyslipidemias.