# Continuing Education Activity

Bullosis diabeticorum (BD), also known as diabetic bullae or bullous eruption of diabetes mellitus, is a specific type of skin lesion occurring in patients with diabetes mellitus. Kramer first reported it in 1930, and Rocca and Pereyra later described it in 1963. This activity reviews the pathophysiology and presentation of bullous diabeticorum and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in its management.

**Objectives:**
- Review the etiology of bullosis diabeticorum.
- Describe the histopathology of bullosis diabeticorum.
- Summarize the treatment for bullosis diabeticorum.
- Explain modalities to improve care coordination among interprofessional team members in order to improve outcomes for patients affected by bullosis diabeticorum.

# Introduction

Bullosis diabeticorum (BD), also known as diabetic bullae or bullous eruption of diabetes mellitus, is a specific type of skin lesion occurring in patients with diabetes mellitus. Kramer first reported it in 1930, and Rocca and Pereyra later described it in 1963. The term “bullosis diabeticorum” was then introduced in 1967 by Cantwell & Martz.

# Etiology

The pathophysiology of bullosis diabeticorum is not completely clear and appears to be multifactorial. In a study by Bernstein and colleagues, authors demonstrated that patients with insulin-dependent diabetes have a marked reduced threshold to suction blister development compared to age-matched normal controls, with a highly significant difference (p<0.01).

Moreover, it has been postulated in the literature the role of disturbances in calcium, magnesium, and carbohydrate metabolism.

# Epidemiology

The exact prevalence of BD is unknown. The majority of case stories reported in the literature were of a few small series.  In a retrospective study of 5000 patients with diabetes mellitus, conducted by Larsen and colleagues, the incidence of BD was 0.16% per year.

# Histopathology

The histologic findings are heterogeneous. BD shows bullae with inconsistent levels of skin layer separation. Initial reports described intraepidermal blisters (subcorneal or suprabasal) without acantholysis, situated in most cases in the superficial part of the prickle-cell layer, whereas recent publications have usually described subepidermal bullae.

Interestingly, the adjacent epidermis is often unremarkable. The dermis shows minimal inflammation, and microvascular changes consistent with diabetes are also present. The proteinaceous fluid contained in bullae is, most of the time, clear and sterile. However, the sub-epidermal variant can be hemorrhagic.

Direct immunofluo­rescence examination is usually negative, although one report described non-specific associated immunoglobulin M and complement C3 deposits within dermal blood vessel walls.

# History and Physical

BD characteristically starts with a sudden appearance of one or more painless, tense vesicles or bullae within normal-appearing, non-inflamed skin, generally on the acral portions of the body.

Most patients with BD have longstanding diabetes. BD has associations with both insulin-dependent and noninsulin-dependent diabetes melli­tus. Many patients have an associated polyneuropathy, retinopathy, or nephropathy. But occasionally, bullae can be a presenting sign of the disease.

# Evaluation

Once the diagnosis of BD is a consideration, the patient should undergo evaluation for his metabolic condition; levels of glycemia should be controlled. And if diabetes mellitus a known diagnosis, prompt screening should take place. Patients with confirmed BD should be monitored for the development of secondary infection until lesions heal entirely.

Because of the higher prevalence of microangiopathic complications in patients with diabetes mellitus with BD, ophthalmological and neurological examinations are recommended. Evaluation of renal function, especially detecting microalbuminuria, should also be necessary.

# Treatment / Management

No firm consensus has emerged as to the management of BD.

# Differential Diagnosis

Several disorders should merit consideration in the differential diagnosis of BD. In porphyria cutanea tarda and pseudoporphyria, the blisters are usually infracentimetric and favor the hands rather than the feet and ankles. Pseudoporphyria is not uncommon in patients with diabetes as they may develop complications including both chronic renal failure and atherosclerotic cardio­vascular disease and, thus, they may be receiving dialysis and/or diuretics. The distal extremity is also a common site for erythema multiforme and fixed drug eruptions, but the bullae usually develop on an inflammatory base. Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita and localized bullous pemphigoid, closely resembling BD, both clinically and histologically, are dif­ferentiated from BD by histologic examination and direct immunofluorescence, as well as by an accen­tuation of lesions at frictional sites in patients with epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. If there is a surrounding inflammatory skin with erythema, warmth, and tenderness, the possibility of bullous cellulitis must also be a consideration.

# Prognosis

BD is more frequently a self-limiting condition and usually resolves spontaneously within a few weeks. Lesions typically heal without post-inflammatory pigmentation or residual scarring. Nevertheless, repeated and recurrent episodes are leading to ulceration, and scarring

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Recognition of BD is essential as the differential diagnosis is extensive. The risk of consequent infection is perhaps the most pressing concern for the interprofessional team, including a primary care provider, nurse practitioner, internist, endocrinologist, and wound care nurse. The connection between BD and the degree of glycemic control in patients with diabetes mellitus remains unclear. Awareness of other potential vascular complications should always be in mind. And given that BD is generally self-limiting, treatment remains mainly supportive.