The anatomy of the heart and the landmarks necessary for the EP study require clarification to understand the EP concept and intracardiac signals.

- **The right atrium**, a structure of great importance for the electrophysiologist, is composed of the appendage, the terminal crest, the body, and the vestibule. This chamber contains a significant part of the electric system of the heart. Crista terminalis is a C shape muscle bundle (ridge) vertically aligned between the right atrium anteromedial wall until the cavotricuspid isthmus. The vertical orientation of the muscle in the terminal crest and the oblique orientation of the rest of the fibers of the right atrium constitute a substrate for arrhythmias (reentry mechanism).

- **The sinoatrial node**(SN) is a crescent-shaped structure that is part of the electric or excito-conductory system of the heart. It has a superior and anterolateral position at the junction of the RA with the inferior vena cava. The SN gets irrigated by the sinus node artery with an RCA origin in 55% of individuals and a circumflex artery origin in 45%.

- **The atrioventricular node**(AVN): The impulse arising from the sinoatrial node gets conducted at the atrioventricular node, a relay station between the atria and the ventricle. The AVN is located just at the apex of the Koch triangle, in the paraseptal myocardium. It has a potential pacemaker activity with 20 to 60 impulses per minute (in the absence of the primary pacemaker activity-the SAN). The representative aspect of the AVN is that it presents two conduction pathways - the fast pathway (FP) and the slow pathway (SP). The two pathways can entertain the most common form of supraventricular tachycardia named atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), always induced by premature beats.

- **The Koch triangle**. It is an area of the right atrium that contains the atrioventricular node (AVN). The borders of the triangle are in posterior the tendon of Todaro (a fibrous continuation of the Eustachian ridge), inferiorly the coronary sinus ostium with the adjacent vestibulum and anterior the annulus of the tricuspid valve.****The fast pathway of the AVN is at the apex of the triangle of Koch. The dimensions of the triangle can vary a lot from an individual to another. This finding is of great importance during mapping and ablation procedures of structures contained within this area (usually the slow pathway a part of the atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia circuit).

- **The cavotricuspid isthmus**. It is an inferior area of the RA lying between the inferior vena cava and the tricuspid valve, which conventionally and anatomically divides into three parts: inferolateral inferior and paraseptal. The CTI is essential in the genesis and maintenance of the typical isthmus-dependent atrial flutter.****In one fifth to one-third of the population, the CTI is U shaped or has a recess (also named sub-Eustachian sinus, sinus of Keith, or sub-Thebesian recess) that makes mapping and catheter ablation difficult.

- **The Eustachian valve**is a flap with a crescent shape that guards the inferior vena cava at the junction with the RA. Sometimes this valve is large and may impede the access of the catheters into the RA.