There are a plethora of case reports citing anomalous vasculature originating from the kidneys, with some vessels branching at wide angles, others bifurcating before reaching their destination, and others encircling structures found within the abdominal cavity

The normal anatomical arrangement of renal vessels should include only one vein and one artery. Both arise from the renal hilum and extend medially before reaching the inferior vena cava. In approximately 6% of patients, the right gonadal vein drains into the right renal vein before it enters the lateral aspect of the inferior vena cava, mirroring the normal anatomy of the left renal venous system. In about 31% of individuals, an accessory vein from the right adrenal gland drains into the right renal vein before it reaches the inferior vena cava. In about 3% of cases, the retroperitoneal venous vessels, such as lumbar or hemiazygos vessels, drain into the right renal vein before it enters the inferior vena cava.

The most common physiologic variant of the left renal vein is the “circumaortic left renal vein.” The circumaortic left renal vein is a variant that includes two branches of venous drainage from the left kidney. One branch courses anterior to the aorta, and one branch courses posterior to the aorta as they course toward the medial aspect of the inferior vena cava. Most of the time, the circumaortic branch begins as one renal vein at the hilum of the left kidney and then splits into the anterior and posterior branches; 25% of the time, a circumaortic left renal vein begins as two vessels at the hilum of the left kidney. In about 3% of the population, a retro-aortic left renal vein is present. This variant typically crosses posteriorly to the aorta and then drains into the inferior vena cava at a lower level than typical for anteriorly located left renal veins. A retro-aortic left renal vein has also rarely been known to drain into a common iliac vein instead of the inferior vena cava. About 25% of the time, there are no posterior tributaries of the left renal vein from the retroperitoneal space.