Since PBL is very uncommon, it has not been easy to establish a chemotherapy regimen that would be the standard of care. CHOP (Cyclophosphamide, Vincristine, Doxorubicin, and Prednisone) is considered inadequate due to the highly aggressive nature of the lymphoma. Other regimens such as dose-adjusted EPOCH or cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, high-dose methotrexate (CODOX-M)/ alternating with ifosfamide, etoposide and high-dose cytarabine (IVAC) or hyperfractionated cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone alternating with methotrexate and cytarabine (hyper-CVAD) can be considered as treatment options for this highly aggressive lymphoma. Chemotherapy usually involves 6 to 8 cycles of these regimens. Most experts believe that EPOCH should be regarded as first in the treatment of PBL. A meta-analysis confirmed the benefit of EPOCH over CHOP in HIV-positive PBL. Intrathecal chemotherapy is not well-studied in these cases and can be offered on a case-to-case basis. In the literature, intrathecal methotrexate and high-dose cytarabine have been used in patients in the past. Other chemotherapeutic options such as bortezomib combined with doxorubicin or lenalidomide can be considered in the refractory setting, although they are not well studied in this setting. They work well for myeloma, and since PBL has some of those immunophenotypic markers, these agents can be used as a last resort. Patients whose disease is chemosensitive should also be considered for an autologous stem cell transplant in first remission. Patients with HIV should begin or continue their anti-retroviral therapy under direction from an infectious disease specialist.