Anaplasma phagocytophilum is an obligate intracellular bacteria that survives and propagates within the host cell and can evade neutrophil antimicrobial functions. A. phagocytophilum infection is acquired through a tick bite and disseminates to the bone marrow and spleen.  A. phagocytophilum can selectively survive and multiply within cytoplasmic vacuoles of polymorphonuclear cells. It affects the progenitors of myeloid and monocytic lineages, and it is seen in neutrophils in peripheral blood and tissue. The presence of Anaplasma in neutrophils induces proinflammatory responses leading to neutrophil deactivation, and the release of cytokines promotes neutrophil degranulation. Interleukin-10, IL12, and IFN-gamma are among the cytokines released which contribute to continuous tissue injury. IFN-gamma is primarily produced by innate immune NK and NKT cells as well as CD8 T lymphocytes. The development of tissue injury prevents neutrophils from exerting effective antimicrobial response. These cytokine-driven mechanisms as a response to infection explain the clinical manifestations associated with human granulocytic anaplasmosis.  Clinical cases may present with fever, pancytopenia, liver dysfunction or more severe manifestations such as shock or organ failure.

In animal models, A. phagocytophilum infection-induced IFN-gamma production which also activates macrophages and increases inflammatory tissue injury. Further, Anaplasma also can inhibit the fusion of lysosomes with the cytoplasmic vacuoles and inhibiting signaling pathways responsible for respiratory burst. Other effects of Anaplasma include downregulation of phagocyte oxidase activity, delay in apoptosis, ineffective binding to and transmigration of activated endothelium, and inhibition of phagocytosis.