Indications for cardiac surgery are described in current guidelines.

In valvular heart disease, stenotic lesions and regurgitation can be differentiated. In general classification of valvulopathies is a 3-step approach, mild, moderate, and severe, in contrast to 4-step angiographic grading done in the catheterization laboratory. Severe valve regurgitation or stenosis requires intervention. Depending on the valve affected surgeons offer replacement or reconstruction.

With the upcoming of transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) first introduced by Cribrier in 2002, the heart team decides on the surgical or interventional treatment of severe aortic stenosis.

Decision making in aortic regurgitation requires pathophysiologic consideration. Aortic regurgitation due to enlargement of ascending aorta requires operative treatment. Patient with symptoms due to severe aortic regurgitation also need surgery. Asymptomatic patients with decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) or increased left ventricular residual volumes should also receive operation. (LVEF less than 50% or LVEDD greater than 70 mm or LVESD greater than 50 mm). Echocardiographic characteristics of severe aortic stenosis are vena contracta of more than 6 mm pressure half-time of less than 200 ms effective regurgitant office area of more than 30 and regurgitant volume of more than 60 ml.

Mitral stenosis is mainly caused by rheumatic heart disease which is rare in industrialized countries. Mitral regurgitation (MR) is treated depending on the etiology.

Multivalvular disease comprises an especially difficult decision making since studies are rare.

Cardiac surgery offers treatment for a plentitude of cardiac rhythm disturbances through the implantation of pacemakers such as dual chamber devices for atrioventricular blocks, defibrillators for ventricular arrhythmia, and cardiac synchronization therapy for advanced heart failure.

Congenital heart disease is divided into cyanotic and non-cyanotic lesions. Ventricular and atrial septal defects can be surgically closed. Special operation techniques have been developed for diseases such as Ebstein anomaly, tetralogy of Fallot, and transposition of the great vessels among others.

The most common benign tumor of the heart is an atrial myxoma. The most frequent malign cardiac tumor is a sarcoma. Secondary metastatic tumors to the heart are more frequent than primary cardiac tumors. Tumors may cause obstructive or embolic symptoms.

Pulmonary thrombendarterectomy may be necessary as a final treatment option for severe pulmonary embolism. With a certain extension of the thoracic aorta, operation of dissection and aneurysm and replacement with a vessel graft are indicated.

For the therapy of coronary artery disease (CAD), surgical revascularization can be a preferred option.

Terminal heart failure despite best medical therapy can be treated with cardiac resynchronization, implantation of assist devices or heart transplantation.