Ritonavir capsules and tablets are not bioequivalent. It is available in 100 mg tablets, capsules, powder packets, and 80 mg/ml oral solutions. Usually, it is used in the lopinavir/ritonavir combination of drugs used for HIV. The small amount of ritonavir increases the bioavailability of the lopinavir.

**Lopinavir/Ritonavir****Formulation**

- **Tablet:**100 mg/25 mg, 200 mg/50 mg

- **Oral Solution:**400 mg/100 mg per 5 mL

**HIV-1**

- 400 mg/100 mg orally twice daily, or 800 mg/200 mg by mouth once daily in patients with less than three lopinavir resistance-associated substitutions

- Increase the dose to 500 mg/125 mg orally twice daily in tablet formulation or 520 mg/130 mg (6.5 mL) solution by mouth twice daily if used with efavirenz, fosamprenavir, nelfinavir, or nevirapine

**HIV Post-exposure Prophylaxis**

- 400 mg/100 mg orally twice daily

**Pediatric Population**

**14 days to 12 months**

- 16 mg/4 mg/kg orally twice daily

**Treatment naïve patients, age over 13 months, less than 15 kg**

- 12 mg/3 mg/kg orally twice daily or 230 mg/57.5mg/m^2

- Increase the dose to 300 mg/75 mg/m^2 when used with efavirenz, fosamprenavir, nelfinavir, or nevirapine.

**Treatment naïve patients, greater than 13 months, 15 to 40 kg**

- 10mg/2.5 mg/kg by mouth twice daily OR 230 mg/57.5 mg/m^2

- Increase the dose to 300 mg/75 mg/m^2 when used with efavirenz, fosamprenavir, nelfinavir, or nevirapine.

**Treatment-experienced patients older than 13 months, under 15 kg**

- 13 mg/3.25 mg/kg orally twice a day. Max dose is 400 mg/100 mg twice daily or 300 mg/75 mg/m^2

- Increase the dose to 300 mg/75 mg/m^2 when used with efavirenz, fosamprenavir, nelfinavir, or nevirapine

**Treatment-experienced patients, over 13 months, 15 to 45 kg**

- 11 mg/2.75 mg/kg by mouth two times daily. Max dose is 400 mg/100 mg twice daily or 300 mg/75 mg/m^2

- Increase the dose to 300 mg/75 mg/m^2 when used with efavirenz, fosamprenavir, nelfinavir, or nevirapine.

**Treatment experienced patients older than 13 months, weight greater than 45 kg**

- 400 mg/100 mg/kg orally twice daily

- Increase to 500 mg/125 mg orally twice daily or 520 mg/130 mg solution twice daily with efavirenz, fosamprenavir, nelfinavir, or nevirapine.

**Special Patient Population**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment**

- In case of moderate or severe hepatic impairment, use ritonavir with monitoring. As per the manufacturer's labeling, avoid using in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations**

- 400 mg/100 mg oral dosing twice daily

- Increase the dose to 500 mg/125 mg orally twice daily when used with efavirenz, fosamprenavir, nelfinavir, or nevirapine.

- Healthcare providers are encouraged to register patients to Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry (APR), which monitors pregnancy outcomes in women exposed to ritonavir during pregnancy. The oral solution contains around 27% propylene glycol and 43% ethanol; hence the use is not recommended during pregnancy.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**

- The CDC recommends against HIV-infected mothers breastfeeding their infants to prevent postnatal transmission of HIV, developing viral resistance (when HIV-negative infants), and serious adverse drug reactions. There is no information available on the effects of the ritonavir on milk production or the effects on the breastfed infant. There are no adverse reactions reported in infants.

**COVID-19 Emergency Use Authorization**

- Administer 300 mg nirmatrelvir with 100 mg ritonavir by mouth twice daily (in the morning and the evening) for five days. For each dose, it is a must to take all three tablets at the same time. The dose for patients with a renal impairment needs to be adjusted based on renal function. For eGFR ≥30 to <60 mL/min, decrease the dose to 150 mg nirmatrelvir and 100 mg ritonavir twice daily for five days. Use is not recommended for patients with eGFR <30 mL/min.