A photo of one eye of the patient is taken at a time. First, align the circle on the screen with the patient’s iris and pupil. Adjust the height to make the three white dots in a symmetric position. Then focus on the retina of the patient. Ask the patient to focus on the green light they see. Adjust the joystick forwards, backward, and sideways to get a sharper view of the two dots on the three o clock and nine o clock positions (to ensure the optimal distance of the camera from the eye) or a sharper image of the reticules.

There is an indicator indicating the good focus of the retina (two vertical lines which have to be aligned in some cameras). For manual capture, the eyepiece must be correctly set. The photographer must wear the refractive error corrections, if any. The accommodation of the photographer must be at rest. When the reticules are sharper, and the view of the retina is sharper, the button is pressed to capture the image (Figure-5). Fundoscopy has been taught to students using virtual platforms, which proved useful, especially during the COVID pandemic.

Stereophotography uses two images taken from the right and left, which are then viewed with a stereo viewer. Optional lenses must be employed for focusing anterior objects (mid-vitreous, anterior segment). To focus posterior objects or the retina in pathological myopia, minus lenses have to be added. For extremes of refractive errors (around +15 diopter or -15 diopters), the autofocus function of the fundus camera may not work, and manual focusing should be used to focus the retina.