The most important application of the conoid of Sturm is the optics and management of astigmatism.

**Optics of Astigmatism and The Conoid of Sturm**

The same concept can be applied to an eye. In the case of astigmatism, the horizontal and vertical meridians of the eye have different powers. Thus, it becomes a toric surface. The refraction through an astigmatic eye will be configured as the conoid of Sturm. [see image on - Optics of astigmatism and The Conoid of Sturm]. As the light from infinity is not forming a point focus on the retina, the image will be distorted.

**Types of Astigmatism and The Conoid of Sturm**

Astigmatism can be divided into two types:

- Regular

- Irregular

Irregular astigmatism is when the power changes non-uniformly from one meridian to another. In this type of astigmatism, the two principal meridians may not be at a perpendicular orientation. This type of astigmatism cannot be corrected with spectacles lenses.

Irregular astigmatism has a variety of causes:

- Irregular corneal surface

- Pterygium
- Keratoconus
- Corneal ulcers
- Dry eye
- Corneal dystrophyies
- Corneal scarring

- Postoperative causes

- after cataract surgery
- after scleral buckling surgery
- after trabeculectomy
- after LASIK
- after vitrectomy

- Crystalline lens

- Cataract
- Posterior lenticonus

Regular astigmatism is when there is a regular change in power between the two principal meridians.

Regular astigmatism can be further classified in the following ways:

- Based on etiology:

- Corneal astigmatism
- Lenticular astigmatism

- Curvature – Due to congenital abnormalities of the curvature of the lens (for example, lenticonus)
- Positional – tilting of the lens
- Index – due to variable refractive indices within the lens


- Retinal astigmatism - rare and postulated to be formed by unequal meridional lengthening of the sclera within the macula

- Based on the axis and the position of the axes:
            1) With-the-rule astigmatism:
            The two principal meridians are placed at right angles. The vertical meridian is more curved than the horizontal meridian (which is in accordance with the regular curvature of the cornea. Normally, the vertical meridian of the cornea is steeper than the horizontal meridian due to pressure from the eyelid hence the name). When light rays from infinity pass through such a system, the rays in the vertical meridian converge more than the rays in the horizontal meridian, forming the conoid of Sturm. [See the image on - Optics of astigmatism and The Conoid of Sturm]
            2) Against-the-rule astigmatism:
            The two principal meridians are placed at right angles. The horizontal meridian is more curved than the vertical meridian. When light rays from infinity pass through such a system, the rays in the horizontal meridian converge more than those in the vertical meridian, forming the conoid of Sturm. [See the image on - Against-the-rule astigmatism]
            3) Oblique astigmatism:
            The two principal meridians are placed at right angles but not in a horizontal/vertical orientation.
            4) Bio-oblique astigmatism:
            The two principal meridians are not at right angles to each other.

- Based on the position of the focal lines with respect to the retina:
            1) Simple astigmatism:
            The rays of light from one meridian focus on the retina, while the rays in the other meridian focus either in front (simple myopic astigmatism) or behind the retina (simple hypermetropic astigmatism). [See the images – simple myopic astigmatism and simple hypermetropic astigmatism]
            2) Compound astigmatism:
            The rays of light from both meridians focus either in front of (compound myopic astigmatism) or behind the retina (compound hypermetropic astigmatism) [See images on – compound myopic and compound hypermetropic astigmatism]
            3) Mixed astigmatism:
            The rays of light from one meridian focus in front of the retina, and the rays in the other meridian focus behind the retina. [See the image on – mixed astigmatism]

**Optical correction of astigmatism and the conoid of Sturm**

The endpoint of refraction in astigmatism is:

1) To ensure that the circle of least confusion falls on the retina:

When the circle of least confusion falls on the retina, the image seen has the least distortion and creates the least perception of blur. To do this, we need to correct astigmatism with a lens with a spherical equivalent equal to the refractive error of the eye and off opposite power.

For example, [See the image on - Using a spherical lens for astigmatism].

2) To collapse the interval of Sturm:

The smaller the circle of least confusion, the clearer the image. But the image is not a point; rather, it is a circle. Therefore, even when the circle of least confusion lies on the retina, the vision is suboptimal. To optimize vision, we need to collapse the conoid of Sturm onto the retina so that the pair of focal lines reduce to a single focal point. This requires using cylindrical lenses to neutralize the error in each meridian. [See the image on - Using a cylindrical lens for astigmatism]