Typically, only supportive care is necessary for patients with ketamine toxicity. The effects of ketamine intoxication typically last between 15 minutes to several hours depending on the dose, route of administration (e.g., oral more than intravenous), metabolic capacity, and intrinsic sensitivity to the effects of the drug, which depends on genetics and several other factors.

Monitoring includes the patient’s airway, breathing, and circulation, as ketamine can potentially cause cardiopulmonary compromise, especially when taken in combination with other drugs. If the patient vomits, the patient should be positioned to lean forward or lie on the left side with the head facing down to avoid airway compromise and aspiration. Ketamine has been shown to cause bronchodilation and maintain a protective airway better than other anesthetic agents used for sedation, although there have been reports of aspiration.

If ketamine was ingested, especially in large quantities or with other drugs, activated charcoal could be used for gastrointestinal decontamination. Activated charcoal is typically given in a 1 g/kg dose, with a maximum oral dose of 50 g/ng.

According to the toxicology data network, there are no medications approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat a ketamine overdose, but medications can provide management of agitation and psychosis. Benzodiazepines such as lorazepam and diazepam can alleviate agitation, psychomimetic effects, hypertension, hyperthermia, and seizures. Lorazepam is typically given 2 to 4 mg intravenously or intramuscularly, and diazepam dosing generally is 5 mg to 10 mg IV. Butyrophenones, including haloperidol, have been used to treat psychotic episodes and agitation.

Other medications can manage other symptoms. Alpha-2 agonists such as clonidine can treat or prevent ketamine’s psychomimetic side effects, increase hemodynamic stability by decreasing blood pressure, and provide synergism with ketamine’s analgesic effects.