The management of dyslipidemia requires input and interprofessional communication from the healthcare team members, including physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other healthcare professionals. Without question, physicians and pharmacists need to be up to date on the guidelines detailing the management of blood cholesterol. Cholesterol is one of the primary risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular disease is one of the costliest disease states to manage. In fact, the CDC estimated in 2010 that $444 billion, or $1 out of every $6 spent on health care, can be attributed to cardiovascular disease.

Clinicians need to manage dyslipidemia in the outpatient setting to prevent hospitalization due to cardiovascular disease. The pharmacist's role is to verify orders for lipid-lowering agents and contact prescribers if there is a medication-related error. For instance, there are many commercially available lipid-lowering agents, including HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, niacin, bile acid sequestrants, and fibric acids. If the pharmacist receives an order and identifies a more suitable agent for the patient than the agent prescribed, then it is the responsibility of the pharmacist to contact the prescriber and relay that information. This interprofessional team approach to patient care will yield improved outcomes, not only with fibric acid therapy but also in treating the patient as a whole. [Level 5]

In the hospital setting, nurses have several responsibilities, including patient monitoring. For that reason, nurses need to have a basic understanding of the side effect profiles of commonly used lipid-lowering agents. If a patient is suffering a medication-related adverse event, nurses are on the frontline to identify the problem and manage the patient's symptomatology. Additionally, adverse events should be reported to the medical team, including physicians, nurse practitioners, and pharmacists, to initiate appropriate action to control the patient's blood cholesterol. All health care team members play an important role in optimizing drug therapy for the patient, and the common denominator in the ideal scenario is interprofessional communication. In doing so, health care professionals can manage a patient's blood cholesterol in the outpatient setting, prevent unnecessary hospitalizations, and save the health care system billions of dollars in costs.