Localization of the lesion in Horner syndrome is crucial in subsequent management. A detailed history and physical examination are, therefore, of vital importance. When evaluating, the following points need to be considered:

- Balance, hearing, sensory, and swallowing problems can point towards a more central process involving the first-order neurons.

- Prior history of trauma or surgical intervention involving the head, face, neck, shoulder, or back points towards the involvement of second-order neurons.

- A detailed past medical and medication history to rule out the use of a miotic or mydriatic agent.

- A headache, double vision, facial numbness, or pain indicate third-order neuron involvement.

- The presence of anhidrosis and its location can help in the localization.

- A detailed history of a headache if present.

- Longstanding symptoms point towards a more benign underlying cause versus recently progressive symptoms such as weight loss, hemoptysis, low-grade fever, and lymphadenopathy.

- Facial flushing suggests a preganglionic lesion.

- Facial or orbital pain in combination with miosis and ptosis should point towards Raeder paratrigeminal syndrome.

- History of skin lesions or previously diagnosed herpes zoster infection.

- Severity and location of the pain.

A detailed examination of the eyes is warranted and should include the following:

- Reactivity of the pupils to light and accommodation

- Measurement of pupillary diameter in dim and bright light

- Examination of the upper eyelid for ptosis and fatigability

- Evaluation of extraocular movements

- Vision, including color vision and visual fields

- Slit-lamp examination for structural details

- Evaluation of the presence of nystagmus

A detailed exam can reveal a round and constricted pupil. The affected pupil exhibits dilation lag (dilates more slowly), and the unequal pupils are appreciated more in darkness compared to light. In addition, the ciliospinal reflex may be absent.

Furthermore, partial ptosis, iris heterochromia, apparent enophthalmos, contralateral eyelid retraction, injected conjunctivae, and no change or a transient decrease in intraocular pressure may be seen.

It is important to perform a detailed systemic examination, paying specific attention to neurological, pulmonary, and cardiovascular systems and considering various differentials discussed later.