Aortitis syndrome refers to inflammation and/or narrowing of the aorta secondary to an autoimmune process, infection, or other systemic inflammation. This syndrome can present at any portion of the aorta: ascending, aortic arch, thoracic or abdominal. Infectious aortitis is typically secondary to septicemia, syphilis, or mycobacterial infection. In particular, syphilis is a common cause of aortitis of the aortic arch, which can lead to the narrowing of the take-off point of the great vessels of the superior mediastinum. Non-infectious causes of aortitis include Takayasu arteritis, giant cell arteritis, and Bechet’s disease. Surgery is often necessary for the event of a severe narrowing of the aorta or one of the great vessels. The inflammatory process should be controlled prior to any operative intervention. Both endovascular and open procedures have been studied. Endovascular techniques have been shown to decrease perioperative complications, but long-term efficacy appears comparable.

The thymus is a small triangular gland containing lymphoid tissue. In the infant, the thymus is quite large and can occupy most of the space behind the manubrium. It is a primary lymphatic organ responsible for the development of cellular immunity. The thymus reaches its maximum just after puberty and then gradually atrophies. In the adult, only fat cells and small fibrous strands remain. In about a quarter of individuals who develop myasthenia gravis, the thymus may be enlarged (thymoma). The thymus gland is accessed via the median sternotomy and removed in toto. Great care should be taken during the excision of the thymoma as the phrenic nerve runs laterally and can easily be damaged. The only way to determine if the thymoma is benign or malignant is by visual inspection of its location and invasion of adjacent structures. Many tumors receive treatment with surgery and radiation therapy. Malignant lesions tend to be invasive and adherent to nearby structures. Adherent lesions treated with surgery increase the risk of vascular compromise during the procedure. Care is necessary to carefully dissect any vessels to which the mass is adherent, particularly the brachiocephalic trunk, but also including the remaining great vessels. Thirty percent of tumors are too advanced for surgery and will require chemotherapy.