# Introduction

The human coccyx is the final portion of the vertebral column, typically comprised of three to five vertebral segments.

However, the coccygeal vertebrae do not contain any pedicle, lamina, or spinous processes. The coccyx serves as the attachment site for multiple pelvic ligaments and tendons and contains an extensive plexus of coccygeal nerves. Damage to any one of these components can have implications in several clinical conditions.

# Structure and Function

Conventional knowledge dictates that the coccyx is a single fused entity; however, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomogram (CT) based evaluations of coccygeal anatomy in different populations have shown that the coccyx contains anywhere from three to five separate bony segments, with the four segments being the most common.

Together the cornuae form the sacral foramen, allowing for the traversing of various nerves. As the coccygeal vertebra progress, the length and width of each bone decrease, and together form an overall triangular shape. Given its location, the coccyx plays a significant role in weight-bearing when in a seated position and forms a tripod of support along with the two ischial spines of the pelvis.

# Embryology

During gastrulation of the human fetus, a trilaminar embryonic disk forms, containing three distinct germ layers (endoderm, mesoderm, ectoderm) along with a notochord, which is adjacent to the neural tube.

Each sclerotome then divides into a cranial area of loosely packed cells and a caudal area of densely packed cells, between which the intervertebral disk forms. This intervertebral disk separates sclerotomes at different levels and forces the cranial cells of one sclerotome to fuse with the caudal cells of the adjacent somite, thus giving rise to a complete vertebral body. Simultaneously, cells surrounding the neural tube will begin forming vertebral arches to form a protective canal for the future spinal cord. These arches create pedicles, laminae, spinous processes, transverse processes, and articular processes, which ultimately fuse with the developing vertebral bodies, giving rise to the bony spine. Typically during the eighth week of gestation, the sacral and coccygeal vertebrae appear.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

There are a vast number of vessels that supply the structures of the pelvic region. At the level of L4, the abdominal aorta bifurcates into the internal and external iliac arteries. The internal iliac artery then divides into its anterior and posterior divisions while still located within the pelvis. In contrast, the external iliac continues towards the lower extremities as the femoral arteries.

The posterior division of the internal iliac artery includes the iliolumbar artery, lateral sacral artery, and superior gluteal artery. Ultimately, the lateral sacral artery gives off spinal branches which supply both the sacrum and the coccyx. Additionally, directly from the aorta, median sacral arteries arise near the L4 bifurcation site.

# Nerves

The coccygeal plexus primarily innervate the coccygeal vertebrae, a network of nerves originating from the ventral rami of S4, S5, and Co1 along with the dorsal rami of the sacral sympathetic trunk, converging in the area of the iliococcygeus muscle.

# Muscles

Anterior to the coccyx vertebrae lie the levator ani muscle along with the sacrococcygeal ligament.

# Clinical Significance

Avulsion injury of the levator ani muscle, specifically of the pubococcygeal segment, is common in postpartum women who have undergone a vaginal delivery.

Coccydynia refers to pain localized to the coccygeal region, without associated lower back pain or radiation/referral of pain. The condition affects individuals in all age groups; however, onset has typically been shown to be in the fourth decade, with a greater prevalence in women.

Treatment of coccydynia relies on the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), decreased time spent sitting, sitting modifications (such as "donut" shaped gel pads), as well as physical therapy. Local injections may also be options. Surgical management is typically for patients who have persistent pain despite non-operative management. Excision of any mobile coccygeal segments, coccygectomy, may be utilized; however, post-operative complications such as infection as well as continued pain and neurovascular complications are not uncommon.