# Introduction

Heart sounds are created from blood flowing through the heart chambers as the cardiac valves open and close during the cardiac cycle. Vibrations of these structures from the blood flow create audible sounds — the more turbulent the blood flow, the more vibrations that get created. The same variables determine the turbulence of blood flow as all fluids. These are fluid viscosity, density, velocity, and the diameter of the column through which the fluid is traveling. Auscultation of the heart sounds with a stethoscope is a cornerstone of physical medical exams and a valuable first-line tool to evaluate a patient. Some sounds are very characteristic of significant pathological lesions that have major pathophysiological consequences, and these first present on auscultation. These type of lesions can be heard in systole, diastole, or continuously through the cardiac cycle.

# Organ Systems Involved

**Cardiac Valves**

Anatomy:

There are four chambers of the heart: the right atrium, the right ventricle, the left atrium, and the left ventricle. The atrioventricular valves are located on the floor of the atria and empty into the ventricles. These valves are composed of leaflets attached to papillary muscles in the ventricle via thin cord-like structures called chordae tendineae. The leaflets also attach to a fibrous ring, known as the valve annulus, that supports the valve between the atria and ventricles. The tricuspid valve separates the right atrium from the right ventricle, and the mitral valve separates the left atrium from the left ventricle. The tricuspid valve consists of three leaflets, while the mitral valve consists of two leaflets.

The semilunar valves separate the ventricles from the great arteries. These valves are composed of three sinus-like leaflets also attached to a valve annulus. The pulmonic valve separates the right ventricle from the pulmonary artery, and the aortic valve separates the left ventricle from the aorta. The superior aspects of the right and left aortic valve leaflets contain the origins of the coronary arteries. The aortic valve on average opens and closes 100000 times a day.

Cellular:

A single layer of endothelial cells called the endocardium lines the surface of the heart valves. The subendocardium contains a vast population of cells types. It contains fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, nerves, elastic and collagenous fibers. The connective tissue of the subendocardium is continuous with the connective tissue of the myocardial layer.

The endothelial cells of the valves are genotypically and phenotypically unique from other endothelial cells found in the body. Research has shown these cells are very functionally active and can alter the mechanical properties of the aortic valve, which in turn alters its function. They modulate the elastic modulus of the valve, which is the valve’s strain for a given amount of stress. Endothelial cells accomplish this via communication with myofibroblast and smooth muscle cells in the subendocardial layer.

Function:

The heart valves permit forward flow of blood while preventing backward regurgitant flow.

# Function

**Flow**

Flow can be laminar or turbulent. Laminar flow is smooth with low resistance. It is conceptualized as layers neatly stacked in parallel as they flow through a column. In contrast, turbulent flow is rough with high resistance and has a chaotic, unorganized structural pattern. Reynold’s number can quantify the likelihood of a fluid demonstrating turbulent flow. It states this likelihood is related to fluid viscosity, density, velocity, and the diameter of the column through which the fluid is traveling. Flow becomes more turbulent as velocity increases and the diameter of the column becomes smaller.

Heart sounds are primarily generated from vibrations of cardiac structures caused by changes that create turbulent flow.

**Physiologic Heart Sounds**

The S1 heart sound is produced as the mitral and tricuspid valves close in systole.

The S2 heart sound is produced with the closing of the aortic and pulmonic valves in diastole.

Different heart sounds exist aside from S1 and S2 that hold no pathologic consequence. The factors involved in the production of these sounds are the same factors involved with all heart sounds: turbulent flow and vibration of cardiac structures. These physiologic murmurs occur in systole, typically early systole, with a short duration. They are characterized as soft sounds affecting maximally 60% of systole and do not propagate well. These murmurs have also been called innocent, harmless, irrelevant, evolving, benign, habitual, infantile, growth murmurs, accidental, non-pathological, non-organic, normal, false, meaningless, ‘’functional’’, supine position, nonsignificant, transitory, and dynamic murmurs. Some specific examples are Still’s murmur, venous hum, and pulmonic flow murmur.

# Related Testing

The classic tool for evaluating heart sounds is the stethoscope. The stethoscope has been around for decades with many changes in design, but the function has always remained the same-to amplify the noise created by the heart and blood for better evaluation. The basic components are a headset with earpieces connected to a chest piece via tubing. The chest piece can act as a bell for low-frequency sounds and a diaphragm for high-frequency sounds. Most chest pieces incorporate both the bell and diaphragm, usually through a two-sided model, or a one-sided model where changing the amount of pressure applied to the chest piece allows for switching between each. The headpiece and earpieces are designed to optimize hearing by creating a seal around the ear canal to decrease ambient noise. The external ear canal travels in an anterior angle towards the tympanic membrane. The angle of the headset facilitates alignment with the external ear canal anatomy to create a complete seal. The correct size of the earpieces is also important for creating a proper seal.

The stethoscope can be used to auscultate all four cardiac valves. The aortic valve is best heard in the 2nd right intercostal space. The pulmonic valve is best auscultated in the 2nd left intercostal space. The tricuspid valve is loudest in the 4th left intercostal space, and the mitral valve is loudest in the left 5th intercostal space at the midclavicular line.

The digital age has spawned the creation of phonocardiography, which is the use of a phonocardiogram to record sounds made by the blood and heart. One example of these is commercially available electronic stethoscopes.

# Clinical Significance

Auscultation of heart sounds is a foundational component in clinical physical examination. An abundant amount of on-going research has been produced on the proper technique and interpretation of heart auscultation. Heart sounds and murmurs have been described in terms of their timing in the cardiac cycle, intensity, how intensity changes during the cardiac cycle, sound wave shape, pitch, location where the sound is audible, radiation, rhythm, and response to physical exam maneuvers. These different characteristics are utilized to differentiate between physiologic and pathologic sounds.

**Systolic Sounds**

Clinically significant systolic heart murmurs can be further broken down into ejection and regurgitant murmurs.  Ejection murmurs are crescendo-decrescendo murmurs that occur as blood flows through an obstruction. The sound intensity increases as the pressure gradient across the obstruction increases.

**Diastolic Sounds**

Examples of diastolic murmurs are aortic and pulmonic valve regurgitation (AR & PR), tricuspid and mitral valve stenosis (TS & MS), S3 sounds, and S4 sounds. Diastolic heart sounds are more clinically significant because all diastolic murmurs are pathologic, except for some S3.

**Continuous Sounds**

Continuous sounds are created when there is a connection between two chambers or vessels that have differences in pressure. These sounds can be heard throughout the body, such as in the renal arteries from renal artery stenosis, or with the formation of an arteriovenous fistula, like those common in pregnancy. The cardiac lesion that creates a continuous murmur is a patent ductus arteriosus. This is a connection between the pulmonary artery and the aorta that is needed only for fetal development but sometimes persist after birth. It is said to be a “machine-like” sound best heard in the left upper sternal border.****