Many other disorders can present with similar symptoms and signs commonly found in patients of hepatitis. Patients with acute and chronic active viral hepatitis infections usually present with malaise, fatigue, low-grade fever, anorexia, loss of weight, nausea, vomiting, etc. Patients can be completely normal on physical exam or may have right upper quadrant pain with hepatomegaly, urticarial rash and may show signs of dehydration. In advanced stages of liver disease from chronic viral hepatitis, patients may present with hematemesis, ascites, pedal edema, encephalopathy, etc. These symptoms and signs are observable with many other acute or chronic infectious or non-infectious conditions.

Patients who have viral or bacterial gastroenteritis, acute cholecystitis, acute cholelithiasis, tuberculosis, HIV, liver abscess, malignancies such as pancreatic cancer, lymphoma, and hepatocellular cancer, small bowel obstruction, peptic ulcer disease can all have an overlap of these signs and symptoms. Patients with severe congestive heart failure can present with pedal edema, ascites, and hepatomegaly due to hepatic congestion. Patients who have gastrointestinal bleeding from other causes, including cirrhosis due to advanced non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, can present similarly like patients with advanced liver disease due to viral, autoimmune, or alcoholic hepatitis.

Patients with hereditary hemochromatosis can present in their 50s or 60s with abdominal pain, fatigue, weakness, and symptoms and signs of liver failure. Hereditary hemochromatosis is an autosomal recessive disease that disrupts the body's iron regulation, and excess iron becomes deposited in various organs of the body, including the liver. Diagnosis is usually by checking serum iron, serum ferritin, and serum transferrin levels. A liver biopsy may become necessary to evaluate for the degree of fibrosis and to differentiate it from other disorders of the liver, including viral or autoimmune hepatitis. Patients can present with joint pain, and some patients complain of pain in the knuckles of the first two fingers called the "iron fist" sign. This sign is specific to hereditary hemochromatosis but is not present in all the patients.

Patients with autoimmune hepatitis and alcoholic hepatitis can also have similar symptoms as in viral hepatitis, especially when the disease is advanced, and patients experience severe liver dysfunction. A careful history, laboratory studies, and liver biopsy, when necessary, should be obtained to differentiate them. Further information on how to diagnose and differentiate these conditions are obtainable from the evaluation section of this article.

Since there are so many conditions that can present with similar symptoms and signs, it is not within the scope of this article to discuss every condition listed in the differential diagnosis.

- Liver abscess

- Hepatocellular cancer

- Pancreatic cancer

- Drug-induced hepatitis

- Autoimmune hepatitis

- Acute cholangitis

- Acute cholecystitis and biliary colic

- Blunt abdominal trauma

- Pancreatitis

- Gastroenteritis

- Cholelithiasis

- Intussusception

- Peptic ulcer disease

- Small-bowel obstruction