Posture balance control is a multifactorial activity that is dependent on the integration of motor, sensory, visual, cognitive, and vestibular neural networks. A disruption in any of these circuits can lead to postural instability. The specific etiology of postural instability is difficult to identify because it is a heterogeneous disorder, and there is much ground left to uncover regarding knowledge of the pathogenesis of the disease.

In a healthy individual, balance control relies on visual, somatosensory, and vestibular information. The central nervous system aggregates sensory signals, and subsequently, a corrective motor response is produced. Slower visual processing speed, disturbances in visuospatial orientation, and decreased visual acuity, as seen in Parkinson disease, can create impediments in motor function and the ability to stabilize posture. Along with visual inputs, vestibular and proprioceptive cues are necessary to maintain an upright stance. Vestibular receptors detect deviations and accelerations in head orientation. In Parkinson disease, tilting reactions are impaired, which suggests that labyrinthine postural reactions are centrally integrated with the basal ganglia. Vestibular dysfunction, however, does not appear to fully explain postural deficits in patients with a mild to moderate degree of Parkinson disease.

Somatosensory system input for postural stability involves (1) the conscious perception of passive or active motion and direction of movements, and (2) the processing of proprioceptive information from muscle spindles and cutaneous and joint receptors. The basal ganglia are known to be involved in the integration of proprioceptive signals for the coordination of posture and movement. Proprioception is significant in controlling postural reactions induced by unexpected stimuli.