Suspected olecranon fractures require orthopedic consultation.  After a thorough history, physical exam, and imaging, the fracture should be immobilized in a posterior splint with slight extension. The reduction is indicated in type 3 injuries with the aim of reducing the remaining articular surface with the trochlea.

Nondisplaced olecranon fractures can be treated with an initial period of immobilization in a posterior slab long arm splint with the elbow in 45-90 degrees of flexion followed by early progressive active range of motion exercises with avoidance of active extension

Type II and III injuries generally require surgical intervention.  Non-operative management of type II injuries may be an option as there is

Displaced, stable, non-comminuted fractures (Mayo type 2A) may be amenable to tension band wiring (TBW).  This construct converts the tension force from the pull of the triceps into a compressive force at the articular surface.  It requires an intact dorsal cortex. Fractures treated with TBW should not have significant comminution, or they will cause collapse and narrowing of the distance between the coronoid and olecranon

Plate and screw fixation is recommended for unstable fracture patterns with significant comminution or a fracture line exiting distal to the semilunar notch (Mayo Type 2B) and fracture-dislocations (Mayo Type 3)

Intramedullary nails are now available and may be suitable for some fracture types.  Intramedullary devices may avoid the wound complications related to the superficial location of traditional hardware used to treat olecranon fractures

Excision and triceps advancement is an option in elderly, low-demand individuals where the fragment is too small for fixation or where less than 50% of the joint surface is involved.  Cadaveric studies have shown that excising over 50% of the olecranon results in elbow instability, therefore this is the maximum recommended resection