Hypothermia is potentially lethal if not quickly recognized and treated. The majority of patients first present to the emergency department, and the triage nurse should promptly accept the patient and inform the emergency department physicians. In general, treating patients with hypothermia requires an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals.

EMS personnel provide the initial encounter and resuscitation effort. They will remove wet clothing and initiate external passive rewarming. After reaching the hospital, nurses and emergency room physicians will work together to further warm the patient with external and internal invasive rewarming methods.

Hypothermic patients are prone to many complications and require admission to the ICU, where there will be continuous monitoring by the nurses. The pulmonologist and cardiologist should be involved if the patient has pulmonary edema or aspiration pneumonia. Since frostbite is a common outcome, wound care must take part in therapy. Regular debridement of the wound may be necessary. Blood work requires monitoring for rhabdomyolysis. Nursing must remain in attendance constantly and report any deterioration in condition to the physician staff, as well as administering fluids and any medications.

Nephrologists, surgeons, and cardiology may be required if ECMO, hemodialysis, or cardiopulmonary bypass is needed.

Hypothermia is a medical emergency and requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level V]

For those who survive, education is necessary to prevent a repeat episode. These individuals should avoid alcohol, dress appropriately, and carry a survival bag with the essential equipment and material to protect the body. Only through an interprofessional team approach can be morbidity of hypothermia be lowered.

**Outcomes**

Patients who receive rapid resuscitation usually have good results, but residual frostbite and muscle injury may be present. Outcomes are worst for the very young and elderly.