According to the World Health Organization Guidelines on Drawing Blood: Best Practices in Phlebotomy, **complications of blood donation**include (from most likely to least likely) a hematoma, vasovagal reaction or syncope, delayed syncope, arterial puncture, and nerve damage.**Complications of blood transfusion**include transfusion reactions and transfusion-transmitted infections.

Although the risk of transfusion-transmitted infection has decreased substantially, bacterial contamination in platelets stored at room temperature is still a concern for potential septic transfusion reactions. Bacterial contamination is typically from commensal bacteria normally found on the skin of donors or from transient bacteremia in donors. Another increasing concern is transfusion-transmitted emerging pathogens such as Zika virus and babesiosis.  As the risk of infectious complications has decreased, noninfectious transfusion complications have become the primary area of concern and focus for improvement. The efforts focused on detection, recognition, and reporting of transfusion-related adverse events has improved the safety of transfusion of blood and blood components. Transfusion reactions that can occur with the transfusion of blood range from life-threatening reactions to circumstances in which transfusion can continue, once the cause of the reaction is determined (e.g. simple allergic reaction).  The most common reactions include the following:

- Transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO)

- Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)

- Transfusion-associated dyspnea (TAD)

- Simple allergic reaction

- Anaphylactic reaction

- Hypotensive transfusion reaction

- Febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reaction (FNHTR)

- Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction (AHTR)

- Delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction (DHTR)

- Delayed serologic transfusion reaction (DSTR)

- Transfusion-associated graft vs. host disease (TAGVHD)

- Post-transfusion purpura (PTP)

- Transfusion-transmitted infection (TTI)

With efforts to reduce TRALI, transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO) has been an emerging concern for morbidity and mortality in patients receiving blood transfusions.