There are at least five subtypes of muscarinic receptors (M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5) present throughout the body. Understanding the general function of each muscarinic receptor at each organ system is necessary to understand the anticholinergic reaction. Additionally, although the general patterns of distribution/function listed below are accepted, new research is still being performed to identify additional locations and functions of the receptor subtypes.

- **Brain**: All five (M1-M5) muscarinic receptor subtypes are distributed throughout the brain. However, several studies suggest that the receptor most significantly implicated in the anticholinergic reaction is the M1 receptor. Components of the reaction include delirium, cognitive impairment, dizziness, sedation, and confusion.

- **Eye**: M1-M5 are present throughout the eye, but M3 predominates. The stimulation of M3 by ACh causes iris sphincter contraction, leading to pupillary constriction (miosis). Anticholinergic toxicity, therefore, leads to improperly-timed pupillary dilation (mydriasis) and blurred vision.

- **Glands**
- **Salivary Glands**: M1 and M3 receptors predominate, and stimulation by ACh leads to increased salivation. Anticholinergic toxicity leads to decreased salivation and dry mouth with difficulty swallowing. M4 is possibly present at the parotid glands, but its full effect is currently unclear.
- **Sweat Glands**: The M3 receptor predominates at the sweat glands of the skin and stimulation by ACh leads to increased sweating. The anticholinergic reaction leads to a decreased ability to sweat, and therefore, a decreased ability to dissipate heat.

- **Heart**: The M2 receptor predominates in the heart and modulates several aspects of cardiac function; slowing down pacemaker activity and atrioventricular conduction (chronotropic), and decreasing cardiac inotropy (contractility). An anticholinergic effect at the M2 cardiac receptor would lead to sinus tachycardia and increased contractility.

- **Lungs**: The lung contains M1-M4 receptors which play an important role in lung/bronchial function as well as treatment of lung disease.

- **Gastrointestinal System**: M2 and M3 receptors predominate and under ACh stimulation, increase gastric motility. In the anticholinergic reaction, the motility slows down, which can result in****gastric stasis and constipation.

- **Bladder**: M3 is predominantly responsible for detrusor/bladder contraction. M2 may be responsible for inhibiting detrusor relaxation, but the exact role is still unclear. Inhibition during an anticholinergic reaction leads to an inability to contract the bladder, causing urinary stasis and retention.

- **Skin**: Although M3 is the primary receptor at the skin, there is no clear relationship between ACh and vasodilation. ACh can stimulate muscarinic receptors in vascular endothelium, leading to increased nitric oxide synthesis and vasodilation. ACh also acts on nicotinic receptors in the vascular endothelium, leading to vasoconstriction. There is a complex interaction at the vascular endothelium between nicotinic and muscarinic receptors, as well as other factors including norepinephrine and prostaglandins. The anticholinergic reaction generally results in vasodilation at the skin****despite the complexity of factors involved, likely to dissipate excess body heat.