Patients with reversible causes of seizures, such as hypoglycemia, may be discharged after appropriate interventions and with consideration for a safe home environment. For patients with a history of epilepsy who have returned to baseline mental status, adjusting the medication regimen and follow-up with other providers may be necessary. Testing for medication levels may be appropriate if available for the particular antiepileptic drug. If the patient has been noncompliant with an antiepileptic drug regimen, medications should be resumed.

Patients with alcohol withdrawal seizures represent another group of patients who may be discharged after appropriate treatment and a period of observation. Treatment of alcohol withdrawal seizures deserves special mention since episodic treatment with lorazepam has shown to decrease the risk of recurrence.

A first unprovoked seizure in an adult who has returned to a normal neurological baseline often does not require initiation of medical treatment.

If deciding to start drug therapy, many medications are options to treat a chronic seizure disorder or epilepsy as first-line medication or adjunctive medications. Selection may be guided by side effects and in consultation with a neurologist. They can be grouped based on their mechanism of action and include sodium channel blockers (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, eslicarbazepine, phenytoin, fosphenytoin, lamotrigine, lacosamide, and zonisamide), and agonists of GABA receptor (benzodiazepine and barbiturates). Other drugs with associated mechanisms include GABA reuptake inhibitors (tiagabine), inhibitors of GABA-transaminase (vigabatrin), glutamate antagonists (topiramate, felbamate, perampanel), medications with binding to synaptic vesicle 2A protein (levetiracetam, brivaracetam), and drugs with multiple mechanisms (gabapentin, pregabalin, valproic acid).

For the patient with generalized convulsive status epilepticus, immediate treatment of the seizures should begin while stabilization and other diagnostic procedures commence. Supportive care with attention to airway, breathing, and circulation issues are vital. Benzodiazepines such as diazepam, midazolam, or lorazepam are acceptable as the first-line medications for continuing seizures. Recommended dosage varies, but accepted regimens for adults are listed below.

- Lorazepam 4 mg IV; repeat once in 5 to 10 minutes if seizures continue

- Midazolam 10 mg IM or IV; repeat once in 5 to 10 minutes if seizures continue

- Diazepam 10 mg IV; repeat once in 10 minutes if seizures continue

The best second-line medication is unclear even after completing a highly anticipated randomized trial of benzodiazepine refractory status epilepticus- the established status epilepticus treatment trial (ESETT). Second-line medications include fosphenytoin, valproate, levetiracetam, and others. Doses used in the ESETT study are listed below, given with an infusion time of ten minutes. The dosing of these medications in this study was higher than doses typically used in clinical practice. Clinicians have noted similar incidences of adverse effects with these medications, and no one drug was superior to the others.

- Fosphenytoin 20PE/kg (up to 1500 phenytoin equivalents)

- Valproate 40mg/kg (up to 300 mg)

- Levetiracetam 60/mg (up to 4500 mg)

Should generalized convulsive status epilepticus continue, often advanced airway management is necessary. Blood pressure support may be necessary. The best treatment for refractory status epilepticus is unknown, but options include propofol, barbiturates (pentobarbital), or continuous benzodiazepine infusions in addition to other anesthetic medications. ICU admission will be necessary with continuous EEG monitoring.