Deferoxamine is poorly absorbed from the GI tract when taken orally. For this reason, it must be given intramuscularly, subcutaneously, or intravenously.

A 25 gauge or smaller butterfly needle is used for the SQ route. The abdomen is generally the safest and most common area to avoid important vessels and nerves. A 10% deferoxamine solution is administered subcutaneously over 8 to 12 hours using a slow infusion pump.

Intravenous administration is reserved for those patients with severe acute iron toxicity with Iron levels >500 mcg/dL, severe cardiac disease (dysrhythmias, LV dysfunction, severe heart iron loading (T2*<6 ms on MRI)), or those who cannot tolerate the subcutaneous infusion.

The dose of deferoxamine may be reduced or increased by using clinical judgment, decreasing liver ion concentrations, or calculating the therapeutic index, which divides the daily dose of deferoxamine by the serum ferritin levels. The therapeutic index should be <.025 at all times to avoid serious adverse effects.

Vitamin C can potentiate the therapeutic effect of deferoxamine by mobilizing iron stores, subsequently increasing the concentration of chelatable iron.

In aluminum toxicity, the appropriate dosing and therapy duration of the drug is uncertain and should be tailored by serum aluminum levels, symptoms, and response. The National Kidney Foundation has listed specific guidelines for the use of deferoxamine in aluminum toxicity, which this article will cover. A proposed mechanism by the Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative states that in symptomatic patients with serum aluminum levels >60 μg/L but <200 μg/L or a rise in aluminum after DFO >50 μg/L, deferoxamine should be given to treat the aluminum overload. Deferoxamine's ability to draw aluminum out of tissues and into the plasma makes its use very dangerous in those patients with serum aluminum levels >200 μg/L. To avoid DFO-induced neurotoxicity in these patients, its use should delay until the completion of intensive dialysis (6 days per week) with a high-flux dialysis membrane and a dialysate aluminum level of <5 μg/L and until the pre-dialysis serum aluminum level has been reduced to <200 μg/L.