It is not surprising that, without proper barriers and monitoring for the detrimental effects of hydrocodone and acetaminophen intoxication, the morbidity and mortality of using opioid analgesia can be quite substantial. The drug information sheet from the manufacturer emphasizes in bold letters the importance of warning patients of abuse, misuse, and addiction of hydrocodone and acetaminophen, which can lead to overdose and death. Multiple efforts point toward reducing prescription abuse and misuse.

The mitigation of opioid overdose and misuse risk starts from the system-level intervention by clinicians and nurses prescribing narcotics. In addition, the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program and Medicaid managed care lock-in program require that patients receive all scripts from a single prescriber. Although over 55% dropped from the program, the proportion of stable patients, i.e., patients exclusively filled from one prescriber, increased from 31% to 78% at 36 months.

Pharmacists should use formulary management tools to address both opioid overprescribing and overdose. One of them is a prior authorization requirement placed by the insurance companies to verify that the medication is necessary. Cochran et al. conducted a retrospective cohort study evaluating the effects of prior authorization on the rate of abuse and overdose of patients enrolled in the Pennsylvania Medicaid program from 2010 to 2012. The study demonstrated that plans with prior authorization requirements had lower rates of use disorder and overdose.

All in all, there is a battle to reduce the opioid prescription crisis, and still, rates of overdose continue. Numerous interventions show some promise in mitigating this problem, and it truly takes an interprofessional team, including clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, to achieve this goal. [Level 5]