In any patient with thrombocytopenia, a thorough history and physical exam help in establishing the etiology behind the low platelet count.

A physical exam provides clues towards determining the etiology of thrombocytopenia. Patients with gestational thrombocytopenia are often healthy, asymptomatic women who are found to have low platelets on lab investigations.

Specific clues in the history and physical exam can point a clinician towards an underlying etiology.

- Gestational thrombocytopenia: It is diagnosed based on the following criteria.
- onset in mid-second to the third trimester
- no symptoms in the mother and no history of bleeding
- no effect on the outcome of the pregnancy
- no thrombocytopenia in the neonate
- self-limited course and resolution in 4 to 8 weeks
- A tendency to recur with the same degree in subsequent pregnancies

- Pre-eclampsia: Patients present with severe hypertension after 20 weeks of gestation (defined as systolic pressure more than 160mmHg and diastolic pressure more than 110 mmHg on two separate occasions, at least 4 hours apart) or with severe persistent right upper quadrant epigastric pain which is unresponsive to medications. Eclampsia can present as a sequela to pre-eclampsia with seizures.

- HELLP syndrome: It correlates with generalized edema in more than 50% of patients who demonstrate hepatic and renal insufficiency in labs.

- AFLP: Clinically, it is quite challenging to distinguish between AFLP and HELLP syndrome. However, encephalopathy, hypoglycemia, severe coagulopathy, along with TMA like hemolysis, are more frequently present in patients with AFLP.

- PNH: Patients usually present with hemolytic anemia, pancytopenia, and thrombosis; however, the characteristic finding of hemoglobinuria is almost never seen.

- HIT: A history of recent exposure to heparin is quintessential to the diagnosis of HIT. The thrombocytopenia usually develops within 5 to 10 days of exposure to heparin but can occur sooner if the previous exposure was relatively recent. The presence of skin necrosis and/or venous thromboembolism should prompt a workup towards HIT. The clinical 4-T score also aids in the diagnosis of HIT.