Ocular hypotony can be caused by a wide range of ocular and systemic conditions, and the diagnosis is often clinical. Ocular hypotony may also result as a complication of drug use. The diagnosis and management of ocular hypotony may involve diverse ophthalmic subspecialists, including glaucoma, vitreoretinal, uveitis, and cornea.

The systemic causes of hypotony could involve an interplay between the ophthalmologist, cardiologist, neurologist, rheumatologist, and obstetrician. Opthalmology NPs and PAs may also be involved in the case. In some cases, the input of a pharmacist is required if some of the topical and systemic medications associated with intraocular pressure reduction are in use and are possible culprits.

For diagnosing and evaluating the effect of treatment on the ocular complications of hypotony such as hypotony maculopathy, diverse ocular imaging investigations including fundus photography, fundus autofluorescence, fluorescein angiography, optical coherence tomography (OCT), and OCT Angiography, and more is required.

These investigations require the services and expertise of an ophthalmic photographer and ophthalmic technician. The nurses play a crucial role in the management team by educating the patient and relations on using prescribed medications without dropper contact with the eye, maintaining strict hygiene, and preventing infection.

The prognosis and outcome of ocular hypotony depend on the cause. However, quick resolution of the hypotony is beneficial to good vision. Several causes of ocular hypotony will require immediate treatment, such as retinal detachment and ocular trauma. Therefore, urgent consultation with a multidisciplinary and interprofessional team is advised.