Pegloticase is a pegylated, recombinant uricase (urate-oxidase) FDA-approved for chronic gout refractory to conventional therapy in adult patients. The management of patients with chronic gout requires emphatic and interprofessional care from a team of healthcare professionals. Thorough clinical investigations and communication can lead to more effective management strategies, which can further increase the impacts of pharmacologic management, decreasing flares and increase the quality of life. The interprofessional team of healthcare professionals includes a primary care physician (PCP), a rheumatologist, nurses, a physical therapist (PT), and a pharmacist.

Patients being treated should be thoroughly educated on chronic gout and treatment with pegloticase and its possible adverse effects. Alongside therapy, lifestyle modifications should also be counseled. The primary care provider and rheumatologist should maintain regular follow-ups to ensure the management of symptoms and maintain a normalized targeted range for uric acid levels. The interprofessional team should also continually be updated with the latest guidelines on chronic gout management.

Treatment with pegloticase should be administered in a healthcare setting by a healthcare professional. Patients receiving treatment should be informed about anaphylaxis and transfusion reactions and be administered antihistamines and corticosteroids as pre-infusion medications. Healthcare providers should screen subjects at increased risk for G6PD deficiency as a contraindication to therapy as hemolysis and methemoglobinemia may ensue.

Patients receiving treatment should be counseled by their healthcare provider of no concomitant oral urate-lowering medications while on therapy with pegloticase. Patients with underlying CHF should be consulted with a cardiologist prior to initiation of treatment as CHF exacerbation may occur while being treated. If pegloticase is considered in these patients, regular follow-ups are essential. The PCP and rheumatologist should routinely monitor uric acids levels as levels rising above 6 mg/dL and or two sequential levels above 6 mg/dL are observed; suspending treatment should be considered.

Childbearing women considering treatment with pegloticase should be counseled about the possible risks to the fetus as currently, no reproductive studies in humans or animals have been reported. The rheumatologist and obstetrician should be consulted to consider the benefits and risks of therapy during pregnancy. Women who are breastfeeding should also be advised treatment with pegloticase is not recommended as it is not sufficiently understood if pegloticase is excreted in the human milk. Communication between healthcare providers and their patients is vital to establishing rapport and a physician-patient relationship. Thorough interaction and guidance on disease course and management can improve patient education on medication compliance and decrease disease progression.