Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 17-hydroxylase deficiency is a rare form of CAH that presents differently than other forms of the disease and, if untreated, can cause significant morbidity. The condition is best diagnosed and managed by an interprofessional team, including pediatricians, nurses, endocrinologists, reproductive health, geneticists, surgeons, and mental health providers. Early diagnosis and treatment, indeed, allow for the prevention of morbidity associated with hypertension, electrolyte abnormalities, and sexual development impairment.  Since newborn screening programs that identify the most common form of CAH do not detect 17-hydroxylase deficiency, provider awareness and consideration of this condition are imperative for appropriate diagnosis.

Treatment, whether medical or surgical, also requires an interprofessional team approach. The physicians, including specialists, will dictate the therapeutic direction in conjunction with the patient and the family. For medical treatment, the pharmacist should assist the physician with steroid/hormone therapy management, verify dosing, and check for drug-drug interactions. Nursing often is best positioned to assess the effectiveness or failure of treatment, monitor for adverse drug reactions, counsel the patient, and assess for compliance. Both the pharmacist and nurse should report immediately to the physician any concerns or changes they encounter. This interprofessional approach will best ensure that patients receive an accurate diagnosis and the proper therapy they need for a successful outcome. [Level V]