Usually, vigabatrin toxicity develops gradually as a result of prolonged treatment. A documented case of acute toxicity is described in the literature where a 25-year-old patient attempted suicide by consuming 120 vigabatrin 500 mg tablets. She had a history of refractory seizures, for which temporal lobectomy was performed. After the surgery, she was placed on phenytoin, carbamazepine, and vigabatrin. The patient was admitted to the hospital after consuming the tablets. She was found to be very agitated and combative requiring physical restraint. She had impaired concentration and was disoriented to time and place. Given the findings, she received a diagnosis of vigabatrin-induced delirium. No specific antidote was administered to reverse the toxicity. She was treated symptomatically with diazepam and haloperidol. Forty-eight hours later, the patient recovered but could not recall the series of events that occurred. Her renal and hepatic parameters remained normal throughout the admission.

Unconsciousness, drowsiness, and/or coma were described in most cases of vigabatrin overdose. Other less commonly reported symptoms include psychosis, vertigo, bradycardia, apnea, respiratory depression, agitation, headache, irritability, confusion, hypotension, abnormal behavior, increased seizure activity,  speech disorder, and/or status epilepticus. These symptoms were resolved with supportive care.

**Management:**Given the pharmacokinetics of vigabatrin, hemodialysis would significantly accelerate drug extraction and reduce vigabatrin plasma concentrations by 40% to 60%, making it a possible treatment in overdose patients.