Cerebral autoregulation is a term which was first used to describe the physiologic response that keeps cerebral blood flow relatively constant between a mean arterial pressure of ~ 60 to 150 mmHg. There are generally thought to be four general mechanisms behind cerebral autoregulation including neurogenic, metabolic, endothelial, and myogenic. Even though there are multiple different mechanisms at play, each of these systems is intertwined intricately to help with cerebral blood flow.

Myogenic Control:

The myogenic control of cerebral blood flow comes from constriction or relaxation of vascular smooth muscles in the arterioles of the cerebral vasculature. If the smooth muscle is not allowed to vasoconstrict during periods of high mean arterial pressure or vasodilate during episodes of hypotension, then cerebral blood flow is disturbed.

Neurogenic Control: Sympathetic regulation of CBF:

The sympathetic nervous system and sympathetic-acting drugs play a role in regulating cerebral blood flow. Research has shown that by blocking the sympathetic cervical ganglion generally causes an increase in cerebral blood flow; thought to be because of a blockade of sympathetic action on cerebral blood vessels. During times of severe hypertension, the sympathetic nervous system acts to limit the amount of blood going to the brain, which is not the case when the sympathetic CNS is blocked.

Endothelial Control:

Endothelial control of CBF involves the production of nitric oxide and adenosine by endothelial cells in the cerebral vasculature generally during episodes of hypoxia to allow additional vasodilation of arteries.

Metabolic Control:

One of the primary methods of control for CBF is changes in arterial blood gases which include changes in PaCO2 and PaO2. We know that CBF is affected by hypoxia but only when PaO2 reaches around 50 mmHg or lower. Otherwise, the control is generally dependent on hypercapnia or increases in PaCO2 where hypercapnia causes vasodilation, and hypocapnia causes vasoconstriction. The entire vasculature of the brain is reactive to changes in arterial blood gases and can constrict or dilate in response. However, the main area for resistance modulation is the pial arterioles.  Larger arteries such as the ICA and vertebral arteries can also serve as a location for resistance changes even before the pial arterioles need to react. Because all of the differently sized vasculatures of the brain can respond to changes in arterial blood gases, CBF is well controlled.

Another method for control of CBF is by the production of metabolic products in areas of the brain that have increased regional activity. Through the production of local metabolites and release of excitatory/inhibitory neurotransmitters by astrocytes at terminals near arterioles, we see increases in CBF to those areas.

During mild to moderate hypoxia all the arteries react accordingly, and CBF remains relatively the same. Interestingly enough, new studies have shown that during episodes of severe hypoxia the anterior circulation through the ICA has a higher increase in CBF when compared to posterior circulation through the vertebral arteries.