As discussed previously, several infections secondary to GAS are diagnosed based on history and physical alone, especially in the case of infections such as cellulitis, impetigo, and necrotizing fasciitis. Other infections, such as those causing toxic shock syndrome, can be suspected clinically; however, they are most effectively evaluated with blood cultures to identify the causative organism to tailor appropriate antibiotic therapy.

Pharyngitis secondary to GAS is one area where there have been significant recommendations regarding appropriate testing. The primary reason is that the testing currently employed demonstrates a small amount of false-negative and false-positive rates, which may result in inappropriate treatment or lack thereof if the testing is not used appropriately. Throat swab cultures are the gold standard for identifying cases of GAS pharyngitis. However, these results are not available for 24 hours or longer. Rapid swabs for GAS have a specificity of greater than 90 percent, but the sensitivity is still only between 80 to 90 percent. In children, the rate of infection is high enough (high pretest probability) that a positive rapid swab results in a high enough post-test probability that there is no need for a confirmatory throat culture to confirm the diagnosis of GAS pharyngitis. Conversely, in adults, given the low general rate of pharyngitis due to GAS (and therefore low pretest probability), it is actually a negative rapid swab that does not need to be confirmed by culture as a negative rapid swab confers an extremely low post-test probability of infection with GAS.

GAS grows easily on sheep blood agar, is a Gram-positive coccus, and is arranged in chains. GAS is both catalase and oxidase-negative. COnfirmatory identification is done using Lancefield grouping and, more recently, using techniques such as the MALDI-TOF.