# Introduction

Smooth muscle is found throughout the body where it serves a variety of functions. It is in the stomach and intestines where it helps with digestion and nutrient collection. It is found throughout the urinary system where it functions to help rid the body of toxins and works in electrolyte balance. It is found throughout arteries and veins where it plays a vital role in the regulation of blood pressure and tissue oxygenation. Without these vital functions, the body would not be able to maintain the most basic functions.

Smooth muscle differs from skeletal muscle in a variety of ways, perhaps the most important being its ability to be contracted and controlled involuntarily. The nervous system can use smooth muscle to tightly regulate many of the body's subsystems for life with no thought from the user. A person does not need to think about their blood pressure for it to adapt to increasing oxygen demands from exercise. The nervous system instead uses hormones, neurotransmitters, and other receptors to control smooth muscle spontaneously.

Smooth muscle also plays an important role in the disease process throughout the body. The use of bronchodilators to relax airway smooth muscle is an important and life-saving treatment in asthmatics.

# Structure and Function

Smooth muscle differs from skeletal muscle in function. Unlike skeletal muscle, smooth muscle is capable of maintaining tone for extended periods and often contracts involuntarily. At a cellular level, smooth muscle can be described as an involuntary, non-striated muscle. Smooth muscle consists of thick and thin filaments that are not arranged into sarcomeres giving it a non-striated pattern. On microscopic examination, it will appear homogenous. Smooth muscle cytoplasm contains a large amount of actin and myosin. Actin and myosin act as the main proteins involved in muscle contraction. Actin filaments attach to dense bodies that are spread throughout the cell. Dense bodies can be observed under an electron microscope and appear dark. Another important structure is the calcium-containing sarcoplasmic reticulum which aids in sustaining contraction. The shape of the smooth muscle is described as fusiform, which is described as being round in the center and tapering at each end. Smooth muscle can tense and relax but has greater elastic properties than striated muscle. This is important in organ systems like the urinary bladder where contractile tone must be preserved.

Actin and myosin form continuous chains within the smooth muscle cell which are anchored at the dense bodies. The intermediate and thin filaments formed by the actin and myosin chains can then stretch to dense bodies located on adjacent smooth muscle cells forming a mesh-like network encircling a large number of smooth muscle cells. By implementing adherens junctions or connexins, the smooth muscle cells contract uniformly in what has been described as a spiral corkscrew fashion.

The function of smooth muscle can be expanded on a much larger scale to the organ systems it helps regulate. The functions of smooth muscle in each organ system is an incredibly broad topic and beyond the overall scope of this article. For simplicity, the basic functions of smooth muscle in the organ systems are listed below.

- Gastrointestinal tract: Propulsion of the food bolus

- Cardiovascular: Regulation of blood flow and pressure via vascular resistance

- Renal: Regulation of urine flow

- Genital: Contractions during pregnancy, propulsion of sperm

- Respiratory tract: Regulation of bronchiole diameter

- Integument: Raises hair with erector pili muscle

- Sensory: Dilation and constriction of the pupil as well as changing lens shape

# Embryology

Smooth muscle is derived from both mesoderm and neural crest cells. This is because smooth muscle contributes to many different tissues throughout the body. One unique feature of neural crest cells is their migration that occurs during embryological development. For this reason, numerous tissues throughout the body are derived from neural crest cells. Neural crest cells play an important role in the development of smooth muscle throughout the body, specifically in the regulation of blood vessels.

Vascular smooth muscle cells arise from multiple origins; this becomes medically significant because it may contribute to the site-specific localization of vascular diseases. For example, atherosclerosis and aortic aneurysms often present at specific vascular locations. In the past, this was thought to be related to hemodynamics and underlying vessel structure. However, there is increasing evidence that smooth muscle cell embryonic lineage may play a role in determining the location and presentation of the disease.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

Due to smooth muscles' widespread presence throughout the body, blood supply and lymphatic contributions vary by region. Almost every artery in the body supplies blood to smooth muscle whether that is in the form of endothelial smooth muscle located directly in the artery or smooth muscle within an organ system such as arteries of the gastrointestinal tract. It becomes more important to recognize how smooth muscles impact blood supply themselves. For example, within the cardiovascular system, smooth muscle helps to regulate blood flow by controlling the diameter of the vessel. As previously discussed vascular pathologies of smooth muscle can have devasting effects on the body and lead to significant pathology. Atherosclerosis once thought to be only a function of hemodynamics and vessel structure has more recently been shown to be linked as well to smooth muscle development.

# Nerves

Similar to the blood supply, the innervation of smooth muscle varies widely by location and function. Vascular smooth muscle is primarily innervated by the sympathetic nervous system. Alpha-1 and alpha-2 receptors function to cause vasoconstriction by contracting vascular smooth muscle cells leading to systemic hypertension. Beta-2 receptors also respond to sympathetic stimulation but produce a vasodilatory effect and which will lead to systemic hypotension. However, parasympathetic stimulation also plays an important role in the contraction of smooth muscle cells. Studies performed as early as 1925 demonstrated the effect of parasympathetic innervation on the gastrointestinal tract.

Ultimately innervation from the autonomic nervous system leads to a calcium release in smooth muscle tissue. Smooth muscle contraction is dependent on calcium influx. Calcium is increased within the smooth muscle cell through two different processes. First depolarization, hormones, or neurotransmitters cause calcium to enter the cell through L-type channels located in the caveolae of the membrane. Intracellular calcium then stimulates the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) by way of ryanodine receptors and IP3, this process is referred to as calcium-induced calcium release.

Steps involved in smooth muscle cell contraction:

- Depolarization of membrane or hormone/neurotransmitter activation

- L-type voltage-gated calcium channels open

- Calcium-induced calcium release from the SR

- Increased intracellular calcium

- Calmodulin binds calcium

- Myosin light chain kinase activation

- Phosphorylation of myosin light chain

- Increase Myosin ATPase activity

- Myosin-P binds Actin

- Cross-bridge cycling leads to muscle tone

Dephosphorylation of myosin light chains terminates smooth muscle contraction. Unlike skeletal muscle smooth muscle is phosphorylated during its activation. This creates a potential difficulty in that simply reducing calcium levels won't produce muscle relaxation. Myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP) is, instead is responsible for dephosphorylation of the myosin light chains ultimately leading to smooth muscle relaxation.

# Muscles

Smooth muscle can be found in all the organ systems below:

- Gastrointestinal tract

- Cardiovascular: Blood vessel and lymphatic vessels

- Renal: Urinary bladder

- Genital: Male and female reproductive tracts

- Respiratory tract

- Integument: erector pili of the skin

- Sensory: Ciliary muscle and iris of the eye

# Physiologic Variants

Smooth muscle consists of two types single-unit and multi-unit. Single-unit smooth muscle consists of multiple cells connected through connexins that can be stimulated in a synchronous pattern from only one synaptic input. Connexins allow for cell-to-cell communication between groups of single-unit smooth muscle cells. This inter-cellular communication allows ions and molecules to diffuse between cells giving rise to calcium waves. This unique property of single-unit smooth muscle allows for synchronous contraction to occur.

# Surgical Considerations

Due to autonomic control regulatory effects of smooth muscle, every surgery will be impacted by its overall function. Monitoring a patient's vital signs during surgery is paramount to a successful procedure and the stressors of surgery can have a vast impact on the autonomic nervous system which is responsible for regulating smooth muscle contraction. Surgery can even be targeted at modifying the function of smooth muscle as in the case of a vagotomy. Overstimulation of the vagus nerve has been speculated to be a possible cause for peptic ulcer disease, vagotomy is a classical surgical procedure that aims at treating this disorder by removing the vagus nerve at the level of the stomach and thus removing stimulation. However, this procedure has fallen out of favor recently due to advancements in medical therapy for peptic ulcer disease but may still show some benefit in certain patients.

# Clinical Significance

It is estimated that in the year 2013 health care costs associated with asthma reached $81.9 billion in the United States.

From a functional aspect, smooth muscle physiology is responsible for maintaining and preserving every vital sign. Regardless of whether a patient presents with acute emergent disease or a chronic disease, it is likely that smooth muscle has played some role in its development. In an acute setting, many life-saving therapies directly target smooth muscle. In these settings, a firm foundation and understanding of smooth muscle will help health professionals save lives. An even broader understanding of smooth muscle will help clinicians to increase the quality of life of their patients. As part of the biopsychosocial model, it is also important to take into consideration the psycho-social factors that may be overlooked with the diseases of smooth muscle, for example, a patient diagnosed with neurogenic bladder disease may become socially isolated to avoid the embarrassment associated with their disease state. When approaching smooth muscle dysfunction, it is important for healthcare providers to appreciate the many facets of how the disease will impact their patients.

As with all aspects of medicine, a continuing amount of research will likely change our future understanding of smooth muscle and its overall effects on disease. Current research into smooth muscle has shown promise in future implications such as restoring endothelial tissue which in the future could lead to new ways to encourage revascularization. Even small changes in understanding like this could have an astronomical impact on the treatment and mortality of cardiovascular disease in the future.

# Other Issues

Smooth muscle anatomy, physiology, and function remain a broad and relatively elusive topic despite the amount of funding and research efforts put into understanding it. As more time and effort is put into understanding smooth muscle our ability to treat the pathophysiology that comes with its dysfunction will broaden. It is important the clinicians continue to learn and study the impact that smooth muscle can have. As discussed, future methods may involve stimulating the regrowth of tissue with smooth muscle modulating factors. It is not inappropriate to think that many advances in the future of medical management will focus on impacting smooth muscle in some way or another.