History is critical in establishing the etiology and likelihood of compartment syndrome. Past medical and surgical history must be reviewed. In the trauma setting, it is important to distinguish the mechanism. Both high-velocity blunt trauma and penetrating trauma can lead to compartment syndrome. Clarify if the patient is on any antiplatelet or anticoagulant medications. In the non-trauma setting, the clinician should obtain a further history to evaluate for other possible etiologies including but not limited to toxicologic, iatrogenic, infectious, vascular, among others. The ability to gather history in children or patients with other injuries may be limited.

Compartment syndrome classically presents with pain out of proportion to the exam. He or she may describe it as deep, burning or aching or a fullness, swelling, or tense feeling. He or she may endorse pins and needle sensation, numbness, or tingling. The patient may report an inability to dorsiflex the leg or describe it as feeling “dead” or “weak.”

On exam, the provider should evaluate for any breaks in the skin, swelling, erythema, discoloration, or other signs of trauma. Palpation of the anterior compartment will reveal a swollen, tender muscle belly, typically at the middle and distal one-third of the leg. Pain is classically worsened with passive stretching of the affected muscles. In the case of anterior compartment syndrome, passive plantarflexion should worsen the patient's pain. The patient may have decreased sensation, especially to two-point discrimination. Vibration sense may also be diminished. He or she may have limited dorsiflexion, inversion and/or eversion. Both the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses should be documented.

Examining patients with symptoms concerning for chronic exertional compartment syndrome requires a unique approach. They will typically report pain that worsens with a specific activity and resolves with rest. These individuals can reliably predict when the symptoms will start and end. They are likely to have a normal exam at the time of evaluation. They should participate in an exercise challenge, for example, run on a treadmill or outside, and be re-evaluated after they become symptomatic. Once symptomatic, their exam should be abnormal; the clinician may observe swelling, muscle herniation, tenderness along the anterior compartment, pain with passive plantar flexion, and foot drop.