Coronary arteriovenous fistula (CAVF) is a rare form of congenital heart disease. However, it is the most common type of congenital coronary artery anomalies.

Human coronary circulation comprises of two main epicardial coronary arteries. They arise from the coronary ostia located in the coronary sinus of Valsalva situated just above the aortic valve cusps. The aortic valve is tricuspid and consists of the right coronary cusp, left coronary cusp, and noncoronary cusp. The left coronary artery (LCA) originates from the left coronary sinus and branches into the left circumflex and the left anterior descending artery (LAD). The left circumflex artery supplies the anterolateral and posterolateral left ventricular walls. The left anterior descending artery supplies the anterior septum, the anterior free wall at the base and mid cavity level, apical septum, anterior wall, and apical cap. The right coronary artery (RCA)  arises from the anterior aortic sinus or the right coronary sinus. It supplies the right atrium, right ventricle, sinoatrial (SA) node, and atrioventricular (AV) node. The posterior descending artery, a branch of RCA, provides blood supply to the inferior septum, the inferior free wall, and posterior left ventricular segments. The right coronary artery dominant variant is 80%.

The right coronary artery is the most common site of origin for CAVFs, found in approximately 50% of patients. Other sites include the left anterior descending artery in 35% to 40%, the left circumflex artery in 5% to 20%, and both coronary arteries in 5%.

A coronary arteriovenous fistula may lead to coronary artery dilatation due to increased flow, hyperkinetic pulmonary artery hypertension due to the large left to right shunt, congestive heart failure, myocardial ischemia from coronary steal phenomenon and thrombosis or aneurysm of fistula.