The management of patients suspected of having CSX is challenging and complex as its etiology is not entirely understood. To date, there are no specific guidelines to treat CSX, and management should be initiated on a case by case basis. Treatment modalities include pharmacologic management with anti-ischemic agents, analgesics for pain management, non-pharmacological management, and lifestyle modifications. Conventional anti-ischemic agents include beta-blockers, statin therapy, calcium channel blockers, ACE inhibitors, and antianginal agents such as ranolazine.

Patients with CSX and anginal chest pain should be initiated on therapy with sublingual nitrates. Although no studies have reported the effectiveness of the vasodilatory effects of nitrates on the small coronary vessels in subjects with established CSX, nitrates alongside beta-blockers are currently the mainstay of treatment.

Calcium channel blockers (nifedipine, verapamil, diltiazem) may be an alternative therapy to beta-blockers if a therapeutic response is not achieved.

Statins enhance the endothelium's vasodilatory effects and may be effective in patients with CSX. ACE inhibitors have also been reported to be beneficial. They impede endothelial bradykinin degradation, which results in vasodilatory effects.

Based on the hypothesis of altered pain perception in patients with CSX, analgesic pharmacotherapy may be effective. Agents such as xanthine derivatives (adenosine receptor blockers), aminophylline, and neural electrical stimulation have been proposed in select patients. Neural electrical stimulation procedures target increased pain sensitivity in CSX and are utilized in subjects resistant to pharmacotherapy. Procedures include spinal cord stimulation and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). The therapeutic effects reportedly enhance parasympathetic activity, further improving endothelial dysfunction and pain sensitivity. Other reported actions include increasing blood flow in the coronary vessels by spinal cord stimulation.

Other agents proposed for therapy include antidepressants such as tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Imipramine has been reported to decrease the frequency of chest pain by roughly 50%. TCAs action of serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibition exerts analgesic action; hence their proposed benefits in patients with CSX. Imipramine is also advised by the American College of Cardiology for CSX patients unresponsive to beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and nitrates. Imipramine, used in the management of CSX, has been controversial due to its adverse effects.

Alongside pharmacological therapy, lifestyle modifications should be advised. Adjustments include exercise training, smoking cessation, weight loss, and dietary changes. Lifestyle changes have shown to have beneficial effects on endothelial function, which plays a significant role in reducing adverse cardiovascular events and CSX.