**Brief History of Medical Ethics and Human Rights**

Writings that specify ethical obligations (both in general and by physicians) predate by millennia writings that specify human rights (both in general and for patients). The earliest writings containing ethical principles date from the Old Kingdom of the Egyptians, e.g., the autobiography of Nefer-seshem-re, circa 2340 BCE. Ethics began to flourish as a scholarly discipline during the golden age of Greece (the time of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle) in the 5th century BCE. In these respective cultures, discussions of physicians’ ethical duties date to the same times, e.g., an inscription on the tomb of Nenkh-Sekhmet, “chief of the physicians,” circa 2400 BCE, and the writings of the Hippocratic school of Cos in the 5th century BCE. Deontological or “duty” ethics (which stems largely from the writings of Immanuel Kant in the late 18th century and is a dominant form of ethics within modern law and healthcare) imposes on persons the obligation to preserve the rights and freedoms of others.

Whereas the Cyrus Cylinder (from the 530s BCE) is an exception, human rights writings are a relatively late development in civilization. The Magna Carta (1215 CE) first established political rights for citizens living in Western society. However, human rights did not enter into Western scholarly or philosophical circles until the 1600s and 1700s by Enlightenment thinkers such as John Locke. Whereas patients had earlier been enabled to establish “rights” through civil suits against their healthcare providers after adverse outcomes (1374 CE)

As the rationale for patient rights depends on the ethical principles that predated them, the moral principles will be discussed first, followed by a discussion of how they result in related patient rights.

**Overview of Core Ethical Principles in Modern Western Medicine**

**Beneficence**

Beneficence is doing what is in the best interest of the patient throughout the process of diagnosis and treatment. The physicians of the Hippocratic school of Cos vowed to "help the sick" in a general sense. In recent times, such as with the development of osteopathic medicine, Western physicians have begun to renew the call for a more holistic approach to benevolence, which entails addressing the patient’s emotional, social, and spiritual well-being in addition to the care of the body.

Of the other principles, a physician's intent for beneficence conflicts most often with patient autonomy. This conflict has led to the development of documentation in which the patient must demonstrate their understanding of the predictable consequences of his decision to act against medical advice. When disagreements arise between a healthcare provider and a patient, the health care provider must explain the reasons for their recommendations, allowing the patient to make a more informed decision.

**Patient Autonomy**

Autonomy (literally “self-rule”) refers to the capacity to live according to one's own reasons and motives. Concerning the autonomy of ordinary citizens, Western society has undergone a radical change in the last 350 years. Before the Enlightenment, most persons lived under the rule of a monarch or similar type of authority. Early Enlightenment philosophers (e.g., Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau) advocated what is now called social contract theory. This is the view that persons' moral and political obligations should depend on an agreement amongst themselves regarding which rules will hold in their particular society.

Later philosophers argued for individual autonomy to an even greater degree than championed by social contract theorists. Autonomy as a fundamental aspect of human existence was advanced largely by two moral and social philosophers, John Stuart Mill (early 19th century; of the school of utilitarian liberalism) and Immanuel Kant, respectively. Kant proposed that each person of sound mind should first live in moral autonomy, imposing moral decisions regarding himself or herself on himself or herself and secondly allow all other persons to do the same. Mill advocated autonomy with regard to a person’s capacity to govern oneself, and subsequent philosophers and jurists expanded autonomy to include other forms of self-expression. Western post-Enlightenment philosophy and law are no longer concerned with whether autonomy in its various forms is a human right but instead to whom it extends and to what degree.

A patient who can defend his or her judgments has the right to make decisions that do not coincide with what the physician believes is beneficial to that patient. This philosophical concept has become a legal right essentially throughout the Western world. As legal precedents have advanced the requirements for patient autonomy to a greater degree than the requirements for health care provider beneficence, patient autonomy has arguably become the dominant principle affecting patient rights. For example, a patient may refuse treatment that the physician deems to be an act of beneficence. In such cases, the unwritten social contract between patient and physician requires that medical professionals still attempt to inform the patient of the potential consequences of proceeding against medical advice. A patient's autonomy is violated when family members or members of a healthcare team pressure a patient or when they act on the patient’s behalf without the patient’s permission (in a non-emergency situation).

**Nonmaleficence (“Do no harm”)**

Complementary to beneficence, nonmaleficence seeks to ensure a patient will be no worse off (physically, emotionally, or otherwise) after treatment than before. Nonmaleficence dates to the medical writings of the early Egyptians, as cited earlier. The Hippocratic Oath lists specific acts of nonmaleficence, including euthanasia, abortion, an attempt by the professional at procedures outside of his area of expertise, stealing property, making sexual advances, and violating privacy. The consideration of whether a treatment plan is or is not malevolent extends to all types of treatments, including medications, physical manipulations, and invasive procedures.

In relation to other ethical principles, nonmaleficence most commonly conflicts with beneficence. Despite the potential reason why treatment is beneficial, the therapy may have unintended harm. Examples include procedures in which a surgeon must cut into a patient’s body or certain drugs (such as chemotherapies). The body is essentially poisoned so that it may have the opportunity to heal later. In each case, the odds and degree of harm must be weighed against that of benefit. Physicians cannot control all responses to treatments. So a physician can still act under the principle of nonmaleficence if the physician takes measures to minimize the chances of harm and informs the patient prior to taking the risk so that the patient has the opportunity to accept or decline the risk.

**Patient-Provider Fiduciary Relationship**

Not unique to the medical profession, but essential to its function, is the trust (Latin: fiducia) that the client places in the professional. Primarily, the belief is that the health care professional will act in such a way as to serve the client’s best interests. There is inherently unequal power within a patient-physician relationship. As stated by the Illinois Supreme Court,

“[T]he physician-patient relationship has its foundation is on the theory that the former [physician] is learned, skilled and experienced in those subjects about which the latter [the patient] ordinarily knows little or nothing, but which are of the most vital importance and interest to him since upon them may depend the health, or even life, of himself or family. [T]herefore, the patient must necessarily place great reliance, faith, and confidence in the professional word, advice, and acts of the physician."

Patients have different preferences for the degree of passiveness or proactiveness they exert within the fiduciary relationship. Emanuel and Emanuel described four patient-physician relationship models within the history of Western medicine.

- In a paternalistic relationship, the doctor decides on behalf of the patient. This is the most passive type of relationship for the patient.

- In an interpretive relationship, the doctor first discerns what the patient’s goals and values are and then offers options that help achieve those goals and preserve those values. The patient remains passive in this relationship.

- In an informative relationship, the doctor provides information to assist with a decision and, without swaying the patient, allows the patient to decide for himself or herself.

- In a deliberative relationship, the doctor and patient collaborate essentially as equals. They work together. This model is the most likely to achieve a patient’s healthcare goals and preserve his or her values.

**Justice**

In healthcare, justice refers explicitly to the philosophical concept of “distributive justice.” This principle asserts that all persons (patients) will be treated fairly and equitably. It means not only respecting the rights of individuals but also treating all patients in a given situation the same regardless of who they are. Laws and policies within healthcare use the principle of justice to establish access for all persons to obtain healthcare required to preserve life, such as in emergency situations. Some governing bodies, such as the Canadian federal government, have extended justice in healthcare far beyond emergency care. Distributive justice, as defined by John Rawls, can be understood as equal respect for persons – entitlement of persons having a given need to the same rights and services as other persons with the same need and the provision of services of a more significant benefit offered to persons with greater need.

**Sanctity and Dignity of Human Life**

In addition to prescriptions regarding moral behavior, the belief in a creator god or set of gods is a common feature of the earliest literate societies. Before 500 BCE, the Egyptians, Babylonians, Assyrians, Vedic culture of ancient India, Greeks, and Israelites all wrote regarding theology in conjunction with moral behavior. The ethical codes of all these early civilizations condemned lay citizens from ending the lives of other citizens. For the ancient Egyptians, preparation for one’s afterlife was a major facet of one’s present life. Ancient Greek philosophers, including Plato and Aristotle, taught extensively about the notion of humans having souls.

The Israelites (founders of a nation of people later to be known as Jews) originated the notion of a divinity that placed value on the lives of all members of the society of believers. The Jews also were original in believing that the divinity itself was the author of the societal moral code, that the divinity created humans in Its image, and that human life itself, therefore, is sacred or holy. The idea that a person is created “in the image of God” is mentioned several times in the book of Genesis alone (Genesis 1:26-27, 5:1-2 9:6). The book of Psalms echoes this concept when the psalmist asserts that God was responsible for his formation, in contrast to the notion that the psalmist may have been formed solely by biological mechanisms (Psalms 139:13). Christianity retained the holy books of Judaism and much of the Jewish philosophy pertaining to the sanctity of the lives of its adherents. The book of Acts, for example, professes that God gives life and breath to all people (Acts 17:25).

Christian culture fused with Greco-Roman culture in the 4th century CE upon the Christianization of the Roman emperor Constantine and his family. This fusion eventually resulted in the dissemination of Judeo-Christian beliefs on the value of human life throughout the West geographically and, later, through the development of all three North American countries. Judaism has become the second-largest religion in North America. Islam, the third-largest religious group in North America, shares much in common with Judeo-Christian belief, not only concerning its traditional stories and notions of God but also concerning notions of the sanctity of human life. Although Mexico, the United States, and Canada's governments were based on the separation of religion and state, the moral teachings of the Abrahamic religions have nevertheless greatly influenced the health care policies of these three countries both in the laws at the national and state level and in the rules set by medical societies and medical administrative organizations. Furthermore, the belief that human life is sacred is not limited to the Abrahamic faiths. As just one example, the Hippocratic physicians (living in a polytheist society) vowed not to take measures to end human life either prior to conception or in the setting of gravely ill patients.

Despite the division of religion and national government politics that occurred in many Western countries starting after 1700 CE, the fusion of religion and politics that existed for thousands of years had effects that persist in the ethical and legal codes of secularized countries today. Western secularization has resulted in the substitution of religious terms (e.g., sanctity) with secular terms (e.g., inviolability) and arguments. The right of a person to maintain one's property, originated by Jean Jacque Rousseau and championed by John Locke, continues to be used in secular defenses that one human cannot legally destroy the life of another.

Scientific advancement has allowed the study of human fetal development and options for the care of sick and dying adults to a more advanced degree than what was possible for ethicists of earlier centuries. The question of modern debate no longer is at what point an embryo is biologically human but at what point it be granted rights as one. Similarly, in many instances, physicians no longer wonder how to prolong the life of a suffering individual but whether it is the morally correct decision to do so. Instances have occurred in which patients have been pronounced clinically dead or in a persistent vegetative state but have later regained consciousness.

Drafted shortly after World War II in response to Nazi experimentation on humans and an increased need for international standards, the Declaration of Geneva (Physician’s Pledge) and the International Code of Medical Ethics both included language protecting the rights of the unborn. However, revisions in subsequent decades gradually made the language vaguer prior to eventually removing it altogether. Under the 1948 Declaration of Geneva, it was the duty of a doctor to respect human life “from the time of conception.”

As with all ethical dilemmas, reaching a morally acceptable decision requires examination of how each of the core ethical principles interplay. For example, while abortion proponents emphasize beneficence and patient autonomy for the mother, pro-life supporters place greater emphasis on nonmaleficence and the sanctity of human life for the unborn child.