Peripheral IV lines are the principal modality for the delivery of intravenous therapy in acute healthcare. Placement of peripheral lines is a core skill for many healthcare professionals and may also be performed by technicians or assistants depending on local practice and training.

According to the Hagen-Poiseuille equation (which describes flow dynamics for fluids undergoing fully developed laminar flow), the rate of flow through a cylindrical tube is directly proportional to the pressure gradient applied across the tube and inversely proportional to its length. However, flow is proportional to the fourth power of the internal radius, making this the single most important determinant of flow rates, and meaning that increasing the caliber of a line will have significantly more impact upon the potential maximum flow than reducing its length. A wide, short peripheral line may, therefore, achieve much higher flow rates than more technically advanced vascular access devices like central venous catheters.

Catheter diameter is measured using either the Birmingham gauge system or the French system. In the gauge system, a lower gauge number signifies a larger diameter. Peripheral IV lines are commonly available in sizes ranging from 14 to 26 gauge; 14 gauge is the widest of these, allowing for the highest potential flow rates. Nevertheless, persistent high flow rates may dramatically increase shear stress at the venous wall, which can result in endothelial dysfunction that precipitates earlier failure of the peripheral line.