The definitive treatment of cystic teratoma is surgery. Due to the highest incidence of cystic teratomas in women of reproductive age, the major concern is preserving fertility and minimizing post-surgical adhesion formation. Size of the mass, ultrasound characteristics, involvement of adjacent structures, risk of malignancy, and most importantly, patient’s symptoms and wish to retain fertility are factors determining the best management plan. Options include the following:

**Surveillance**: Pre-menopausal women who wish to be pregnant and have a cyst size of lower than 6cm are recommended conservative management for as long as the growth rate of the cyst is <2cm/year. In cystic teratoma during pregnancy, surveillance is recommended as far as the patient is not having acute symptoms.

**Surgical management:**In premenopausal women, symptomatic dermoid lesions less than 5 cm are preferably removed by simple laparoscopic cystectomy, rather than removing the entire ovary. Cysts larger than 5 to 6 cm and have involved the entire ovary with distortion of its structure should be removed by oophorectomy. Oophorectomy should be considered in postmenopausal women with multiple cysts. Histological examination of the surgical specimen confirms the diagnosis, including staging in case of carcinoma. In such cases, complete resection with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, hysterectomy, and even platinum-based chemotherapy is the mainstay of treatment.

**Laparoscopic surgery**has a diagnostic advantage in which peritoneal liquid sampling and exploration of the abdominopelvic cavity for possible malignancy can be done to assess the involvement of adjacent structures.

**Laparotomy**may be given priority over the laparoscopic approach if there is a risk of spillage of cyst contents. As soon as the pathological diagnosis of malignancy is established, the next step is to complete tumor excision with staging to determine prognosis and further treatment.