A pancreas and a kidney can be transplanted serially or simultaneously. The procedure takes 3-4hr when the pancreas alone is transplanted, while if combined with the kidney, it will take 6-8hrs. The kidney is placed in the left of the abdomen while the pancreas in the right. The native pancreas and kidneys are left in place. The blood vessels of the new pancreas are connected to the iliac vessels. The pancreas has two arterial supplies, so a ‘Y’ graft is created using donor arteries, which allow both to be supplied from a single arterial anastomosis. A connection between the small intestine and the pancreas is made so that the digestive juices produced by the pancreas can be drained by it. A segment of the donor duodenum already joined to the pancreatic head is used for this purpose. All of this is done through either one incision in the abdomen or two along either groin.

Retrieval of the pancreas from a donor is generally part of the removal of multiple intra-abdominal organs. Combined liver and pancreas graft is removed by a unique technique. After the liver is removed, the pancreas is removed en bloc, along with the duodenum and spleen, and the vascular stumps of the superior mesenteric and splenic arteries are preserved, and that of the portal vein. The pancreatic and vascular grafts are then immersed in 1L of Belzer solution. The pancreatoduodenal graft is prepared by removing the spleen. The duodenal segment is shortened, with invagination of the duodenal borders, mobilization of the portal vein is done, and vascular Y graft reconstruction is done, which involves using iliac arteries from the donor with the pancreatic graft superior mesenteric artery and splenic artery. The preferential access route is midline laparotomy. The pancreas transplant is preferentially done in the right iliac fossa of the recipient as the right iliac vessels are more accessible. The pancreas can be drained by systemic or portal venous blood. Drainage of exocrine secretion of the graft can be enteric in the form of side-to-side duodenojejunal anastomosis or involving bladder in the form of side-to-side duodenovesicular anastomosis.

The surgical techniques of pancreas transplantation have changed over the years. Most of the transplant units around the world now transplant the solid pancreas together with a segment of the duodenum. The superior mesenteric and splenic arteries are attached to a Y graft from the bifurcation of the donor common iliac artery as arterial inflow. Venous drainage is to the common iliac vein or inferior vena cava. Venous drainage into the portal venous system is also done by some units. Drainage of the pancreatic exocrine secretion has always been the main problem in pancreas transplantation. Various technical modifications have been developed. The body and tail of the pancreas with pancreatic duct occluded can be transplanted into the bladder, jejunum, or stomach. Another way is to transplant the whole organ with a segment of the duodenum into the urinary bladder, jejunum, or duodenum.

Monitoring of pancreatic graft is challenging as there is no simple marker of early graft injury with no equivalent to GFR in kidney transplantation. Hyperglycemia is a late event and means significant and irreversible graft injury. Graft function is measured by basal and stimulated C-peptides levels. An increase in serum amylase and lipase levels relevant to graft rejection is not known. In SPK, kidney graft function is used as a surrogate for pancreatic graft, assuming the changes are also occurring in the pancreas, although discordant graft rejection is also known. In the bladder drainage technique, amylase production can be used as a measure of graft function, and also a biopsy of donor duodenum can be taken by cystoscopy. Alteration in levels of urinary amylase is associated with impairment in pancreatic graft function, but it should be balanced against the urological and biochemical complications of bladder drainage. In enterically drained pancreatic graft, a percutaneous radiologically guided biopsy is now increasingly advocated and appears to be safe; however matter of monitoring the graft remains a problem.

In the classic technique, the venous outflow from the pancreas allograft is directed to the recipient iliac vein. This endocrine drainage into the systemic circulation causes hyperinsulinemia, which may lead to accelerated atherosclerosis. Another technique is using portal venous drainage through the superior mesenteric vein. It not only provides venous outflow similar to that of a native pancreas but also has the theoretical advantage of delivering allograft antigens to the liver. The delivery of antigens to the liver by the portal vein induces immunotolerance into the recipient. According to initial reports, rejection rates are less in pancreases drained through the portal vein as compared to those drained into the systemic circulation.

Whole-pancreaticoduodenal grafts have been standard in the pancreas transplant since the mid-1980s. The duodenal segment is considered an important component of the pancreatic graft because it permits safe drainage of exocrine secretions.

The immunosuppression in pancreas transplantation is similar to any other solid organ transplantation. Most of the units start induction with thymoglobulin (ATG), alemtuzumab, or basiliximab followed by tacrolimus and mycophenolate combination. Steroids are also used in some units. Up till now, there is no conclusive evidence regarding optimal induction therapy.

Patients received modern induction therapy, which was either interleukin (IL)-II receptor antagonist or anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) from March 1999. Now induction therapy consists of an anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody (alemtuzumab), which was first started in December 2007. Before 1999, patients were receiving either anti-CD3 antibody (OKT3) or no induction therapy. Recipients are given a combination therapy of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil as maintenance therapy. Recipients received cyclosporine, azathioprine, and prednisone until 1996. The routine administration of prednisone was stopped in 2008. Patients are given a low dose of low molecular weight heparin twice-daily, and it was started in 2008 as prophylaxis to prevent graft thrombosis. Before that, regular antithrombotic therapy was given in the same dose once daily. Patients are now given vitamin K antagonists for at least three months due to partial graft thrombosis. Computed tomography imaging is done between the fourth and seventh days after transplantation, depending on renal (graft) function.