**Urine tests:**Nephrotic-range proteinuria will be apparent by 3+ or 4+ readings on the dipstick or by semiquantitative testing by sulfosalicylic acid. A 3+ reading represents 300 mg/dL of urinary protein or more, which correlates with a daily loss of 3 g or more and thus is in the nephrotic range. Urine samples over 24 hours (for an accurate measure) and proteinuria (3 g protein) is diagnostic.

Urinalysis may demonstrate casts (hyaline, granular, fatty, waxy, or epithelial cell). Lipiduria, the presence of free lipid or lipid within tubular cells, within casts, or as free globules, suggests a glomerular disorder.

**Blood tests:**The serum albumin level is classically low in nephrotic syndrome. Serum albumin often is less than the normal range of 3.5 to 4.5 g/dL. Creatinine concentrations vary by degree of renal impairment. Total cholesterol and triglyceride levels are typically increased.

- Serologic studies: The role of testing for secondary causes of nephrotic syndrome is controversial (because yield may be low). Tests are best done as indicated by clinical context. Consider: Serum glucose or glycosylated Hb (HbA), antinuclear antibodies, Hepatitis B and C serologic tests, serum or urine protein electrophoresis, cryoglobulins, rheumatoid factor, serologic test for syphilis (e.g., rapid plasma reagin), HIV antibody test, complement levels (CH50, C3, C4)

Test results may alter management and preclude the need for biopsy.

**Ultrasonography:**Individuals with a single kidney may be prone to developing focal glomerulosclerosis; having only one kidney is also a relative contraindication to kidney biopsy. Ultrasonography also demonstrates renal echogenicity. Increased renal echogenicity is consistent with intrarenal fibrosis.

**Renal biopsy:**This is indicated for the following: congenital nephrotic syndrome, children older than eight years at the onset, steroid resistance, frequent relapses or steroid dependency, significant nephritic manifestations. It is worth noting that in clinical practice, kidney biopsies frequently reveal glomerular diseases to be the cause of nephrotic-range proteinuria and not tubular diseases. This contradicts the idea that tubular function determines proteinuria.

**Phospholipase A Receptor (PLA R):**it is a transmembrane receptor expressed on the surface of podocytes. 70% of cases with idiopathic membranous nephropathy have autoantibodies against PLA R.