A firm understanding of anatomy is indispensable in understanding the etiology and pathophysiology of LS plexopathy. The LS plexus is a combination of lumbar and sacral plexuses and encompasses the anterior rami of the L1 through S4 nerve roots of the peripheral nervous system, with a small contribution from T12 as well. Lumbar plexus lies above the pelvic brim and forms from L1 through L4 nerve roots, while the S1 through S4 nerve roots make up the sacral plexus, which lies below the pelvic brim.

- **Lumbar Plexus:**The four anterior rami of the lumbar nerve roots travel down the psoas muscle and divide into an anterior and posterior branch. These branches later give rise to individual nerves. The femoral nerve is made up of the posterior branches of L2-L4, while the obturator nerves make up of the anterior branches of L2-L4. Other nerves of the lumbar plexus include the iliohypogastric nerve (T12-L1), ilioinguinal nerve (L1), genitofemoral nerve (L1-L2), and lateral femoral cutaneous nerve of the thigh (L2-L3). The sciatic nerve is primarily comprised of anterior and posterior branches of the lumbosacral trunk, as well as the S1 and S2 anterior rami.

- **Sacral Plexus:**It includes the superior gluteal (L4-S1), inferior gluteal (L5-S2), posterior femoral cutaneous of the thigh (S1-S3), and pudendal nerve (S1-S4). LS plexus receives its blood supply by five lumbar arterial branches of the abdominal aorta. Furthermore, the deep circumflex iliac artery, iliolumbar, and gluteal branches of the internal iliac artery also supply the plexus.

Since LS plexus is present near to abdominal and pelvic organs, various pathologies and injuries contribute to LS plexopathy. These include (but not limited to):

- Direct trauma

- Posterior hip dislocation
- Sacral fracture
- After lumbar plexus block

- Metabolic, inflammatory, and autoimmune causes: 
- Diabetes mellitus (DM) - more likely in those with type II DM
- Amyloidosis
- Sarcoidosis

- Infections and local abscess.
- Vertebral osteomyelitis
- Chronic infections (e.g. Tuberculosis, fungal infections)
- Other infections: Lyme disease, HIV/AIDS, Herpes zoster (HZ)
- Psoas abscess

- Radiation therapy of the abdominal and pelvic malignancies.

- Pregnancy-related

- Mostly occur in the third trimester and after delivery due to birth trauma.

- Postoperative plexopathy

- Scar tissue formation and hematomas may occur following gynecological and other pelvic surgeries.

- Damage to the vasculature innervating the LS plexus

- Femoral vessel catheterization
- Ischemia from direct compression due to arterial pseudoaneurysms, aortic dissection, retroperitoneal hematoma, etc.).