Plant alkaloid toxicity results from over-exposure to plants harboring these phytochemicals, including seeds, flowers, or weeds, in the form of extracts, tinctures, herbal teas, or as contaminants of food products. Utilization may be inadvertent or deliberate- recreational or for self-harm. Contact may be direct or indirect through inhalation, ingestion, transdermal, or vertical transmission. Nicotine toxicity can result after ingestion of Nicotiana tabacum leaves, insecticidal products, electronic cigarette refills, cigarettes, and transdermal, as in green tobacco sickness affecting farm workers who harvest tobacco. Pyrrolizidine alkaloid toxicity may occur secondary to ingestion of parent plants for medicinal purposes or via consumption of food grain contaminated with the seeds of such plants.

Maternal consumption of plant products comprising pyridine or quinolizidine alkaloids has been linked to developmental defects in humans and animals. Through alkaloid-mediated desensitization of fetal muscle-type nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, fetal movement is arrested and leads to skeletal flexure defects like kyphosis, lordosis, scoliosis, and torticollis.

In many instances, as in the case of nicotinic toxicity, only small concentrations of a toxin may be required to cause illness. Poison hemlock has been unintentionally ingested by foragers searching for wild carrots due to the similar appearance of the two plants. Cytisine, another nicotine-like alkaloid found in Cytisus laburnum, has been held responsible for the mass poisoning of children and adults who consumed as little as 0.5 milligrams (mg) per kilogram (kg) body weight.