**Applications of SPECT-CT**

- The SPECT-CT provides 10 percent better quantification accuracy than planar imaging, allowing its use for individualized radionuclide treatment planning. Such implementations improve patient outcomes.

- SPECT-CT improves the sensitivity and specificity in preoperative localization of parathyroid adenomas and improves the detection rate in the asymptomatic group.

- In thyroid cancer management, accurate staging and risk stratification are essential. SPECT-CT allows more precise characterization of the etiology, i.e., begins versus malignant.

- SPECT-CT has significantly improved the diagnostic accuracy of neuroendocrine tumors. Also, this helps in optimizing PRRT (Peptide-receptor radionuclide therapy) with patient-specific dosimetry.

- In the case of skeletal scintigraphy, the SPECT-CT again increases the specificity and positive predictive value in oncology patients. It also defines the extent of metastases better by reducing unnecessary diagnostic procedures.

- In orthopedic implants with suspected infection, the SPECT-CT has provided accurate information, which allows differentiation of bone infection from soft tissue infection. It is also beneficial in diagnosing relapsed osteomyelitis with post-traumatic structural bone alterations.

- In coronary artery disease, the SPECT-CT detects coronary artery stenosis and myocardial perfusion abnormalities. In a selected group of patients, it improves the diagnostic accuracy of detecting CAD and guidance regarding revascularization procedures. Also, the anatomical information provides advantages of coronary artery calcium scoring along with perfusion data.

- The SPECT-CT provides many additional values in sentinel node imaging for breast cancer, melanoma, oral cavity, penile, vulvar, prostatic, testicular, renal cell, cervical, endometrial, and lung malignancies.

- In the case of lung ventilation-perfusion (VQ) scintigraphy, the authors, in a study, found that the SPECT alone and SPECT-CT have a sensitivity of 97 percent, whereas the specificity of SPECT increased from 88 percent to 100 percent in the case of SPECT-CT.

**Applications of PET-CT**

Undoubtedly, PET-CT has changed the management of oncological patients. A seemingly limitless variety of PET tracers has covered all cancer hallmarks.

Apart from oncological applications, the PET-CT is very useful for non-oncological applications such as in the assessment of myocardial viability, cognitive impairment/Alzheimer’s disease, infectious/inflammatory diseases, assessment of sarcoidosis, the diagnosis of osteomyelitis, spondylodiscitis of non-postoperative origin, the investigation of pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO), postoperative fever, recurrent sepsis, septic embolisms, detection of synovitis in the shoulder, hip & sternoclavicular joints, assessment of the atheromatous plaque calcification along with many more.