To understand and treat myofascial pain, it is important to know the pathological processes behind this syndrome. The myofascial trigger point is a site of latent ischemia, which could explain the cause of pain. This ischemia lowers the pH, creating an acidic environment in the myofascial compartment. This decreases levels of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) while it increases the effectiveness of acetylcholine (ACh), hence causing prolonged muscle contraction.

The amount of ATP within a TP is decreased. Ischemia causes decreased ATP leading to a lack of muscle relaxation (ATP depletion prevents the calcium pump - calcium ATPase) from withdrawing the calcium present in the muscle fibers. This leads to calcium (Ca2+) accumulation within the myocytes. If calcium is not withdrawn completely from the cytoplasm, it becomes cytotoxic, stimulating inflammatory mediators like bradykinin, CGRP, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, substance P, inflammatory interleukins (IL-6, IL-8, IL-1beta), norepinephrine, and serotonin. Such inflammatory substances cause increased nociceptive sensitization that results in severe pain.

According to a recent theory, TPs may derive nociceptive afferents via the subcutaneous accessory pain system (SAPS), which is an extra-innervation pathway to the spinal cord through the dorsal rami.

Nociceptive afferent signals from the myofascial system could cause structural and functional changes of the central nervous system (CNS), starting from the spinal cord (due to an accumulation of inflammatory substances), causing changes in medullary neurons (increase in neuronal excitability) with centrifugal progression.