Interprofessional healthcare teams must be aware of the potential for bacterial resistance to cephalexin. Administering cephalexin to a patient with an infection that harbors cephalexin resistance puts them at risk for adverse effects of the drug without curing the infection; this impedes effective management of the infection and increases the potential for bacterial resistance to the drug.

One of the most critical aspects of the cephalexin administration that healthcare teams need to consider is the potential for drug-induced allergic reactions. The most common manifestations of allergic reactions with cephalexin include urticaria and maculopapular exanthema.

Other major and potentially deadly complications of cephalexin are Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Although these complications are extremely rare, healthcare professionals need to recognize the symptoms that may present, including an extensive erythematous rash followed by large areas of epidermal sloughing. In Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis, the drug reaction can occur as late as one to three weeks after initiation of drug administration. However, this type of drug reaction can happen sooner than one to three weeks, presenting as conjunctivitis or lesions at mucosal membranes. It can also present with flu-like symptoms. These include, but are not limited to, cough, arthralgias, myalgias, and fever and can progress to massive ulcerations on any surface of the body, multisystem organ failure, and ultimately death. The most important way to prevent these progressions and complications is to stop the administration of cephalexin immediately.

If the clinical team works together to understand how to recognize these types of adverse drug reactions to cephalexin, they will be able to intervene better and stop drug administration before significant complications occur. Education on these topics allows for a healthcare environment that optimizes patient safety and care quality. Interprofessional management of cephalexin therapy with an interprofessional team that includes clinicians, mid-level practitioners, nurses, and pharmacists, all operating as a cohesive healthcare administration unit, will drive better patient outcomes. [Level 5]