The toxicokinetics of hydrazines are not fully characterized and are largely unknown, as there are no human studies evaluating exposures to hydrazine through inhalation, cutaneous, or oral routes. Animal studies on oral, inhalational, and dermal exposures suggest that hydrazines are rapidly absorbed into the blood and readily distributed to tissues without preferential accumulation at any specific site.

Tissue levels of hydrazine and 1,1-dimethylhydrazine generally reach maximal values within 1 hour and are undetectable after 24 hours. In vivo and in vitro studies indicate that hydrazines are metabolized through several enzymatic and nonenzymatic pathways.

**A. Absorption**

There are no studies regarding human absorption after oral, inhalation, or dermal hydrazine exposure.

**Oral Exposure**

Of note, isoniazid (INH), an antituberculosis drug, is metabolized into hydrazine and its derivatives. Patients taking INH were found to have elevated levels of hydrazine in their blood plasma.

**Inhalational Exposure**

A single animal study (Llewellyn et al 1986) investigated the absorption of hydrazine in lungs where rats were exposed to 10 to 500 ppm of hydrazine for 1 hour.

**Dermal Exposure**

Toxicokinetic studies on hydrazine dermal exposures are limited to 2 animal studies on dogs examining monomethylhydrazine (MMH) and 1,1-dimethylhydrazine (UDMH).

Of note, MMH was found to cause a reddish discoloration of the skin within 5 minutes of application, which progressed to purple and light grey, and was associated with swelling.

**B. Distribution**

There are no studies regarding the distribution of hydrazine in humans after oral, inhalation, or dermal exposures. Furthermore, no current studies are available regarding the distribution of hydrazine in animals after inhalation or dermal exposures.

**Oral Exposure**

A single animal study examines the distribution and metabolism of ingested hydrazine in rats. After a single dose of 2.9-81 mg/kg hydrazine, peak plasma and liver hydrazine levels occurred at 30 minutes.

**C. Metabolism**

Hydrazine is metabolized through several enzymatic and nonenzymatic pathways. However, studies show that the pathways involved and metabolites formed during the metabolism of hydrazines are not dependent on the route of exposure.

Metabolism of INH occurs by either direct hydrolysis of INH or by hydrolysis of its metabolite, acetylhydrazine.

**D. Excretion**

No studies have been reported on human excretion after oral, inhalation, or dermal exposure to hydrazines.

**Oral Exposure**

A single animal study by Preece et al found that at least 19 to 46% of the hydrazine administered was found in the urine of rats.

**Inhalation Exposure**

Unchanged hydrazine, acetyl hydrazine, and diacetyl hydrazine were recovered in the urine of rats inhaling hydrazine after 48 hours from administration.

**Dermal Exposure**

The animal studies performed by Smith and Clark et al on dermal exposure of hydrazine and 1,1-dimethylhydrazine reported detection in the urine at about 3 and 5 hours, respectively.