Although the diagnosis of a gastrocnemius strain is mainly clinical, imaging studies can assist in differentiating partial and complete ruptures. The utility of plain films and computed tomography scans in soft tissue injury is limited. Ultrasound offers the advantage of nonionizing radiation and is relatively inexpensive. The examiner should be aware of sonographic findings such as the disruption of the normal fiber arrangement at the myotendinous junction, hematoma, and fluid collection between the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles. Ultrasonography can also differentiate partial from complete tears of the muscle, and determine the size of the hematoma. A bigger hematoma usually indicates a complete gastrocnemius muscle tear rather than a partial tear. Ultrasound can also determine the size of a complete rupture and is helpful in guiding the percutaneous aspiration of the hematoma. Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) can also be scrutinized by using ultrasound, which is sometimes concomitant with gastrocnemius strain.

One study of 141 patients with clinically diagnosed tennis leg showed that 67% had a partial tear of medial gastrocnemius, 1.4% had associated plantaris tendon rupture, and 21% had intermuscular fluid collection without medial gastrocnemius muscle tear. Ten percent had deep vein thrombosis without visible gastrocnemius pathology.

Sonography is useful to follow up the healing course. Signs of recovery on sonography include a progressive decrease in the hematoma size, reparative tissue signified by a peripheral hypoechoic area that extends toward the center, and rearrangement of muscle fibers.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is indispensable in certain conditions as it offers outstanding soft tissue imaging. Findings include rupture or discontinuity of muscle fibers and retraction of the torn muscle fibers. MRI also allows differentiation between gastrocnemius and Achilles tendon injury, which can help to improve direct treatment. MRI can also provide an assessment of surrounding connective tissues in some muscle injury cases. Three MRI studies reported that connective tissue injury plays an important role to evaluate the return to sports after muscle injury.