It is essential to know that renal angiomyolipoma has different types ( fat-rich angiomyolipoma, fat-poor angiomyolipoma, and fat-invisible angiomyolipoma).

It is necessary to exclude the other differential diagnoses before deciding on treatment.

- Renal cell carcinoma

- Oncocytoma

- Wilms tumor

- Retroperitoneal liposarcoma

- Adrenal myelolipoma

- Tumors metastatic to the kidney

The recent high use of high-resolution imaging modalities has raised the detection of small renal masses. Many of these small renal lesions are found incidentally, are assumed to be possible renal cell carcinomas, and are managed accordingly.

Differentiating renal cell carcinomas from angiomyolipomas can sometimes be challenging in routine clinical practice.

Clinical information that favors the diagnosis of angiomyolipoma includes female gender, younger age, and asymptomatic clinical manifestations.

Retroperitoneal liposarcomas may also appear similar to larger angiomyolipomas. Since angiomyolipomas are renal parenchymal tumors, there will be an indentation or dimple where the mass originated, while a liposarcoma will tend to envelop and compress the entire kidney with no specific originating marker.

When a renal mass lesion cannot be reliably determined to be an angiomyolipoma from imaging alone but is considered suspicious for AML, a percutaneous biopsy is reasonable, especially for high-risk patients, as it will avoid the risks and potential complications of surgery.

If there are indications of malignancy (such as internal necrosis, calcifications, or local lymphadenopathy), it should be treated as a malignancy unless proven benign by percutaneous renal biopsy.

Lesions suspicious of possible malignancy (tumoral necrosis or calcifications, regional lymphadenopathy, metastasis, perinephric extension) should generally be treated surgically.