The next part of the triple assessment approach is imaging, which typically includes ultrasound or mammography as well as some form of tissue biopsy.

On ultrasound, a simple cyst is seen as a round, well-circumscribed, anechoic lesion with an imperceptible wall. This is a benign finding and usually does not require intervention unless symptomatic. The complex cyst is seen on ultrasound as heterogeneous echogenicity, with debris which mobilizes with a change in position. Complex cysts also are characterized by thick walls, intracystic masses, and/or discrete solid components. These cysts are further categorized into four types based on Berg et al. criteria: Type 1 have either a thick external wall, thick internal septa, or both; type 2 has one or more internal masses; type 3 has mixed cystic and solid components but predominantly cystic, and type 4 is predominantly (at least 50%) solid with eccentric cystic foci.

Mammography is not as helpful as ultrasound in determining between cystic or solid masses such as fibroadenomas but is more appropriate for breast evaluation in patients over 35 years old.  Patients younger than 35 typically have denser breast tissue, which is better evaluated with ultrasound. Mammography can be helpful in the classification and identification of associated microcalcifications, as well as other suspicious features.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is also an imaging modality used. However, due to cost and availability is not as routinely used as ultrasound or mammography.

The American College of Radiology proposed a classification system: Breast imaging-reporting and data system (BI-RADS) provides a standardized classification system for the assessment of the findings of breast radiological imaging and has six classifications representing different levels of suspicion for malignancy.

The last part of the triple assessment approach is histopathology by fine-needle aspiration (FNA) or core needle biopsy (CNB). The FNA is performed directly or by ultrasound guidance in the presence of a symptomatic cyst or cysts with suspicious solid components. Typically, the aspirated contents appear straw-colored but can be opaque, dark green, or even thick and purulent in the case of a galactocele. If the aspirate appears purulent, it should be sent for antibiotic sensitivity and microbiology analysis. However, if it is a galactocele, these are typically sterile. Bloody aspirate should be sent for cytology.

The majority of simple cysts aspirated disappear after aspiration, and the treatment is considered complete. If the cyst recurs, then core needle biopsy should be considered to evaluate for unseen solid components. Core needle biopsies are done when the ultrasound shows the presence of solid components, presence of suspicious mammogram findings including architectural distortions or calcifications, or the presence of small solid components that are difficult to aspirate by a large-bore needle. If the adequate sample cannot be taken by core needle biopsy, or if the cyst continues to recur even after a core needle biopsy, then excisional biopsy should be considered.