The common carotid artery travels in the neck, and at the upper thyroid cartilage, it bifurcates into internal and external carotid arteries on both the side. The carotid sinus, which is a neurovascular structure appears as dilatation of the arterial wall more commonly at the beginning of the internal carotid artery.

The carotid sinus baroreceptor functions as a sensor responding to the mechanical stretch that occurs to the carotid artery as the arterial blood pressure increases. There are two types of baroreceptors. Type 1 (Dynamic) has large myelinated A-fibers, and Type 2 (Tonic) has small A and unmyelinated C-fibers.  When mean arterial pressure (MAP) increases baroreceptors in the carotid sinus, and aortic arch sends afferent signals via the glossopharyngeal nerve to the cardiovascular control center (baroreceptor input goes to commissural, medial, dorsomedial and dorsolateral subnuclei of nucleus tractus solitarius in the brainstem).

The baroreceptor reflex is also critical in maintaining heart rate and blood pressure during postural changes. Standing from the supine position leads to pooling of 500 to 1000 ml of blood in lower extremities and splanchnic circulation, which results in decreased venous return and a resultant decrease in cardiac output and blood pressure. The reduction in blood pressure leads to a decline in the stretching of the carotid sinus baroreceptor. This reflexly increases sympathetic outflow and decreases a parasympathetic outflow. Thus it increases the heart rate and blood pressure (due to vasoconstriction of systemic vessels). Therefore, changing the posture from supine to standing results in only a small fall in systolic and diastolic blood pressure (5 to 10 mmHg) and an increase in heart rate (10 to 25 bpm). Thus the failure of the baroreceptor reflex leads to a fall in blood pressure (more than 10 mmHg) with the assumption of upright posture, which is known as orthostatic hypotension.

The baroreceptors, both in the carotid sinus and aortic arch, are the terminal endings of sensory nerve fibers that express many nonselective cation channels in the transient receptor potential (TRP) family. TRP1 is sensitive to stretch. The transmural pressure causes the vessel to expand and produce an inward current that depolarizes the receptor, causing a receptor potential whose amplitude is proportional to the stretch of the vessel.