A high index of clinician suspicion for myxedema coma is important. As discussed above, patients who present will most likely be women in the winter months with a history of thyroid disorders and a precipitating illness. The two most common findings will be altered mental status and hypothermia, along with common findings of hypothyroidism. Other common signs include hyponatremia, hypotension, bradycardia, and hypoventilation. Laboratory results in primary hypothyroidism will show severely low or undetected low serum total T4, free T4, free T3, and elevated TSH. The underlying etiology for most patients is a primary thyroid failure, but secondary, tertiary, and sick euthyroid should be in the differential diagnosis.

**Laboratory Abnormalities in Myxedema Coma**

- Anemia (either normocytic or macrocytic anemia) and leukopenia

- Elevated creatinine phosphokinase can lead to misdiagnosis of myocardial infarction

- Elevated transaminases

- Hyperlipidemia due to inhibition of lipoprotein lipase enzyme

- Hypoglycemia due to downregulation of metabolism)

- Hyponatremia with low serum osmolarity and elevated creatinine (increase ADH with a decreased ability of kidneys to excrete water)

**Other Required Investigations**

- Septic workup to rule out infection, including cultures and chest X-ray, etc.

- EKG can show bradycardia with non-specific changes, decrease voltage, variable block, or prolong QT interval

- Arterial blood gases can show hypoxia, hypercapnia, and respiratory acidosis.

- If cardiomegaly is present on imaging studies, further investigations to rule out pericardial effusion are necessary (echocardiogram)

- Neurological investigations like lumbar puncture usually show elevated protein with non-specific EEG changes.

A retrospective study in 2014 proposed a diagnostic score on 14 patients with myxedema coma and seven patients without myxedema coma, where a score greater than or equal to 60 in the proposed scoring system is potentially diagnostic. Lower scores between 45 and 59 demonstrate a risk of developing myxedema coma. The scoring system consisted of alterations of thermoregulatory, central nervous, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and metabolic systems and the presence or absence of a precipitating event.