The goal of disease-modifying therapy in sickle cell anemia is to reduce the frequency of vaso-occlusive crises (VOC) and pain crises and prevent organ damage. These medications usually do not have a role "during" acute crises. Hydroxycarbamide, or hydroxyurea, was the first drug approved by the FDA for use in patients with SCA. However, the USFDA approved hydroxyurea for pediatric patients two years and above only in 2017 (based on the ESCORT HU trial).

**Disease-Modifying Drugs/Therapy**

The goal of disease-modifying therapy in patients with SCA is to alter the kinetics of sickle erythrocytes. Hydroxyurea does this by increasing the concentration of fetal hemoglobin (HbF).

**Hydroxyurea:**This is a ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor that increases the concentration of HbF in patients with SCD. It not only increases the intracellular concentration of HbF but also increases the number of erythrocytes containing HbF. In addition to this, hydroxyurea also reduces the number of circulating reticulocytes and leukocytes, raises the volume of an RBC (high MCV is noted in patients receiving hydroxyurea), reduces the deformability of RBC, improves the flow of blood through capillaries, and alters the expression of adhesion molecules hence preventing vaso-occlusive crises. The initial trials with hydroxyurea (Phase-III Multicenter Study of Hydroxyurea in Sickle Cell Anemia (MSH)) demonstrated a clear benefit over placebo in reducing the incidence of pain crises and the cost of care. Long term, the MSH study also showed a mortality benefit. In the pediatric age group, two seminal trials (HUG-KIDS-Phase I/II and BABY HUG-phase III) demonstrated good tolerability and led to the drug's approval.

- **Who should receive hydroxyurea?**
- Having three or more sickle cell-associated moderate to severe pain crises within a 12-month period; treat with hydroxyurea
- Those with sickle cell-associated pain that interferes with daily activities of living and quality of life
- History of severe and/or recurrent ACS
- Severe symptomatic chronic anemia that interferes with daily activities or quality of life
- Infants 9 months of age and older, children, and adolescents with SCA, offer hydroxyurea regardless of clinical severity to reduce SCA-related complications (e.g., pain, dactylitis, ACS, anemia)
- For those with chronic kidney disease taking erythropoietin and hydroxyurea can be added to improve anemia
- DO NOT give hydroxyurea to pregnant women and lactating mothers who choose to breastfeed their babies

- **Clinical use of hydroxyurea:**
- Dosing for adults: Start with 15 mg/kg/day. Round up to the closest 500 mg. For patients with CKD- start at 5 to 10 mg/kg/day. 
- Dosing for infants and children: start at 20 mg/kg/day
- Increments are to be done every eight weeks in aliquots of 5mg/kg to a maximum of 35 mg/kg/day.

- Target absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of above 2000/microL and platelet count above 80,000/microL. In younger patients, an ANC of 1250/microL is allowed if baseline counts are low.
- Monitor blood counts every four weeks when increasing the dose of hydroxyurea.


- Clinical response takes 3 to 6 months to come. Hence a minimal trial of 6 months of daily continued use of hydroxyurea is done before considering alternative therapies. 
- Daily adherence is a must. It must be emphasized to the patient.
- If a positive response is seen, then hydroxyurea must be continued indefinitely.

- **Adverse events:**
- Myelotoxicity is the most common and most substantiated adverse effect of hydroxyurea. The rest of the adverse effects reported in the literature, especially carcinogenesis and leukemia, have never been demonstrated in large studies. 
- Avoid the use of hydroxyurea in patients with leg ulcers.

**Voxelotor:**Voxelotor acts by inhibiting the polymerization of HbS and increasing the affinity for oxygen. It is dosed at 1500 mg by mouth daily and is approved for SCA treatment in patients 12 years of age and older. Voxelotor can be given with or without hydroxyurea. USFDA approved it in 2019 based on the results of the phase 3 HOPE trial (Hemoglobin Oxygen Affinity Modulation to Inhibit HbS Polymerization) evaluating voxelotor (1500 mg versus 900 mg versus placebo in 1:1:1 design).

The most common adverse reactions are headache, diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, fatigue, rash, and pyrexia. Voxelotor interferes with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Hence the hemoglobin quantification is not accurate when the patient is on voxelotor. HPLC should be done when the patient is off therapy. Also, the use of voxelotor may increase the Hb, but there is no evidence to suggest discontinuation of exchange transfusion in patients receiving this for stroke prophylaxis.

**Crizanlizumab:**A humanized immunoglobulin G2-Kappa monoclonal antibody inhibits P-selectin, thereby blocking its interaction with P-selecting glycoprotein-1. This leads to reduced interaction between activated endothelium, platelets, leukocytes, and sickled RBCs, leading to reduced VOC.

It is approved for the treatment of SCA in patients 16 years of age and older. It is dosed as a 5mg/kg intravenous infusion administered over 30 minutes at weeks 0, 2, and then every four weeks. The most common adverse reactions are nausea, arthralgia, back pain, and pyrexia. Infusion-related reactions can occur. Crizanlizumab can interfere with platelet counts; send the blood immediately before administration or send blood in citrated tubes.

**L-Glutamine:**Glutamine is the most abundant amino acid in the body. It is not an essential amino acid under normal circumstances, but in patients with SCA, a high hemolysis rate increases the demand for glutamine. L-glutamine is available in a medical formulation. The exact mechanism of action of L-glutamine remains anecdotal. It is believed to work by scavenging for reactive oxygen species and acting as a substrate for the regeneration of nitrous oxide, NAD, and NADH.

**Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant**

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is a potentially curative option in SCA patients where cure rates approach approximately 90%. Improving the quality of life and reducing the cost of managing long-term complications trumps the cost of performing allogeneic HSC. Pre-school age is considered the best time to perform HSCT, with increased mortality recorded in older patients. A myeloablative or a non-myeloablative regimen can be used; however, myeloablative regimens are not recommended for adults. Matched sibling donor is preferred for performing allogeneic HSCT. Due to the lack of matched sibling donors, other approaches like a matched unrelated donor, umbilical cord blood transplant, and haploidentical transplant are also being explored.

Potential barriers to performing allogeneic HSCT

- Alloimmunization due to repetitive transfusions (exchange of blood)

- Organ dysfunction due to SCA (possibly a reason why younger patients do better)

- Lack of matched sibling donors/ insurance.

Indications for performing allogeneic HSCT

- Stroke (most common and strongest indication to perform allogeneic HSCT.

- Abnormal transcranial doppler

- Acute chest syndrome

- Recurrent VOC not controlled with medical therapy or chronic transfusions

The complications with allogeneic HSCT:

- Transplant-related mortality approaches 7 to 10%, comparable with SCD-related mortality

- Graft rejection OR graft failure - less with myeloablative regimens (7 to 11%) compared to non-myeloablative regimens (11 to 50%)

- Graft-versus-host disease and related morbidity

- Transplant-related complications like lung injury, endocrine, and metabolic adverse events

The recent approvals of newer agents and the emergence of gene-editing techniques have expanded the options for SCA patients. Also, extending the benefit of HSCT to low-income countries remains a significant challenge.

**Future Perspectives**

Gene editing is a new therapy focus whereby researchers attempt to increase the HbF level in patients with SCA. This technique is being developed alongside HSCT. Many approaches to gene editing are in clinical trials right now.

- Viral gene addition using lentivirus: The technique aims to add a modified beta or gamma-globin gene to reduce the HbS component and increase the HbA (beta-globin gene) or the HbF (gamma-globin gene).

- CRISPR (Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats): Targets the expression of BCL11A, which normally downregulates gamma-globin expression. By introducing insertions and deletions in the BCL11A erythroid lineage-specific enhancer on chromosome 2, BCL11A is downregulated, resulting in increased expression of the gamma-globin gene, which subsequently increases HbF.

**Cost Factor**

The annual cost of the voxelotor is approximately $125,000. Each vial of crizanlizumab costs approximately $2400, with a yearly cost of $84,852 and $113,136 per year for most patients. The monthly cost of the L-glutamine formulation is $3000 for adults and up to $1000 for the pediatric age group. A myeloablative regimen for HSCT can lead to a cost of approximately $280,000 at 100 days of care/admission.