The diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis is similar in both pregnant women and the general population. It has its basis in representative serologic and histologic findings as well as the exclusion of other types of chronic liver disease.

For individuals with consistent clinical or laboratory features, it is recommended to obtain serum anti-nuclear (ANA), anti-smooth muscle (ASMA), anti-mitochondrial (AMA), and anti-liver/kidney microsomal-1 (ALKM-1) antibodies, as well as either an immunoglobulin G (IgG) or gamma globulin level. It is recommended for those who are negative for these autoantibodies to obtain anti-soluble liver antigen/liver pancreas antibody, anti-actin antibodies, and atypical perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic (p-ANCA) antibodies.

Patients with AIH historically categorize into two disease subtypes according to the nature of autoantibodies

- Type 1 AIH: Anti-nuclear (ANA) and/or anti-smooth muscle (ASMA) antibodies with F-actin specificity

- Type 2 AIH: Anti-liver/kidney microsomal antibody type 1 (ALKM-1) and/or anti-liver cytosol antibody type 1 (ALC-1)

Roughly 20 percent of individuals presenting with AIH features lack circulating ANA, ASMA, or ALKM-1 antibodies.

In specific instances, it may be preferable to obtain a liver biopsy in individuals in whom autoimmune hepatitis is suspected because histologic assessment can confirm the diagnosis and help to guide treatment. Histologic evaluation is especially useful as part of the diagnostic evaluation for those with few or atypical findings, negative autoantibodies, and/or normal IgG levels.

After obtaining a liver biopsy, the diagnostic confirmation is by histology showing typical features (see histopathology section).