The vestibulocochlear nerve transmits an electrochemical signal from the cochlea, semicircular canals, and vestibule through the internal acoustic meatus and into the posterior cranial fossa.

Cochlear nerve

Impulses begin in the hair cells located within the spiral ganglion of the cochlea. Depolarization of hair cells propagates to the cochlear nerve.

Vestibular nerves

Impulses begin in hair cells located within the ampulla of the semicircular canals and the utricle and saccule. There is a vestibular ganglion, known as Scarpa’s ganglion, that exists within the internal acoustic meatus at the junction at which the vestibular and cochlear nerve meet. The bipolar cells that comprise Scarpa’s ganglion have dendritic processes that retrieve electrochemical impulses directly from the hair cells. Specifically, the superior vestibular nerve innervates the utricle and superior and lateral semicircular canals. The inferior vestibular nerve innervates the saccule and inferior/posterior semicircular canal. The bipolar cells then transfer the electrochemical impulse via axonal fibers to the vestibular nerve.

Vestibulocochlear nerve

The vestibulocochlear nerve refers to the point at which the vestibular and cochlear nerve course together through the internal auditory meatus. After entering the posterior cranial fossa, CN VIII enters the brainstem between the pons and medulla and synapses on nuclei within the pons. The cochlear nerve synapses on the dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei. The vestibular nerve synapses on the superior, inferior, medial, and lateral vestibular nuclei.