Nocturnal enuresis is a very common problem in children, leading to embarrassment, social isolation, and loss of self-esteem. Because many people do not admit to the problem for fear of embarrassment, the exact incidence remains unknown. Because of its significant negative repercussions on the child, the condition is best diagnosed and managed by an interprofessional team. Nurses can assess the effectiveness of therapy, medication compliance and counsel the family or caregivers. Pharmacists can verify dosing and counsel on proper administration. Concerns in these areas require communication with the rest of the healthcare team. Only through this type of interprofessional collaboration can patient outcomes achieve their optimal potential. [Level V]

Healthcare providers should actively ask about enuresis during well-child visits since many families still see it as a disciplinary issue instead of a medical condition. Parents need to understand that punishment has no role in the treatment of this condition and may make the enuresis worse.  The nurse should educate the caregiver on alarm therapy, and the pharmacist should provide information about the drugs, their benefits, and their adverse effects.

The children should be evaluated every few months to monitor progress.

An interprofessional approach involving the primary care provider, a urologist in the setting of refractory or non-monosymptomatic cases, nurses, and different specialists in case of comorbidities, including mental health professionals, is the ideal line of action to achieve better outcomes.