# Introduction

The parathyroid glands are four nodular structures, typically located on the dorsum of the thyroid at each of its four poles. These glands monitor the serum calcium level and secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH) when it is low.

# Structure

The parathyroid glands are nodular configurations derived from endodermal tissue on the dorsum of the thyroid gland.

# Function

The principal physiological function of the parathyroid glands is to secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH). This hormone binds to its receptor to activate second messenger systems throughout the body, mainly on the cells of the kidney and bone.

# Tissue Preparation

To histologically examine the parathyroid glands, one must first obtain a sample of glandular tissue via biopsy or parathyroidectomy. These tissue samples are treated and dried with a series of solvents, then embedded in paraffin wax as quickly as possible.

# Histochemistry and Cytochemistry

Several immunohistochemical stains can be used to identify cellular features that are characteristic of parathyroid glandular tissue. Normal parathyroid glands stain positive for parathyroid hormone, neuroendocrine markers chromogranin-A and synaptophysin, and keratins 7, 8, 18, and 19. No one of these markers is entirely specific to the parathyroid gland so multiple need to be present to identify parathyroid tissue. Chromogranin-A is a specific neuroendocrine marker that typically stains chief cells more intensely than oxyphil and other cells. There have been suggestions that chief cells may stain less intensely with chromogranin-A or PTH in hyperfunctioning or adenomatous parathyroid glands.

# Microscopy, Light

The parathyroid glands are primarily composed of chief cells and adipocytes, with clusters of oxyphil cells scattered throughout. On H&E stain, under high power magnification, chief cells appear to have poorly demarcated borders, scant light pink cytoplasm, and large, round nuclei. Oxyphil cells are larger and less frequently seen on light microscopy than chief cells. They also have smaller nuclei and more eosinophilic cytoplasm.

# Microscopy, Electron

The parathyroid gland's composition is primarily chief cells that are rich in mitochondria and are connected by desmosomes. When these cells are active, many dense, irregularly-shaped secretory granules are visible within the cytoplasm on electron microscopy. Also, a large Golgi complex and numerous free ribosomes are present in the active cell.

# Pathophysiology

The dysfunction of the parathyroid glands is an underlying cause of multiple pathologies. Primary hyperparathyroidism characteristically shows inappropriate PTH secretion from at least one parathyroid gland and is most commonly caused by a single adenoma, but may also be caused by multiple adenomas, hypertrophy of all four parathyroids, or rarely carcinoma.

# Clinical Significance

**Primary Hyperparathyroidism**

Primary hyperparathyroidism is a relatively common disorder, affecting approximately 2% of the population over 55 years of age.

**Secondary and Tertiary Hyperparathyroidism**

Unlike primary hyperparathyroidism, which is characterized by inappropriate secretion of PTH, secondary hyperparathyroidism occurs as an appropriate reaction to a stimulus that induces the secretion of PTH from the parathyroid glands. In secondary hyperparathyroidism, PTH is synthesized and secreted in response to chronically low serum calcium levels, which may result from malabsorption of calcium from the GI tract, vitamin D deficiency, renal insufficiency, or medications such as thiazide diuretics.

**Hypoparathyroidism**

Hypoparathyroidism is a disease characterized by a depressed PTH level that results in hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and increased calcium loss in the urine. It is usually caused by surgery or radiation to the neck, but can also be a product of certain genetic, autoimmune, or other diseases. On bloodwork, hypoparathyroidism appears as a low ionized or albumin-corrected calcium level along with an inappropriately low PTH level.

**Pseudohypoparathyroidism**

Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a group of disorders characterized by a defect in the Gs-alpha/cAMP/PKA second messenger pathway that is activated when PTH binds to its receptor, which results in resistance to PTH, which can lead to decreased production of active vitamin D, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia.

**Parathyroid Carcinoma**

Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare malignancy that causes primary hyperparathyroidism and most commonly occurs in middle-aged adults. Certain genetic syndromes such as MEN I and II, isolated familial hyperparathyroidism, and hyperparathyroidism jaw tumor syndrome may predispose individuals to develop parathyroid carcinoma. Other risk factors include a history of radiation to the neck and CRF, resulting in secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism.