The most commonly used system for classifying the severity of croup is the Westley score ranging from 0 to 17 points divided by five factors: stridor, retractions, cyanosis, level of consciousness, and air entry.

- Inspiratory stridor: 0 (None); 1 (When agitated); 2 (At rest)

- Retractions: 0 (None); 1 (Mild); 2 (Moderate); 3 (Severe)

- Air entry: 0 (Normal); 1 (Decreased); 2 (Markedly decreased)

- Cyanosis: 0 (None); 4 (When crying); 5 (At Rest)

- Level of consciousness: 0 (Alert); 5 (Disoriented)

Westley score less than or equal to 2 indicates mild croup.

Westley score between 3 to 5 indicates moderate croup.

Westley score between 6 to 11 indicates severe croup, and a score greater than 12 indicates impending respiratory failure.

More than 85% of children present with mild disease; severe croup is rare (less than 1%).

Croup is typically a clinical diagnosis based on signs and symptoms.

- Consider nasal washings for influenza, Respiratory syncytial virus, and parainfluenza serologies.

- Rule out other obstructive conditions, such as epiglottitis, an airway foreign body, subglottic stenosis, angioedema, retropharyngeal abscess, and bacterial tracheitis.

- A frontal x-ray of the neck may be considered but is not routinely performed. It may show a characteristic narrowing of the trachea in 50% of cases, known as the steeple sign, because of the subglottic stenosis, which resembles a steeple.

- Blood tests and viral culture are advised against, as they may cause unnecessary agitation and lead to further airway swelling and obstruction.

- Viral cultures, via nasopharyngeal aspiration, can confirm the cause but are usually restricted to research settings.

- Consider primary or secondary bacterial etiology if a patient is not responding to standard treatments.