Dietary manipulation has generally not been highly successful in dissolving struvite stones in humans. The suggested diet would need to be low calcium and low phosphorus with the possible addition of aluminum hydroxide (to help reduce phosphorus absorption) and a urinary acidifier, such as ammonium chloride. Estrogen supplementation has also been recommended for appropriate individuals. Such a diet has serious potential risks of inducing hypercalciuria and aluminum toxicity, although a similar diet has been shown to be reasonably successful in cats who often make struvite urinary calculi.

L-methionine has been suggested to increase urinary acidification and possibly reduce the risk of struvite stones. In one study, the addition of 1500 mg of L-methionine daily decreased the urinary supersaturation ratio for struvite by 34% in healthy volunteers and significantly lowered their urinary pH.

There are limited data to guide the non-surgical treatment of staghorn calculi other than culture-specific antibiotics. All patients suspected to have infection stones should be started on initial antibiotics regimens like cefepime, amoxicillin-clavulanate, or ciprofloxacin. Culture-specific antibiotics should be substituted when the data is available. Suppressive antibiotic therapy alone can significantly reduce the risk of urinary tract infections (UTIs), pyelonephritis, and sepsis while limiting further stone growth. While unlikely to dissolve the stone completely, partial dissolution from antibiotic therapy alone has been reported.

Medical management of struvite stones only provides a relatively modest benefit and is rarely successful alone. However, a recent meta-analysis has revealed that conservative management of staghorn calculus might not be as unreasonable as previously thought.

Acetohydroxamic acid (AHA) is a urease inhibitor that has been shown to decrease struvite stone growth and recurrence rates.

The American Urological Association guidelines recommend using AHA only after all surgical options are exhausted for residual or recurrent struvite stones. The use of AHA has been limited by significant side effects like nausea, vomiting, tremulousness, edema, diarrhea, headache, loss of taste, rash, hallucinations, phlebitis, deep vein thrombosis, anemia, reticulocytosis, and hemolytic anemia. About 20% of patients treated with AHA will develop a significant side effect from the medication and discontinue use. The use of oral ammonium chloride for urinary acidification is theoretically attractive but has been shown to have only limited long-term clinical usefulness and risks serious side effects such as metabolic acidosis.

There is no question that the optimal treatment for struvite stones is the complete surgical removal of all stone material. Struvite calculi tend to grow rapidly so that any remaining stone fragments can serve as a nidus for new stone formation. Recurrence rates are notoriously high at about 85% if residual fragments are left behind. Even with complete stone extraction, recurrence rates for struvite stones are reported as 10%. Antibiotics alone are relatively ineffective in controlling urinary infections if infected struvite stone fragments remain.

**Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy:**Shock-wave lithotripsy (SWL) should be considered only when the stone size is less than 2.5 cm with a non-dilated collecting system, or in the pediatric population.

**Percutaneous nephrolithotomy:**Percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) is generally considered the gold standard for the surgical treatment of most large staghorn calculi. The procedure begins with the creation of a percutaneous tract from the skin to the renal collecting system. This allows for the passage of instruments, including rigid and flexible scopes, lasers, ultrasonic and pneumatic lithotrites, graspers, guide wires, etc. Ultrasound or fluoroscopy is used to guide the initial placement of the tract, which is typically 24Fr to 30 Fr in size. Multiple tracts may be necessary for larger, complex, branched stones. A prone flexed prone or supine position may be used instead of the traditional flat prone position.

Rarely, if PCNL is not feasible due to anatomic abnormalities like pelvic kidney, spinal deformities, or retro-renal colon, open surgery like atrophic nephrolithotomy might be considered. Surgery should also be considered in the morbidly obese patient, in whom endoscopy and fluoroscopy are difficult. The acute complications rate is lowest for PCNL and highest for open surgery and SWL. Some of the common acute complications associated with stone removal procedures are perforation of the renal pelvis, perinephric hematoma, significant blood loss, hydrothorax, pneumothorax, sepsis, renal impairment, and wound infection, among others. Long-term complications include stone recurrence, renal impairment, and growth of residual stone fragments. Antibiotics should be continued postoperatively. However, there are no current guidelines regarding specific regimen, dose, or duration.

When the stone is big, and/or fragments are not accessible by PCNL, a combination of PCNL and SWL can be used.

Tranexamic acid is a reversible blocker of lysine sites on plasminogen molecules. It is normally used for hemorrhage control in patients with nose bleeds and heavy menstrual periods. Several studies have suggested that the administration of tranexamic acid (1 gram at induction followed by 500 mg every 8 hours x 3) can help reduce blood loss associated with percutaneous nephrolithotomy, and we now recommend it except in patients with renal failure where it is contraindicated.

Various nomograms have been developed to help urologists predict surgical outcomes after PCNL. Of the three nomograms currently available (CROES, Guy's, and STONE), the STONE nomogram achieved the highest predictive accuracy, especially when combined with the presence of any pre-existing urinary tract infections and the number of involved calyces.

Checking for stone fragments after PCNL with CT or by ultrasound together with plain radiographs (KUB) is critical in identifying residual stone fragments after surgery.

**Dissolving struvite stones:**The use of ion exchange resins and acidifying solutions for direct irrigation of staghorn stones is theoretically an attractive option for chemo-dissolution of struvite calculi. By chemically exchanging magnesium in the irrigation fluid for calcium in the stones within an acidic environment, the stone material becomes more soluble. While there is evidence that this technique can work to dissolve struvite stones, conditions must be optimal to avoid serious side effects. The urine must be kept sterile, serum phosphate and magnesium must be checked regularly, and the renal pelvic pressure must be kept low to avoid serious hypermagnesemia. Antibiotics are recommended before, during, and after therapy.

**Open surgery:**Traditional open surgery for staghorn stones is rarely performed currently, although it was the gold standard years ago. Today, it is only performed when the intrarenal anatomy does not allow any other approach or the intention is to remove the kidney.

Followup imaging and periodic urine cultures after struvite stone surgery is recommended at 6 to 12 months, although this can be done more often at 3 to 6 months in patients who've demonstrated rapid or frequent stone recurrences.

**Summary of Current AUA/Endourological Society Guidelines for the Management of Struvite/Staghorn Stones (Modified)**

- A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan should be obtained prior to performing percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) and to assist in selecting the best surgical option between shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) and ureteroscopy.

- If a significant loss of renal function is suspected in one or both kidneys, a functional imaging study (DPTA or MAG-3) renal nuclear scan may be obtained.

- A urinalysis should be done prior to urological instrumentation, and urine culture should be obtained in patients with struvite/staghorn stones or whenever there are laboratory or clinical signs of a possible infection.

- Preoperative laboratories for urologic procedures like PCNL, where there is a significant risk of bleeding or in patients known to have anemia, thrombocytopenia, or infection, should include a CBC and platelet count.

- Serum creatinine and electrolytes should be checked if there is any history or suspicion of renal failure.

- Additional imaging with contrast may be obtained in patients with complex stones or unusual anatomy if better visualization of the renal collecting system and/or ureter is needed.

- PCNL is the recommended initial treatment for staghorn patients who are symptomatic with stones >20 mm.

- PCNL is also recommended as the initial treatment for lower pole stones >10 mm as PCNL has a higher stone-free rate, although it is more invasive with higher morbidity than SWL.

- SWL should generally not be offered as the preferred initial therapy to staghorn patients with stones >20 mm or with lower pole stones >10 mm as PCNL has a higher stone-free rate but is more invasive with higher morbidity.

- If an involved kidney has a minimal or negligible function, a nephrectomy should be considered.

- Stone treatment may be considered in patients with flank pain and non-obstructing, calyceal stones where there is no other obvious cause of the pain.

- Standard PCNL should routinely include flexible nephroscopy.

- Ureteroscopy and PCNL should only use normal saline for irrigation.

- Patients with a staghorn or large renal stones who are not candidates for PCNL for some reason may be offered ureteroscopy as a staged procedure.

- After SWL, alpha-blocker medications can be used to facilitate the passage of stone fragments.

- Stone patients with functional or anatomic ureteral restrictions or any untreated obstructions of the ureter distal to the stones should not undergo SWL surgery.

- All urinary stone material collected should be sent for chemical analysis.

- Staghorn stones should undergo complete removal whenever possible and safe to do so.

- Endoscopic procedures should be offered to patients as needed to make them totally stone-free, particularly when residual infected stone fragments remain.

- Robotic, laparoscopic and open surgery for stones should be considered as the recommended initial treatment only in cases of significant anatomical abnormalities, particularly complex or large calculi, and those patients where urinary tract reconstruction will be performed concomitantly.

- Most endoscopic procedures should be performed with a safety guidewire in place.

- Antibiotics should be used before stone surgical procedures. Antibiotic selection should be based on prior urine cultures, the local antibiogram and comply with the latest Best Practice Policy Statement.

- When performing an endoscopic stone intervention, purulent urine may be encountered. When this happens, the procedure should be stopped immediately, and appropriate urinary drainage established via nephrostomy or double J stenting. A urine sample should be sent for culture, and antibiotics should be continued. Antibiotics should be changed as appropriate based on the culture results when they are available.

- Ureteroscopy is the preferred modality for treating most stone patients with uncorrected bleeding disorders and for those who are cannot safely stop their anticoagulation therapy.

- Endoscopic therapy is recommended if initial therapy with SWL fails.