The success of UAE depends on appropriate patient selection, which requires an investigation of multiple pertinent positive and negative factors.

- Heavy regular menstrual bleeding or dysmenorrhea associated with intramural fibroids

- Premenopausal

- No desire for future pregnancy

Fibroids characteristically cause heavy bleeding cycles, not irregular bleeding.  Increased frequency of bleeding (fewer than 21-day cycles) and increased duration of bleeding (greater than 10 days) are more likely to be related to endometrial pathologies such as polyps or cancer.

Instead of or in addition to bleeding, fibroids can cause "bulk-related" symptoms:

- The sensation of pressure in the lower abdomen, legs, and back

- Dysuria (i.e., nocturia, polyuria, incontinence)

Prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials (RCT) of women who have undergone UAE have found a long-term improvement in bulk-related symptoms,

There are other indications for UAE.

**Adenomyosis**

A retrospective review reported that 76% of 511 women having undergone UAE for the treatment of adenomyosis reported significant improvement,

**Postpartum Hemorrhage (PPH)**

Whether UAE is viewed as the first or second line treatment (i.e., after incomplete/ineffective surgical ligation) for PPH tends to be institution and/or gynecologist dependent.  Factors predicting the need for UAE as the first line before surgery include abnormal placental attachment and abnormal clotting function (e.g., as determined by serum fibrinogen/INR).  Performing UAE after a failed uterine artery ligation is more difficult.

Persistent bleeding after surgical treatment can indicate the source of bleeding to be an extrauterine arterial source that may be better identified with arteriography.  In one case series, arterial embolization was successful in 10 of 11 cases after failed surgical ligation therapy.

**Prophylaxis of Intra-Operative or Post-Operative Bleeding**

In some institutions, gynecologists request UAE as a prophylactic measure in an attempt to reduce operative hemorrhage, such as for:

- resection of benign or malignant uterine tumors

- before fetal delivery in the setting of placenta accreta.

**Failed Medical Therapy or Poor Candidate for Other Therapies for Fibroids**

UAE also becomes a relevant consideration if a patient without contraindications to the procedure declines or has already attempted other therapies to treat bleeding or pelvic bulk symptoms (e.g., hysterectomy, myomectomy, endometrial ablation, gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists, or focused ultrasound).

An in-depth discussion of medical treatment for fibroids and abnormal uterine bleeding is beyond the scope of this article, but a brief overview is included here.  A Cochrane database meta-analysis of randomized trials concluded that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are more effective than placebo at decreasing menstrual pain and heavy menstrual bleeding but are less effective than tranexamic acid or the levonorgestrel-releasing IUD than placebo.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues (GnRHa) can shrink fibroids and limit menorrhagia but usually initially worsen symptoms.  Because they cause osteopenia with long term use, GnRHa can only be used for 2 to 6 months and when there is a clear therapeutic goal such as scheduled surgery or when menopause is incipient (Friedman 1991).

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonists (GRHa) avoid the symptom flare that is associated with GnRHa but also cause osteopenia with long term use.  Rebound fibroid growth occurs after cessation of both GnRHa and GRHa.

Randomized trials have shown that the progesterone-receptor antagonists (PRa) mifepristone and ulipristal acetate decrease fibroid symptoms and reduce fibroid volume without osteopenia.  A woman undergoing therapy with a PRa cannot become pregnant, which is a goal for some women simultaneously wanting therapy for fibroids.