The popliteal fossa is a diamond-shaped space located posterior to the knee joint. It allows for the passage of critical neurovascular structures. These structures, from medial to lateral, are the popliteal artery, popliteal vein, tibial nerve, and common peroneal nerve. The tibial nerve inverts and plantarflexes the foot, while the common peroneal nerve everts and dorsiflexes the foot. The tibial nerve provides sensation to the sole, while the common peroneal nerve provides sensation to the dorsum of the foot. The popliteal fossa has four major borders. The superomedial border is formed by the semimembranosus muscle, the superolateral border is formed by the biceps femoris muscle, the inferomedial border is formed by the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle, and the inferolateral border is formed by the lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle and the plantaris muscle.

The popliteal artery is a continuation of the superficial femoral artery as it passes through the adductor hiatus of the adductor magnus muscle, traveling posteriorly to the knee and anterior to its accompanying vein, the popliteal vein, until it bifurcates into the anterior tibial artery and the common trunk of the posterior tibial and peroneal arteries. Geniculate arteries branch at multiple levels of the knee to provide blood to the structures of the knee and contribute to collateral blood flow of the lower extremity.

The popliteal artery provides numerous branches of blood supply to the structures of the knee and the lower extremity. Originating from above the knee joint are the superior medial and superior lateral genicular arteries with connections to the deep femoral artery providing collateral blood flow proximal to the knee. At the level of the knee joint is the middle genicular artery and sural arteries. Below the knee joint are the inferior medial and inferior lateral genicular arteries with connections to the tibial arteries, providing additional collateral blood flow distal to the knee. The four geniculate arteries anastomose anteriorly around the knee and patella.

The popliteal artery also provides blood directly to numerous muscles including the soleus, gastrocnemius, plantaris, and distal portions of the hamstring muscles.

Blood Supply

- Superior geniculate arteries - the knee joint, distal femur, and muscles of the medial and lateral knee

- Sural arteries – structures within the popliteal fossa and gastrocnemius, soleus, and plantaris muscles

- Middle genicular artery – cruciate ligaments and synovial membrane of the knee

- Inferior geniculate arteries – knee joint, muscles of the medial and lateral knee, and proximal tibia