It is an oral medication containing dofetilide as the active ingredient. The formula also contains inactive ingredients of microcrystalline cellulose, corn starch, colloidal silicon dioxide, magnesium stearate, gelatin, titanium dioxide, and FDC Yellow 6.

**Clinical Uses of Dofetilide**

Dofetilide is effective in maintaining sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation. In the DIAMOND studies (Torp-Pedersen C et al., 1999), dofetilide did not affect mortality in patients with advanced heart failure or those convalescing from acute myocardial infarction.

Dofetilide is indicated in adults for the conversion of atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter to normal sinus rhythm (NSR) and the preservation of normal sinus rhythm in patients with highly symptomatic atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter of more than one week whose pathological sinus rhythm has converted to normal.

Azimilide and sematilide are also class III antiarrhythmics, but they are not available in the United States.

Because induction of severe ventricular arrhythmias is possible with dofetilide, it was available through a restricted distribution system that includes only clinicians, hospitals, and other institutions that have received special educational programs covering proper dosing and in-hospital treatment initiation, which is called Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS). However, in January 2016, although the safety risks for Tikosyn (dofetilide) continued to be present by FDA's determination, the agency also decided that the REMS program is no longer compulsory because the risk-benefit ratio tilts to the side of the benefits of the drug.

**Off-Label Uses of Dofetilide**

Clinicians have used dofetilide as an off-label prescription for supraventricular arrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia, and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.