Lasers represent a relatively new group of devices used in the practice of surgery. The applications of lasers in medicine continue to advance with the addition of new devices and the expansion of indications for laser therapy. Selecting a laser for a specific indication is generally a function of the laser's chromophore - the molecule or molecules most prone to absorbing electromagnetic energy of a particular wavelength. Because LASER (light amplificated by the stimulated emission of radiation) light waves are by definition collimated (parallel), coherent (in phase), and monochromatic (a single wavelength), the technology is excellent for not only very precise surgical applications, such as excising lesions from vocal cords under a microscope or correcting the curvature of a cornea but also for targeting only specific tissues tissue types, such as hair follicles or telangiectasias, due to their unique chromophores.

The process of targeting a specific chromophore is known as selective photothermolysis. The most common chromophores are water, tissue proteins, hemoglobin, and pigment (e.g., melanin or tattoo pigment). Lasers that target water and interstitial proteins tend to vaporize the tissue and are therefore termed "ablative." In contrast, lasers that target hemoglobin and other pigments tend not to cause tissue destruction directly and are therefore known as "non-ablative." Commonly employed ablative lasers are the carbon dioxide (CO2) and erbium-doped yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Er:YAG) lasers; examples of non-ablative lasers include pulsed dye (PDL), potassium-titanyl-phosphate (KTP), and neodymium-doped yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) lasers.

Therapeutic lasers are typically used for five different indications: vascular coagulation, pigment ablation, facial rejuvenation, tissue cutting or ablation, and hair removal.