Diphenhydramine mainly works through antagonizing the H1 (histamine 1) receptor, although it has other mechanisms of action as well.

The H1 receptor is located on respiratory smooth muscles, vascular endothelial cells, the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), cardiac tissue, immune cells, the uterus, and the central nervous system (CNS) neurons. When the H1 receptor is stimulated in these tissues, it produces a wide variety of actions, including increased vascular permeability, promotion of vasodilation causing flushing, decreased atrioventricular (AV) node conduction time, stimulation of sensory nerves of airways producing coughing, smooth muscle contraction of bronchi and GIT, and eosinophilic chemotaxis promoting the allergic immune response.

Diphenhydramine acts as an inverse agonist at the H1 receptor, thereby reversing the effects of histamine on capillaries, reducing allergic reaction symptoms.

Given that diphenhydramine is a first-generation antihistamine, it readily crosses the blood-brain barrier and inversely agonizes the H1 CNS receptors, resulting in drowsiness and suppressing the medullary cough center.

The H1 receptor is similar to muscarinic receptors. Therefore, diphenhydramine also acts as an antimuscarinic; it is a competitive antagonist of muscarinic acetylcholine receptor, resulting in its use as an antiparkinson medication.

Lastly, diphenhydramine acts as an intracellular sodium channel blocker, resulting in local anesthetic properties.

The liver metabolizes diphenhydramine via CYP450. It is excreted in the urine, unchanged, and has a half-life of 3.4 to 9.2hours. The drug's time to peak, serum is 2 hours.