FISH is a technique where the fixed genetic material of cells on interphase or metaphase hybridizes with a fluorescent DNA probe designed to target several specific sequences of the gene of interest; probes against sequences of housekeeping genes always serve as positive internal controls.

The probe can be tagged directly with fluorophores or with targets for fluorescently labeled antibodies or other substrates. Different types of tags can be used; therefore, different targets can be detected in the same sample simultaneously (multi-color FISH). Tagging can be done in various ways, such as nick translation or PCR using tagged nucleotides. Probes can vary in length from 20 to 30 nucleotides to much longer sequences. Locus-specific probes target a specific gene sequence of interest.

Break-apart probes target two areas of a specific gene sequence. Usually, a green fluorescent label is used on one end of a gene sequence, and a red fluorescent label is used on the other end of the gene sequence. When the gene sequences are intact, the green and red signals will usually fluoresce as a yellow signal, known as a fusion signal. Whole chromosome probes are collections of smaller probes, each of which binds to a different sequence along the length of a given chromosome.

The chromosomal microarray (CMA) is like a grid covered with thousands of tiny probes consisting of small pieces of DNA from known locations on each of the 46 chromosomes. CMA looks for imbalances of chromosomal material between DNA from the control and the patient’s DNA.

Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) is based on differential chromatography retention of DNA heteroduplexes after denaturation and renaturation; the migration of DNA heteroduplexes is determined not only by the length of the molecule but also by its melting temperature, which is a crucial point for the sensitivity of the test.

In the presence of a mismatch, not only the original homoduplexes, formed upon reannealing of the perfectly matching sense and antisense strands (25% each) are produced again but, simultaneously, two heteroduplexes form upon reannealing of the sense strand of either homoduplex with the antisense strand of the other homoduplex (also 25% each). As the heteroduplexes denature more extensively than the homoduplexes, they elute earlier than the homoduplexes that undergo less denaturation.

The sample for MLPA is genomic DNA; specific MLPA probes become hybridized with denatured genomic DNA; MLPA probes are designed with two peculiarities; the first one is that each pair of probes can hybridize next to each other on the target DNA region where they are ligated; the second peculiarity of the probes is that their design confers a unique length to each pair of amplified MLPA probe; thus they are detectable and quantifiable by capillary electrophoresis.

NGS amplifies DNA with random priming generating millions of reads and a genome-wide view of the genetic background of the patients. The first step for NGS is the generation of a library of fragments that are representative of the entire genome or transcriptome of the individual; the library generation starts with the fragmentation of the nucleic acid; in the modality of whole-exome sequencing, the fragments come from cDNA, while the whole-genome modality includes the complete genomic DNA.

Sanger sequencing is a multistep process that begins with PCR-based amplification of target DNA, followed by the removal of excess deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) and PCR primers.

In manual Sanger sequencing, the user reads all four lanes of the gel at once, moving from bottom to top, using the lane to determine the identity of the terminal ddNTP for each band.