T-cell dysfunction is notable in several types of immunodeficiencies and autoimmune diseases, both acquired and genetic. Notably, T cells are the main targets of HIV and HTLV. T cells are also implicated in several types of neoplasms, such as T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (T-ALL) and adult T-cell lymphoma (ATL). T cells are often implicated in transplant rejection, and their surface receptors are pharmacologic targets for anti-rejection drugs.

T cells are specifically affected by several immunodeficiency disorders. Bare lymphocyte syndrome is an immunodeficiency in which T cells become selectively lost due to impaired MHC expression (due to genetic mutations in MHC production/expression). DiGeorge syndrome is another disorder that impacts T cells as the thymus never forms, and thus T cells are never properly matured due to a deletion of the 22q11.21 through 22q11.23 chromosomal arms. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is an X-linked recessive disease in which the immune synapse is disordered, and T cells cannot react to foreign antigens. Various ZAP-70 and CD3 mutations impair TCR formation/function and cause T cell dysfunction too. Combined immunodeficiency’s (in which both B and T cells are affected) such as SCID and JAK3 deficiency also impair T cell function.

Type IV hypersensitivity (delayed-type hypersensitivity, also known as DTH), is CD4+ T cell-mediated and is implicated in contact dermatitis and granuloma formation and the basis for the tuberculin skin test. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder in which autoreactive CD4+ T cells lead to the production of autoreactive antibodies (via B cell activation). A similar reaction occurs in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), in which autoreactive CD4+ TH17 and TH1 cells release autoreactive cytokines causing joint inflammation. IPEX is an autoimmune disorder in which FOPX3 mutations cause a loss of function in T regulatory cells and uninhibited T-cell activation, leading to widespread inflammation.

HIV targets CD4+ T cells by binding to the CCR5 and CXCR4 chemokine receptors to infect them. Some note that in individuals with mutations to these receptors, there is some immunity to HIV, due to HIV using them as its portal of cell entry. Human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) also specifically targets CD4+ T cells, using them to replicate. HTLV appears to use the adhesion molecules (used to migrate throughout the body by T cells) on cells surface to gain entry and replicate. HTLV infection eventually leads to the development of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL). ATL results from HTLV activating NF-kappaB, which leads to unregulated T-cell replication and expansion. T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (T-ALL) is also a T-cell centric neoplasm, caused by an activating mutation in NOTCH1. T cells are also heavily implicated in extranodal T-cell lymphoma, various types of Hodgkin lymphomas and ALK + lymphomas. The type of T-cell response and which subtype responds to a pathogen is essential to fight off infections caused by Mycobacterium and Leishmania species, among others.

T cells are often implicated in transplant rejection, and their surface receptors are pharmacologic targets for many anti-rejection drugs. There has been a recent interest in T regulatory cells as a method to promote wound healing after surgery and to battle cancers. There is research to use all forms of T cells to combat a variety of diseases/enhance immune responses.