BWS is a complex multisystem disorder that presents in a wide and varied clinical spectrum. For a better understanding of the historical features and physical findings likely to encounter in BWS patients, this section is divided according to the presentation of the syndrome in the different stages of life.

- **Prenatal stage:**common complications in pregnancies with BWS fetuses usually start after the 22 weeks of gestation with gestational hypertension, pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes mellitus, vaginal bleeding, polyhydramnios, macrosomic fetus, increased alpha-fetoprotein, and ultrasonographic findings of organomegaly. During birth, patients may present with macrosomia-related complications (e.g., cephalohematoma, brachial plexus injury), premature birth, and placentomegaly. A positive family history of BWS is another important consideration since approximately 15% of cases could be attributed to familial transmission, although it is important to point out that most cases are sporadic.

- **Neonatal period:**neonates with BWS may present with macrosomia, whole body hemihypertrophy, limb length discrepancy, distinctive facial appearance, abdominal wall defects (omphalocele, umbilical hernia, or diastasis recti), organomegaly (could involve liver, kidneys, spleen, pancreas, thymus, heart, and adrenal glands), nephrological abnormalities (kidney malformations +/- hydronephrosis), cardiac anomalies (patent ductus arteriosus, patent foramen ovale, and congenital long QT syndrome), and hypotonia. Typical dysmorphic facies in BWS include prominent eyes, infraorbital creases, midfacial hypoplasia, macroglossia (most common feature), prognathism, anterior earlobe creases, posterior helical pits, and nevus flammeus at the glabella. Other physical findings are cleft palate, supernumerary nipples, polydactyly, and genital abnormalities (cryptorchidism). Neonatal BWS is also characterized by hypoglycemia, most likely secondary to islet cell hyperplasia and hyperinsulinism.

- **Infancy, childhood, and Adolescence:**typical features of BWS facies are usually lost in later childhood. Regarding growth parameters, height and weight usually remain around the 90th percentile while head circumference remains around the 50th percentile. Development is, most of the time, not affected unless specific 11p15.5 duplication or perinatal complications were present. Nephrocalcinosis, nephrolithiasis, renal cysts, and recurrent urinary tract infections are common nephrological complications that could develop during infancy to adolescence. Predisposition to embryonal tumors development is one of the most fear characteristics of BWS, for which long-term monitoring is warranted. The most common malignancies reported are Wilms tumor and hepatoblastoma, while others include neuroblastoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma.

- **Adulthood:**Most of the features derived from their pediatric phenotype. Adult height usually ends in the normal range, although some studies report an increased mean adult height in the BWS population. Limb length discrepancy can persist or even worsen, leading to scoliosis. Fertility issues have been reported in males as a primary testicular dysfunction or consequence of cryptorchidism; insufficient data is available for females.