**Image Interpretations**

Glenohumeral arthrograms provide unique imaging signs. These include abnormal joint communications with other collections or compartments, labral, tendinous, and ligamentous tears or injuries, synovitis with an irregular capsular margin, cartilaginous abnormalities, and loose bodies. Within the shoulder, there are structures for which an arthrogram provides optimal assessment, including the ligamentous structures, capsule, glenoid labrum, rotator interval, biceps pulley, and biceps-labral complex. A rather thorough review of pathology is beyond the focus scope of this article, but there are some key pathological and anatomical comments to be made.

**Normal Arthrogram**

When reading the arthrogram, if there is a normal appearance of the rotator cuff muscles and tendons, an absence of any damage to the glenoid cartilage or humeral head, lack of evidence of any fracture or dislocation to the osseous structures, this would be indicative of a normal shoulder arthrogram.

In a normal glenohumeral arthrogram, thin, halo-like contrast should be seen covering the humeral head superiorly but separated from the bony margin via radiolucent articular cartilage. With external rotation, the thin halo-like contrast material should end abruptly lateral at the humeral anatomic neck. Both the soft tissues above and lateral to the greater tuberosity should be free of the opaque medium. A radiolucent filling defect can be visualized within the opaque-filled recess within the superior aspect of the glenohumeral joint, which is the long tendon of the biceps muscle.

It can be possible to track the course of this tendon through the glenohumeral joint from the superior rim of the glenoid into the contrast-filled synovial sheath in the bicipital groove. The subscapularis recess, which often has a tongue shape, extends immediately from the glenohumeral space, travels under the coracoid process, and deep to the subscapularis. This recess communicates with the glenohumeral joint via a normal opening within the anterior glenoid labrum. This recess will serve as a prominent landmark on internal rotation, but on external rotation, it becomes less prominent as the taut, overlying subscapularis expresses the fluid.

The axillary fold or recess is located at the inferior margin of the glenohumeral space and is a redundant capsule. When the arm is placed into abduction, the axillary fold is obliterated. There is an indentation between the axillary fold and subscapularis recess. Using the axillary view, a thin layer of the contrast medium can be visualized within the glenohumeral space that is separated from the bony margins by the articular cartilages. Both the anterior and posterior margins of the cartilage in the glenoid rim can appear as radiolucent triangular filling defects located within the synovial recesses. Anteriorly, a linear filling defect can be visualized, which represents the long tendon of the biceps muscle. Frequently, this can be visualized anteriorly as this tendon extends into an opaque-filled sheath within the bicipital groove. The subscapularis recess can be seen anterior to the glenoid.

**Abnormal Arthrogram**

There is an abnormal communication between the subacromial bursa and the glenohumeral joint in the presence of a complete thickness rotator cuff tear. Contrast injected to the joint will then flow into the bursa, which is recognized as a collection of the contrast above and lateral to the greater tuberosity.

The glenohumeral ligaments are thick bands within the anterior joint capsule. They have attachments to the proximal humerus as well as the glenoid margins. These ligaments are composed of three parts: the superior glenohumeral ligament, middle glenohumeral ligament, and inferior glenohumeral ligament.

The glenoid labrum acts to increase the surface area and depth of the glenoid fossa to better accommodate the humeral head. It also serves as an attachment site for the anterior band of the inferior glenohumeral ligament. In regards to the configuration of the labrum, there is a significant variety in terms of size and shape, particularly in the superior labrum at the junction of the upper to middle thirds of the fossa.

A close relationship exists between the bursa and the undersurface of the acromion process superiorly. The bursa extends in a downward fashion adjacent to the humeral head to a variable degree. The size or configuration of the bursa does not necessarily correlate to the severity of the lesion or injury to the rotator cuff complex. Instead, this can be an anatomical variation. A complete rupture of the rotator cuff has a distinct appearance and location of contrast filling the subacromial bursa.

There may be an inadvertent injection of the bursa inside of the glenohumeral joint. This can cause an appearance of a cuff rupture, but instead is a bursogram and contrast material will not be present within the glenohumeral space or the subscapularis recess. It is important to see contrast located in the bursa and the glenohumeral joint to determine the presence of abnormal communication.

If there is a partial rupture or incomplete tear of the rotator cuff, the glenohumeral joint does not communicate with the bursa; hence the bursa will not opacify using arthrography. If a partial tear is located under the surface of the tendon, this may be visualized as an ulcer-like collection of the contrast medium above the head of the humerus, close to the anatomic neck. An incomplete tear deeper within the actual substance of the tendon can be more difficult to detect.

In a patient with adhesive or retractile capsulitis, moderate pressure will be noticed to inject a small amount of fluid into the glenohumeral joint. In the arthrogram, the axillary and subscapularis recesses are either absent or very small in size. The bicipital tendon sheath will poorly fill or not fill at all. Patients with adhesive capsulitis may have relief of symptoms a few weeks post arthrography.

In a patient with shoulder instability with recurrent anterior dislocation of the shoulder, arthrography can show the location and severity of the soft tissue damage and aid in evaluating the integrity of the rotator cuff complex. In a patient with recurrent dislocations, the humeral head can detach the joint capsule from the glenoid rim and the neck of the scapula between the axillary fold and subscapularis recess. This forms an anterior pouch that can be visualized in the frontal view. This will be seen as a collection of a peak medium that extends from the subscapularis recess into the axillary fold. There's a border that is the normal demarcation between these structures. This pouch and its size can be most appreciated with an internal rotation view.

There is an area lacking attachment to the glenoid labrum known as the sublabral foramen located in the anterosuperior quadrant. It is never located below the equator, which can serve as a mimic for a SLAP tear.

Type two, which is also the most common, demonstrates detachment of the superior labrum from the glenoid rim. Type three demonstrates a bucket handle tear and an inferior displacement of the central labrum. The tendon and anchor remain intact in type three. A type four is similar to a type three as it demonstrates a bucket handle tear with the same inferior displacement of the central labrum but includes displacement of the tendon and the anchor of the biceps. Types five through ten are subsequently categorized by the associated labral and ligamentous abnormalities demonstrated. A Buford complex is described in approximately 1.5% of shoulder arthroscopies, which is a variant that consists of a cord-like MGHL. The MGHL in this circumstance attaches directly to the superior labrum anteriorly to the biceps with an absent anterosuperior labrum.

A Bankart injury includes an avulsion of the anteroinferior labral ligamentous complex in conjunction with disruption of the scapular periosteum. When visualized with an osteochondral injury, this is known as a bony Bankart. A Perthes injury consists of the detachment of the anteroinferior labral ligamentous complex. The scapular periosteum is intact, although stripped. An anterior labral ligamentous periosteal sleeve avulsion, ALPSA, has similarities to the Perthes injury, but due to the periosteum, this allows a medial displacement and inferior rotation of the torn capsulolabral tissue. The labrum remains attached to the periosteum overlying the glenoid, hence the sleeve categorization. With a glenolabral articular disruption, GLAD, an anterior inferior superficial labral tear, is present and associated with an anterior, inferior articular cartilage injury to the glenoid. In this injury, the MR arthrogram will demonstrate the cartilage in this defect but also contrast that enters into the glenolabral junction.