The life cycle of D. latum, as it relates to humans, begins when un-embryonated eggs are released into the feces of humans that were infected with the intestinal parasite. These eggs will become embryonated in water under appropriate conditions, with the process usually lasting 18 to 20 days. During this maturation process, oncospheres, which are the first larval forms of the tapeworm, materialize within the egg. The oncosphere is then covered by an outer envelope that contains cilia and is called a coracidium. This coracidium hatches from the egg in the surrounding water and becomes a free-swimming larval stage that subsequently goes on to attract the first intermediate host. The free-swimming coracidium is consumed by the first intermediate host. This is usually an aquatic arthropod, such as crustaceans from the subclass Copepoda.

Next, within these copepods, the second larval stage of D. latum develops, called the procercoid. This occurs through a complex host of interactions where the coracidium penetrates the intestinal wall of the first intermediate host. This procercoid stage contains six embryonic hooks on its posterior appendage, which helps to anchor it. When the infected crustacean is ingested, usually by freshwater or marine fish, this second intermediate host now takes over as the site of further larval maturation. The ingestion of the copepod allows the procercoid larvae to be released, and they migrate to enter the tissues of the second intermediate host in order to develop into the third larval stage called the plerocercoid. This is the infective stage of the larvae, and when these smaller second intermediate hosts are consumed by larger fish, the plerocercoid will migrate to the musculature of these larger fishes. Human transmission occurs when humans consume these raw or undercooked fish that are infected with D. latum.

In humans, the plerocercoid develops into mature tapeworms, which attach and reside in the intestine. The fecundity, which is the reproductive potential of these tapeworms, is extremely high, and one tapeworm is estimated to produce up to 1 million eggs per day.D. latum infection has been shown to cause structural changes locally, leading to altered gastrointestinal tract functioning by modulating the neuroendocrine response and causing enhanced secretion as well as changing gut motility.D. latum has also been shown to lead to anemia secondary to the dissociation of vitamin B12 from its intrinsic factor complex in the gut, which is due to the faster absorption rate of vitamin B12 by the tapeworm relative to the human gut.