MRI patient study is carried out in a specific room that houses the MR system, called "scanner room." Patients are lead into the scanner room by an MRI technologist and placed on a padded, comfortable table that slowly glides patient into and out of the scanner when done. Typically, scanners are a tube-like machine that opens at both ends.

To prepare for the MRI clinical study, patients are given earplugs or headphones to wear in order to protect patients’ hearing because, when scanners are in operation, loud noises are produced. These loud noises, which are musically rhythmic in nature are normal and should be of less concern for the patient.

During some MRI clinical procedures, a gadolinium-based, contrast agent will be injected into a vein to help acquire an enhanced and clearer picture of the area being imaged. At some point during the MRI clinical study, an MRI technologist or a nurse, will pull the table out of the scanner in order to inject the contrast agent. Injection of the gadolinium-based contrast agent is performed through a small an intravenous catheter that is placed in a hand vein or an arm vein of the patient. A normal saline solution plus heparin is instilled through the intravenous line to prevent clotting until at some point, when the gadolinium-based contrast agent is injected during the MRI procedure.

Most MRI studies will last between 15 to 45 minutes depending on the human body areas imaged and how many images are to be collected, although some may take as long as 60 minutes or longer. The most important thing for the patient to do is to lie still and relax. Patients are told before the start of the clinical study the duration of each scanning protocol.

Patients are asked to remain motionless during the image acquisition time. In between imaging protocols, some minor movement are allowed. The MRI technologist will advise patient on when he or she could move or not move.

When the MRI protocol begins, the patient could breathe normally. However, for some specific evaluations, it may be necessary for the patient to hold his/her breathing for a short time period.

During patients MRI procedure, the MRI technologists will be able to talk to and hear the patient, and observe patient all the time. Patients are also able to communicate with the MRI technologists at all times.

When the MRI evaluation is complete, patients may be required to wait until the images are examined in order to determine if additional images are required. After the scanning procedure, there are no restrictions on the patient, and could go about his/her normal activities. Patients who are injected with gadolinium-based, MRI contrast agents are advised to drink additional water for few hours after the procedure, in order to clear the contrast agent from their bodies.

After the MRI procedure is completed, radiologists will review and evaluate the images, and will send a report of the scans to the patients’ primary physician.

MR Imaging study produced a complex reaction between mobile hydrogen protons in biologic tissues, a main, static magnetic field (static field), and excitation energy in the form of radiowaves (Rf) of a specific frequency introduced by transmitting coils positioned next to the human body areas of interest. Images from areas of interest are produced by computer processing of resonance data received from protons in the body's field of view. The field strength of the main, static magnet is directly related to signal-to-noise ratio (SN/R) of the images acquired; the higher the field strength, the higher the signal-to-noise ratio. While 1.5-T static, main magnets are now the standard high-field MRI units, 3.0-T static, main magnets are now widely used and have distinct advantages in the musculoskeletal systems and brain because of higher signal-to-noise ratio and increased soft tissue differentiation.

Spatial localization of the body's areas of interest is obtained by gradient magnetic fields inserted and/or surrounding the main magnet field, which produce minor changes in the magnetic field throughout the imaging volume. Radiofrequency pulses momentarily excite the energy state of the mobile hydrogen protons of the body's areas of interest. Radiofrequency pulse is applied at a frequency specific for the main magnetic field strength. For example, for a 1.5T magnetic field strength, the frequency is 63.85 MHz. The mobile hydrogen protons subsequent return to equilibrium energy state (relaxation) and resulted in a release of radiofrequency energy (the echo), which are detected by the receive coils or a transmit-receive coils. Fourier transform analysis is applied to the echo signals into data used to form the acquired MR images. The MR images acquired consist of a map of the distribution of mobile hydrogen protons, with signal intensity produced by both differences in the relaxation times and density of hydrogen protons on different molecules. Although clinical MRI procedure makes use of the abundant mobile hydrogen protons, research into carbon and sodium imaging and spectroscopy are being pursued by several researchers.

**MR Imaging Relaxation Times (T1 & T2)**

The time it takes to return to the equilibrium state of the excited mobile hydrogen protons is called the relaxation time. The relaxation time differs among abnormal and normal tissues. The relaxation time of a mobile hydrogen proton in a tissue is achieved by local interactions with neighboring molecules and atoms. There are two relaxation times, T1 and, T2, that affect the images' signal intensity. T1 relaxation time, (also called longitudinal relaxation times) is the time, for 63% of the excited mobile hydrogen protons to return to their normal equilibrium state. T2 (Transverse relaxation times) relaxation time. is the time for 63% of the excited mobile hydrogen protons to fan out of precession or dephased owing to reactions with nearby hydrogen protons. The intensity and image contrast of the signal acquired within various tissues can be controlled by altering acquisition parameters, such as the time between the Radiofrequency pulse and the signal reception (TE = echo time) and interval between Radiofrequency pulses (TR = repetition times). T1-weighted (T1-W) images are acquired by setting the TR and TE relatively short, whereas applying longer TR and TE times produce T2-weighted (T2-W) images. Subacute hemorrhage and fat have relatively shorter T1 relaxation rates and thus higher signal intensity than brain on T1-W images. Tissues and organs, having more water, such as edema and CSF, have long T1 and T2 relaxation rates, resulting in relatively lower signal intensity on T1W images and higher signal intensity on T2-W images. Gray matter consists of 10–15% more water than white matter, this accounts for much of the intrinsic contrast between the two tissues on MR Imaging. T2-W images are more sensitive than T1-W images to demyelination, infarction, edema and chronic hemorrhage, while T1-W MR Imaging is more sensitive to fatty tissues and subacute hemorrhage.