Hypercholesterolemia is common and associated with enormous morbidity and mortality, leading to high healthcare costs. To manage the condition, an interprofessional team dedicated to the prevention of heart disease is essential. Besides physicians, the role of the pharmacist, nurse, dietitian, and physical therapist are critical in the management of hypercholesterolemia.

The nurse is an ideal position to educate the patient about changes in lifestyle, eating a healthy diet and resuming an active lifestyle. The pharmacist should ensure compliance with the statin medications and offer antismoking aids. Further, the pharmacist should also be aware of the side effects of statins like muscle pain and liver damage; and ensure that regular blood work is performed.

The dietitian should educate the patient on dietary modifications and avoidance of fatty foods.

The patient should enroll in an exercise program and achieve healthy body weight. Patients who fail to lower cholesterol with the above measures should be referred to a bariatric surgeon. In some patients with low self-esteem and morale, a mental health nurse should offer counseling. Members of the interprofessional team should communicate with each other so that all patients are provided with the acceptable standard of care treatment.

**Outcomes**

With the availability of the statins, the adverse effects of hypercholesterolemia have been decreased. More importantly, if the lifestyle is altered, then there is a significant improvement in body weight, hypertension, and diabetes. Cessation of smoking is also very important in improving outcomes. Countless studies have shown that when hypercholesterolemia is appropriately managed, the outcomes are good.