Thymic NETs pose a diagnostic challenge as symptoms at presentation are typically equivocal. Therefore, a high level of suspicion by clinicians must be attained. On occasion, thymic NETs may be found incidentally while undergoing workup for other causes.

**Imaging Studies**

Initial evaluation with computed tomography (CT) of the chest with intravenous (IV) contrast is the test of choice for anterior mediastinal masses. Cross-sectional imaging, along with IV contrast use, helps characterize the mass and improves localization but also provides information regarding local invasion or regional metastases. Findings of a large, heterogeneous, lobulated, and most often invasive, anterior mediastinal mass with areas of hemorrhage or necrosis are suggestive of thymic NETs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), more specifically, cardiac MRI, can play a valuable role in delineating more detailed information regarding invasion to local structures such as proximal great vessels, heart structures, or pericardium.

The use of somatostatin-receptor-based imaging has become, over the past decade, a more popular tool in the diagnosis and staging of NETs. Thymic NETs, just like other NETs, flaunt an overexpression of somatostatin receptors, thus the use of radiolabeled somatostatin analogs, such as the gallium Ga-68 DOTATOC, (OctreoScan) allows thymic NETs to be identified and distinguished from other malignancies that arise in the anterior mediastinum.

**Laboratory Studies**

As previously discussed, the greater number of thymic NETs cases do not produce hormones. Therefore the utility of laboratory evaluation is limited to specific circumstances. Chromogranin A (CGA) levels, if initially elevated at the time of diagnosis, may be helpful in the monitoring of disease activity, especially in patients with metastatic disease.

In cases of paraneoplastic syndromes, such as Cushing’s syndrome, a high concentration of cortisol can be found in serum and in 24-hour urine cortisol. Hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia can be seen in humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy along with high levels of PTHrP concentration, and might also be used to monitor for recurrence of the disease.

**Biopsy**

Based on CT chest findings and characteristics of the mass and level of invasion, medical teams are able to determine if mass resection or tissue biopsy is indicated. For small, encapsulated masses, surgical resection of the tumor should be attempted. On the other hand, for larger masses with unclear margins, a tissue biopsy is recommended prior to attempting a surgical resection to ascertain the need for a possible role of chemotherapy.

Most biopsies are performed through a CT guided core needle biopsy, which is able to identify a thymic NET in most cases.

If biopsy results are still not definitive, a surgical approach is indicated. The type of surgical approach will be determined by the location of the tumor. Anterior mediastinotomy is indicated in cases where the mass invades towards the anterior chest wall. On the other hand, if the mass has invaded towards either side of the chest, a video-assisted thoracoscopic (VATS) approach is warranted.