Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography are the two best tools to evaluate the aortic valve morphology. There are strict criteria outlined by the American Society of Echocardiography for severe aortic stenosis and the need for aortic valve replacement. Severe aortic stenosis is described as follows:

- Aortic valve area of less than or equal to 1.0 cm2

- Mean transvalvular aortic gradient greater or equal to 40 mmHg

- The maximum aortic jet velocity of greater than equal to 4 m/s across the valve

The following are the stages and recommendations for aortic valve replacement in valvular stenosis:

- Severe high-gradient aortic stenosis with symptoms by either history or on exercise testing (stage D1).

- Asymptomatic patients with severe AS (stage C2) and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <50 %.

- Patients with severe AS (stage C or D) undergoing other cardiac surgery.

- Asymptomatic patients with severe AS and low surgical risk.

- Asymptomatic patients with severe AS and decreased exercise tolerance or fall in systemic blood pressure.

A mechanical valve is preferable over a bioprosthetic valve in the following patients:

- Surgical aortic valve replacement in patients age < 55 years old.

- No contraindication to anticoagulation with Vitamin K antagonist.

- An existing indication for anticoagulation like a prosthetic mechanical valve at a different location.

- High risk of morbidity and mortality with reintervention.

The following are predictors of poor outcome in patients undergoing aortic valve replacement:

- Concomitant cardiac diseases can further compromise myocardial function such as poor left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), previous cardiac surgery, and associated coronary artery disease (CAD).

- Neurological dysfunction

- Chronic lung disease or terminal end-organ lung dysfunction

- Liver cirrhosis or terminal end-organ liver dysfunction

- Renal insufficiency

- Recent stroke within the last six months

- Severe pulmonary hypertension with right ventricular dysfunction

- Echocardiographic evidence of an intracardiac mass, thrombus, or vegetation

- Life expectancy less than 12 months owing to a noncardiac cause

- Myocardial infarction within the last 30 days