The management of metabolic syndrome is best done with an interprofessional team that includes a dietitian, physical therapist, pharmacist, cardiologist, internist, neurologist, bariatric surgeon, nurse practitioner, an endocrinologist, and a social worker. The key to this disorder is the prevention and education of the patient. The patient must be told of the importance of changes in lifestyle and weight loss. The dietitian should educate the patient on a Mediterranean-style diet and the importance of exercise. The patient should be urged to stop smoking and abstaining from alcohol. The pharmacist must ensure that the patient is compliant with the medications. Probably the most important intervention is an exercise because it can lower body weight, cholesterol, blood pressure, and blood glucose at the same time. Finally, patients with metabolic syndrome should be educated on good sleep hygiene.

**Outcomes**

Patients with metabolic complications can develop a wide range of complications including heart disease, aortic stenosis, atrial fibrillation, stroke, and even thromboembolic disease. Today evidence seems to indicate that the risk of an ischemic stroke is much higher in patients with metabolic syndrome than previously thought. In addition, other problems associated with metabolic syndrome include a risk for malignancies of the kidney, gallbladder, colon and even the prostate gland. Further, the metabolic syndrome may also increase the risk of eclampsia and affect cognitive performance. Finally, patients with metabolic syndrome also face higher medical bills, are more likely to be poor and may find access to good quality healthcare difficult.