The ANS exerts its control through chemical messengers known as neurotransmitters. The neurotransmitters involved in the ANS are acetylcholine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine. Preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions and postganglionic neurons of the parasympathetic nervous system utilize acetylcholine (ACh). Postganglionic neurons of the sympathetic nervous system use norepinephrine and epinephrine. Although, there are exceptions to this as described below.

ACh is released by all preganglionic neurons, regardless of their involvement in the parasympathetic or sympathetic nervous system. ACh binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, a ligand-gated ion channel, on postganglionic neurons. Once ACh binds, the ion channel is open to allow the flow of ions, specifically sodium and calcium, which induces an excitatory postsynaptic potential, and results in the propagation of a neuronal signal down the axon.

Norepinephrine gets released by postganglionic neurons of the sympathetic nervous system, which binds to and activates adrenergic receptors. These receptors further divide into alpha11 (G coupled receptor), alpha-2 (G  coupled receptor), beta-1 (G coupled receptor), and beta-2 and beta-3 (G and G coupled receptor).

Epinephrine is released into systemic circulation by chromaffin cells within the adrenal gland, specifically the adrenal medulla. The sympathetic nervous system splanchnic nerves synapse on chromaffin cells and stimulate them to release epinephrine using the signal messenger acetylcholine. This feature of the adrenal gland is an important component of the sympathetic nervous system as it allows systemic effects to occur on major organ systems.