The pathogenetic mechanisms of normocytic normochromic anemia vary; specifics depend largely on the etiological cause. Each of several individual factors will play a role in the cumulative cause of the anemia. Since anemia of chronic disease constitutes a major percentage of normocytic normochromic anemia cases and has common pathophysiology with other causes of normocytic normochromic anemia, in the following section, we will refer primarily to the common pathways involved in anemia of chronic disease, along with other associated conditions.

Anemia of chronic disease is usually mild to moderate normocytic normochromic anemia; it evolves with time to become hypochromic and, more rarely, microcytic. Less than 25% of normocytic normochromic anemia cases progress to microcytic hypochromic anemia, in which case the mean corpuscular volume is rarely less than 70.

The pathophysiology of normocytic normochromic anemia is complex but typically relates to three broad causes, each related to an increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines and a subsequent increase in hepcidin levels. In addition, inappropriate erythropoietin (EPO) levels, a decreased response to erythropoietin, and decreased RBC survival contribute to normocytic normochromic anemia. This is the underlying mechanism most commonly seen in patients with acute renal failure.

- **Increase in Pro-inflammatory Cytokines and Iron Dysregulation:**This increase is associated with a variety of disease states, including infection, neoplasm, chronic kidney disease, as well as autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Hepcidin is the main modulator of iron metabolism, giving it a key role in the pathophysiology of anemia of chronic disease. An acute-phase protein, the upregulation of hepcidin is facilitated by interleukin-6 (IL-6) and other proinflammatory cytokines. Hepcidin binds to the iron export protein, ferroportin, which is present in macrophages, hepatocytes, and enterocytes. Increased hepcidin levels lead to iron trapping within macrophages and hepatocytes, resulting in low levels of circulating iron. Through negative feedback stimulated by increased iron stores, hepcidin causes enterocytes and macrophages to degrade ferroportin, thus reducing absorption and promoting storage, respectively.

- **Inappropriate Erythropoietin (EPO) Levels or Less Response to Erythropoietin:**In a healthy individual, erythropoietin circulates in the bone marrow to assist in the production of RBCs, thereby improving oxygen concentration in the blood and relieving hypoxia. Recent studies have identified a number of cytokines that inhibit hemopoiesis in the bone marrow and contribute to a subnormal erythropoietin response, varying by the degree of anemia. For example, in patients with chronic kidney disease, anemia is mainly due to a deficiency of EPO. Because kidney function plays an important role in hepcidin clearance, kidney dysfunction leads to decreased hepcidin clearance and consequent hepcidin storage, resulting in hyposideremic anemia development**.**

- **Decreased RBC Survival and******Bone Marrow Infiltration:****Several studies have identified a mild shortening of the red-cell lifespan in normocytic normochromic anemia cases, which appears to be due to an extracorpuscular factor or intrinsic abnormality of the red cells. The RBC survival is usually not markedly shortened, and marrow function should compensate for the reduced survival. In hemolytic anemias, the etiology of premature erythrocyte destruction is diverse and can be due to conditions such as intrinsic membrane defects, abnormal hemoglobin, erythrocyte enzymatic defects, immune destruction of erythrocytes, mechanical injury, and hypersplenism. Hemolysis may also be intramedullary, occurring in cases when fragile red blood cell (RBC) precursors are destroyed in the bone marrow before their release into the circulation.

Anemia secondary to cancers occurs via these common mechanisms: decreased production of RBCs, increased RBC destruction, blood loss, or miscellaneous etiologies. However, in some cases, significant anemia has also been observed in the absence of marrow invasion or deficiency of vital nutrients. This signifies that other pathways may be important in the pathogenetic processes leading to anemia, cancers, or marrow changes that lead to physical obstruction and destruction of the bone marrow microenvironment.