# Definition/Introduction

Sensory integration (SI) is a framework conceptualized by Dr. A. Jean Ayers, Ph.D. in the 1970s; hence it is currently known as Ayres Sensory Integration (ASI).

SI describes how the nervous system integrates sensory input into action. Two structures may be affected in registration and modulation disturbances: the limbic system and the vestibular and proprioceptive systems. The vestibular system is in charge of the sensory information from body movement through space. The proprioceptive system has a role in processing sensory input from joints and muscles. When impaired, it can lead to issues such as hand flapping

Based on Ayer's theory, lack of sensory integration may be one of the underlying causes of the behavioral problems in children with autism.

# Issues of Concern

Some of the postulates in Ayers’ framework have not received corroboration at the neurological level; for instance, her ideas on sensory registration and vestibular processing in ASD have not been corroborated through neuroimaging studies.

# Clinical Significance

Sensory integration therapy (SIT) is mainly performed by occupational therapists to help children improve their processing and integration of sensory inputs to gain appropriate adaptive response to everyday stimuli.

Sensory integration is mainly an intervention for children with developmental and behavioral disorders. The activities included in SI provide vestibular, proprioceptive, auditory, and tactile stimuli, which in turn organize the sensory system. Such stimuli are provided in play using brushes, swings, trampolines, balls, and other equipment used to elicit proprioceptive, tactile, and vestibular challenges.

ASI interventions are founded on neuroplasticity, aiming to malleate the nervous system through experience. Guided involvement in sensorimotor activities incorporated in play can promote neuroplastic changes leading to adaptive behaviors as a result of the experiences directed during the intervention. This practice has its basis in the idea that neural networks form as a result of experience.

Sensory deficits are measured through the sensory profile, which consists of interviews with parents, a review of child evaluation reports, and observation of behaviors. After the assessment of data, goals are created to target areas of concern.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

Sensory integration is incorporated in occupational therapy interventions that focus on directing the child towards sensory-rich experiences targeting the individual’s sensory needs. Over 95% of occupational therapists report incorporating SI in their practice.