Systemic circulation to the lungs takes place via the bronchial circulation, which ultimately drains into the pulmonary vein. This normal left-to-left anatomic shunt results in a slight drop in PaO2 from 100 mmHg at the end of pulmonary capillaries to 95 mmHg in the pulmonary vein. The A-a gradient typically measures this slight drop in oxygen partial pressure from the alveoli (PAO2) to the pulmonary vein (PaO2) due to shunting, which may increase in some pathological conditions. Right to left shunts may further reduce PaO2 to cause hypoxemia and exhibit an increased A-a gradient. Diffusion problems may also lead to an increased A-a gradient because arterial blood may not reach equilibrium with alveolar air due to diffusion-limited gas exchange.

Physiological conditions can cause extreme V/Q ratios outside of the normal range. In a right-to-left shunt, a portion of the pulmonary blood flow is shunted away from alveoli, resulting in ventilation without perfusion and a higher V/Q ratio. Although diffusion between capillaries and alveoli is unaffected, the arterial PO2 is decreased from the lack of ventilation of the shunted blood, resulting in an increased A-a gradient. The arterial PCO2 is increased from a lack of gas exchange as well. Because of the plateau in the hemoglobin oxygen-binding curve, a small change in oxygen content of the arterial blood causes a significant shift in PO2. As a result, right-to-left shunts result in more hypoxemia than hypercapnia. Generally, increasing FiO2 through supplemental oxygen therapy does not improve hypoxemia in patients with right-to-left shunts. The increased oxygen content of the inspired air never reaches the shunted blood for gas exchange.

Alveolar dead space occurs when some alveoli are not ventilated, resulting in a high V/Q ratio. Alveolar dead space increases the total physiological dead space, decreasing alveolar ventilation; this results in an increased V/Q ratio and decreases PAO2 for functional alveoli. Hypoxemia results from the reduced PAO2, which may be corrected by oxygen therapy to increase the PAO2 of functioning alveoli.