The clinical signs associated with meningitis, including Kernig and Brudzinski, correlate with other diseases. The differential diagnoses in the presence of positive signs include spinal cord tumors, myelitis, intervertebral disc prolapse, sciatica, multiple sclerosis, trauma, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and increased intracranial pressure from numerous causes or in the setting of stroke. When seen in meningitis, these signs are usually present acutely within 24 hours of symptom onset. The thought is that these findings are due to mechanical factors in the spine. When the meninges in the spinal cord and spinal nerves are inflamed, patients will resist stretching the cord and the nerves to prevent pain from this inflammation. These clinical maneuvers appear to provoke this stretching; this is why contractures occur when performed, resulting in a positive test.

Bacterial meningitis is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality across the world. It is among the top ten infectious causes of death, with a mortality rate of 20% to 30%, responsible for 135,000 deaths yearly. Physical exam findings, including nuchal rigidity, Kernig, and Brudzinski signs, are used at the bedside to help in the diagnosis of cases of suspected meningitis. Several studies have evaluated the utility and accuracy of these bedside exam findings for diagnosing meningitis. Both the Kernig sign and Brudzinski sign have a limited role in ruling out meningitis in their absence, with low sensitivities of 5%. However, the signs have specificities of 95% and are considered highly predictive of bacterial meningitis when present in the appropriate clinical setting. The jolt accentuation maneuver, described more recently in 1993, is a bedside maneuver to identify cases of meningitis with exacerbation of a headache caused by rotation of the head horizontally two or three times per second. The jolt accentuation maneuver is one of the most sensitive bedside exam findings, with a sensitivity of 97%.

Although the presence or absence of the Kernig sign is not conclusive for the diagnosis of meningitis, in a patient with fever, recent onset of headache, and positive meningeal irritation signs, there is a high chance of bacterial meningitis.