The biochemical pathways involved in the formation of LB, specifically alpha-synuclein, are associated with protein misaggregation and impaired protein cleavage.

Classical and cortical LBs share immunochemical and biochemical characteristics. The major biochemical components include a-Syn, ubiquitin (Ub), and phosphorylated Ub associated with multiple other substances, including structural fibrillary elements, a-Syn-binding proteins, proteins implicated in the Ub-proteasome system, synphilin-1, aggresome- and mitochondria-related proteins, and cytoskeletal, cytosolic, and cellular response proteins, among others.

LBs have a distinct central Parkin-positive and Ub-positive domain with a-Syn in the periphery. Aggregation of a-Syn, synphilin and Parkin within LBs suggests that parkin plays a role in ubiquitination and modification of a-Syn. Tyrosine hydrolase (TH) and choline-acetyl transferase (ChAT) are co-localized in cortical LBs; brainstem LBs have TH and ChAT immunoreactivity in the core, surrounded by a peripheral rim of a-Syn, suggesting that they may disrupt cholinergic and catecholaminergic transmitter production.

In summary, the Ub-proteasome system and the autophagy pathway help our brain clear toxic forms of misaggregated proteins, including helping with a-Syn turnover. Dysfunctional proteolytic pathways may result in the accumulation of toxic forms of a-Syn. Ubiquitinated proteins in LBs may be a manifestation of attempts by the cellular machinery to eliminate damaged cellular components and delay the onset of neuronal degeneration. Some evidence showing this is the high incidence of mitochondrial DNA deletion in LB-positive neurons in PD brain compared to LB-negative neurons and controls, suggesting increased mitochondrial damage in LB-positive neurons.