**Conservative Measures**

Measures to take include calming the patient to get them to relax, moving outside or away from the likely source of allergen, and cooling the person. Removing clothing and washing the face and mouth to remove allergens is sometimes done, but it is not evidence-based.

Environmental control is vital if one wants to avoid recurrent attacks. Allergen avoidance can significantly improve the quality of life. This means avoiding tobacco, dust mites, animals, and pollen.

Weight reduction in obese asthmatics leads to improved control.

Allergen immunotherapy remains controversial. Large studies have not shown any significant benefit, and the technique is prohibitively expensive.

Monoclonal antibody therapy is indicated for patients with moderate to severe asthma who have a positive skin test. The treatment can lower IgE levels, which in turn decreases histamine production. However, the cost of the injections is high.

Bronchial thermoplasty is a relatively new technique that delivers thermal energy to the airway wall and reduces the narrowing of the airways. Several studies show that it can reduce emergency visits and days missed from school.

**Medical**

Medical management includes bronchodilators like beta-2 agonists and muscarinic antagonists (salbutamol and ipratropium bromide respectively) and anti-inflammatories such as inhaled steroids (usually beclometasone but steroids via any route will be helpful).

There are five steps in the management of chronic asthma; treatment is started depending on the severity and then escalated or de-escalated depending on the response to treatment.

Step 1: The Preferred controller is as needed low dose inhaled corticosteroid and formoterol.

Step 2: The preferred controllers are daily low dose inhaled corticosteroid plus as-needed short-acting beta 2 agonists.

Step 3: The preferred controllers are low dose inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta 2 agonists plus as-needed short-acting beta 2 agonists.

Step 4: The preferred controller is a medium-dose inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta 2 agonist plus as-needed short-acting beta 2 agonists.

Step 5: High dose inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta 2 agonist plus long-acting muscarinic antagonist/anti-IgE.

Indications for admission

If a patient has received three doses of an inhaled bronchodilator and shows no response, the following factors should be used to determine admission:

- The severity of airflow obstruction

- Duration of asthma

- Response to medications

- Adequacy of home support

- Any mental illness

Patients with life-threatening asthma are managed with high flow oxygen inhalation, systemic steroids, back to back nebulizations with short-acting beta 2 agonists, and short-acting muscarinic antagonists and intravenous magnesium sulfate. Early involvement of the intensive care team consultation helps to reduce mortality. In the case of near-fatal asthma, early intubation and mechanical ventilation are needed.

**Surgical**

There is no surgical input into the management of typical asthma.

**Other/Long Term**

Weight loss, smoking cessation, occupational change, and self-monitoring are all important in preventing disease progression and reducing the number of acute attacks.