One of the most clinically relevant examples of altering the normal cardiac cycle is heart failure. Heart failure represents a decreased functioning of the ventricles. This pathology can be classified as right ventricular, left ventricular, or both, as well as diastolic or systolic.  Systolic heart failure represents a dilation of the left ventricle and a decreased ability to contract during the ventricular contraction phase of the cycle. Diastolic heart failure represents sufficient contraction, but poor distention of the myocardium. This lack of lusitropy (the rate of relaxation) is often a result of a thickened myocardium. Regardless of the cause, the symptoms of heart failure depend on the compartment preceding the area of backup. For example, left heart failure can result in pulmonary symptoms such as shortness of breath or abnormal lung sounds. Alternatively, right heart failure results in systemic symptoms such as pedal edema. While structural abnormalities in the myocardium typically characterize congestive heart failure, some of these symptoms may be present in any pathology that alters flow between cardiac chambers and subsequent cardiac output. Myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, or vascular disease can all compromise the cardiac cycle's normal function, albeit with slightly different clinical pictures.

Similarly, valve defects can affect blood flow between cardiac compartments. Incompetent valves fail to direct the flow in the proper direction, and stiff/stenotic valves fail to allow proper blood flow to the next chamber. When the valve defects are severe enough, a clinical picture emerges resembling our discussion of heart failure. As in heart failure, incompetent valves decrease forward flow and can result in a backup of blood. Another series of conditions that compromise normal blood flow within the heart and corrupt the normal cardiac cycle are developmental anomalies. Of note, ventricular septal defects (VSDs) cause flow through the normally impermeable ventricular septum due to the incomplete closure. This typically results in blood moving from the left ventricle to the right ventricle and slightly decreased forward flow. If allowed to persist, the shunt can reverse due to right ventricular remodeling (Eisenmenger syndrome), causing reduced blood flow to the lungs.