**Ascaris lumbricoides**can be diagnosed by the presence of eggs, larvae, or adult worms.

- The chest X-ray can show pulmonary infiltrates, bronchoscopy may show the evidence of bronchitis, and filariform larvae may also be found in sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage, or gastric aspirate in Loeffler syndrome that may also occur by A. duodenale, N. americanus, and S. stercoralis.

- Acute larval infections are associated with eosinophilia and increased IgE titers.

- Egg concentration techniques are commonly used in hospital-based laboratories, whereas the Kato-Katz technique, which is more simplified and field-friendly tests are used for public health control. There are some other techniques like McMaster, FLOTAC, and mini-FLOTAC; these techniques use the concentration of eggs that can be more sensitive than Kato-Katz.

- Ultrasonography is one of the most important diagnostic tools for hepatobiliary and pancreatic ascariasis, although duodenoscopy and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography can also be used.

Stool microscopy is sufficient in uncomplicated cases of **trichuriasis.**Colonoscopy can detect trichuriasis in severe cases, and sometimes biopsy also be needed to confirm the diagnosis. In trichuriasis dysentery syndrome, iron-deficiency anemia should be evaluated.

**Loeffler syndrome**can occur inA. duodenale and N. americanus infection, the diagnostic method is the same as Ascaris infection. In intestinal infection, the mainstay of diagnosis is stool microscopy. Capsule endoscopy can identify hookworms, although it is rarely used. Anemia should be evaluated in any case of hookworm infection as well as in hookworm infections.

**S. stercoralis** also causes Loeffler syndrome, and the diagnostic method is the same as Ascaris induced Loeffler syndrome. For intestinal infection, filariform larvae can be seen in a single wet mount stool preparation. Duodenoscopy with duodenal biopsies may also be used and shows eggs, larvae, and adult worms. If gut damage is being investigated, then plain X-ray of the abdomen, contrast-enhanced CT, and MRI can be used. If Strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome is suspected, targeted tissue such as lung, bronchial, and small bowel biopsies might identify eggs, larvae, and adult worms. Either IgE titers and eosinophils can be highly elevated or depleted.

The gold standard method for the diagnosis of **schistosomiasis**is the microscopic examination of ova in urine (S. haematobium) or stool. Kato Katz technique may also be used to assess the intensity of infection. Schistosomiasis can also be diagnosed by the presence of eggs in tissue biopsy specimens that might be taken from rectum, bladder, intestine, and liver. The standard screening method is the serology for egg antigen. Some other nonspecific findings may also present in schistosomiasis, including eosinophilia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia (from splenic sequestration). Schistosomiasis tests are usually negative when Katayama fever develops because it occurs before maturation of schistosome flukes begin to lay eggs, but diagnostic tests for schistosomiasis detects eggs or serology for egg antigens. Hepatosplenic schistosomiasis may be diagnosed by abdominal ultrasonography.

History of exposure in endemic areas is the first step for the diagnosis of **lymphatic filariasis**. Then serology testing of blood for microfilariae can be done. A skin biopsy can be performed but is usually reserved for tissue-dwelling nematodes such asOnchocerca volvulus infection. In the case of asymptomatic males with microfilaraemia, ultrasonography can be done to see scrotal lymphatics. PCR tests, lymphoscintigraphy, and immunochromatographic tests are can also be used.

**Hydatid cyst**may reveal laboratory abnormalities, including elevated ALT, eosinophilia, and fibrinogen level. Elevated transaminases, bilirubin, and gamma-glutamyl transferase may signify the complication such as biliary obstruction. If cyst leaked into biliary structures or there is cyst rupture, gamma-glutamyl transferase and alkaline phosphatase may be significantly elevated along with eosinophilia; but these findings are usually absent in intact cysts. Imaging is the main diagnostic mode of a hydatid cyst, and the most commonly used method is ultrasonography. Other imaging modalities are CT scan, MRI, or MRI with MRCP.

For **intestinal taeniasis**, enzyme-linked immunoelectrotransfer blot (EITB) for excretory-secretory antigens detection and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) for coproantigen may be used. For**neurocysticercosis**, CT and MRI of the brain are the main modalities of neuroimaging tests. ELISA method is used as a serological test to detect the parasitic antigen in the serum and anticysticercal antibody in cerebrospinal fluid. Enzyme-linked immunoelectrotransfer blot (EITB) assay may also be a useful diagnostic test.

**Diphyllobothriasis**is evaluated by appropriate clinical features and laboratory workup that may reveal megaloblastic anemia, pancytopenia, and eosinophilia. The presence of eggs or proglottids in the stool sample may use for diagnosis. Molecular methods such as PCR and restriction fragment length polymorphism are also an available method for diagnosis ofD. latum.