The occipital belly of the occipitofrontalis covers much of the occipital bone.

Several muscles attach to the inferior part of the occipital bone, whose insertions were discussed in the “Structure and Function” section. The most medial and superficial of these is the trapezius, with its multiple origins, one of which is the external occipital protuberance. Its innervation and blood supply will not be discussed here.

Just deep and on either side of the vertebrae are the left and right semispinalis capitis muscles, serving to extend and flex the cervical and thoracic spine and head laterally. These muscles are innervated by the dorsal primary rami of spinal nerves C3 to T6 and receive blood from the posterior intercostal arteries, the deep cervical artery, and the lumbar arteries.

Deeper still are the left and right rectus capitis posterior minor muscles, which help extend the head. Lateral of the rectus capitis posterior minor muscles are the rectus capitis major muscles, which help with ipsilateral rotation and head extension. Lateral and superficial to the major rectus capitis is the obliquus capitis superior muscle, which serves the same function as the former. The rectus capitis posterior minor, posterior major, and obliquus superior muscles are all innervated by the suboccipital nerve and blood supplied by the occipital artery.

The most lateral muscle of the occipital bone is the rectus capitis lateralis, serving to flex the head laterally. This muscle receives innervation from the spinal nerves C1 to C2 and receives arterial supply via the deep cervical artery. The longus capitis and the rectus capitis anterior muscles are anterolateral and anteromedial muscles of the occipital bone, whose function is to flex the head and neck.

The cervical plexus innervates the longus capitis, and the ventral primary rami of the spinal nerves C1 to C4 and receive arterial flow from the deep cervical artery. The rectus capitis anterior receives its nerve supply from the ventral primary rami of the spinal nerves C1 and receives arterial flow from the ascending cervical artery.