While behavior modifications (i.e., planned naps, a sufficient night's sleep) play a role in the management of the excessive daytime sleepiness associated with type 1 narcolepsy, treatment of cataplexy is purely pharmacological. The duration of therapy is indefinite, as type 1 narcolepsy is incurable. It bears mentioning that treatment options include various combinations of medications, often creating an individualized treatment. Clinicians can use the Epworth Sleepiness Scale to follow the response to treatment. For completeness, the pharmacologic treatment of type 1 narcolepsy, as a whole, is presented below:

Successful management of excessive daytime sleepiness often requires the use of wakefulness-promoting agents, as behavioral modifications fail to provide complete relief.

Successful management of cataplexy requires the use of REM sleep-suppressing drugs. Such agents increase the concentration of norepinephrine and serotonin. The following pharmacologic agents are considered first-line in the management of cataplexy: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (fluoxetine 10 to 80 mg by mouth daily every morning), norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (atomoxetine 40 to 80 mg by mouth daily every morning), serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (venlafaxine extended-release 37.5 to 150 mg by mouth once daily every morning), and tricyclic antidepressants (clomipramine 10 to 150 mg by mouth daily every morning). Prescribers of the medications, as mentioned earlier, should keep in mind the following considerations:

- Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have fallen out of favor for the treatment of cataplexy due to their anticholinergic side effects (i.e., delirium, dry mucous membranes, hyperthermia, ileus, mydriasis, tachycardia, and urinary retention). Moreover, TCA overdose can result in a toxidrome: anticholinergic symptoms, cardiac toxicity, and CNS toxicity. Cardiac toxicity includes interventricular conduction delay (QRS prolongation), right-axis deviation, and tachycardia (anticholinergic effect).

- Serotonin syndrome is diagnosed clinically using the Hunter criteria: administration of a serotonergic agent in the setting of inducible clonus with either agitation or diaphoresis. It can occur with the use of a single serotonergic agent as prescribed/taken in excess or with the co-ingestion of multiple serotonergic agents simultaneously. Its manifestations are due to an increase of serotonin in the central nervous system. Typical presentation includes altered mental status, increased autonomic activity, and neuromuscular changes. Great care is necessary to avoid the prescription of multiple serotonergic agents in a single patient.

Currently, only one medication has FDA approval for the treatment of both cataplexy and the excessive daytime sleepiness associated with narcolepsy: Sodium oxybate, the sodium salt of gamma-hydroxybutyrate. The mechanism of action of this medication is unknown; however, it is a known metabolite of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). It is therefore thought to work via the GABA-B receptor. This medication is dosed initially at bedtime with subsequent dosing 2.5 to 4 hours later and has a significant salt content of 1100 mg to 1640 mg when dosed in the effective range (6 g to 9 g per night in two divided doses).

The management of type 1 narcolepsy in children differs slightly from management in adults. In children, the first-line pharmacologic agents for the treatment of symptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness are stimulants such as dextroamphetamine-amphetamine (10 to 40 mg by mouth daily in one to two divided doses) or methylphenidate (10 to 60 mg by mouth daily in two to three divided doses) rather than wakefulness-promoting agents such as armodafinil (50 to 250 mg by mouth once daily every morning) and modafinil (50 to 200 mg by mouth once daily every morning). Moreover, the first-line pharmacologic agent for the treatment of cataplexy is sodium oxybate (1 to 2 g per night in two divided doses), rather than REM sleep-suppressing drugs, in children over the age of seven. In children under seven with cataplexy requiring treatment, the following REM sleep-suppressing drugs are possible therapies: clomipramine 25 mg by mouth once daily at bedtime, fluoxetine 5 to 10 mg by mouth once daily, or venlafaxine extended-release 25 mg by mouth once daily.