Historically, cases of PRS have been classified into groups or grades based on severity. The most common classification system was developed by Cole et al. and reports grades 1-3 from mild to severe.

Mild disease can often be treated using conservative management without surgery. This entails prone and lateral positioning to allow gravity to pull the tongue anteriorly and improve airway obstruction, resolving approximately 70% of cases of PRS.

The literature is very conflicted regarding the potential for catch up growth in the postnatal period. Some studies have shown that isolated PRS may reach normal mandibular growth in the years following birth, but others have reported persistently small mandibles at up to 5 years of age. There is good consensus, however, that syndromic PRS does not experience catch up growth of the mandible.

More severe cases of PRS require surgical management. Syndromic PRS will typically require this treatment. It has been estimated that only approximately 10% of isolated PRS requires surgical management.

Tongue-lip adhesion is a procedure where the tongue is sutured to the mucous membrane and muscle of the lower lip to hold the tongue in an anterior position in an attempt to reduce the amount of airway obstruction. This is often employed in isolated PRS as a temporary measure while the mandible grows during the first few years of life. Complications include lacerations, dehiscence, Wharton’s duct injury, infection, and aspiration.

Mandibular distraction osteogenesis is another surgical intervention that produces longer-term results. This procedure advances and elongates the jaw in 3 phases - latency, activation, and consolidation. Latency is the period of time after osteotomy, and before distraction begins with the rotation of an external device that elongates the distance between the bones at the site of the break. Consolidation is the time allowed for bone formation and healing at the site of the osteotomy. Complications include infection, osteomyelitis of the mandible, damage to the inferior alveolar nerve, bite deformities, and permanent dentition loss.

Tracheostomy is a procedure where the trachea is directly cannulated through the anterior aspect of the neck. This is more likely to be performed on patients with syndromic PRS. This is also a good option for patients with airway obstruction in multiple areas. This remains the gold standard of treatment for airway protection.