The mature venous system of the brain originates as a precursor venous system that develops and increases in complexity with the fetal brain. These primitive vessels receive little coverage in medical education texts, and their origin was first described in detail by Dr. George Linus Streeter in 1915. The cerebral veins begin development as undifferentiated mesenchyme known as the primary meninx. The meninx differentiates into a network of capillaries which then develop into a confluence of several vessels comprised of a thin layer of endothelium. They are believed to be of the same heterogeneous origin as the dura mater: both neural crest and mesoderm. The early major vessels are, from rostral to caudal: the anterior cerebral vein, the pro-otic vein, the vena capitis medialis, the vena capitis lateralis, the supra-optic anastomosis, and the posterior rhombencephalic veins. These vessels merge and form the anterior cardinal vein which drains to the primitive atrium. These primitive vessels are fated to develop into their more familiar adult structures. Of note, the anterior cerebral vein develops into the transverse sinuses, the pro-otic vein and vena capitis medialis develop into the cavernous sinus, which will drain the middle meningeal and ophthalmic veins, the vena capitis lateralis regresses, the posterior rhombencephalic vein and the supra-optic anastomosis form the sigmoid sinuses, and the anterior cardinal vein develops into the internal jugular vein. Additionally, the superior sagittal sinus derives as the space between the falx and dural layers along the midline.