Many definitions for delegation exist in professional literature. One of the most commonly cited definitions of the word was jointly established by the American Nurses Association and the National Council of State Boards of Nursing. These groups describe delegation as the process for a nurse to direct another person to perform nursing tasks and activities. Delegation involves at least two individuals: the delegator, and the delegatee. The delegator is a registered nurse who distributes a portion of patient care to the delegatee.

**Essential Components of Delegation**

Responsibility

Based on individual states’ nurse practice acts, registered nurses have a professional duty to perform patient care tasks dependably and reliably.

Authority

Authority refers to an individual’s ability to complete duties within a specific role. This authority derives from nurse practice acts and organizational policies and job descriptions.

Accountability

Accountability within the nursing context refers to nursing professionals’ legal liability for their actions related to patient care. During delegation, delegators transfer responsibility and authority for completing a task to the delegatee; however, the delegator always maintains accountability for the task's completion. The registered nurse is always accountable for the overall outcome of delegated tasks based on each state's nurse practice act provisions.

Possible legal and ethical constraints arise regarding delegation in nursing. Therefore, the American Nurses Association developed the five rights of delegation to assist nurses in making safe decisions.

**Five Rights of Delegation**

- Right task

- Right circumstance

- Right person

- Right supervision

- Right direction and communication