**Discrepancies in Blood Typing**

Before a transfusion, ABO typing is routinely performed to provide the safest transfusion possible. Forward typing (antigen typing for A and B on red cells) and reverse typing (testing for anti-A and anti-B in the patient’s plasma) are performed. The forward and reverse typing are performed to confirm the blood type. However, discrepancies between forward and reverse typing may occur. The discordance can be due to a lack or excess of antigens or antibodies.  If a discrepancy is found, the first step is to perform confirmatory assessments to evaluate for any errors in testing or technical problems.  Various clinical scenarios can also explain these discrepancies.

In forward typing, the patient’s red blood cells are combined with commercial antisera.  Weaker RBC agglutination than expected (weak or missing reactivity) can occur in cases of A or B subgroups.  Additional RBC reactivity on forward typing can occur in cases of acquired B phenomenon. The acquired B phenotype occurs in cases where bacterial enzymatic changes lead to the conversion of N-acetylgalactosamine (A antigen) into galactose (B antigen); this phenomenon has been documented in cases of bacterial infections and colorectal malignancy.

Reverse ABO typing combines a patient’s plasma with commercial red blood cells. Possible causes of weaker than expected plasma reactivity include immunosuppression, very young or old age, hypogammaglobulinemia, and prior treatment with rituximab.  Unexpected or “extra” reactivity detected in reverse typing can be seen in patients who have received intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) or non-ABO-matched plasma products.

**Choosing the Safest Blood Products**

In the simplest terms, individuals with type O blood are considered “universal donors” for red blood cells, and type AB patients are “universal recipients” for red cells from patients with any ABO blood type. Type AB plasma is compatible with all other ABO blood types.  There are, however, many caveats and clinical scenarios to consider when choosing the safest and most appropriate blood products for each patient.

The ABO antigen is fully developed at birth; however, newborns do not start making antibodies until 3 to 6 months of age. The antibodies present in the serum of newborns under four months of age are passively transferred from the mother. Therefore when a red cell transfusion is ordered for an infant under four months of age, the mother’s blood type must be considered.

Platelets have ABO antigens, but the expression is variable; these antigens are only strongly expressed in a minority of patients. Platelets are, however, suspended in plasma containing ABO antibodies.  The plasma accompanying the platelets may cause hemolysis if the plasma is not compatible with the recipient’s red blood cells.