Primary immunodeficiency diseases result from intrinsic defects in immune cells, including T cells, complement components, and phagocytes. Recurrent pneumonia caused by extracellular bacteria suggests antibody deficiency. On the other hand, recurrent fungal infections may be caused by a lack of T lymphocytes.

Severe combined immunodeficiency disorders (SCID) are incompatible with life, and affected children usually die within the first 2 years. SCID is more common in the male. It is caused by a gene defect on the X chromosome in more than 50% of cases. The defective gene encodes the gamma chain of the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor. This chain forms a molecular part of the receptors for IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-11, IL-15, and IL-21. On the other hand, few cases of SCID are caused by defective genes that encode for adenosine deaminase or nucleoside phosphorylase. The deficiency of these enzymes causes ribonucleotide reductase inhibition leading to a defect in DNA synthesis and cell replication. Mutation in the genes encoding RAG1 or RAG2 causes an autosomal recessive form of SCID.

The DiGeorge anomaly arises from a defect in the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches that causes a developmental abnormality of the thymus. The T-cell defect is variable depending on the severity of the thymic lesion. These infants have partial monosomy of 22q11-pter or 10p.

In the bare leukocyte syndrome, there is a mutation in the gene that encodes for the MHC class II transactivator (CIITA), resulting in the absence of class-II MHC molecule on antigen-presenting cells including macrophages and dendritic cells. A mutation in the gene that encodes for a transport-associated protein (TAP) results in the lack of class-I MHC molecule expression, which is manifested by a deficiency of CD8+ T lymphocytes.

Secondary immunodeficiency may be caused by drugs, including steroids, cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, mycophenolate, methotrexate, leflunomide, ciclosporin, tacrolimus, and rapamycin, which affect the functions of both T and B lymphocytes. Viral infections can cause immunodeficiency. For example, HIV causes AIDS, which mainly affects CD4+T cells and downregulates cellular immune responses that produce opportunistic infections and cancers, which are threatening to human health.

Malnutrition is a cause of secondary deficiency, for example, protein-energy malnutrition affects cell-mediated immunity and phagocytosis, the ingestion of microorganisms is intact, but the ability of phagocytic cells to kill intracellular organisms is impaired. Nutritional deficiency can result from cancer, burns, chronic renal disease, multiple trauma, and chronic infections. Zinc and iron deficiencies have a variety of effects on immunity, including a reduction in delayed cutaneous hypersensitivity. Vitamin supplementation (B6 and B12), selenium, and copper are also important for the normal function of the immune system.