Physical examination is the easiest and most effective means of diagnosis. The most representative assessment methods for assessing congenital torticollis include an assessment of the passive cervical range of motion using an arthrodial goniometer (can be done by physical therapists), as well as an active range of motion, and global assessment. Neurological assessment, as well as auditory assessment, are fundamental to exclude other differential diagnoses.

It is crucial to assess visual function: eye alignment, presence of red reflex, and pupillary reaction to light, to determine whether it fixes and follows objects. Often there may be a weakness of the oculomotor muscles (lateral rectus or superior oblique); the torticollis results from a compensatory mechanism to improve vision. On physical examination, if there is no muscle contracture and joint amplitudes are intact, then this suspicion requires referral to ophthalmology.

The observed incidence of hip dysplasias is approximately 15% of patients with congenital torticollis; other studies report one in five babies has associated hip dysplasias. Multiple risk factors correlate with a higher incidence of hip dysplasia: female sex, first childbirth, family history of hip dysplasia, the existence of other deformities such as congenital torticollis, birth with a pelvic presentation, cesarean delivery, large fetus.

This condition can be bilateral and is most often unilateral. Early diagnosis of hip dysplasia is of utmost importance. It is an asymptomatic condition in the newborn, in which early detection can be effectively treated, improving the prognosis. Late diagnosis can result in sequelae such as lameness, chronic pain, degenerative arthritis, as well as mental impairment.

Thus, appropriate screening for this condition is essential for the clinical signs of hip dysplasia and the need for early diagnosis and, if in doubt, refer to a specialist. The clinical diagnosis systematically relies on both major and minor clinical signs. Major signs are Ortolani/Barlow sign and hip abduction limitation. The minor signs are Galeazzi sign and asymmetry of the folds (inguinal and thighs).

The evaluation of congenital torticollis is very important for treatment planning.

Clinical signs of  congenital torticollis include:

- Fibrosis or shortening of the sternocleidomastoid muscle

- A lateral tilt of the head in the frontal plane and contralateral rotation in the transverse plane with notable limitation of the active and passive cervical range of motion.

- A palpable mass or tumor on the sternocleidomastoid during the first three months of life followed by restriction of range of motion and a fixed postural stiff neck resulting from a restricted or fixed muscle

- Modification of cranial morphology (related to the presence of plagiocephaly) by flattening the parieto-occipital zone and/or anteriorization of the contralateral ear to the affected sternocleidomastoid with frontal flattening homolateral to the affected sternocleidomastoid.

- Compensatory postures of the cervical, thoracic, trunk, extremities, shoulder elevation, or trunk inclination to the affected side.

Diagnosis is usually made clinically, with few cases diagnosed through the use of complementary diagnostic tests. Diagnosis is generally before two months in 50% of cases; parents identify most cases and may correlate with plagiocephaly.

The most common imaging modality is ultrasonography, especially in the neonatal period. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be useful to rule out nonmuscular causes of torticollis.

Ultrasound is advantageous in assessing neck mass / pseudo-tumor, as well as long-term monitoring and post-treatment evaluation.

The swelling is firm, movable under the skin, and soft to the touch. The age of presentation varies with severity: postural is the version that appears earlier. The tumor tends to disappear between 4 and 8 months of age.

Histopathologic studies are rarely necessary for instances where the imaging modalities are inconclusive regarding the etiology. In the early course of the condition, fine-needly aspiration cytology (FNAC) specimens are an option. Biopsy or surgical specimens have fewer findings since they are obtained in the latter course of the disease.

Regular hip examination and also ultrasound scan by 4 to 6 weeks of age or a plain radiograph of the hips (4 to 6 months of age) are a recommendation as at least 15 % of the infants have associated hip dysplasia.