There are six main classes of HAART agents that target different stages in the viral lifecycle. A fundamental cornerstone of HAART is the co-administration of different drugs that inhibit HIV replication by several mechanisms so that the propagation of a virus with resistance to a single agent is inhibited by the action of the other two agents. Some agents may be co-formulated to increase ease of patient compliance with these medications.

**Nucleoside/Nucleotide Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NRTIs)**

- NRTIs require intracellular phosphorylation via host enzymes before they can inhibit viral replication. These agents are nucleoside or nucleotide analogs with an absent hydroxyl at the 3’ end that are incorporated into the growing viral DNA strand. They competitively bind to reverse transcriptase and cause premature DNA chain termination as they inhibit 3’ to 5’ phosphodiester bond formation.

- Examples include: abacavir, didanosine, lamivudine, stavudine, tenofovir, and zidovudine

**Non-nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NNRTIs)**

- NNRTIs bind to HIV reverse transcriptase at an allosteric, hydrophobic site. These agents cause a stereochemical change within reverse transcriptase, thus inhibiting nucleoside binding and inhibition of DNA polymerase.

- Examples include delavirdine, efavirenz, nevirapine, and rilpivirine.

**Protease inhibitors (PIs)**

- PIs competitively inhibit the proteolytic cleavage of the gag/pol polyproteins in HIV-infected cells. These agents result in immature, non-infectious virions.

- PIs are generally used in patients who fail their initial HAART regimen and should be administered with boosting agents such as ritonavir or cobicistat.

- Examples include atazanavir, darunavir, indinavir.

**Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitors (INSTIs)**

- Integrase inhibitors bind viral integrase and prevent viral DNA from being incorporated into the host cell chromosome.

- Examples include: dolutegravir, elvitegravir, raltegravir

**Fusion inhibitors (FIs)**

- Fusion inhibitors bind to the envelope glycoprotein gp41 and prevent viral fusion to the CD4 T-cells.

- Examples include enfuvirtide.

**Chemokine Receptor Antagonists (CCR5 Antagonists)**

- CCR5 antagonists selectively and reversibly block entry into the CD4 T-cells by preventing interaction between CD4 cells and the gp120 subunit of the viral envelope glycoprotein.

- Examples include maraviroc.