**PTSD**

Treatment for PTSD should be initiated soon after diagnosis when symptoms have persisted for at least four weeks, although most patients present months or years later. First-line treatment generally consists of psychotherapy, with medications as a reasonable alternative or augmenting strategy based on patient preference or when psychotherapy is unavailable.

Non-pharmacologic therapies: Effective PTSD psychotherapies include exposure therapy, cognitive processing therapy (CPT), trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy (TF-CBT), and eye-movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR). Exposure therapy is rooted in emotional processing theory and seeks to correct a dysfunctional fear cognitive structure. CPT is trauma-specific and takes twelve weeks. This also draws on emotional processing theory along with social cognitive theory and attempts to correct distorted cognitions about the self and world after trauma.

Pharmacotherapy: Medications can be effective in reducing core PTSD symptoms and should be kept as an option. They are more effective against hyperarousal and mood symptoms and less so for re-experience, emotional numbing, and avoidance symptoms. No medication class has demonstrated better suitability or tolerability than others. However, the largest and greatest number of trials have been conducted on selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Multiple randomized control trials found reduced PTSD symptoms with SSRIs when compared to placebo. Venlafaxine, a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), has shown effectiveness and tolerability in a smaller body of literature.

Combining therapies: Some trials suggest that SSRIs, TF-CBT, and their combination are roughly equivalent in effectiveness, with some advantages to psychotherapy for patient preference. There was improved adherence when patients were given their preferred treatment modality.

**Depression**

Treatment for MDD remains the same for both the general and military populations. Combinations of pharmacologic and psychotherapies have been proven to be the most effective treatment strategy.

Psychotherapy: Psychotherapy is a category of treatment options involving talk sessions between patient and provider. There are several types, including CBT, interpersonal psychotherapy, behavioral activation, problem-solving therapy, supportive psychotherapy, and psychodynamic psychotherapy. Although no type has been shown to be superior to another, CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy are often selected first because of the lengthy list of studies on those methods.

Pharmacotherapy:  Evidence continues to support the use of pharmacologic agents in the treatment of MDD. Options include serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs), SSRIs, MAOIs, SNRIs, and TCAs. Each class of medications works in slightly different ways and is beyond the scope of this article. The selection of the appropriate agent should be individualized to the patient. Patient factors include comorbid conditions, clinical presentation, side effects, and previous medication use.

Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT): ECT involves an electric current to stimulate the brain into a generalized cerebral seizure. It is widely viewed as efficacious and safe but is generally reserved for cases of severe, resistant MDD.

**Suicide**

As part of treatment, the VA and DoD recommend a crisis response plan that includes assessing SI and history of previous attempts. Patients at imminent risk of suicide should be hospitalized, and a safety plan developed.

**Substance Use Disorders**

Non-pharmacologic therapies: Psychotherapy is the mainstay of SUD treatment. Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) is a “first aid” strategy designed to intervene on unhealthy drinking before progression to AUD and provide immediate treatment to those who have already developed it. If further treatment or evaluation is indicated, patients should be offered longer-term management in primary care or specialist settings. Evidence-based psychotherapy or behavioral interventions should be offered. This typically consists of short-term CBT to identify and modify maladaptive thoughts and behaviors around substance use. CBT can also help incentivize abstinence, manage contingencies, and improve stress management skills.

Pharmacotherapy: Several pharmacotherapies have received support in managing SUDs, primarily by reducing cravings or withdrawal symptoms to incentivize abstinence or reduce barriers to quitting.

In addition to clinical interventions, veterans with SUDs can be introduced to self-help groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous. They are generally free, available in most locations, and can be helpful as ongoing maintenance engagement in those seeking abstinence.