The use of irinotecan for FDA-approved purposes such as colorectal and pancreatic carcinoma has greatly improved patient longevity. Factors that limit its usage mainly involve dose-limiting toxicities. Irinotecan's appropriate dosing regimen is still unclear, but the medical community has come to a consensus. The goal for the recommended dosing of irinotecan involves limiting side effects but still providing adequate treatment. The use of irinotecan requires the efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team to be maximally effective.

To minimize its side effects, there have been attempts to manage drug-limiting diarrhea that can occur in patients. A combination of atropine with irinotecan or loperamide with irinotecan has demonstrated effectiveness in preventing diarrhea in some patients.

Irinotecan therapy requires the focused efforts of an interprofessional healthcare team. Board-certified oncologic pharmacists review dosing, check for interactions and assist with patient education, as well as consult with the oncologist or other ordering clinicians. Oncology nurses administer the medication, monitor for side effects, facilitate communication with the team, and chart their observations for use in making therapeutic decisions in the future. These are but two examples of interprofessional teamwork that can improve patient outcomes; this needs to be the norm in healthcare delivery. [Level 5]

In a study completed at the Gustave Roussy Institute in 2002, the Department of Medicine conducted a study to determine the appropriate dosing of irinotecan in patients with cancer with hyperbilirubinemia. Researchers noted that the dose-limiting toxicities observed in the patients were mainly neutropenia and diarrhea. Patients with high bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase levels had a reduction in the clearance of irinotecan.

Research has noted that irinotecan works better as a combination therapy. Two main combinations, XELIRI and FOLFIRI, are used to treat colorectal carcinoma. XELIRI is the combination of capecitabine with irinotecan, whereas FOLFIRI is the combination of 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan. A meta-analysis in 2014 in China demonstrated that one was not superior to the other.