Activator deficient Tay Sachs disease: A variant of Tay Sachs disease with classical findings of neuro regression, exaggerated startle response, and cherry red spot of the macula without hepatosplenomegaly. This condition should be considered in patients with classical findings of Tay Sachs but with normal Hex A and Hex B levels. Ganglioside accumulation occurs due to the deficiency of GM2 glycoprotein( intralysosomal glycoprotein) required for GM2 Ganglioside degradation.

Sandhoff disease is characterized by progressive neurodegeneration starting at 6 months of life associated with hyperacusis, cherry red spot, and blindness. Sandhoff disease is indistinguishable from Tay Sachs in clinical course, diagnosis, and management except for the visceral and bone involvement. Hepatomegaly is common in Sandhoff disease. Sandhoff is a severe form of Tay Sachs disease caused by a mutation in the Hexosamidianse B (Hex B) gene. It is usually not limited to any specific ethnic group.

Progressive neurodegeneration with cherry-red spot is also common in other lysosomal storage disorders, including GM1 Gangliosidosis, Sandhoff disease, infantile Gaucher's disease, Niemann Pick disease type A, and galactosialidosis.

The differential diagnosis for late-onset Tay Sachs disease with neurological findings includes adolescent-onset Spinal muscular atrophy, Friedreich ataxia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Kuf's disease ( adult-onset neuronal cerebral lipofuscinosis) and late-onset forms of lysosomal storage disorders. Differential diagnosis of adult-onset Tay Sachs with neuropsychiatric manifestation includes Hepatolenticular degeneration, Niemann Pick Type C, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, ceroid neuronal lipofuscinosis, metachromatic leucodystrophy, and X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. All the above diagnoses should be considered in young patients with refractory or unusual neuropsychiatric symptom clusters.