The decision to proceed with a CCTA should only be made if the results will affect a patient’s clinical management or prognosis and if there is a reasonable expectation of being able to obtain interpretable images.  A review of any possible contraindications should also be performed with subsequent evaluations of the risks versus benefits.

Informed consent should be obtained before the start of the CCTA. The patient should have nothing to eat for 4 hours before the exam and no caffeine for 12 hours before the test. Preferentially, intravenous (IV) access should be obtained in the right antecubital vein with an 18-gauge catheter. This minimizes streak artifact during image acquisition and also allows for the rapid infusion of contrast. Hand veins should be avoided, as this typically requires a 20-gauge or smaller catheter, which can result in slower flow rates. Central lines should not be used unless rated for power injection.

The ideal heart rate for CCTA image acquisition is typically 60 beats per minute or less. An oral beta-blocker is typically administered 1 hour before the test, and this can be supplemented with intravenous beta-blocker administration at the time of the test. Oral metoprolol tartrate 50 mg to 100 mg is typically used as a pre-medication. Alternatives can include oral atenolol, IV esmolol, calcium-channel blockers, and ivabradine.

Nitrates vasodilate coronary arteries and when given 5 minutes before CCTA image acquisition improves visualization of coronary arteries and stenoses. Typically 400 to 800 micrograms of sublingual nitroglycerin are used for this effect.