Directed antimicrobial coverage, surgical drainage for discrete abscesses and aggressive supportive care are the main management options. Empiric regimens that are based on the expected microbiology and local resistance data should be initiated and adjusted appropriately once the organism and its sensitivities become available. The choice of antimicrobial regimens for the treatment of deep neck space infections has not yet been studied in clinical trials. Intravenous nafcillin or vancomycin plus gentamycin or tobramycin combination, ampicillin/sulbactam, or clindamycin are generally accepted initial choices. For methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections, vancomycin or linezolid plus cefepime (alternates are metronidazole, imipenem, meropenem, piperacillin-tazobactam) can be used. MRSA coverage must be included as part of the initial treatment regimen for patients that are at risk for MRSA carriage or infection, such as those with comorbid disease (for example, diabetes mellitus), history of intravenous drug use, and in communities or hospitals where there is a substantial incidence of MRSA. For the majority of deep neck infections especially parapharyngeal, retropharyngeal, or prevertebral space infections, antibiotic treatment should generally be continued for 2 to 3 weeks, and longer courses may be required when complications are present. Antibiotics can be switched to the oral route once there is significant clinical improvement and patient able to tolerate oral intake. Consultation with head and neck surgeons is recommended as surgical drainage may become necessary if there is no improvement after 48 hours of antibiotic therapy. All but the smallest deep neck abscesses typically warrant surgical drainage, while small or questionable abscesses and phlegmon often respond well to appropriate aggressive medical management.

Nonetheless, in the acute setting, the airway always comes first. Patients with deep neck infections, particularly those with submandibular or odontogenic infections, as well as those with any airway symptoms or difficulty handling their own oral secretions, should have their airways adequately secured first and foremost via elective intubation. This frequently requires awake fiberoptic intubation. The use of glucocorticoids for symptomatic relief in patients with acute airway obstruction remains controversial and lacks supporting evidence, and any patient with a deep neck abscess and even minimal airway symptoms should be electively intubated and the abscess drained.