For the majority of patients, evaluation for tonsillitis includes physical examination, risk stratification by scoring systems, and consideration of rapid antigen testing and/or throat culture.  Imaging is rarely necessary for uncomplicated infections. Evaluation should begin with a thorough history and physical exam, and this information can be used to calculate a Centor Score. This scoring system uses the following criteria: the presence of a fever, tonsillar enlargement and/or exudates, tender cervical lymphadenopathy, and absence of a cough. Each finding warrants one point. This criterion was updated to include an age modification, giving an extra point for age groups 3 to 15 years and subtracting a point for patients 45 years of age and older.

Testing for GABHS can occur via throat culture alone or in conjunction with rapid antigen testing. When using rapid antigen testing, it is important to note that while this test is specific (88% to 100%), it is not sensitive (61% to 95%); false negatives are possible.

In complicated infections, including patients with unstable vital signs, toxic appearance, inability to swallow, inability to tolerate oral intake, or trismus, a more extensive evaluation may be required. Examples include CT imaging of the neck with intravenous contrast to exclude dangerous causes such as abscess, Lemierre disease, and epiglottitis. Laboratory testing, including complete blood count and basic metabolic panel to assess renal function, merits consideration.