The treatment of ocular hypotony can be medical or surgical. Management of ocular hypotony depends on the cause, as outlined above. A good history and physical examination will usually reveal the cause and direct the treatment. The treatment could be relatively straightforward, such as discontinuing a specific culprit medication, surgical repair of a leaking globe injury, or more complicated with uncertain outcomes such as revising a bleb (demonstrated in **figure 1**) or repairing a large cyclodialysis cleft.

The goals of treating ocular hypotony depend on the cause and clinical impact of ocular hypotony. They include reversing the causative pathology, maintaining the anatomical integrity of the eye, and restoring any compromised visual function.

**Medical/Conservative Treatment**

Ocular hypotony is commonly observed after filtering surgery and may result from a leaking bleb or over filtration. A large diameter (14 mm) bandage contact lens encourages epithelial migration and wound healing; this effectively manages early bleb leaks.

Other options for managing a leaking bleb include cyanoacrylate glue, autologous blood injection, and compression sutures.

Uveitis-induced ocular hypotony is reported to occur after noninfectious and infectious uveitis.

Options for treatment include systemic corticosteroids, systemic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, a topical steroid (including prednisolone acetate, difluprednate) and non-steroid, and local injection of steroids (including posterior subtenon triamcinolone, peribulbar/transseptal triamcinolone/methylprednisolone). In some cases, systemic immunomodulatory agents could be used to manage the primary inflammatory condition. Corticosteroid therapy can be used with good effect if the cause of hypotony is associated with intraocular inflammation and shuts down the production of aqueous by the ciliary processes.

Corticosteroids also work by inducing a change in the extracellular matrix of the trabecular meshwork. Cycloplegic agents (including atropine) help treat ocular hypotony and provide posterior rotation of the ciliary processes, maintaining the anterior chamber depth. Topical ibopamine 2% has been used twice daily, with reports of good effect in treating patients suffering from chronic ocular hypotony attributable to vitreoretinal surgery, uveitis, and penetrating trauma.

Injection of an ophthalmic viscosurgical device (OVD) has been used to treat ocular hypotony.

Other reported complications of intracameral OVD injection include the need for severe inflammation, repeated OVD injections, and Descemet membrane detachment. It is recommended that OVDs with greater cohesiveness and viscosity be used for this purpose as they have better anterior chamber stabilization.

Cidofovir is an example of a systemic medication that can induce ocular hypotony and anterior uveitis.

It is usually used as an intravenous infusion; however, topical and intravitreal preparations have also been used.

The cellular anterior chamber activity resolved with topical corticosteroid administration in all eyes with uveitis, but some patients had a significant flare that persisted despite topical steroids. Posterior synechiae responded poorly to topical mydriatic therapy—visually significant hypotony maculopathy developed in a minority of patients.

The same authors advised that cidofovir should be discontinued in favor of an alternative anti-cytomegaloviral agent when ocular hypotony occurs. In another report, two patients developed severe cidofovir-related hypotony, necessitating discontinuation of therapy. They were treated successfully with Ibopamine 2% eye drops combined with dexamethasone 0.1% eyedrops.

**Surgical Treatment**

In general, the surgical treatment of ocular hypotony is instituted when the conservative approach has not been successful, apart from cases that require immediate surgery, such as the repair of a globe perforation or retinal detachment. The excision and revision of a leaking bleb may be required using either the conjunctival advancement approach or a free conjunctival autograft.

Ab Interno partial tube ligation has been used as an effective surgical option to achieve an immediate, predictable, and sustained intraocular pressure increase either as a primary procedure or after the failure of conventional methods to resolve hypotony in eyes with non-valved glaucoma drainage devices (GDDs).

Prompt resolution of the hypotony often results in normalization of retinal anatomy. Other surgical treatments for ocular hypotony include the repair of a retinal detachment and cyclodialysis cleft.

Traction-induced ciliary body detachment is a cause of ocular hypotony, and it is associated with proliferative vitreoretinopathy, uveitis, and trauma. The use of silicone oil in vitreoretinal surgery for PVR or recurrent retinal detachments and chronic uveitis has improved ocular hypotony.

The dissection of membranes from the ciliary body (through direct visualization or endoscopic viewing) also promotes recovery of the ciliary body and therefore improves aqueous production. Gürelik et al. have reported a simple technique for treating ocular hypotension post glaucoma filtering surgery and vitreoretinal surgery.

This surgical technique increases the resistance to aqueous outflow by placing a capsular tension ring (CTR) in the iridocorneal angle through a cornea incision. They treated 13 eyes that suffered from chronic severe hypotony using this technique, with a follow-up of at least one year, and reported an improvement in all treated eyes. This surgical technique is remarkable considering the ease with which the surgery can be performed, and the authors reported no surgical complications.

Ocular Ischemic Syndrome (OIS) is associated with ocular hypoperfusion and hypotrophy of the ciliary body. This eventually results in decreased aqueous production and chronic hypotony. The primary cause of OIS is atherosclerosis. But it could be due to giant cell arteritis, carotid artery disease, Behçet disease, trauma, and inflammation. Management of OIS is by a multidisciplinary team consisting of a cardiologist, neurologist, and ophthalmologist. The goal is to improve or restore ocular blood perfusion.

In line with the treatment goals, complications of ocular hypotony can be successfully treated using surgical techniques. A good example is the report of successful treatment of hypotony maculopathy using vitrectomy for non-resolving chorioretinal folds.

Before removing silicone oil, possible persistent postoperative hypotony or phthisis should be considered, especially in eyes with an IOP of 10 mm Hg or less in silicone oil-filled eyes.