Management of perinephric abscess includes antibiotics therapy with concurrent percutaneous drainage if necessary.

Empiric antibiotics should initially be directed against gram-negative organisms and Staphylococcus aureus. The choice of empiric antibiotic also depends on the suspected organism. In patients with pyelonephritis and associated perinephric abscess, antibiotic therapy should target Enterobacteriaceae. In patients with Staphylococcus bacteremia with perinephric abscess, antibiotic therapy should be directed against the Staphylococcus.

Empiric therapy can be delayed for percutaneous drainage in a stable patient if drainage can be done immediately to identify the causative organism. Perinephric abscesses larger than 3 cm should be drained while abscesses smaller than 3 cm should be initially treated with an antibiotic. Percutaneous catheter drainage should be done if symptoms and radiographic abnormality persist after several days of appropriate antibiotics treatment.

Duration of antibiotics should be at least 2 to 3 weeks. Duration of treatment should be adjusted to the timing of laboratory and clinical improvement and abscess resolution. Once drainage catheter is removed, patients with infections due to Enterobacteriaceae can be transitioned to oral antibiotics. Patients with S. bacteremia with perinephric abscess infection should complete the antibiotic course with intravenous antibiotics.

A urologist should be consulted when there is an obstruction that needs to be drained or when an abscess occurs in the presence of an anatomic abnormality, for example, obstructing kidney stones or vesicoureteral reflux or when the abscess is too large for antibiotic therapy and percutaneous drainage.

Response to treatment should be evaluated throughout medical therapy. Clinical symptoms and laboratory results to follow include flank pain, temperature, white blood cell count, CRP, and ESR. Symptoms and laboratory results should all improve with successful treatment.

Repeat imaging is indicated in patients with persistent symptoms and laboratory abnormalities. Repeat imaging is also indicated in cases where percutaneous catheter drainage is not progressing as expected. Ultrasound can be performed before discharge to assess for radiological improvement of an abscess.