The naso-orbito-ethmoid complex is a confluence of structures made up of the nasal bones, the nasal processes of the frontal bone, the frontal processes of the maxillae, the lacrimal bones, the laminae papyraceae of the ethmoid bone, and the sphenoid bone.

The facial skeleton is underpinned by four horizontal buttresses, and four paired vertical buttresses, which are columns of bone that provide the horizontal and vertical dimensions of the face, support for muscle action, and resistance to deformation with impact. The NOE complex incorporates the medial vertical and inferior and superior horizontal buttresses. Reconstructing these is the focus during surgical reduction and fixation of NOE fractures. It has been suggested that the pattern of NOE fractures clinically observed is the result of facial bone design; the nasal bones are thin and transmit force posteriorly to the lacrimal and ethmoid bones, which crumple and thus spare the contents of the cranial vault and orbits.

Sensory innervation to the NOE region occurs through the ophthalmic and maxillary branches of the trigeminal nerve. Motor innervation comes from the zygomatic branches of the facial nerve. The lacrimal nerve transmits sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers to the lacrimal gland; sympathetic fibers also provide innervation to Mueller's muscle, elevating the eyelid when stimulated.

Arterial supply to the NOE region originates from the internal and external carotid arteries. The facial and maxillary arteries are given off by the external carotid artery and perfuse the majority of the face. The ophthalmic artery, originating from the internal carotid artery, supplies blood to the orbital contents. The ophthalmic artery also gives rise to the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries, which perfuse the ethmoid sinuses and terminate in the nasal cavity. These arteries anastomose with the sphenopalatine artery to form Little's area, which is responsible for the majority of epistaxis.