# Continuing Education Activity

This activity reviews salient details regarding accessing tissue specimens via a puncture through the chest wall into the lung (percutaneous lung lesion biopsy). Percutaneous lung lesion biopsy (PLLB) is by far the most common indication for percutaneous needle biopsy of the deep tissues of the thorax. PLLB has one of the highest complication rates among procedures performed by radiologists, with complication rates of around 35%. This activity reviews the evaluation and treatment using a percutaneous lung biopsy and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in coordinating this procedure.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the indications and contraindications for PLLB.
- Apply best practices for patient preparation and procedural techniques for PLLB.
- Identify complications from and limitations of PLLB.
- Recognize clinical benefits that can be achieved by PLLB and how the interprofessional team can assist in procedure and post-procedure management.

# Introduction

Percutaneous lung lesion biopsy (PLLB) is a procedure that involves passing a needle percutaneously under image guidance (using thoracic computed tomography or CT scan). PLLB includes either needle aspiration  (TTNA) or biopsy (TTNB) to diagnose lung cancer which is by far the most common indication for percutaneous needle biopsy of the deep tissues of the thorax.

PLLB has one of the highest complication rates among procedures performed by radiologists, with complication rates of around 35%.

# Anatomy and Physiology

In the typical configuration, the lungs are divided into 5 lobes (3 on the right and 2 on the left) and are surrounded by serous membranes called pleural membranes. The parietal pleura is the inner lining of the thoracic wall, and the visceral pleura is the outer lining of the lungs. Between the membranes is a potential space or cavity called the pleural space that normally contains scant fluid, which allows the visceral pleural to slide along the parietal pleura while still maintaining surface tension (preserving contact) between the membranes. Without this surface tension, the lungs do not remain fully inflated.

The lungs have a dual blood supply by bronchial and pulmonary arteries. The aorta supplies the bronchial arteries, and the right ventricle supplies the pulmonary arteries. The most common configuration of the bronchial arteries is 2 to the left lung and 1 to the right. They bifurcate alongside the bronchi and bronchioles. The most common configuration of the pulmonary arteries is 1 pulmonary trunk with 1 primary artery per lung and 1 secondary artery per pulmonary lobe.

# Indications

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP, and the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO)) have created guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of lung cancer.

- Patients with a strong clinical suspicion of stage 1 or 2 lung cancer (based on risk factors and radiologic appearance) do not require a biopsy before surgery. A biopsy adds time, costs, and procedural risk and may not be needed for treatment decisions.

- A preoperative biopsy may be appropriate if a non-lung cancer diagnosis is strongly suspected that can be diagnosed by core biopsy or fine needle aspiration.

- A preoperative biopsy may be appropriate if an intraoperative diagnosis appears difficult or very risky. If a preoperative tissue diagnosis has not been obtained, then an intraoperative diagnosis (ie, wedge resection, needle biopsy) is necessary before lobectomy or pneumonectomy.

- Invasive mediastinal imaging is recommended before surgical resection for most patients with clinical stage 1 or 2 lung cancer.

- The preferred diagnostic strategy for an individual patient depends on the size and location of the tumor, the presence of mediastinal or distant disease, patient characteristics (such as pulmonary pathology and/or other significant comorbidities), and local experience and expertise.

- The least invasive biopsy with the highest yield is preferred as the first diagnostic study.

- Anatomic pulmonary resection is preferred for the majority of patients with NSCLC.

- Patients suspected of having the metastatic disease should have confirmation from one of the metastatic sites if feasible but should have a biopsy of the primary lung lesion or mediastinal lymph nodes if it is technically difficult or very risky to biopsy a metastatic site.

- Patients with metastatic disease should have the histologic subtype established with adequate tissue for molecular testing (including consideration for re-biopsy or plasma biopsy) to enable the best guidance for chemotherapy options.

- Decisions about the optimal diagnostic steps for suspected stage 1 to 3 lung cancer should be made by thoracic radiologists, interventional radiologists, interventional pulmonologists, and thoracic surgeons who devote a significant portion of their practice to thoracic oncology.

- A joint decision among a radiologist, a pulmonologist, and a medical or radiation oncologist is the desirable approach.

- In patients suspected of having small cell lung cancer (SCLC) based on radiographic and clinical findings, it is recommended that a pathologic diagnosis be confirmed by the least invasive method (sputum cytology, thoracentesis, fine needle aspiration (FNA), or transbronchial aspiration, as dictated by the patient’s presentation (Grade 1C).

- In patients suspected of having lung cancer who have a solitary extrathoracic site suspicious of metastasis, it is recommended that tissue confirmation of the metastatic site be obtained if an FNA or biopsy of the site is feasible (Grade 1C).

- In patients suspected of having lung cancer who have lesions in multiple distant sites suspected of metastases but in whom biopsy of a metastatic site would be technically difficult, it is recommended that diagnosis of the primary lung lesion be obtained by the least invasive method (Grade 1C).

- In patients suspected of having lung cancer with a peripheral lung nodule, when tissue diagnosis is required due to the uncertainty of diagnosis or poor surgical candidacy, radial EBUS is recommended as an adjunct imaging modality (Grade 1C). If radial EBUS is thought to be unlikely to achieve a diagnosis, then electromagnetic navigation guidance is recommended if the equipment and the expertise are available (Grade 1C). Remark: If electromagnetic navigation is not available, then percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is recommended.

- If specimens obtained initially are not adequate for histologic and molecular characterization, then pursuing a second biopsy is acceptable, given the importance of accurate tumor characterization.

- In the case of a small (less than 3 cm), solitary, peripheral lung lesion that is suspicious for lung cancer in a patient who appears to have early-stage disease and is a surgical candidate, the diagnostic dilemma generally centers around whether it is necessary to obtain a biopsy specimen to confirm the diagnosis of cancer before surgical resection is carried out. When the lesion is moderate to highly suspicious for lung cancer, surgical excision performed via thoracoscopy is the most definitive method of establishing a diagnosis and determining treatment. In nodules with an indeterminate likelihood of malignancy, sampling via percutaneous lung lesion biopsy or bronchoscopy with or without guidance technology (radial EBUS or electromagnetic navigation) may be considered.

The 2022 update of NCCN recommends that molecular testing for mutations (such as BRAF and EGFR mutations) be performed using sufficient tissue samples from lung biopsies, particularly in patients with advanced or metastatic non-small lung cancer, to allow for targeted therapy or immunotherapy.

# Contraindications

There are several relative contraindications for lung biopsy. Proceeding to biopsy without taking special precautions is not advisable for several pulmonary, sedation, bleeding, and other risks.

**General Limitations**

- Uncooperative patients

- Pulmonary hypertension (as determined on CT or better by right heart catheterization)

- Respiratory failure requiring invasive or non-Invasive mechanical ventilation

- Severe hypoxic respiratory failure requiring Oxygen supplementation

- Severe bullous emphysema

- Extensive pleural disease

- Contralateral pneumonectomy

- End-stage pulmonary fibrosis

- Severe impairment of diffusion capacity DLCO <35% of predicted

- Recurrent cough (cough suppressants should be prescribed)

- Advanced age (>76 years) with interstitial lung disease

- Uncorrectable coagulopathy

**Contraindications to Sedation**

Determination of periprocedural anesthesia risk is institution-dependent. Many hospitals require physicians to assess the patient using the American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) Physical Classification System and a Mallampati score. The ASA in 2014 provided greater detail to the classification regarding what constitutes a threat to life (class 4). Symptomatic CHF, sepsis, and myocardial infarction or stroke within three months constitute class 4 disease. In general, an uncontrolled or worsening neurologic, respiratory, cardiac, hematologic, or renal situation can qualify as a threat to life.

If the patient is ASA class 4 or higher, has unstable risk factors not qualifying as ASA class 4, and/or has any other anesthetic risk factors (such as a "difficult" airway), then some institutions and authors recommend or even require that the patient should have anesthesiology and/or other clinical subspecialist consultation prior even to otherwise "low risk" sedation procedures (Cohn S, ed. Perioperative Medicine. London: Springer-Verlag; 2011).

This consultation determines whether the risk factor is modifiable/able to be made stable and/or whether extra help should be available during the procedure. It is suboptimal patient care for the radiologist to discover risk factors the day of the procedure and/or to proceed with the biopsy out of the desire to "just get it over with." Patients with difficult airways or low threshold for sequelae of pneumothorax may need to have extra equipment and medications available in the room and/or healthcare personnel made available before the procedure to assist with complications.

**Bleeding Risks**

Standards of practice recommendations for the cessation of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications for interventional radiology procedures are categorized based on hemorrhage risks from level 1 to level 3. Percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is classified as a level 2 procedure. An INR of no more than 1.5 and a platelet count of at least 50,000 cells/microliter are recommended for such procedures. The same guidelines offer specific criteria for the cessation of antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications for level 2 procedures.

In the Johns Hopkins Surgical Risk Classification System, which is based primarily on the potential need for blood replacement, percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is considered a category 2 procedure (blood loss up to 500 cc) on a scale of 1-4. This is equivalent in risk to laparoscopic cholecystectomy and inguinal hernia repair. Both of these procedures are almost always performed with the aid of an anesthesiologist or certified registered nurse anesthetist present who can help with hemodynamic correction, as well as with airway maintenance and analgesia. A rapid large pneumothorax can cause a degree of chest pain similar to that of a heart attack or aortic dissection. Some lesions can be anticipated to be highly vascular, such as renal cell carcinoma or melanoma metastasis.

There may be no more reasonable alternative than percutaneous lung lesion biopsy for the next step in a patient's management despite one of the above contraindications. A patient may have a poor cardiopulmonary function that would be more likely to lead to death during surgery than during pneumothorax, pulmonary hemorrhage, or other complications from a lung biopsy.

The diagnosis of cancer may be considered too tenuous in the mind of the oncologist that treatment with radiation or chemotherapy would be considered unacceptable without tissue confirmation. In these circumstances, as suggested by the language of the NCCN and ACCP guidelines, it is the responsibility of a team of physicians (primary care, oncology, surgery, pulmonology, etc.) to work together to optimize the patient (e.g., respiratory function, blood pressure, glucose level, coagulation ability), to be ready to assist immediately for percutaneous lung lesion biopsy complications and to set expectations for the patient.

**Other**

The reality of percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is that it is often performed on highly mobile targets without the use of real-time imaging guidance. In this setting, a "noncooperative" patient (i.e., a person who cannot lie still or breathe in a controlled fashion for the time needed to perform the biopsy) is a major contraindication to continuing with the procedure.

# Equipment

Whereas some hospitals have machines that offer continuous CT fluoroscopy that enables the radiologist to watch the needle while advancing it in real-time (while radiating their own hand), many do not.

**Patient and Room Set-Up**

All patients should be outfitted with the following (at a minimum):

- A monitor that can detect blood pressure, cardiac rhythm, oxygen saturation, carbon dioxide waveforms

- A working intravenous (IV) line

- These are necessary because of (1) the rare but occasionally dramatic occurrence of vasovagal episodes that require immediate sedation or delivery of medications without interrupting the procedure or moving the patient, and (2) lung biopsy patients often have serious coexistent medical problems, such as heart disease, that may need emergency medication.

The following should be available:

- Oxygen

- Suction equipment

- Artificial airway and intubation equipment

- A bag valve mask

- A resuscitation cart

Other equipment for handling a pneumothorax should include the following:

- Needle for Seldinger or trocar technique of chest tube introduction

- Chest tubes with or without a guidewire (4 French is small enough to evacuate the air, while 14 French may be needed to evacuate thick blood); a valved tube is useful (one can be created with a stopcock)

- Heimlich valve for emergent treatment of tension pneumothorax

- Wall suction

- Chest drainage system for long-term treatment of pneumothorax/hydrothorax/hemothorax

- Connecting stopcocks and tubing

**Use of Intravenous Contrast**

For lesion localization, a non-enhanced CT alone is usually sufficient because the difference in density between the lung and nodule serves as natural contrast. Occasionally, intravenous contrast agent administration may be required during the procedure, such as to define vascular structures in the anticipated needle path or mediastinal structures.

# Preparation

The Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) guidelines address preparation for percutaneous lung lesion biopsy and other aspects of patient care in PLLB.

Whereas some lesions are so apical that they do not move with respiration or are so large that they are nearly impossible to miss despite respiratory excursion, many lesions in the 1 to 2 cm range near the diaphragm may take more than 20 minutes of frustrating effort and multiple chest wall punctures attempting to align the biopsy needle with the target lesion before entering the lung.

CT images for percutaneous lung lesion biopsy are usually only available as axial slices, and the CT machine often only images a 1 cm or so thick slab of tissue. A lesion near the diaphragm may easily move craniocaudal 4 to 5 cm throughout a standard breath. Just asking the patient to "hold your breath" may not succeed. Even after pinpointing the small lesion within the slab of tissue and then inserting the needle at that level, the patient would need the opportunity to regain his breath to hold it again at the time of the needle thrust into the lung. Then the next time the patient holds his breath, he may have moved his torso or diaphragm differently enough that the lesion is no longer visible or that it is visible but a rib, fissure, or diaphragm is now in the line of the site, precluding safe entry. If a new skin entry site is then selected to account for the change, then the patient, not knowing what to do to aid the radiologist, may revert to the first breath hold position on the subsequent breath.

This process is made all the more complicated if the patient is sedated. The success or failure of the procedure may devolve into more a matter of chance than of logic or planning while striving for the moment when the needle is properly aligned to have a high probability of striking the lesion on the first thrust. Lesions with a higher technical challenge can be addressed in the following ways:

- Training the patient to breathe in a controlled fashion

- Positioning the patient to reduce the likelihood of motion and post-procedure air leak

- Choosing a target with the most desirable features

**The Patient is a Partner in Promoting a Successful Biopsy**

More so than for other types of image-guided biopsies (in which there is neither a biopsy target that moves faster than the imaging machine nor a moderate risk of short-term hospitalization), it may be important before the day of the procedure to spend time explaining the usual biopsy experience to the patient and even simulating the experience.

Each patient is slightly different in their ability to follow instructions and hold a given position. Patients sent for lung biopsies are often debilitated, dyspneic, arthritic, hard of hearing, and sleep-deprived. Holding the same amount of air in the lungs on command is a feat that usually takes practice, even for healthy, highly intelligent persons. There are no known clinical trials that demonstrate that one technique to facilitate consistent breath holds is superior.

Nevertheless, emphasizing to the patient their role in contributing to a successful procedure and having the patient practice breath-holding and prolonged lying in the planned biopsy position theoretically will improve the chance of a successful outcome.

Patients dependent on 100% oxygen infusion, tracheostomies, phobias (such as lying partially prone), or additional factors that would otherwise prevent successful percutaneous lung lesion biopsy can be trained to turn the moving target into a stationary target. Different methods work better for different patients, and a detailed discussion of these methods is beyond the scope of this article.

**Patient Position Effects**

Some recommend placing the patient in a lateral decubitus position to reduce the risk of iatrogenic pneumothorax. Another position that can be used as an alternative is supine or prone positioning.

Patients are more comfortable with their arms at their sides. All positions should seek to eliminate cervical or other joint strain, pressure on "pressure points," and dyspnea, as these are problems that will result in patient motion increasing procedure duration and risks.

**Choice of Target Lesion****(in the setting of more than one potential target)**

Size is often not the most important factor in selecting a target. A 1 cm pleura-based lesion may be safely directly accessed in the upper lung in a cooperative patient because the upper lung moves little with respiration. However, even a 1 cm lesion would be an undesirable target for a direct puncture in the lower lung because of the high likelihood of respiratory misregistration either at the moment of initial pleural puncture or at some point during obtaining subsequent samples.

A large (in the craniocaudal dimension) lesion that either abuts the pleura or is visually distinct from but has adjacent airspace opacification extending to the pleura, demonstrated on prior PET-CT to be hypermetabolic is the ideal lesion for percutaneous lung lesion biopsy. The size improves the chance of striking the target. The craniocaudal lesion size is more important than other lesion dimensions (especially if the procedure is performed using a machine that does not have real-time CT fluoroscopy), as that is the dimension that will determine how likely it will be to keep the lesion in the field of view on the imaging monitor during the procedure. A peripheral location in the thorax reduces the chance of striking larger vessels and the chance for needle drift/inadvertent redirection during insertion. The ability to avoid aerated lung on entry diminishes the odds of pneumothorax. A higher metabolic activity increases the chance that viable abnormal tissue will be obtained.

When a lesion large in the craniocaudal dimension is not available as a target, the next most ideal location is one that neither abuts the pleura nor is central (allowing room for needle redirection after a possible inadvertent initial pleural puncture without withdrawing the needle through the pleura but avoiding proximity to larger central vessels).

The most mobile part of the lung is peridiaphragmatic. The part of the lung most challenging to expand after a pneumothorax is the lung apex. A lesion in the upper region of the lower lobe is preferable to peridiaphragmatic and apical lesions because this part of the lung moves little with respiration and because the lower lobe can undergo compression with gravity in the supine position after the procedure to prevent or reduce a pleural air leak.

In a patient with multiple lesions and prior invasive thoracic procedure, the side on which prior surgery was performed should be selected for biopsy. Pleural adherence can increase due to scarring and reduce the chance of a pneumothorax. Puncturing via the thoracotomy scar itself should be avoided, however, because the hard tissue can interfere with needle manipulation.

It cannot be stressed enough that the morphology of the area of concern is a key feature when contemplating lung biopsy. Benign round atelectasis or even "standard non-round atelectasis" can fit all of the criteria of the optimal "lesion" described above, including being very hypermetabolic on PET, as could a region of parenchymal fibrosis. However, biopsying such abnormalities, with or without an associated mass, rarely yields clinical benefit. Only true nodules/masses will likely yield any useful material on pathology review.

Some scenarios have a probability of failing (with or without the need for emergent surgery) that is more probable than not (i.e., risks outweigh likely benefits).

- Small, immediately subpleural lesions make it difficult to time needle entry to pierce these lesions on the first attempt and keep the introducer needle in the lesion throughout obtaining multiple samples (increasing risk for pneumothorax).

- Small lesions touching the heart are usually unsuitable for biopsy. Cardiac motion on the lesion increases the risk of missing the lesion while placing the patient at high risk for pericardial/myocardial puncture followed by tamponade and death.

- Nodules along fissures (particularly in the superior portion of the right middle lobe just under the minor dome-shaped fissure) can be difficult to target without puncturing a second lobe (thereby making two additional pleural punctures inadvertently) even with the benefit of an angled CT gantry.

- Small lesions deep in the costophrenic sulci move a great deal. An inadvertent puncture of the diaphragm (which can be very painful even if there is no associated puncture of an immediately underlying structure such as the liver or spleen) is a likely sequela.

- Ground glass or largely necrotic lesions where the viable cellular yield is likely to be too low from needle sampling to enable a diagnosis. The smaller the lesion, the more unlikely it is to yield diagnostic material. Nodules as small as 4 mm have yielded enough tissue for a pathologist to feel confident in diagnosing nonsmall cell lung cancer, but size in and of itself is not a reliable indicator of success.

In these situations, either planning to offer thoracoscopic biopsy post-percutaneous lung lesion biopsy the same day or next day service or proceeding straight to thoracoscopic sampling with all its inherent risks is the proper route.

Before the procedure is started, the following steps should be taken:

- Review of patient allergies, medications, sedation plan, and laboratory tests (such as platelet count and coagulation profile).

- Review the patient's imaging and confirm the size and site of the guided sampling intended for the diagnosis.

- A preprocedural time-out is obtained, including confirmation of the lesion's location.

# Technique or Treatment

A coaxial technique of inserting a thinner sampling needle through a larger needle placed at the edge of the lesion has several theoretical advantages over tandem punctures. Several samples can be obtained without re-puncturing the pleura (until the introducer needle lumen develops a high degree of friction from the accumulation of coagulated blood). This theoretically improves speed and reduces pain and puncture-related complications.

The depth of the sampling passes can be planned, and the stiffer, larger needle can enable additional torque and better steerability during manipulation. If a pneumothorax does occur, the introducer needle often will remain lodged in the lesion, allowing further samples to be obtained. A properly selected larger-bore needle can be used to obtain a biopsy gun specimen, insert a marker into the lesion for thoracoscopic resection or radiation therapy, or deliver a substance to caulk the tract (discussed below).

Each puncture site has a certain pressure above which air will leak into the pleural space. Performing a single puncture decreases the chances that one will leak at a relatively low intrathoracic pressure and cause a pneumothorax—most small puncture wounds to the pleura leak at 10 to 40 mm Hg. A coughing fit will generate pressure over 100 mm Hg, due to which all non-patched and probably most patched punctures would leak. Visible tearing of the pleura allows leakage at a pressure of 1 to 2 mm Hg.

A single puncture non-coaxial approach should be considered for high-risk circumstances, such as for a transcaval or trans brachiocephalic vein approach for lesions known to have hemorrhaged or suspected to be at high risk for hemorrhage and lesions with an associated prominent internal air-bronchogram in which there is an increased risk of air embolism.

**Breath Holding**

Respiratory volume should remain within the range of normal, quiet breathing. A puncture during a deep inspiration or expiration results in tension on the needle when the lung returns to its more normal status. This theoretically places greater stress on the pleura at the puncture site increasing the likelihood of a pleural tear. During sampling, care should be made not to create tension on the needle; ideally, the patient holds their breath while the radiologist is sampling. Patients are better able to hold a breath in inspiration than in expiration. Once a person can no longer hold their breath, they tend to exhale if inspiration is held but to inhale if an expiration is held. The latter is more likely to cause an air embolism.

**Precautions**

**Minimizing the Time that a Needle is Crossing the Pleural Space**

If the needle is allowed to move with the motion of normal respiration, usually, no harm occurs. However, as the duration of the procedure increases, patients are eventually bound to move due to discomfort, cough, or otherwise, placing themselves at risk from needle motion. Delays, such as prolonging time to review the adequacy of tissue samples, from imaging to detect clinically silent intrathoracic complications, or from personnel in the room not having proper radiation safety equipment, should be reduced to the absolute minimum.

**Cough Suppression**

Forceful coughing is likely to tear the pleura. Dramatic negative intrathoracic pressure occurs during inspiration before a cough, and high positive intrathoracic pressure occurs during a cough. This places the patient at risk for pneumothorax and air embolism should the needle be uncovered with the tip in a vein. Procedure progress is halted during coughing episodes. Cough suppressant medication should be administered, or the irritant addressed. Otherwise, the procedure should be terminated.

**Lung/Pleural Patch Technique**

This technique entails caulking the pleural defect via the introducer needle after the procedure to prevent puncture site gas leakage. Different materials may be used, but the traditional approach involves using the patient's blood. A blood patch is unnecessary if the aerated lung has not been violated. A blood patch is theoretically less valuable if multiple punctures have been made or pneumothorax has already developed. While the technique has been effective in lung biopsy models and actual patients, no randomized trials comparing different types of blood patch techniques have been performed.

**Post Procedure**

After blood patch placement and needle removal, some physicians roll the patient into the puncture-site-down position. This initial repositioning event should be performed by as many assistants as necessary to ensure that the patient remains passive and does not strain or perform a Valsalva maneuver. A forceful Valsalva maneuver is less likely if the roll is performed while the patient lets their breath out. The needle removal and the rolling should take no more than a few seconds. Puncture-site-down positioning was first suggested by Zidulka in 1982.

It may work from a physiologic and mechanical mechanism. Physiologically, it makes the periphery of the dependent lung atelectatic, which should reduce local aeration. Mechanically, it tamponades the tract by creating visceral-parietal pleural apposition.

It is theoretically beneficial to prevent all activities that may elevate intrathoracic pressure, such as any type of breathing requiring the use of accessory muscles (e.g., laughing) or straining (e.g., sitting up in bed without assistance).

Oxygen saturation should be monitored. Supplemental oxygen interferes with this method of following the clinical impact of a small pneumothorax, so it should only be used when necessary. If a pneumothorax is known to be present, oxygen may be administered to facilitate the resorption of the existing pneumothorax. The premise for how this may help is that a higher partial pressure of oxygen speeds the diffusive resorption of trapped pleural air, which is comprised mainly of nitrogen (and carbon dioxide).

**Follow-up Imaging**

No chest radiograph must be obtained immediately after the biopsy unless symptoms or a falling oxygen saturation level suggest pneumothorax is present. Despite the best intentions of the technologist, the performance of a radiograph will probably entail at least some degree of patient straining or Valsalva maneuver. Oxygen saturation levels provide enough clinical information to delay the acquisition of the first image.

On the other hand, if an initially subclinical problem does exist, it is best to know about it before discharge. After several hours in the puncture-site-down position, the patient should be permitted to test activities similar to those they would perform at home. A chest X-ray is then obtained. Upright expiratory images in at least two views (e.g., frontal and oblique) provide the most sensitive method for detecting intrapleural air via plain film radiography. In the absence of serial images, new or continuing leakage cannot be distinguished from leakage that occurred immediately after the procedure and then stopped. Thus, follow-up imaging should be done after the initial discovery of pneumothorax to determine leak stability.

**Patient Discharge**

The decision to discharge a patient, as opposed to admitting for observation or treatment, depends on the patient's condition, home situation, and home location. In asymptomatic patients, the safety of a shortened observation approach (2 hours postprocedure) without needing a chest X-ray has been reported previously.

- Can tolerate a larger pneumothorax,

- Have a responsible family member who will be staying the night with the patient, and

- Lives within range of transport to a medical facility or arrival of an ambulance within 10 to 15 minutes of symptom onset.

# Complications

Percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is among the highest complication-rate procedures performed by radiologists. Some standard practices suggested thresholds of up to 45% and 20% for pneumothorax rate and a chest tube insertion rate, respectively, before the trigger of a departmental review for creating a plan to lower the frequency of these complications.

The risks increased when PLLB is performed on persons who are obese, elderly, highly emphysematous, and/or are ASA category 4 patients (e.g., patients who are unable to walk up a flight of stairs). Pre-notification of consultant medical specialists (e.g., an interventional pulmonologist or respiratory therapist) to be available on call at the first sign of trouble is prudent in cases where patients have these risk factors.

Deaths can occur following PLLB, usually secondary to hemorrhage (rate of about 1%), air embolism (rate of less than 1%), cardiac event, or tension pneumothorax.

**Pneumothorax**

Pneumothorax is a common complication of PLLB (approximately 1 in 4 will develop it) and much less common to require a chest tube (between 0 to 15%).

- Long lesion depth (≥3 cm)

- Small lesion size (≤4 cm)

- Lesions without pleural contact

- Emphysema

- Use of large needle gauge (≥18G)

- Crossing fissures or bulla

- Multiple pleural punctures

- Limited operator's experience

Pain from pneumothorax is not a consistent phenomenon across patients. Patients often experience pleuritic chest pain with a new, even relatively small pneumothorax, although some patients are asymptomatic until a fairly impressive pneumothorax develops. The size of pneumothorax necessary to cause shortness of breath is highly variable and depends on the underlying condition of the lungs.

If a pneumothorax occurs before the completion of tissue retrieval, the lung may need to be reinflated as the next step. Even notwithstanding a patient's clinical deterioration, if the no-longer-fixed-in-position lung does not move predictably, it may be impossible to anticipate the target lesion's future position at the time of the next needle advancement. Also, the lung only may be able to be balloted, rather than punctured, by needle thrusts.

If air leakage is discovered during procedure follow-up, a minimum additional hour of puncture site-down positioning should be performed. Once imaging has shown that leakage has stopped, a period of upright positioning should be tried, followed either by discharge if no leakage occurs or repeating the cycle if leakage recurs. The cycle continues until the patient:

- Can be discharged or,

- Requires pleural drainage due to:

- Symptoms
- A pneumothorax exceeding about 30%
- A recurring pattern of leakage

Visual-only estimates of percent pneumothorax tend to be unreliable. The actual percent stenosis should be estimated using calipers and an evidence-based formula.

Aspiration only of a pneumothorax may prevent chest tube placement in at least some patients with a substantial pneumothorax. Small gauge catheters (as small as 4 French) can be used and inserted either via Seldinger or the trocar technique. Alternatively, a large gauge needle (e.g., a Hawkins-Akins needle, which is a non-sharp needle with a sharp trocar) can be used.

A pneumothorax can be evacuated most quickly via wall suction. Aspiration can also be used intentionally only to re-expand the lung temporarily (such as in the case of posterior-approach percutaneous lung lesion biopsy), thereby allowing for a catheter to be placed under less emergent conditions in a separate predetermined location for long-term use. Other studies suggested using a saline tract sealant to decrease the need for chest drain insertion.

While most pneumothoraxes occur immediately after PLLB, some occur after discharge, are delayed for up to two weeks, and require significantly more chest tube insertion.

Delayed pneumothorax is more common in patients with upper lobe location and multiple punctures of small lesions. It is recommended that patients with biopsy-related pneumothorax should avoid engaging in activities such as scuba diving or air travel for at least 24 hours following the biopsy (some earlier recommendations are for at least 72 hours post-biopsy).

**Hemoptysis and Pulmonary Hemorrhage**

Pulmonary hemorrhage is a common complication of PLLB, with an estimated rate of up to 60%.

Hemptoysis is more likely to occur if puncturing a pulmonary cavity or enlarged bronchus, which are both associated with bronchial artery hypertrophy. Unusually bloody specimens and the formation of ground-glass attenuation in the lung prognosis the possible development of clinically significant hemoptysis.

If these findings develop, then less aggressive biopsy manipulations are recommended. Oxygen should be applied. The patient can be placed biopsy side down to prevent blood from dripping through the bronchi into the other lung. Intubation, if necessary, should be performed with a dual-lumen tube. If these maneuvers do not work, then consultation should be obtained for bronchoscopic tamponade of the lobar bronchus. Other therapies to consider include bronchial artery embolization, pulmonary artery embolization, and surgery.

**Air Embolism**

Air embolism is very rare, affecting <1 % of PLLB. It may occur from inspiration by the patient when the trocar has been removed from a needle tip located in a pulmonary vein and/or 2) iatrogenic creation of a bronchovenous fistula. The patient may become unconscious, have signs of a stroke, or undergo a seizure; only one-third of these cases have significant morbidity or mortality.

The patient should be placed in the left lateral decubitus Trendelenburg position to prevent air from exiting the left atrium before dissolving. Oxygen should be given to facilitate the absorption of nitrogen in the bubbles.

Intubation and positive pressure ventilation may worsen venous air introduction in a bronchopleural fistula. Although most hospitals do not have decompression/hyperbaric chambers, this would be an appropriate time to use if one were available.

# Clinical Significance

The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in the United States cites lung cancer as, by far, the most common cause of cancer death in the United States. Multiple society guidelines recommend that cancer treatment decisions be based on tumor histologic type and molecular markers. Although exceptions can be made, tissue diagnosis is the general rule before both curative and palliative therapy.

However, just as it is good medical care for physicians to see patients as persons and not as diseases, clinicians need to understand that for tissue diagnosis to be obtained, biopsy procedures often require special considerations regarding the person undergoing the biopsy. The patient may not be able to lie still long enough to create an accessible avenue for the needle, may not be able to hold their breath consistently sufficient to enable access to the moving lesion given limitations in a hospital's CT fluoroscopy equipment, or may warrant specialist consultation to optimize pre-biopsy and post-biopsy care to prevent prolonged hospitalization or even severe permanent injury secondary to complications.

For these reasons and because most experienced interventional radiologists can reach a target of at least 5 mm diameter and less than 15 mm depth, the commonly asked question "Can the lesion be biopsied?" is generally inappropriate. The following three questions are more appropriate to decision-making for patient care:

- "Has the lesion reached a size allowing a reasonable chance at a tissue yield, or is it more reasonable to wait to allow the lesion to grow in anticipation that a diagnosis will still likely be achieved before potential metastasis?"

- "Assuming that biopsy is now appropriate, how should the physicians and patient work together to optimize the patient medically and psychologically to improve the likelihood of a safe and successful biopsy?"

- "Anticipating that the biopsy attempt may not yield adequate tissue, what will plan B be?"

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

A percutaneous lung lesion biopsy is usually performed by a radiologist, but complete patient care also involves nurses and radiologic technologists and may involve surgeons, pulmonologists, and other medical specialists assisting the surgeon in the preparation and education of the patient. During and after the procedure, the specialty-trained radiology nurse assists the radiologist and monitors the patient reporting any destabilization of vital signs. The nurse should also assist in providing coordinated patient education. A team approach to the care of these patients will lead to the best outcomes. [Level 5]

**Outcomes**

Percutaneous lung lesion biopsies have a high likelihood of diagnostic success and, in most cases, are without complication. However, a sizeable number of patients will experience one or more complications or failure of the procedure. Hence, patients should be educated in advance about such possibilities and ways to help reduce them, and patients must be closely monitored during and after the procedure.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

The role of the nurse is essential after the procedure. Because there is always a risk for a hemothorax or pneumothorax, the nurse should assess the pulmonary status in the recovery room. In addition, if there is a Heimlich valve or a drainage tube, the nurse should ensure that it is patent and functioning. Any drainage should be recorded. The nurse should examine the chest x-ray report to determine if a pneumothorax is present.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Monitoring

Vitals signs, including pulse oximetry, should be monitored for several hours after the procedure. The chest should be auscultated, and output from any chest drain should be recorded. Patients discharged with a Heimlich valve should be educated on how to maintain it and when to return to the surgeon.