Intentional or accidental administration of excessive insulin lispro outside of the body's needs will result in hypoglycemia.

Mild to moderate hypoglycemia is evidenced by a blood glucose level less than 70 with or without the following symptoms: irritability, tachycardia, shakiness, lightheadedness or dizziness, anxiety or nervousness, double or blurred vision, mild confusion, sweating, and clamminess. Mild to moderate hypoglycemia can be treated with oral intake of 15 grams of carbohydrate, such as 4 ounces of fruit juice, 8 ounces of milk, or a piece of hard candy. Symptoms should improve within 15 minutes, but if they do not and blood glucose is still less than 70, another 15 grams of carbohydrate should be taken. This cycle of eating 15 grams of carbohydrate, waiting 15 minutes, and then reassessing symptoms and blood glucose level can be repeated approximately three times before the patient should seek medical attention.

Severe hypoglycemia is evidenced by more serious symptoms including concentration problems, seizures, unconsciousness, and even death. Patients with severe hypoglycemia require administration of glucagon, which is the principal rapid-acting counterregulatory hormone that functions to raise the concentration of glucose in the bloodstream. Patients on insulin should have a glucagon kit prescribed by their physician. The pediatric dosage is 0.02 to 0.03 mg/kg per dose for patients weighing less than 20 kilograms. The dose can be administered every 15 minutes as needed. For pediatric patients greater than 20 kilograms and adults, the dosage is 1 milligram, and can also be administered every 15 minutes as needed. If a patient requires glucagon, they should be taken to a medical facility without delay. If they fail to respond to glucagon, IV dextrose should be started immediately.