- Chikungunya fever is an arthropod-borne alphavirus from the Togaviridae family endemic to Asia that is transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes and has caused serious worldwide outbreaks with a preference for tropical and sub-tropical climates.

- The Aedes mosquito vectors are also responsible for transmitting Dengue virus and Zika virus, so co-infection is possible.

- Acute clinical manifestations of high fevers, polyarthralgia, and maculopapular rash begin after a 3- to 7-day incubation accompanied by a headache and myalgia. Ocular, neurological, and fetal manifestations have been found in rare instances.

- Chronic arthritis is the most common and severe complication leading to specialist rheumatologic care.

- Diagnosis is obtained with the above clinical findings accompanied by a history of recent travel to an affected area or exposure to mosquito bites. Diagnosis confirmation is performed with RT-PCR or viral serology. The CDC recommends that all patients with exposure and symptoms be tested for CHIKV, DENV, and ZK.

- Supportive care with rest, hydration, and analgesic agents is the mainstay treatment. Aspirin and NSAIDs should be avoided initially for risk of co-infection with DENV. Chronic manifestations can be treated with steroids and disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs). No antivirals or vaccines are commonly used.

- Prevention with avoidance of mosquito bites is paramount. DEET, clothing with coverage, and mosquito nets. Insecticides have been used as a public health measure, but resistance is a factor of increased concern.

- Chikungunya fever is a reportable disease to the CDC.