The right ventricle (RV) receives its arterial blood supply primarily from the right coronary artery (RCA), which arises from the right coronary cusp of the aorta. The division produces the conus artery, which supplies blood flow to the right ventricular outflow tract. The RCA from the second division also supplies the sinoatrial node (SA). Coursing in the atrioventricular groove, the RCA then gives off multiple, small branches to supply the anterior RV before dividing terminally into the acute marginal branch (AM) that runs anteriorly along the diaphragm and the posterior descending artery (PDA) that runs posteriorly. The PDA also supplies the atrioventricular node (AV) in 90% of patients, with a branch of the left circumflex artery providing flow in the remainder of patients. The PDA supplies the inferior wall of both ventricles and is a terminal branch of the RCA in 85% of patients but may arise from the left coronary circulation in 15% of the population.

The primary effects of RV ischemia and infarction result from decreased RV contractility. This leads to a reduction in blood flow from the venous system to the lungs and finally to the left side of the heart. The clinical signs of this are increased right-sided heart pressures, increased pulmonary artery (PA) systolic pressures, and decreased left ventricular preload. Symptoms may include peripheral edema, especially distention of the jugular vein, hypoxemia, and hypotension.

Additionally, as the RV dilates, the motion and function of the interventricular septum are altered. If the RV is dilated secondary to overload or if the septal myocardium is jeopardized by simultaneous left ventricle (LV) ischemia, the symptoms of hypotension and cardiac failure may be pronounced. If the septum shifts leftward during diastole, it impedes left ventricular filling, and as a result, cardiac output is decreased. This is termed loss of biventricular interdependence.