MGD patients can present asymptomatically or be severely bothered to the extent that their daily routine activities are affected. The common symptoms resemble an evaporative dry eye and include itching, burning sensation, redness, irritation, soreness of eyes, eyelid edema, foreign body sensation, watering, or blurred vision.

All the patients presenting to an eye clinic should ideally be examined by gland expression by applying moderate pressure over the lower lid. This will help in detecting many asymptomatic MGD patients. Evaluation among symptomatic patients should include checking the lid morphology, meibomian gland mass, expressibility from the meibomian gland openings, tear film volume, tear film break up time (TBUT), Schirmer's test, fluorescein clearance test, conjunctival and corneal staining.

- Lid morphology – look for lid margin irregularity, pouting or plugging of the orifices, vascular engorgement, changes in the mucocutaneous junction.

- Expressibility from the meibomian gland openings – usually, all gland openings should be patent and clear fluid expressed out of the openings.

- Tear film volume – tear meniscus should be >10 mm

- Tear film break up time (TBUT) – 15 to 45 seconds normal, 10 to 15 seconds borderline, 10 seconds abnormal

- Tear osmolarity – hyperosmolar tears are irritative to the ocular surface

- Schirmer's test – Whatman number 41 strips are used. These are 5 mm wide and 35 mm long. Values of 15 mm are normal, 5 to 10 mm are borderline, and <5 mm are abnormal

- Meibography – to check meibomian gland mass, gland loss, shortening, or any irregularities

- Fluorescein clearance test detects residual fluorescein after 15 minutes of instilling a drop of 2% fluorescein in the culdesac.

- Conjunctival and corneal staining – Normally, the conjunctiva and cornea should be clear to Sodium fluoride or lissamine green or rose Bengal staining, with no lid wiper epitheliopathy.

Additional tests that help understand meibomian glands' morphology and functioning include meibometry, meibography, interferometry to check the tear film lipid layer thickness and spread time, and flow cytometry for biomarkers.

Tapie described Meibography in 1977, who used UV woods light to fluoresce the meibomian ducts on biomicroscopy and infrared light to illuminate the meibomian glands.

Results of meibography are measured in the form of the meiboscore or meibograde method. The meiboscore for each eye's upper and lower lids is calculated separately and graded from 0 to 3; thus, a total score out of 6 is given for each eye.

- The lid has partial or missing glands

- The affected lid area is <33%

- The affected lid area is 33-66%

- The affected lid area is >66%

The meibograde method is the most comprehensive scoring system for evaluating meibomian gland morphology. The characteristics noted include gland distortion, gland shortening, and gland dropout.