Although there are currently no published recommendations for the standards in tracheostomy tube change, many institutions and hospitals have a local protocol or guideline in place to facilitate uneventful tube changes and improve outcomes.

The Global Tracheostomy Collaborative was formed in 2012 by Dr. David Robertson, an otolaryngologist from Harvard. Five ‘key drivers’ are identified to be critical in bringing about improvements in tracheostomy care: (I) multi-disciplinary care, (II) standardization of care, (III) broad staff education, (IV) patient and family involvement, and (V) entering and tracking data. Indeed, evidence shows that collaborative and coordinated tracheostomy care is achievable, implementable, and improves care.

On the other hand, it is recognized that tracheostomy care outcomes are better where there is a concerted effort between various parties, including patient, surgeon, primary physician, otolaryngologist, and interdisciplinary teams such as nurses and speech and language therapists.

In the U.K., the National Tracheostomy Safety Project is a nationwide initiative aimed at improving the care of patients with tracheostomy. Similar to their North American counterparts, the team dedicated to looking after patients with tracheostomy tubes comprise of otolaryngologists, anesthetists, chest physicians, specialist nurses, speech and language therapists, and respiratory therapists. There is increasing evidence that coordinated interprofessional teams influence the safety and quality of care delivered to patients with tracheostomy and their families.