A careful history and physical examination should be performed before performing a comprehensive psychiatric assessment. There are structured diagnostic screening tools that are used to assess personality disorders and specifically borderline personality disorder, for example, the Zanarini Rating Scale for borderline personality disorder.

**The DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria for Borderline Personality Disorder**

A pervasive pattern of instability of interpersonal relationships, of self-image, and affects as well as marked impulsivity beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts as indicated by five or more of the following:

- Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. Note: Do not include suicidal or self-mutilating behavior covered in criterion 5.

- A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships characterized by alternating between extremes of idealization and devaluation.

- Identity disturbance: Markedly and persistently unstable self-image or sense of self.

- Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-damaging, for example, spending, substance abuse, reckless driving, sex, binge eating, etc. Note: Do not include suicidal or self-mutilating behavior covered in criterion 5.

- Affective instability is caused by a marked reactivity of mood, for example, intense episodic dysphoria, anxiety, or irritability, usually lasting a few hours and rarely more than a few days.

- Chronic feelings of emptiness.

- Inappropriate, intense anger, or difficulty controlling anger, for example, frequent displays of temper, constant anger, recurrent physical fights.

- Transient paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms.