**Treatment of Chronic Primary Adrenal Insufficiency**

**1. Glucocorticoid replacement (one of the given regimens):**

- **Hydrocortisone**15 to 25 mg orally in two or three divided doses (the largest dose is taken early in the  morning; typically 10 mg upon awakening in the morning, 5 mg early afternoon, 2.5 mg late afternoon), or

- **Prednisone**5 mg (2.5 to 7.5 mg) orally at bedtime, or

- **Dexamethasone**0.75 mg (0.25 to 0.75 mg) orally at bedtime

- Monitor clinical symptoms and morning plasma ACTH as needed.

**2. Mineralocorticoid replacement:**

- **Fludrocortisone**0.1 mg (range: 0.05 to 0.2 mg) orally. Hydrocortisone 20 mg and prednisone 50 mg provide a mineralocorticoid effect that is almost equivalent to 0.1 mg of fludrocortisone. Therefore, fludrocortisone replacement (if needed) must be decreased accordingly. Dexamethasone, however, lacks a mineralocorticoid effect and would require a full dose of fludrocortisone.

- Liberal salt intake.

- Monitor supine and standing blood pressure as well as pulse, edema, serum potassium, and plasma renin activity

**3. Androgen replacement:**

- **Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)**initially 25 to 50 mg orally (only in women for psychological well-being, if needed, after optimal glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement).

**4. Patient education:**

- Educate the patient about the illness, how to manage stress, and inject dexamethasone or other glucocorticoids intramuscularly or subcutaneously.

**5. Emergency precautions:**

- Patients should have a medical alert bracelet/necklace, an emergency medical information card on their phone or inside their wallet, and prefilled syringes containing 4 mg of dexamethasone in 1 mL saline.

**6. Treatment of minor febrile illness or stress:**

- Increase glucocorticoid dose two to three times for the few days of illness. Do not change the mineralocorticoid dose (3x3 rule).

- The patient should contact the clinician if the condition worsens or persists for more than three days.

- No extra dose is required for most uncomplicated, outpatient dental procedures under local anesthesia.

- Glucocorticoid supplement for surgical stress:

- Minor: hydrocortisone 25 mg IV (or equivalent) on the day of the procedure

- Moderate: hydrocortisone 50 to 75 mg IV (or equivalent) on day of surgery and postoperative day 1

- Major: hydrocortisone 100 to 150 mg IV (or equivalent) in two or three divided doses on the day of surgery and postoperative days 1 and 2

**7. Emergency treatment of severe stress or trauma:**

- Each patient should have an injectable as well as vials of sterile 0.9% normal saline and syringes.

**Treatment of Adrenal Crisis**

**Measures to stabilize the patient:**

- Intravenous access with one or two large-gauge needles

- Laboratory analysis, including serum electrolytes, glucose, and routine measurement of plasma cortisol and ACTH.

- Infusion of 2 to 3 liters of isotonic saline or 5% dextrose in isotonic saline as urgently as possible. Periodic hemodynamic monitoring and measurement of serum electrolytes.

- Give hydrocortisone 100 mg intravenous bolus, followed by 50 mg intravenously every 6 hours (or 200 mg/24 hours as a continuous intravenous infusion for the first 24 hours). If hydrocortisone is unavailable, alternatives include prednisolone, prednisone, and dexamethasone.

- Correct any ongoing electrolyte abnormalities. Hyponatremia is often corrected by cortisol and volume repletion.

**Subacute measures after stabilization of the patient:**

- Intravenous isotonic saline infusion at a slower rate for the next 24 to 48 hours.

- Diagnosis and treatment of possible infectious precipitating causes of the adrenal crisis.

- If the patient does not have known adrenal insufficiency, a short ACTH stimulation test should establish the diagnosis and determine its type and cause.

- Tapering of parenteral glucocorticoid over 1 to 3 days to the oral glucocorticoid maintenance dose, if there are no ongoing contraindications.

- Initiating mineralocorticoid replacement with fludrocortisone, 0.1 mg by mouth daily after stopping the saline infusion.