Research has shown that simulation is a superior educational modality compared to passive methods such as didactic lectures for critical care conditions.

By utilizing telesimulation with teledebriefing, facilities which are lacking faculty resources may gain access to simulation education by the use of basic equipment and a simple Internet connection.

Implementing telesimulation into educational curriculum requires (at a minimum) resources that include (but are not limited to)

- Simulation equipment (ranging from simple procedural task trainers to high-fidelity mannequins)

- Telecommunication equipment that allows the capture and transmission of audio/visual data (can vary from a simple smartphone to full simulation audio/video software programs)

- Internet connection

- Software that has teleconferencing capabilities

In resource-poor/restricted areas, this concept is beneficial since it eliminates the time and distance barriers to the delivery of educational content.

The body of literature supporting the effectiveness of telesimulation is growing. Among these is a prospective, randomized crossover study that examined the effectiveness of telesimulation versus standard simulation in teaching medical students the management of critically ill patients. The study demonstrated no significant difference in evaluation scores (which assessed the learner's comprehension of the educational material delivered) between the two groups of medical students, nor in the favorability of teaching modality (telesimulation vs. standard simulation). The authors concluded that telesimulation could provide educational benefit to learners at off-site locations.