Mesna is available in 100 mg/ml injection, which can be administered as an IV infusion. It is also available as a 400 mg oral tablet.

Mesna is usually administered as an injection concurrently with cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide chemotherapy. If the physician deems it is still necessary after the initial dosage, an oral form (400 mg tablet) is usually administered 2 to 6 hours following subsequent therapy. Due to the strong adverse taste of oral mesna tablets, administering the tablet with juice or food is usually the recommendation due to the sulfur odor/taste. Patients are advised to drink at least 4 cups of liquid daily while taking mesna.

Dilute the volume of mesna injection in 5% dextrose injection, 5% dextrose, 0.45% sodium chloride injection, 0.9% sodium chloride injection, or lactated Ringer's Injection to obtain a final concentration of 20 mg/mL.

**American society of clinical oncology (ASCO) guidelines recommend following protocols for administering mesna.**

**Mesna dosing recommendations with standard-dose ifosfamide:**ASCO recommends that the daily dose of mesna be calculated to be equivalent to 60% of the total daily dose of ifosfamide, given as three bolus doses given 15 minutes before and four and eight hours after administration of each dose of ifosfamide when the ifosfamide dose is less than 2.5 g/m/day administered as a short infusion. When mesna is used with continuous ifosfamide infusion, it may be given as a bolus dose equivalent to 20% of the total ifosfamide dose, followed by a constant infusion of mesna equivalent to 40% of the ifosfamide dose, given for 12 to 24 hours after completion of the ifosfamide infusion.

**Mesna dosing recommendations with high-dose ifosfamide:**The efficacy of mesna for the prevention of urotoxicity with very high-dose ifosfamide (>2.5 g/m/day) has not been established. The half-life of ifosfamide is extended at higher doses. Consequently, prolonged mesna dosage regimens may be required for protection against urotoxicity. A higher concentration of ifosfamide (50 mg/mL) is incompatible with mesna and can decrease the stability of ifosfamide.

**Mesna dosing recommendations by the oral route:**ASCO recommends administering mesna as an IV bolus injection in a dose of 20% of the ifosfamide dose at the time of ifosfamide administration; mesna tablets are administered orally in a dosage equal to 40% of the ifosfamide dose at 2 and 6 hours following each dose of ifosfamide; the total daily dose of mesna is 100% of the ifosfamide dose; patients who vomit within 2 hours of taking oral mesna should repeat the dose or receive IV mesna; the dosing schedule should be repeated on each day that ifosfamide is administered.

**Mesna recommendations with cyclophosphamide:**Mesna plus saline diuresis or forced saline diuresis is advised to reduce the incidence of urotoxicity associated with high-dose cyclophosphamide. It is important to note that mesna injection should not be mixed with cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, carboplatin, and epirubicin. According to KDIGO (kidney disease improving global outcomes) guidelines, mesna should be administered if the cyclophosphamide dosage is considered high.

Studies have also shown mesna administration as a topical agent for chemically assisted dissection of recurrent and residual cholesteatoma, most commonly in pediatric patients.

Another study showed that epidural injection of mesna reduced pain following failed back surgery syndrome (FBSS).

**Use in Specific Patient Populations**

**Patients with Hepatic Impairment:**No clinical studies have been performed to assess the effect of hepatic impairment.

**Patients with Renal Impairment:**No clinical studies have been performed to assess the effect of renal impairment.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**As per the manufacturer's labeling information, it is considered the former FDA pregnancy category B medicine. Clinicians should also inform the risk associated with ifosfamide/cyclophosphamide therapy. According to ACOG, in addition to pretreatment fertility conservation counseling, sexually active young women should be informed about the risks of becoming pregnant during cancer treatment. Clinicians should also guide, and women should also receive counseling regarding effective contraception.

**Breastfeeding Considerations**: An essential consideration of mesna administration is the breastfeeding status of females of reproductive age.