Initial management of hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy) involves evaluating the underlying disease. Since there is no specific therapy for hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy), treatment is directed at the primary disorder. In most cases, treatment of the primary condition leads to the resolution of hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy).

Hyperviscosity syndrome secondary to hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy) can be treated with systemic corticosteroid and plasmapheresis.

For hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy) associated with IgG4-related disease, corticosteroids and rituximab are used as first-line therapy.

The efficacy of rituximab is better than corticosteroids. Approximately 95% of patients with hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal gammopathy) associated with IgG4-related disease will respond satisfactorily to rituximab.

Key recommendations are to induce remission with intravenous rituximab first, then maintenance therapy with low dose corticosteroids or steroid-sparing agent, and follow up with monthly bloodwork. The preferred dose to induce remission is 1 g of rituximab intravenously twice two weeks apart. Once the remission is achieved, monthly follow-up with total IgG, IgG subclass, and serum protein electrophoresis is recommended.

Critical organ damage markers such as c-reactive protein, liver enzymes, and lipase should also be checked routinely. Most of the patients remain in remission with low-dose prednisone. Steroid-sparing agents such as mycophenolate mofetil or azathioprine are preferred to avoid long-term corticosteroid-related side effects. Many patients relapse within one year and need retreatment with rituximab. Although there is no standard therapy in life-threatening cases, combination therapy with fludarabine and rituximab has been used successfully in the cases of treatment-resistant diseases.

Patients with immune thrombocytopenia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and other immune cytopenias should have baseline quantitative immunoglobulin and serum protein electrophoresis testing to rule out other conditions such as common variable immune deficiency and autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Both common variable immune deficiency and autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome may present with polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia.

Severe chronic inflammation from hidradenitis suppurativa and human herpes virus 8 negative idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease is treated with anakinra (IL-1 inhibitor) and siltuximab (IL-6 inhibitor), respectively.

Hypergammaglobulinemia secondary to Sjogren syndrome can be observed periodically without any specific treatment.