PCV 13, PCV 15, and PCV 20 are administered by IM route. PPSV 23 can be administered by IM or SC route. PCV13 and PCV15 are available in a single-dose prefilled syringe (0.5 mL). PCV13/PCV15 may be administered simultaneously with additional vaccines, including COVID-19. However, they must be prepared and administered in separate syringes and utilizing different injection locations. Vaccines should be discarded if there is the presence of particulate matter and discoloration in the solution.

Site: The deltoid muscle is the preferred location for PCV13/PCV15 vaccination in older children and PCV15/PCV20 vaccination in adults. The preferred injection site for PCV13/PCV15 for infants and young children is vastus lateralis in the anterolateral thigh.

Vaccination schedule according to CDC and ACIP

**Infants and children**

CDC and ACIP suggest using PCV (PCV13 or PCV15) for children (2–59 months). PCV13 and PCV15 can be used interchangeably. PCV15 is not indicated for those who have received four doses of PCV13 or age-appropriate complete PCV13 vaccination series. It is important to note that the minimum age for this first dose is six weeks for PCV13/15 and 2 years for PPSV 23. Preterm infants should be vaccinated according to chronological age regardless of birth weight.

- **Infants aged 2–6 months:**Four doses of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13 or PCV15) are recommended. Administer PCV13 or PCV15 to infants in a sequence of 4 doses (3 primary and one booster). The primary series consists of 3 doses of PCV. Infants obtaining the first dose at age ≤6 months should be administered three doses of PCV at intervals of approximately eight weeks. The minimum interval is of 4 weeks. The booster(fourth) dose is advised at age 12–15 months. It should be administered ≥8 weeks after the third dose. Hence the recommended schedule is one dose of PCV 13/PCV15 at 2, 4, 6 months, and 12 to 15 months.

- **Infants aged 7–11 months:**If PCV is initiated at age 7 to 11 months, three doses (either PCV13 or PCV15) are advised. The first two doses should be administered with an interval of ≥4 weeks between doses. The third dose should be given at 12–15 months; an interval of ≥8 weeks between the second and third doses is advised.

- **Children aged 12–23 months:**If PCV is initiated at 12 to 23 months of age, two doses (either PCV13 or PCV15) are suggested, and an interval of ≥8 weeks between doses is advised.

- **Children aged 24–71 months:**Unvaccinated and healthy children aged 24 to 59 months be administered a single dose of PCV (PCV13 /PCV15). Unvaccinated children (24 to 71 months) with any risk condition should receive two doses of PCV (PCV13 or PCV15), and an interval of ≥8 weeks between two doses is recommended.

- **Children and adolescents aged 6–18 years with CSF leak, immunocompromising condition, or cochlear implant:**If a dose of PCV13/PCV15 has not been given earlier, a single dose of PCV13 or PCV15 is advised, regardless of previously received PPSV23 or PCV7.

- **Hematopoietic stem cell transplants:**Recipients of stem cell transplants are advised to receive 3 PCV doses followed by a dose of PPSV23 starting 3 to 6 months after the transplant. In children with graft-versus-host disease(GVHD), PPSV23 can be substituted with a fourth dose of PCV.

**Children 2 to 5 Years**

CDC suggests pneumococcal vaccination for medical conditions that can increase the risk of pneumococcal infection. These conditions are listed below:

- CSF leak

- Cochlear implant

- Chronic heart disease, cardiac failure, and particularly cyanotic congenital heart disease

- Chronic lung disease; asthma treated with chronic high-dose oral corticosteroids

- Diabetes mellitus

**For above mentioned medical conditions CDC suggests:**

- Administering two doses of either PCV13 or PCV15 if children are unvaccinated or received an incomplete pneumococcal conjugate vaccine series with <3 doses before 24 months of age. Administer the second dose at least eight weeks after the first dose.

- Give one dose of PCV13 or PCV15 if patients have been administered three doses of a PCV before 12 months but have yet to receive a fourth booster dose.

- Give one dose of PPSV23 at least eight weeks after completing the PCV series.

**High-risk medical conditions are listed below:**

- Chronic renal failure or nephrotic syndrome

- Sickle cell disease or other hemoglobinopathies

- Congenital immunodeficiency

- Congenital or acquired asplenia, or splenic dysfunction

- Diseases associated with the treatment of immunosuppressive drugs or radiation therapy

- 
              
- Leukemia
              
              
- Solid organ transplant
              
              
- Hodgkin disease
              
              
- Lymphoma
              
              
- Malignancy

- HIV infection

**For high-risk medical conditions, CDC suggests:**

- Administer two doses of (PCV13 or PCV15) if patients are unvaccinated or received an incomplete pneumococcal conjugate vaccine series with <3 doses before 24 months of age. Administer the second dose at least eight weeks after the first.

- Administer one dose of PCV13 or PCV15 if they received three doses of a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine before 12 months but have yet to receive their fourth booster dose.

- Administer two doses of PPSV23 after the PCV series is complete. Give the first dose at least eight weeks after any previous PCV dose, then give the second dose of PPSV23 at least five years after the first PPSV23 dose**.**

**Children 6 to 18 Years**

**For a cerebrospinal fluid leak or cochlear implant, CDC suggests**

- Administer one dose of either PCV13 or PCV15 if the patients have not received any doses of a PCV vaccine. PCV13/PCV15 should be administered before PPSV23.

- Administer one dose of PPSV23 (if not already given before in childhood)≥ eight weeks after PCV13 or PCV15.

**For  high-risk medical conditions mentioned above, CDC suggests**

- Administer one dose of either PCV13 or PCV15 if the patients have not received any doses of a PCV vaccine. Administer PCV13 or PCV15 before giving any recommended doses of PPSV23.

- Administer two doses of PPSV23. The first dose of PPSV23 should be administered at least eight weeks after any initial PCV dose. The second dose of PPSV23 should be administered only five years after the first dose of PPSV23.

**For a child with**

- Chronic heart disease, cardiac failure, and particularly cyanotic congenital heart disease

- Chronic lung disease; asthma treated with chronic high-dose oral corticosteroids

- Diabetes mellitus

**CDC suggests**

- Administering one dose of PPSV23 (if not already given earlier in childhood).

**Adults 19 to 64 Years**

CDC advises pneumococcal vaccination for adults 19-64 years old with certain chronic medical diseases or high-risk factors:

- Alcoholism

- CSF leak

- Chronic liver disease

- Chronic lung disease, including COPD and asthma

- Chronic heart disease, including CHF and cardiomyopathies

- Cigarette smoking

- Cochlear implant

- Diabetes mellitus

- Congenital or acquired asplenia*

- Congenital or acquired immunodeficiency*

- Chronic renal failure*

- Malignancy*

- Hodgkin disease*

- HIV infection*

- Iatrogenic immunosuppression from radiation therapy and chronic systemic corticosteroids*

- Lymphoma*

- Leukemia*

- Multiple myeloma*

- Nephrotic syndrome*

- Solid organ transplant*

- Sickle cell disease or hemoglobinopathies*

*Indicates immunocompromising conditions

**For adults who have not been given any pneumococcal vaccine or have received only PCV7, CDC recommends**

- Administer 1 dose of PCV15/PCV20.

- 
              
- If PCV15 is administered to the patient, it should be followed by PPSV23 after one year. The minimum interval between 2 doses is eight weeks and is used in patients with an immunocompromising state, CSF leak, and cochlear implant.
              
              
- It is important to note that if PCV20 is administered, PPSV23 is not indicated for the patient.

**For adults who have received PPSV23 only, CDC suggests**

- Administer 1 dose of PCV15 or PCV20.

- The PCV15 or PCV20 dose should be given at least one year after the last PPSV23 vaccination.

**For adults who have only received PCV13, CDC suggests**

- Administer a single dose of PCV20 at least one year after PCV13. The second option is administering a single dose of PPSV23 at least eight weeks after the previous vaccination with PCV13.

- 
              
- Patients with immunocompromising conditions require additional doses of PPSV23. The second dose of PPSV23 is administered at least five years after the first. The third dose of PPSV23 is given at ≥ 65 years (minimum interval of five years from the second dose of PPSV23). A third dose is not indicated if a patient is ≥ 65 years old when the second dose is administered.
              
              
- Patients with risk factors or medical conditions listed above will require a second dose of PPSV23 at age ≥ 65 years.

**For adults who have received PCV13 and one dose of PPSV23, CDC suggests**

- Administer one dose of PCV20 at least five years after the last pneumococcal vaccine.

- 
              
- The minimum interval (1 year since the last PCV13 dose and five years since the last PPSV23 dose) can be considered in patients with a cochlear implant, CSF leak, or immunocompromising condition. 
              
              
- The second option is administering PPSV23 at least eight weeks after PCV13 and five years after PPSV23 if patients have immunocompromising conditions.

- Patients with an immunocompromising condition will require an additional third dose of PPSV23 at age ≥65 years. (minimum interval of five years since the second dose of PPSV23).

**Adults ≥65 years of age**

**For adults≥ 65 years who have not been administered any pneumococcal vaccine or have received only the PCV7 vaccine, CDC suggests:**

- Administer 1 dose of PCV15 or PCV20.

- 
              
- If PCV15 is used, it is followed by PPSV23 at least one year later. The minimum period can be reduced to eight weeks in adults with an immunocompromising condition, CSF leak, or cochlear implant.
              
              
- If PCV20 is used, then PPSV23 is not indicated.

**For adults ≥65 years who have only received PPSV23, CDC suggests:**

- Administer 1 dose of PCV15 or PCV20.

- 
              
- The PCV15 or PCV20 should be administered at least one year after the PPSV23.
              
              
-  An additional dose of PPSV23 is not required.

**For adults ≥65 years who have been administered only PCV13, CDC suggests two options:**

****1**.**Administer one dose of PCV20 at least one year after PCV13

2. Administer one dose of PPSV23 at least one year after PCV13. The minimum interval can be reduced to eight weeks for a CSF leak, cochlear implant, or an immunocompromising condition.

**For adults ≥65 years who have been administered PCV13 regardless of age and PPSV23 before age 65 years, the CDC suggests two options:**

- Administer one dose of PCV20 at least five years after the last pneumococcal vaccine. The minimum interval (one year since the last PCV13 dose and five years since the last PPSV23 dose) is considered in patients with a cochlear implant, CSF leak, or immunocompromising condition.

- Administer one dose of PPSV23 at least five years after the last pneumococcal vaccine. The minimum interval (8 weeks since the last PCV13 vaccination and five years since the last PPSV23 vaccination) is considered in patients with a cochlear implant, CSF leak, or immunocompromising condition.

**Shared decision-making:**For adults ≥ 65 years who have been administered PCV13 at any age and PPSV23 at or after age 65 years, CDC suggests shared clinical decision-making. If the clinician and patient determine PCV20 is appropriate, PCV20 should be administered at least five years after the previous pneumococcal vaccine.

**Specific Patient Populations**

**Hepatic Impairment:**The ACIP advises pneumococcal vaccination in patients with chronic liver disease.

**Renal Impairment:**CKD patients naive in pneumococcal immunization should be administered PCV13, followed by a dose of PPSV23 at eight weeks and 2nd dose of PPSV23 after five years.

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Clinical information on the safety of PCV-20 and PCV-15(conjugate vaccines) during pregnancy is inadequate. PPSV23 increases antibody titers in infants. ACOG(The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists) recommends PPSV23 in patients with diabetes, heart disease, sickle cell anemia, and lung disease.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**The CDC suggests that vaccines administered to a nursing mother do not impact breastfeeding safety for mothers or infants. Breastfeeding is not a contraindication to the administration of the pneumococcal vaccines. Immunization during the third trimester of pregnancy increases the pneumococcal antibodies in breast milk. Breastfed infants should be vaccinated as suggested by ACIP and CDC.

**Pediatric Patients:**The safety and efficacy of PCV13 in children < 6 weeks of age have not been demonstrated.

**Elderly Patients:**For PPSV 23, AEFI(adverse events following immunization) is higher following revaccination compared to initial vaccination. Consequently, routine revaccination of PPSV23 in immunocompetent patients>65 years of age is not advised.