**Management if Anterior Crossbite**

The presence or absence of anterior displacement from centric relation to centric occlusion during mandibular closure must be established as a part of the diagnosis. The distinction between true class III and pseudo class III malocclusions have an impact on treatment plan, prognosis, and stability.

Factors to be considered for treatment:

- What type of movement is required

- Overbite at the end of treatment

- Extraction/non-extraction

- If the movement of opposing tooth required

The type of movement required for correction is assessed. Removable appliances can be considered for tipping movement; the fixed appliance is indicated for bodily tooth movement.  The appliance should incorporate these features, good anterior retention to counteract the displaying effect of the active element. To free the occlusion with the opposing arch, a bite plane could be used or an active component to move the teeth. Fixed appliances can be indicated when there is insufficient overbite to retain the corrected incisors. Open coils springs can be used in straight wire mechanics, to create enough arch length to position the teeth. A negative root torque is sometimes required for a palatally placed upper incisors. An adequate overbite and a normal inclination of the long axis of the tooth to be treated is important for the stability of retention.

**Correction of Anterior Crossbite in Preadolescent Age Group**

- Use of tongue blade: This method can be used to correct a developing crossbite. A tongue blade resembles a flat ice cream stick, which is placed inside the mouth contacting the erupting tooth in crossbite on its palatal side. During the slight closure of jaws, the opposing side of the tooth comes in contact with the labial aspect of the opposing mandibular tooth. Light forces generated during this period might help the tooth to attain the better position.

- Catalan’s appliance or lower inclined plane: The lower inclined plane is constructed at an angle of 45 to the maxillary occlusal plane and can be cemented on lower incisors.

- Face masks and Rapid maxillary expansion: This method can be used when a skeletal-transverse deficiency occurs in the maxilla

- Frankel III appliance: Can be used for correction of a developing Class III skeletal malocclusion.

- Chin cup appliance: It can be used to redirect the growth of a prognathic mandible.

**Correction of Anterior Crossbite in Adolescents and Adults**

- Fixed appliances can be used to correct single or multiple tooth crossbite.

- Use of TADs

**Management if Posterior Crossbite**

- Coffin spring is an omega-shaped wire appliance used in correcting crossbite in young developing dentition. The expansion produced is slow and bilaterally symmetrical.

- Quad helix is a fixed appliance, soldered to molar bands cemented to first permanent molars. It can produce slow expansion and can be used along with fixed appliance. Forces generated by appliance can be controlled depending on the amount of activation. Reactivation is done using the three-prong pliers.

- The rapid maxillary expansion involves a hyrax screw type of appliance capable of splitting the mid-palatine suture and bring about skeletal changes in a short interval. The RME screw can be incorporated into 2 types of appliances, the banded RME and bonded RME.

- NiTi Expanders: These are nickel-titanium wire shapes which can be attached to lingual sheath that is welded to molar bands cemented to the maxillary first permanent molars.  Various sizes are available and need to be selected depending upon the amount of expansion desired and the pretreatment width of the palate.

- Fixed orthodontic appliances can be used for correction of posterior crossbite, as they provide 3-dimensional control over the tooth. The arches can be kept slightly expanded or constricted depending upon the movement required. Cross-elastics of 3/16-inch diameter is exerting a force of 2.5 to 4.5 oz can be used to bring about correction of individual tooth crossbites in the posterior segment.