Traumatic globe and orbital surgery often involve an interprofessional team approach. Management of EOMs during globe and orbital trauma often begins with emergency room medical and nursing staff. If the patient has polytrauma, trauma surgeons are also involved in the initial assessment. The patient's medical status should be optimized before surgery. In polytrauma, life-saving interventions are prioritized. In the setting of combined ocular and orbital trauma, ophthalmologists are routinely consulted along with otolaryngologists and/or oral and maxillofacial surgeons.

Ophthalmic sub-specialists, such as oculoplastic and orbital surgeons, often get involved in preoperative planning and surgery if a fracture needs repair. With few exceptions, nearly all globe and orbital trauma surgeries are performed under general anesthesia, so an anesthesiologist is also a part of the team. Prophylactic antibiotic medications are administered to prevent infection, and a pharmacist helps verify the appropriate dose and agent and ensures no drug-drug interactions. Intraoperative surgical technicians and nursing staff are vital to ensuring the appropriate equipment and medications are available. Post-operative nursing staff assists in reviewing aftercare instructions with the patient. Patients who undergo orbital surgery may require inpatient admission to monitor for retrobulbar hematoma.

Post-operative management of globe and orbital injuries is under the ophthalmologist or orbital surgeon. If residual diplopia or strabismus develops, the patient can be referred to a strabismus surgeon, who can follow the patient over time to assess for stability in ocular alignment measurements. Social workers may be employed to help certain patients keep these appointments if access to healthcare is challenging. A successful outcome can only be accomplished with this interprofessional healthcare team approach. [Level 5]