**Evaluation:**Cardiac amyloidosis is an underdiagnosed disease entity. Its systemic manifestations and variety of symptoms based on etiological type make it under-recognized. However, patients with cardiac amyloidosis have the following specific set of findings on cardiovascular investigations.****

**Electrocardiogram:**The 12-lead EKG may show a pseudo-infarction pattern. There can be low voltages in limb leads and Q waves in anterior and inferior leads. (Figure 1). The EKG may also show varying degrees of atrioventricular (AV) block, more commonly, first-degree AV block. These EKG findings are more common in AL amyloidosis. Patients with TTR amyloidosis are more likely to have left bundle branch block (LBBB), a more advanced degree of AV block, and more often normal limb-lead voltages with non-specific ST-T segment changes. Atrial fibrillation is frequently present.

**Echocardiography:**Usually, an echocardiogram gives the first clue and is pivotal in screening and diagnosing cardiac amyloidosis. The echocardiogram characteristically shows increased myocardial wall thickness and a sparkling appearance of the myocardium (Figure 2).

**Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging:**CMR has evolved as a key test in diagnosing cardiac amyloidosis. It helps differentiate amyloidosis from hypertensive heart disease and sarcoidosis. Additionally, it provides information about tissue characterization and helps detect early cardiac amyloidosis. However, it cannot differentiate between TTR and AL amyloidosis. Characteristic findings include restrictive morphology and diastolic dysfunction with disproportionate bi-atrial enlargement and increased myocardial mass and thickening. On late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), there is reduced systolic thickening of LGE segments, and characteristically, there is diffuse circumferential subendocardial LGE which is not restricted to any coronary artery territory. In advanced disease, LGE can be transmurally present. Because of the extracellular deposition of amyloid, there is an increase in T1 (longitudinal relaxation time) and extracellular volume fraction.

**Nuclear SPECT:**A strongly positive bone tracer cardiac scintigraphy (cardiac uptake greater than bone- stage two or three or bone to the chest wall uptake ratio of >1.5 at one-hour), the echocardiographic features consistent with cardiac amyloidosis, and the absence of systemic signs and symptoms of multiple myeloma are almost diagnostic of TTR amyloidosis. On the other hand, there is poor or no radioisotope uptake in AL amyloidosis.

Endomyocardial biopsy: Biopsy is the gold-standard test for diagnosing cardiac amyloidosis. The biopsy shows characteristic salmon-colored amyloid fibrils on the ‘Congo-red’ stain. On electron microscopy, there is a characteristic ‘apple-green’ birefringence on polarized light. A cardiac biopsy is an invasive test and carries a sensitivity of 87 to 98%.

Genotyping: Genotyping is important in patients with ATTR amyloidosis. More than 120 gene variants have been identified to cause cardiac amyloidosis. The two most common variants are Thr60Ala and Val122lle. Genotyping is essential to predict treatment response and prognosis. The type of variants depends on geographical location and ethnic variation.