A clear understanding of the pathophysiology of the adrenal crisis remains to be fully elucidated. A partial understanding of the clinical manifestations can be obtained by understanding the functions of glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids (GC) have permissive, suppressive, stimulatory, and preparative effects in response to stress. These functions have been described in greater detail in an earlier review

**Cardiovascular System**

- GCs have a permissive effect on the adrenergic receptors in the heart and the vascular. Catecholamines are unable to exert a full effect on these receptors in the absence of GCs

**Immune System**

- Infectious or non-infectious stressors are known to lead to the activation of the immune system. There is an increase in cytokine release. Interleukin (IL) 1, IL-2, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and TNF-γ then lead to the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis (HPA) with an increase in GC levels

**Intravascular Volume**

- GCs suppress the expression of anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) in the hypothalamic neurons

**Glucose Homeostasis**

- In response to stress, GCs lead to increased glucose levels by increasing glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis

**Regulation of Appetite:**

- Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is known to be a potent appetite suppressant in response to stress

**Electrolyte Disturbances**

- Mineralocorticoid deficiency is seen in primary adrenal insufficiency due to the direct destruction of the adrenal cortex. The cortex remains preserved in secondary and tertiary adrenal insufficiency. Aldosterone production and secretion are regulated by renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system