The Somogyi phenomenon had been considered in the past; an essential consideration for the proper diagnosis and management of blood glucose levels is vital for the body’s metabolic demands. The post-hypoglycemic hyperglycemia raises the question of whether a patient’s insulin levels should be adjusted in the evening to prevent hyperglycemia in the morning. As this is something ideally avoided, the Somogyi phenomenon occurs too infrequently to make this standardized practice.

**Hypoglycemia vs. Hyperglycemia**

Glucose control is vital for brain metabolism and function, as it is the primary substrate for proper brain activity. The body has different regulatory molecules that act to decrease the likelihood of low blood glucose. The first response thought to activate due to low blood glucose is the counterregulatory hormone mechanism.de novo production of glucose, which occur in the liver.

Hyperglycemic episodes are also to be avoided. Symptoms to look out for include polyuria, polydipsia, weakness, tachycardia, and hypotension.

In an interprofessional team, there are many things to consider in managing a patient’s blood glucose concentrations. Theoretically, the risks of adjusting a patient’s insulin in case they undergo the Somogyi phenomenon could risk the potential consequence of increasing a patient’s chance of becoming severely hypoglycemic.

It is essential to coordinate care by involving the patient in discussions regarding proper glucose management. Lifestyle modifications and being aware of the symptoms of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia require discussion in great detail with the patient. It will allow them to make well-informed decisions regarding their food choices, lifestyle habits, and activity levels.

**Controversy**

The importance of maintaining proper blood glucose levels in any patient is apparent from both ends of blood glucose level abnormalities. Using the Somogyi phenomenon as a precaution for standard in practice does not have enough evidence. Instead, this theory can be used to help monitor patients’ blood glucose levels throughout different times of the day to see if they fit the theory.

Clinical studies suggest that underdosing of insulin from the previous night fails to prevent hyperglycemia.

In a study done at the Washington University School of Medicine to test the hypothesis of the Somogyi phenomenon, the conclusion was that the nocturnal hypoglycemia did not cause daytime hyperglycemia.