Total calcium can be measured using the ISE potentiometric method, but the sample must be pre-acidified to release all bound and complexed calcium to a free form. However, total calcium is commonly measured with spectrophotometric methods, such as the o-Cresolphthalein Complexone method, Arsenazo III method, atomic absorption spectrometry, or, rarely, isotope dilution mass spectrometry (ID-MS).

The free calcium analyzer consists of a system of pumps under microprocessor control that transport calibration solutions, samples, and wash solutions through a measuring cell containing calcium ion-selective, reference, and pH electrodes. Sensitive potentiometers measure the voltage difference between the calcium or pH and reference electrodes for calibrating solutions or samples. A microprocessor calibrates the system and calculates calcium concentration and pH.

Calcium ISEs contain a calcium-selective membrane that encloses an inner reference solution of calcium chloride, often containing saturated silver chloride (AgCl) and physiologic concentrations of sodium chloride and potassium chloride, and an internal reference electrode. The reference electrode, usually Ag/AgCl, is immersed in this inner reference solution. Modern calcium ISEs use liquid membranes containing the ion-selective calcium sensor dissolved in an organic liquid trapped in a polymeric matrix.

Although the range of Na+ and Cl+ concentrations usually observed in serum or plasma does not cause a clinically significant error in the measurement of free calcium, significant errors can occur with other specimens unless the matrices and the ionic strength of the calibrators and samples are matched closely. Modern electrodes have high selectivity for calcium over Na+, K+, Mg2+, H+, and Li+ ions.