As stated previously, there are a variety of ways that coronary artery fistulas can present. Some of the determinants of severity are the site of origin, place of termination, length, and overall size of the fistula. However, with that being said, the majority of patients with coronary artery fistulas are asymptomatic. Generally speaking, fistulas remain asymptomatic for twenty or so years. However, once the fistulas start to become hemodynamically significant, signs and symptoms can develop. Below are some of the more common presentations of coronary artery fistulas.

Congenital coronary artery fistulas - In infants who are around 3-4 months of age, hemodynamically significant coronary artery fistula may manifest itself as congestive heart failure. Infants experience tachycardia, tachypnea, and are usually irritable, restless, and diaphoretic. A continuous murmur during auscultation of the heart can be heard.

Asymptomatic adult patients - The majority of patients with coronary artery fistula remain asymptomatic at least for a decade or two. A physical examination can occasionally reveal a continuous murmur normally heard best over the precordium. Most fistulas are found incidentally on coronary angiography.

Myocardial infarction/chronic myocardial ischemia - One way that coronary artery fistulas can affect the myocardium is to shunt blood away, through a coronary "steal" syndrome. In these situations, the vessels distal to the fistula do not receive blood, and therefore the areas they supply become ischemic. Another mechanism by which fistulas can cause myocardial ischemia is thrombosis at the junction of the normal and aberrant coronary arteries. Patients may present with typical/atypical signs of chest pain. However, in some cases, patients can present with unrelenting, chronic pain that might not get better after rest.

Congestive heart failure - Coronary artery fistulas that increase "left to right shunting" can lead to volume overload of the pulmonary circuitry, and could, therefore, lead to signs of right-sided heart failure. Patients may present with shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, or leg swelling. In patients with congenital fistulas, this is the most common presenting finding that usually occurs during infancy/childhood.

Atrial/ventricular arrhythmias - The mechanism by which coronary artery fistulas can bring about arrhythmia is by inducing low output congestive heart failure, leading to a backup of blood flow and subsequent dilation of the atria and/or ventricles.

Cardiac tamponade - Although very rare, in certain cases, the rupture of coronary artery fistulas could lead to hemopericardium. This would then result in cardiac tamponade with patients presenting with shortness of breath, hypotension, jugular venous distension, and a paradoxical pulse.