# Definition/Introduction

Ethics are inherent in the practice of medicine. In the world of modern healthcare, the area of informatics plays a pivotal role in the maintenance and delivery of care.

Informatics ethics have significant overlap with other codes of ethics developed around social settings. Many of these fundamental principles include autonomy, equality, justice, beneficence, non-maleficence, and integrity. Other principles including information privacy, security, access, openness, least intrusive alternative, legitimate infringement, and accountability play essential roles in healthcare.

All of these ethical principles, provide insight into the duties and responsibilities of clinicians, administrators, and other healthcare personnel when dealing with patient-related content. It is worth emphasizing that these principles function to provide guidance, depending on the nature, context, and specific details of individual situations.

# Issues of Concern

There are several concerns regarding informatics, their regulations, and ethics. One of the significant issues is the consideration of efficiency versus quality care. Specifically, when viewing decision-making across all layers of healthcare delivery, from initial in-person encounters to data storage and transfer, it is imperative to consider the reason behind each decision. An additional issue is patient access to care, and data which has several layers of regulation at the federal, state, and organizational level.

# Clinical Significance

Overall, informatics plays a significant role in modern healthcare. The budding field of informatics ethics highlights views that mandate both flexibility and development and recognition of standards for addressing these issues as the field continues to evolve.