HNPCC remains largely unrecognized. Traditionally the primary tool to identify HNPCC was a positive family history of CRC and other malignancies. There are several criteria to identify individuals at risk.

Amsterdam Criteria: Amsterdam I criteria was initially introduced to identify the individuals at risk of HNPCC. It was later modified as the Amsterdam II criteria to include other HNPCC associated malignancies.

According to the **Amsterdam II criteria**, HNPCC should be suspected in those individuals who meet all of the following criteria:

- Three or more relatives with histologically verified Lynch syndrome-associated cancers (CRC, endometrial cancers, small bowel carcinoma, carcinoma of the ureter or renal pelvis), one of whom is a first-degree relative of the other two and in whom familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) has been excluded.

- At least two generations involved in HNPCC related cancers

- At least one cancer diagnosed before the age of 50

The sensitivity and specificity of Amsterdam II criteria for a diagnosis of HNPCC are 22 and 98 percent, respectively.

**Bethesda criteria guidelines**— The Bethesda and the revised Bethesda guidelines were developed for identifying the individuals who should undergo tumor testing for microsatellite instability (MSI).

**Clinical Features:**

- GI upset (constipation or diarrhea); abdominal pain, cramps, and bloating.

- Blood in the stool (visible blood loss or positive FOBT)

- Melena

- Iron deficiency

- Decreased appetite

- Unexplained weight loss

- Fatigue or generalized weakness