The diagnosis and treatment of a pelvic abscess are very challenging. In a clinical setting, the presentation of the pelvic abscess is sometimes vague with high-grade fever, prostration, and vague lower abdominal pain. It requires prompt diagnosis and hospitalization. To avoid high morbidity, managing the condition is best when by an interprofessional team. It is coherent that the role of a gynecologist is dominant in the diagnosis and management of the patient. The integrated care includes primary care providers, The ED physician, nurses, pharmacists, and radiologists. Generally, the patient first presents to either the primary care physician, nurse practitioner, or to the ED with their chief complaints. The attending physician has to consider pelvic abscess in their differentials. The involvement of radiologists is essential in establishing the diagnosis, causes, and further treatment if imaging-guided drainage is needed.

Close monitoring of these patients by nurses is vital because multiple complications can develop, including stress ulcers, sepsis, DVT, and pneumonia. Also, the nurses should provide prophylaxis against pressure sores and encourage incentive spirometry. Pharmacists should assist in the prophylactic and therapeutic dosing and administration of antimicrobial therapy, and consult with the physician staff if there are any concerns regarding therapy, which in many cases will be administered by the nursing staff.

A dietary consult is necessary since many patients will have ileus and require short-term IV nutrition. Bedside physical therapy is vital to prevent muscle contractures and wasting. Only with close interprofessional team collaboration and open communication can the outcomes be improved. [Level V]

**Outcomes**

The outcome of the patients with a pelvic abscess depends on the extent of the disease, prompt diagnosis, and response to the initial medical treatment. Sometimes the pelvic abscess drains spontaneously into the rectum. The rupture of the pelvic abscess is a life-threatening emergency and requires immediate surgery and frequent monitoring. The rupture of pelvic abscess can present as sepsis, peritonitis, but fortunately, early recognition and expeditious treatment with appropriate antibiotics and surgical interventional can lead to successful treatment.