Following a diagnosis of inflammatory back pain by accepted criteria, referral to a rheumatologic specialist may be indicated in the setting of positive HLA-B27 testing and confirmation of sacroiliitis by imaging.

Initial treatment for inflammatory back pain begins with patient education regarding the nature and the expected course of their condition. The patient should be informed regarding the possibility of associated conditions and further investigation into an underlying cause, such as laboratory evaluation and imaging. It is important to advise patients to stop smoking. Furthermore, sources of psychosocial support should be a topic of discussion with the patient. A consultation with physical therapy is likely necessary as inflammatory back pain and its associated inflammatory illnesses respond favorably to exercise and movement therapies.

Initial pharmacologic therapy for inflammatory back pain, whether or not it is considered symptomatic of an axial spondyloarthropathy, is a trial of NSAID therapy, which may often require a maximum dose. Initial treatment should extend for two to four weeks with evaluation for effectiveness. Upon determining an effective medication, this medication may be useful as needed for the control of symptoms.

If NSAID therapy proves ineffective for control of symptoms in patients with known axial spondyloarthropathy, the next line medications include TNF-inhibitors or an alternative secukinumab. These classes of medications compromise patients’ immune response and require careful consideration of immune function, diagnosis of malignancy, heart health, or coexisting demyelinating diseases.

Indications for surgical intervention in cases of inflammatory back pain with axial spondyloarthritis include severe hip involvement with persistent pain or severe limitation in mobility and quality of life, atlantoaxial subluxation with neurologic impairment, and severe flexion deformities with impaired ability to look in a forward direction.