Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a rare monoclonal lymphoid neoplasm characterized by the following four features: HL usually presents in young adults, commonly arises in cervical lymph nodes, involves scattered large mononuclear Hodgkin and multinucleated Reed-Sternberg cells on a background of non-neoplastic inflammatory cells, and characteristic neoplastic cells are often surrounded by T lymphocytes. Hodgkin lymphoma generally has an excellent prognosis, though this depends on several factors. HL is divided into two distinct categories that demonstrate different pathologic and clinical features: classical Hodgkin lymphoma and nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLP-HL). Classical Hodgkin lymphoma accounts for approximately 95 percent of HL and is further subdivided into four subgroups: nodular sclerosis (NSHL), lymphocyte-rich (LRHL), mixed cellularity (MCHL), and lymphocyte-depleted (LDHL). This activity illustrates the evaluation, treatment, and complications of Hodgkin lymphoma and the importance of an interprofessional team approach to its management.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the distinguishing features of each classical type of Hodgkin lymphoma. 
- Review the presentation of Hodgkin lymphoma.
- Explain how appropriate treatment of a case of Hodgkin lymphoma is determined.
- Review the role of interprofessional team members in optimizing collaboration and communication to ensure patients with Hodgkin lymphoma receive high-quality care, which will lead to enhanced outcomes.