Defects or deformities of the medial longitudinal arch of the foot can lead to clinical consequences. One such example is pes planus, also known as pes valgus or flat foot. This condition demonstrates the loss of the medial longitudinal and can be congenital or acquired. As described before, most infants are born with flat feet and develop normal arches by the age of 6. The most common cause of congenital pes planus in children is flexible pes planus; this is when the arch appears normal without weight-bearing and disappears with weight-bearing.

The collapse of the arch in children has also correlated with obesity. Posterior tibial tendon dysfunction is the most common cause of acquired pes cavus. The classical presentation of this is a woman above the age of 40 with diabetes and obesity. Other structures of the medial longitudinal arch that can contribute to pes planus are the laxity of the plantar fascia, spring ligament, or other plantar ligaments. Any type of trauma or injury to the midfoot or hindfoot can also lead to pes planus. Although it is usually asymptomatic, pes planus includes pain in the back, hip, knee, lower leg, heel, and midfoot. Patients also may present with a history of frequent ankle sprains due to overpronation while ambulating.

Another condition that affects the medial longitudinal arch is pes cavus, also known as clawfoot. The most prominent feature of pes cavus is the elevation of the medial longitudinal arch of the foot. A clawfoot usually results from a deformity of the forefoot or the hindfoot, or a combination of both. In pes cavus, the peroneus longus and posterior tibialis are stronger and overpower the peroneus brevis, tibialis anterior, and intrinsic foot muscles. The peroneus longus commonly contractures in this condition, causing the plantarflexion of the first ray. The higher arch in this condition decreases the foot’s ability to absorb shock and puts excess pressure on the heel and the ball of the foot.

Congenital (hereditary) pes cavus is typically bilateral. The four major causes of this condition are neurological issues, trauma, untreated clubfoot, or it could be idiopathic. Symptoms of pes cavus include foot, ankle, and knee pain, as well as frequent ankle sprains. Patients may also notice that their shoes no longer fit or start wearing out quickly. There may also be a family history of similar foot deformities. A physical examination may show metatarsals that are tender to palpation. Also, an important sign of pes cavus is when the heel pad of the foot is visualized from the front when the patient is standing with both feet pointing forward (“peek-a-boo” heel).

Both pes planus and pes cavus can result in a condition known as plantar fasciitis.  The plantar fascia is a major supporting element of the medial longitudinal arch that also plays a role in shock absorption.  Plantar fasciitis is an irritation of the plantar fascia resulting in degeneration. Although it is due to many factors, the most common cause is an overuse injury due to repetitive strain on the foot. The plantar fascia can develop micro-tears associated with weight-bearing and standing upright. As a predisposing factor, pes planus results in a strain at the medial calcaneal tuberosity and the adjacent perifascial structures (the origins of the plantar fascia).

In pes cavus, the foot does not properly absorb shock or evert; therefore, this also causes increased strain on the heel and can cause plantar fasciitis. Patients typically present with a gradual onset of sharp pain in the heel, which is worst in the morning after arising from bed. Pain lessens during the beginning of walking or other physical activities and then increases during the day. Symptoms also become aggravated by standing for an extended amount of time. During a physical exam, pain is noted when palpating the plantar medial calcaneal tubercle and during passive dorsiflexion of the foot and toes.