The diagnosis of EMZL is made after a morphologic, immunophenotypic, and genetic analysis of the biopsy specimen. Clinicians should aim to obtain the largest biopsy specimen, as small biopsy specimens and fine-needle aspirates may not provide adequate tissue for diagnosis. After the diagnosis of EMZL by an experienced hematopathologist, additional evaluation should include a history and physical exam, focusing on lymph node regions, eyes, ears, nose, throat, liver, and spleen. The blood work should include a complete blood count with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel along with lactate dehydrogenase and beta-2 microglobulin. Hepatitis B and C (HBV and HCV) serology and cryoglobulins in a patient who is HCV positive. The tumor biopsy should be tested for H. pylori, especially in the gastric EMZL. Protein electrophoresis, serum, and urine immunofixation may also be sent.

Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy are highly recommended in EMZL, particularly in non-gastric lymphoma. Imaging should include computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; sometimes, imaging of the orbits and salivary glands are recommended depending on the primary. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan should be considered for the adequate staging of the lymphoma and also is helpful when clinical and laboratory data suggest transformation. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) are also useful in gastric EMZL for appropriate staging. Anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La antibody evaluation should be done in patients with salivary gland involvement to rule out the association of Sjogren syndrome.

The Lugano staging system is widely used for staging. Recently, additional staging systems like the Paris staging system are also being used.