# Continuing Education Activity

Patients with dementia are at increased risk of driving impairment, and fitness to drive should be evaluated in all patients with neurocognitive disorders. There is currently no gold standard test or scale to determine driving fitness, and many clinicians do not feel comfortable making a recommendation to stop driving. This activity reviews the evaluation of driving impairment in patients with dementia and highlights the interprofessional team's role in evaluating and treating patients with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the importance of assessing driving fitness in patients with dementia.
- Identify the neuropsychiatric and physical impairments that place patients with dementia at risk for driving impairment.
- Summarize the different screening tools used to assess driving fitness in patients with dementia.
- Describe when a patient should be formally declared unfit to drive and how to aid patients in their transition.

# Introduction

When caring for patients with dementia (PWD), it is important to feel comfortable assessing the patient’s fitness to drive. Patients with dementia have a two to eight times increased risk of motor vehicle accidents compared to similarly aged drivers without dementia, yet many are never counseled on driving safety.

Driving safety assessment is a sensitive discussion that is often delayed or forgone altogether because of physician reluctance, patient refusal, or caretaker preference. Physicians often do not get formal training on how to conduct these conversations and seldom know that they are qualified to make this assessment. Driving is integral to a patient’s independence, so discussions of driving fitness may be met with emotional resistance, and patients may not recognize or admit their deficits.

The true extent of driving impairment may be minimized by caretakers who either do not want to admit the progression of their loved one’s disease or do not want to take on additional driving responsibilities.

# Issues of Concern

Unlike other activities of daily living, driving is unpredictable and requires attention to many simultaneous audiovisual inputs.

Regardless of the type, neurocognitive disorders can cause deficits in attention, insight, and judgment. Patients have greater difficulty integrating information to make complex executive decisions.

Dementia is a progressive illness, and not all patients with dementia experience the same deficits. In fact, many patients with mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia still have the ability to operate a vehicle safely. However, an analysis of this population of patients with a clinical dementia rating scale of 0.5-1.0 showed on-road testing failure in 13% of the participants.

# Clinical Significance

Assessing fitness to drive requires a multifactorial approach, and there is no single objective test or scale used for evaluation.

A low cognitive testing performance will often correlate with a patient’s inability to pass roadside driving tests. However, there is no clear pattern of regression. The 2010 AAN practice parameter for evaluating and managing driving risk in dementia suggested that patients with a Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score ≤ of 24 are at increased risk for unsafe driving.

A caregiver’s impression of the patient’s driving safety has proven to be more indicative of driving impairment, and it is often more accurate than the patient’s self-assessment.

Triaging patients with these screening tests is important in guiding clinical recommendations.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Given the high emotional stakes with discussing driving privileges, it is better to begin this discussion early in the course of dementia before overt impairment is noted.

After providing the driving fitness assessment, patients and families may need help complying with this new transition at home. Clinicians may suggest social resources or safer public transportation options.

In summary, patients with dementia are at increased risk of driving impairment, and fitness to drive should be evaluated in all patients with neurocognitive disorders. There is no single objective scale or test to determine driving fitness, so this decision should involve a multidisciplinary assessment. It is prudent to begin screening for driving impairment as soon as the clinician obtains a history of driving accidents/citations or significant changes in driving patterns (likely to be reported by caretakers). This should be followed with a thorough evaluation of the patient’s medications and physical exam. If patients have high-risk features on the screening, they should be further evaluated with neuropsychological testing and the clinical dementia severity scale (Level 1A evidence).

Due to the complexity of CDR scoring, clinicians in a busy practice may consider MMSE or MoCA as an alternative. Still, they should consider the lack of Level 1A evidence supporting their use in assessing driving ability. The next step in safety assessment may refer the patient to a certified occupational therapist or a driving rehabilitation specialist to assess on-the-road driving abilities. Using this stepwise diagnostic approach may provide a comprehensive evaluation of patient road safety. After a patient has been deemed unfit to drive, it is the clinician’s responsibility to share this information sensitively and ensure that the patients and caretakers are well-supported in this important transition.