Due to the autosomal inheritance pattern, family history is an important component of the history and physical. The clinical course of worsening of facial deformities over the first 1 to 2 years of life helps make the clinical diagnosis. Additional testing is usually not needed to make the diagnosis. As a genetic disease, the rest of the history of the newborn infant is unlikely to contribute much more to identifying the underlying diagnosis.

Crouzon syndrome is usually suspected at birth due to specific facial and cranial deformities and positive family history. There are several characteristic features of patients with Crouzon syndrome that can be seen on physical examination. The most commonly seen include brachycephaly, wide-set (hypertelorism), bulging eyes (proptosis), a flattened forehead, a beaked nose, and an underdeveloped upper jaw (maxillary/midface hypoplasia) that defines the Crouzonoid face. These patients can also suffer from a cleft lip and/or palate, hearing loss, and dental problems. The incidence of strabismus (misaligned eyes) is very high. An important detail to note is the normal hands and feet found in a Crouzon patient in contrast to those with Apert syndrome, a similar but more severe craniosynostosis syndrome, where there is pronounced syndactyly of the extremities. Pfeiffer syndrome, another craniosynostosis, is also epitomized by short, broad big toes and thumbs in contrast to the previously mentioned normal digits of those with Crouzon syndrome.