Writing prescriptions and medication orders is an everyday job duty for many healthcare workers, including nurse practitioners. However, the increased demands to see more patients who require many medications often become monotonous, and one can become careless. The majority of healthcare workers never anticipate an adverse drug event, and consequently, rarely check back with the pharmacists for drug interactions. With a high number of medication-related errors, healthcare workers are under great scrutiny to change their work habits and adopt a culture of safety when writing drug orders and prescriptions. Though there is no single way to eliminate all drug errors, healthcare workers can reduce errors by becoming more cautious and interacting closely with other practitioners, pharmacists, and patients. Open and direct communication is one way to bridge the safety gap.

An interprofessional team working together is important to achieve accurate medication utilization and decreased errors. Clinicians order medications, pharmacists, fill them, and nurses and patients administer them. Improvements in this chain of communication will ultimately provide better patient care with decreased morbidity and mortality. Better patient education on their medication offers a check and balance on the health professionals and increases safety compliance.

**Communication**

When pharmacists communicate with prescribers and nurses, the pharmacist should:

- Outline the problem and then provide details

- Offer possible solutions, including substitute medications.

- Repeat back the order or order changes

- Confirm understanding

- Document conversation and decision

An environment of teamwork is most conducive to optimal medication delivery. The team should not fear discussion and resolution of conflicts. Lack of interprofessional communication limits the discovery of medication errors and uncovering their root cause. Open discussion amongst the team should be encouraged. [Level 5]