The IOM identifies medical errors as a leading cause of death and injury.

Patients and their families face the most critical and severe consequences of medical errors. Therefore, identifying system processes that lead to medical errors and implementing corrective measures is the primary goal in treating this problem.

**Types of Medical Errors**

- Medication error is widely accepted as the most common and preventable cause of patient injury.

- Another common medical error is a diagnostic error with failure to correctly identify the cause of the clinical condition in a timely manner.

- In hospitalized patients, wound infections, pressure ulcers, falls, healthcare-associated infections, and technical complications constitute another group of preventable medical errors.

- The most common systems-error is failure to disseminate drug knowledge and patient information. This, in essence, is a communication failure, whether with the patient or other providers.

- Failure to employ indicated tests is another medical error that can lead to diagnostic delays or errors.

- Similarly, using outdated tests or treatments or failing to respond to the results of tests or monitoring also constitutes a type of medical error.

- Treatment errors include errors during the performance of a test or procedure and inappropriate treatment.

**Risk Factors that Increase the Incidence of Medical Errors**

Some conditions and patient situations increase the risk of severe or fatal adverse events. For example, advanced patient age has been associated with an increased risk of adverse events related to medical errors.

- Schedule instability

- Sleep Deprivation
- Rotating shiftwork that leads to sleep disturbances and, in many cases, chronic sleep deprivation has been linked to poor work performance, increased sick leave utilization, and a higher likelihood of work-related accidents/errors.

- Provider burnout

- Physician or provider burnout is estimated to affect 50% of all practicing providers.

- Workload and nurse-to-patient ratio