During the early stages of embryonic development, gastrulation occurs and differentiates germinal tissues into three distinct layers: outer ectoderm, intra-embryonic mesoderm, and inner endoderm.

**I. Formation of the Primitive Umbilical Ring**

This developmental stage happens together with the folding of the embryonic disc. During this stage, the embryonic disc bulges into the amniotic cavity as a result of folding. At the same time, the amnio-ectodermal junction, which is the tight connection between the embryonic amnion and the ectodermal layer, becomes the ventral aspect of the embryo. Then, the line of reflection between the amnion and the ectoderm acquires an oval outline called the primitive umbilical ring.

**II. Formation of the Primitive Umbilical Cord**

This stage of development starts in the fifth week of pregnancy, during which the primitive umbilical ring constricts to form a tubular sheath. The tubular sheath is called the primitive umbilical cord. It encloses the body stalk, the yolk sac, and its vessels, as well as a part of the allantois.

**III. Formation of the Definitive Umbilical Cord**

During this stage, the umbilical cord elongates, and its fundamental structures undergo primary changes. For instance, The extraembryonic mesoderm of the body stalk starts to differentiate into a mucoid substance called Wharton's jelly. Wharton's jelly develops gradually and forms the main bulk of the umbilical cord. The remnants of the extraembryonic coelom inside the umbilical cord progressively degenerate. The yolk sac becomes obliterated together with the vitellointestinal duct that connects the yolk sac with the midgut. Similarly, the distal part of the allantois becomes obliterated. However, the allantoic vessels persist and elongate to form the umbilical vessels. Finally, during the sixth week, a part of the midgut loop enters the umbilical cord developing a physiological hernia. That physiological hernia is usually corrected when that part of the midgut returns to the abdominal cavity after the tenth week of pregnancy.