The initial workup of a stroke patient involves stabilizing the Airway, Breathing, and Circulation (ABC). This is followed by a rapid, concise, history and exam such as the NIHSS which is administered simultaneously as the patient gets IV access, telemetry, and labs were drawn.  The patient should then get a stat non-contrasted head computed tomogram (CT) or a combination of head CT, CT Angiography, and perfusion imaging. "Time is brain," and so we should not waste any time at all.  Ideally, rtPA should be prepared as imaging is occurring, and as soon as the non-contrasted head CT can be visualized, and a bleed is excluded, rtPA should be administered after discussing the risks and benefits, and excluding rtPA contraindications.  Time is critical, as only patients who get all the required studies within 4.5 hours qualify for potentially lifesaving thrombolysis.  After IV rtPA, the CT angiography should be reviewed to determine if the patient qualifies for endovascular therapy as well.

The earliest CT sign of stroke is:

- A hyperdense segment of a vessel (direct visualization of the intravascular thrombus/embolus)  - most often seen in the MCA (hyperdense MCA sign and MCA dot sign)

Interpretation of CT perfusion scan:

- Infarct core - Demonstrates matched defects in cerebral blood volume (CBV) and mean transit time (MTT)

- Ischemic penumbra - Prolonged MTT, but preserved CBV

Interpretation of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan:

- Early hyperacute - Increased diffusion-weighted image (DWI) signal and reduced apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values

- Late hyperacute (>6 hours) - High T2 signal in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image

In recent years there are significant advancements in acute stroke care. Multiple stroke trials in 2015 showed that endovascular thrombectomy in the first six hours is much better than standard medical care in patients with large vessel occlusion in the arteries of the proximal anterior circulation. These benefits sustained irrespective of geographical location and patient characteristics.

Again in 2018, a significant paradigm shift happened in stroke care. DAWN trial showed significant benefits of endovascular thrombectomy in patients with large vessel occlusion in the arteries of the proximal anterior circulation. This trial extended the stroke window up to 24 hours in selected patients using perfusion imaging. Due to this, we can treat more patients even up to 24 hours.

All patients should be treated with an antiplatelet agent and a statin, and be admitted for full stroke evaluation.  Hypertension is often seen in acute stroke.  This should not be aggressively treated. A baseline electrocardiogram is recommended. The following labs would be indicated when a diagnosis of stroke is entertained:

- Basic metabolic panel (BMP)

- Complete blood count (CBC)

- Cardiac markers

- Coagulation profile: prothrombin time (PT), international normalized ratio (INR), and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)

- Lipid Panel

- Hemoglobin A1C

A transthoracic echocardiogram, telemetry monitoring, and neck vessel imaging are necessary to elucidate the etiology of stroke.