Neonatal jaundice is a common condition with varied etiologies. Most cases are benign with an excellent prognosis and resolve with or without treatment. However, bilirubin encephalopathy can complicate clinical course in a few. Health care professionals taking care of newborn needs to be aware of this. While many conditions that cause jaundice cannot be diagnosed right away, education about the disease is critical. Nurses and parents are often the first to notice jaundice in a newborn. After discharge from the birth hospital, parents need to be educated by the nurses, pediatricians, obstetricians, and the family practice providers to monitor for jaundice and seek medical care if it worsens.

The availability of a  2-color icterometer can help parents identify jaundice earlier for prompt medical intervention. Nurses can also train mothers on how to examine the skin and eyes of neonates for jaundice. In addition, a smartphone app can also help parents assess jaundice. An interprofessional team approach including nurses, lab-technician, providers from various sub-specialties, and nutritionists is necessary for the best outcome. Every health care provider involved in the care of a jaundiced newborn needs to be updated on current evidence-based management approaches. Nurses play a vital role by monitoring treatments, educating parents, and keeping the team apprised about changes in the patient's condition. [Level 5]  As per the American Academy of Pediatrics, every newborn must have a predischarge bilirubin check and should also be assessed for risk factors associated with the development of severe hyperbilirubinemia to improve patient outcomes.