Given that most patients will be on lifetime treatment for COPD and severe asthma, managing the treatment with beta-2 agonists in the context of the National Asthma Education and Prevention and GOLD guidelines, respectively, require a patient-centered approach involving coordination between interprofessional team members. In primary care, studies have shown improvement in the quality of diagnostic and guideline-oriented therapy approaches in settings with a designated respiratory care specialist. Patient outcomes improved under more focused care in terms of overall decreases in symptoms and decreases in the usage of rescue inhalers. Patients also demonstrated proper inhaler technique more frequently compared to facilities without a respiratory care specialist, and the use of spirometry as a means of diagnosis was greater.

Patients are often from the geriatric population, and coordination between the provider and a nursing home or community center must ensure medication compliance and adequate outpatient care, particularly in patients with multiple disabilities. Pulmonary rehabilitation, to regain lost strength and endurance and become reintegrated into the community, has shown improvements to the overall patient quality of life. This approach involves proper patient education on coping mechanisms for exacerbations or dyspnea to minimize emotional stress, proper breathing techniques, the importance of pacing and life modifications, as well as muscle training. Communication with the patient on correct inhalation techniques, signs of adverse side effects, and lifestyle modifications, including smoking cessation, can improve patient outcomes.

Beta-2 agonist therapy requires an interprofessional team approach, including physicians, specialists, specialty-trained nurses, respiratory therapists, and pharmacists, all collaborating across disciplines to achieve optimal patient results. [Level 5]