**Lifestyle Modification**

In overweight and obese PCOS women and adolescents, exercise and calorie-restrictive diets are the best first-line interventions for weight loss and IGT. Different studies have shown that hirsutism can improve as well as regulation of the menstrual cycle and ovulation. Low-carbohydrate diets have been used, hoping that these will have a better effect on hyperinsulinism, but studies have shown no difference in outcomes with low-carbohydrate diets.

**Hormonal Contraceptive**

First-line treatment for menstrual abnormalities, hirsutism, and acne is a hormonal contraceptive, either oral contraceptive, patch, or vaginal rings. The Endocrine Society does not favor any choice over another. The progestin component decreases LH levels, indirectly decreasing ovarian androgen production and increasing sex hormone-binding globulin. Additionally, some progestins have been shown to have direct antiandrogenic properties as a direct inhibitor 5 alpha-reductase activity to prevent the conversion of free testosterone to its more potent form, 5 alpha-dihydrotestosterone. For this reason, they are highly effective for symptoms of hyperandrogenism and controlling the menstrual cycle.

Screening for contraindication for hormonal contraceptives should be done in all patients. Women 35 or older who smoke more than 15 cigarettes daily, uncontrolled hypertension greater than 160/100, uncontrolled diabetes with severe peripheral vascular disease are considered absolute contraindications. The United States Medical Eligibility Criteria For Contraceptive Use are a valuable tool when multiple comorbidities are present. Patients with diabetes and without vascular complications do not have any contraindication to use hormonal contraceptives.

Regarding the metabolic effect of hormonal contraceptives, higher estrogen activity increases HDL cholesterol and decreases LDL cholesterol. No impact on body weight and fat distribution between PCOS and healthy women.

Oral contraceptive initial dosing of 20 mcg of ethinyl estradiol combined with a progestin with antiandrogenic properties such as desogestrel and drospirenone or with neutral effects like norethindrone acetate. Progestin with antiandrogenic properties has been shown to have a higher risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE). If hyperandrogenic symptoms are not controlled completely with this initial dose, ethinyl estradiol can be increased to 30 to 35 mcg.

**Metformin**

Endocrine Society recommends starting metformin in PCOS patients with DM2 or IGT who fail lifestyle modifications. It decreases progression from IGT to DM2. Metformin also improves menstrual cycles, abnormal waist to hip ratio, and vascular markers in non-obese women with PCOS.

Metformin is also second-line therapy for menstrual irregularities in patients with a contraindication for hormonal contraceptives. It is commonly used in the adolescent as monotherapy, and it helps restore normal menses, weight loss, and reduce insulin resistance. Even though it should not be used primarily to treat clinical hyperandrogenism, it can mildly improve androgen excess symptoms.

**Infertility Treatment**

First-line therapy for infertility in PCOS patients is clomiphene citrate. This is a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), competitive inhibitor of estrogen receptors (ERs), and has mixed agonist and antagonist activity.

Clomiphene enhances fertility and ovulation, especially by its effect on the hypothalamus, where it binds for a prolonged period to estrogen receptors and depletes them, blocking the negative feedback inhibition effect of circulating endogenous estrogen. This results in the pulsatile release of a hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), promoting the secretion of FSH and LH and indirectly stimulating ovulation.

New evidence for estrogen modulators such as letrozole has shown that it can be used in ovulatory infertility. This is an aromatase inhibitor that blocks estrogen synthesis, reducing negative estrogenic feedback at the pituitary. A National Institute of Health founded a double-blind, multicenter trial that reported that letrozole, compared to clomiphene, was associated with higher live-birth and ovulation rates among infertile women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Additional studies regarding relative teratogenicity need to be done, but future guidelines can change after this new evidence.

Metformin is suggested as an adjuvant treatment for infertility, helping prevent ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome in a patient undergoing in vitro fertilization. It has shown higher benefits in obese patients. After pregnancy is confirmed, it is now allowed for patients with diabetes or glucose intolerance to continue the medication as a treatment for sugar control, but attention should be given to avoid maternal gastrointestinal disturbances.

**Treatment for Hyperandrogenism**

Clinical hyperandrogenism requires long-term treatment and takes several months before effects are evident.

Cosmetic interventions should be initiated while medications start working. These can be bleaching and temporary hair removal methods, using galvanic or blended electrolysis for localized areas with the experienced operator, using laser photo-epilation for generalized hirsutism.

Pharmacological interventions include topical eflornithine for face hirsutism which can be an expensive treatment with potentially serious side effects if the body absorbs it.

First-line treatment of hirsutism is low-dose neutral or antiandrogenic oral contraceptives which effectively lowers androgens level and effect. Additionally, contraceptive properties are beneficial when combined with antiandrogenic drugs because the latter requires reliable contraception as they are highly teratogenic. Mild hirsutism can be treated OCP alone.

Adjuvant antiandrogen administration can be done for moderate, severe hirsutism and mild hirsutism without adequate hair growth control after 6 months to 1 year of OCP. As those drugs have similar efficacy, androgen excess and the PCOS Society suggest prescribing finasteride, cyproterone acetate, which is not available in the United States, or spironolactone, instead of flutamide when an antiandrogen is needed, due to potential side effects like hepatotoxicity. They act by blocking androgens effects over the hair follicle; finasteride also has inhibition of 5 alpha-reductase.

Spironolactone is the most common adjuvant anti-androgen medication prescribed after OCP; it is a nonselective mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist and suppresses testosterone levels. Spironolactone also has additional benefits regarding the risk of CVD compared to OCP. Combinations of spironolactone with metformin were superior to monotherapy with either drug regarding improved menstrual cycles, glucose during OGTT, assessed by the area under the curve, and testosterone levels.

Metformin alone or other insulin sensitizers are not considered target treatment for hirsutism due to no consistent evidence showing superior effect than placebo.

**Additional Insulin Sensitizing Treatment in PCOS**

- 
**GLP-1 agonists**

GLP-1 agonists bind to the GLP-1 receptor and stimulate glucose-dependent insulin release from the pancreatic islets. They have a longer half-life than our bodies GLP-1 because of resistance to degradation by the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4). Data shows that GLP-1 secretion was significantly lower in obese compared with lean women with PCOS.

Treatment with GLP-1 agonist was associated with decreased BMI and testosterone and improved ovulation rate in obese women with PCOS.

There is increasing evidence that weight loss and insulin sensitivity are higher with GLP-1 agonists than metformin.

- 
**DPP4 inhibitors**

DPP4 inhibitors decrease the degradation of incretins, therefore, increasing glucose-dependent insulin release. In patients with type 2 diabetes, they are considered weight neutral. New data suggest that in obese women with PCOS, DPP4 inhibitors have beneficial effects in weight loss and lower blood glucose levels. It prevented weight gain in women who were transitioning from GLP-1 agonists.

Evidence suggests that the effect of DPP4 inhibitors on the weight of women with PCOS is based on increasing growth hormone, which is reduced in patients with PCOS. These, in turn, decrease visceral fat mass. Data is still limited, and it is considered experimental.

- 
**SGLT2 inhibitors**

SGLT2 inhibitors increase urinary glucose secretion, improves weight loss and cardiovascular risk in patients with type 2 diabetes. Limited data in obese patients shows promising data for weight loss and fat mass reduction with treatment with SGLT2 inhibitors compared to metformin, but its effect on hormonal and metabolic parameters was similar. More data is needed to implement this medication in clinical practice.

- 
**Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) agonist**

In PCOS, PPARg agonist treatment improved hormonal and metabolic outcomes but had an adverse effect on weight. It can be superior in patients with NAFLD compared to metformin.

- 
**Myoinositol**

Myoinositol is an over-the-counter food supplement that increases insulin sensitivity. Compared with placebo improved insulin sensitivity in women with PCOS without significant effect on BMI. Data is limited, and its use has been mostly applied as fertility treatment of PCOS or when metformin is not tolerated, given it has fewer gastrointestinal side effects.