Always start with open-ended questions and a standard history. Specific questions which are important to ask are recent trauma, pain/tenderness of ear, previous occurrences, fevers/chills, drainage from ears, change in hearing, immunosuppression, diabetes, blood-thinning medications, and hypertension. Physical exam involves a thorough evaluation of external ear. It is important to have a good understanding of the baseline anatomy of the ear to better differentiate pathology. Use of an otoscope to evaluate the external ear canal and tympanic membrane is paramount. A recent history of trauma is common, and wrestling and boxing are common risk factors. If the mechanism of trauma is large, such as a motor vehicle accident, the practitioner must rule out temporal bone trauma as well as assessing the patient for other injuries.

A proper exam includes a full head and neck exam, the details of which are beyond the scope of this article. A focused physical exam includes an evaluation of the external ear, evaluation of the tympanic membrane with an otoscope, and evaluation for any coexistent lacerations or trauma of the head and neck. It is imperative to evaluate for facial nerve weakness as the facial nerve passes through the ear and can be damaged when there is trauma to the ear. Physical exam findings consistent with auricular hematoma include contour irregularity of ear with swelling and fluctuant area overlying the ear's cartilaginous portions. Likely symptoms include pain, paresthesia, and ecchymosis.[8]