Since cumulative seizure time is directly related to neurocognitive decline, reducing seizure frequency, and ideally, achieving seizure control is essential. The impact of epilepsy, as well as its management, have serious implications on the quality of life of the patient and should be taken into consideration.

Upon diagnosis of temporal lobe epilepsy, initial management should be pharmacological intervention with one of a variety of AEDs. Older AEDs such as phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, and phenobarbital, are equal in efficacy to newer AEDs like lamotrigine, gabapentin, or levetiracetam**,**but correlate with a higher rate of adverse effects such as hepatotoxicity. Clinicians should avoid valproate and topiramate if possible, and lamotrigine and may consider levetiracetam, due to clinical evidence of higher rates of favorable outcomes in pregnancy.**.**

About one-third of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy do not have a resolution of seizures after initiation of AEDs.****Surgery is one option for individuals with refractory temporal lobe epilepsy and may provide up to an 80 percent remission rate in individuals with HS.

The two most commonly performed surgical interventions anterior temporal lobectomy (ATL), involving the resection of the anterior temporal lobe, amygdala, hippocampus, and parahippocampal gyrus, as well as selective amygdalohippocampectomy (AHP), which targets the mesial structures specifically, preserving much of the cortical anatomy.

In the standard anterior temporal lobectomy, a posterior cortical incision is made at the level of the lateral temporal gyri beginning around 5.5 cm from the temporal tip in the nondominant hemisphere and 4.5 cm from the temporal tip in the dominant hemisphere at the level of second temporal gyrus. This incision is slanted to avoid the primary auditory cortex in the first temporal gyrus. In comparison, the anteromedial temporal resection technique was developed to preserve more function of the lateral temporal lobe, in addition to aid in the access of mesial temporal structures. This procedure removes around 5 to 6 cm of the temporal lobe. The cortical incision is initiated at about 3 to 3.5 cm from the temporal tip and continued inferiorly towards the third temporal gyrus, with sparing of the auditory cortex in the first temporal gyrus. The mesial structures are subsequently removed using an ultrasound aspirator.

There is inconclusive evidence that a more selective approach may improve neurocognitive outcomes.

For individuals in whom surgery is contraindicated, other options are available for consideration.

The use of ketogenic dieting may also be beneficial at reducing ictal frequency.