The initial medical management of PPCM is similar to other causes of heart failure with the special attention to how the condition can affect the pregnancy. Additional therapeutic considerations for this population may include arrhythmia management, anticoagulation therapy, mechanical support, and investigational therapies.

As part of the goal of treatment for patients with PPCM, optimizing the preload or volume status is done through appropriate diuresis and keeping a balance of intra- and extravascular volume. Fluid restriction is fundamental to achieve this goal. Prepartum PCCM has special considerations for treatment due to side effects of medication that might cross the placenta and affect the fetus. As an example, use of diuretics during pregnancy should be done carefully and in very low doses as they may impair perfusion of the placenta and cause potential harm to the fetus. Both hydrochlorothiazide and furosemide are safe during pregnancy and lactation, with close monitoring for diuresis and at low doses. Insufficient data exist about potassium-sparing diuretics for PPCM during pregnancy.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are contraindicated during pregnancy due to the well known teratogenic effects if administrated during pregnancy. Both of these medications can be used after delivery, but breastfeeding is contraindicated.

Beta-blockers can be used with caution during pregnancy (beta-1 selective agents are preferred) and are contraindicated during breastfeeding because this is excreted in the breastmilk. Carvedilol is a combined beta-blocker with an additional alpha-blockade effect that allows a decrease of the afterload and is effective in the treatment of PPCM.

Hydralazine, a vasodilator, is safe during pregnancy. A nitroglycerin drip can be used to manage afterload in the acute setting. Nitroprusside is contraindicated during pregnancy for concern of cyanide's toxicity.

In very ill patients with hemodynamic instability, the use of inotropes might be necessary. Use of inotropes such as dobutamine, dopamine, and milrinone is restricted for this critical situation with close monitoring and with fast weaning off medication if possible.

Digoxin is another drug that can be used for the treatment of PPCM. It is safe during pregnancy and can be used when the ionotropic and chronotropic effect is necessary, especially in the setting of uncontrolled atrial fibrillation.

Anticoagulation therapy in patients with PPCM is controversial. As a general recommendation, patients with PPCM without LV thrombus or atrial fibrillation should not be in anticoagulation. Patients with PPCM and atrial fibrillation and/or LV thrombus should be anticoagulated according to the guidelines for anticoagulation and the trimester of pregnancy.

Decisions regarding the use of an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) and cardiac resynchronization therapy in patients with PPCM should consider the natural history of these diseases, including the potential for the recovery of ventricular function.

Use of mechanical circulatory support has been describing in patients with fulminant PPCM. Placement of left ventricular assistant device (LVAD) can be a bridge for transplant or recovery.

Experimental medications such as pentoxifylline, bromocriptine, IVIG, and immunosuppression are still under investigation, and nonspecific recommendations exist for these drugs.