The most commonly used anesthetic gases are halothane, nitrous oxide, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane. The primary mode of administration is by inhalation through a face mask, laryngeal mask airway, or a tracheal tube. They can be useful for preoperative sedation in addition to intravenous (IV) anesthetic agents such as midazolam and propofol in the perioperative and intraoperative setting.

Isoflurane has a MAC of 1.2% at sea level.  MAC levels can change based on different factors.  Old age, acute intoxication with sedating drugs, hypothermia will decrease the level of MAC. Hyperthermia, chronic cocaine abuse, and alcohol abuse will increase the level of MAC.  After the age of 40, MAC levels decrease by 6% per decade.

Sevoflurane has a MAC of 2.6%. The age decrease in MAC value is the same as isoflurane.

Nitrous oxide, also known as "laughing gas," is a non-flammable, odorless, and colorless gas. It has a MAC of 104%. Unlike other inhaled anesthetics currently used, it has analgesic properties. Its use has fallen more into favor as an anesthetic option for laboring patients in the obstetric wards.

The higher the MAC, the lower the potency of gas is needed for sedation. Induction speed is determined by the alveolar concentration known as FA in conjunction with the inspired concentration known as FI. The rate at which this ratio approaches 1 is known as the speed of induction.

Children at 6 months of age will require a higher MAC, and the elderly often have reduced MAC requirements. Although 1.0 MAC is the number most often used to produce anesthesia and immobility, many practitioners also use a dose of anesthetic above a particular threshold to prevent recall called MAC awake. While not as reliable as the immobility measure, a dose above 0.4 to 0.5 MAC is considered sufficient to prevent recall. Recall under anesthesia is a rare event, especially with standard dosing of inhaled anesthetics. It has been reported and verified with patients who have had their memory tested post-procedure. Typically this occurs when lower doses of anesthetics were utilized.