The lymphatic transport system can subdivide into five components: capillaries, collecting vessels, lymph nodes, trunks, and ducts. The initial point of entry into the lymphatic system is through the capillaries, which are a single layer of partially overlapping endothelial cells creating a valve. These overlapping junctions form a "button-like" opening, which allows fluid into the capillary when the pressure outside of the vessel is greater than the pressure inside of the vessel. The capillaries subsequently feed fluid into the collecting vessels, in which an endothelial layer with many tight junctions forms a "zipper-like" structure. These collecting vessels also have intraluminal valves as well as pericytes. The pericytes contain alpha-smooth muscle actin, which functions to contract the vessel and pump the fluid further through the system. The valves prevent the backflow of the lymphatic fluid and ensure the unidirectional flow of fluid.

There are three portions of a lymph node, including the medulla, paracortex, and cortex, which in combination, form the house of lymphocytes, antigen-presenting cells, and macrophages. Research has determined that there are approximately 450 lymph nodes in the human body. Each lymph node has lymph sinuses surrounding the lymphoid lobules, all encased by a capsular tissue. The medulla has a reticular meshwork that is very dense and allows antigen-presenting cells, lymphocytes, and macrophages to occupy this space. The paracortex is where T cells function to interact with the dendritic antigen-presenting cells. The B cells of the body are present in the follicles, which comprise the lymph node cortex. The architecture of a lymph node is one of the primary reasons the immune system can function so effectively and efficiently.

After visiting the lymph nodes, the lymphatic fluid flows into efferent lymphatic collecting vessels into larger lymphatic trunks and then into the lymphatic ducts. The lymphatic ducts allow the entry of the lymphatic fluid into the venous system bilaterally via the opening found at the intersection of the subclavian and internal jugular vein.