Management of rhino-orbital cerebral mucormycosis illustrates the classic example of an interprofessional team approach in improving patient outcomes. The management starts in the emergency department. A meticulous history taking and close examination of the patient, along with a high index of suspicion is required. After a quick ABC evaluation and stabilization, there is a need to undergo urgent imaging, and it is extremely important to provide adequate inputs to the radiology team for early, accurate reporting. Once rhino-orbital mucormycosis is suspected based on clinical presentation and radiology, it is important to involve an otorhinolaryngologist for urgent extensive nasal/sinus debridement, and tissue biopsy for histopathologic diagnosis. An ophthalmology evaluation is often followed, and subsequent involvement of an oculoplastic surgeon will help in orbital exploration, decompression, or exenteration. Neurosurgery opinion is often sought whenever there is intracranial involvement. Hospitalists, infectious disease physicians, and endocrinologists are involved in the medical management of the patient. There will be an overlap of roles between different medical and surgical specialties, and close interaction and coordination among the interprofessional team are essential to ensure better patient outcomes. Surgical procedures may have to be done in single or multiple stages. Psychologists or psychiatrists may have to be involved in the counseling of the patient and family to overcome the stress of severe disfigurement following surgical debridement. Rehabilitation opinion is often asked to effectively minimize residual neurologic deficits. Close coordination and interaction between various medical, surgical, nursing, and paramedical professionals help to achieve a better outcome. [Level 5]