Fluvastatin is a member of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor drug class. HMG-CoA reductase, the first committed enzyme of the mevalonate pathway, plays a role in the rate-limiting step of cholesterol synthesis in the liver. Statins competitively inhibit HMG-CoA reductase. Because they are molecularly similar in structure to HMG-CoA, they fit into the enzyme's active site. This binding creates competition with the native substrate, HMG-CoA. Consequently, there is a reduction in the rate by which HMG-CoA reductase can produce mevalonate. Mevalonate is the next molecule in the cascade that eventually produces cholesterol. Moreover, the lowering of blood cholesterol concentrations by fluvastatin causes an increase in the expression of LDL receptors on the liver hepatocytes and enhanced stimulation of LDL breakdown.

**Pharmacokinetics**

- **Absorption:**The bioavailability of the fluvastatin capsule is 24%, and the extended-release tablet is 29%. Administration of a high-fat meal delays the absorption and increases the bioavailability of the ER tablet by approximately 50%.

- **Distribution:**Fluvastatin is 98% bound to plasma proteins. The volume of distribution (Vd) is estimated at 0.35 L/kg. At therapeutic concentrations, the plasma protein binding of fluvastatin is not affected by warfarin, aspirin, and glyburide.

- **Metabolism:**Fluvastatin is metabolized via hydroxylation in the liver. In addition, fluvastatin is metabolized by multiple cytochrome P450 (CYP) isozymes, including CYP2C9 (75%), followed by CYP3A4 (20%) and CYP2C8 (5%).

- **Excretion:**Ninety-five percent of the drug is excreted in feces, with the remaining 5% excreted in the urine.