Treatment options for vestibular schwannomas (acoustic neuromas) include microsurgical resection, radiation therapy, and observation. Post-operative mortality rates have decreased dramatically over the last century. Therefore, preserving facial nerve function has become the primary goal of surgery while removing as much of the tumor as possible. The three standard surgical approaches are middle fossa, retrosigmoidal, and translabyrinthine. Pre-operative hearing level, tumor size, and tumor location determine which approach is used.

The middle fossa approach is reserved for patients with functional hearing levels and < 1 cm of CPA involvement. The retrosigmoidal approach is used for patients with functional hearing levels, > 1 cm CPA involvement, and no extension into the lateral IAC. The translabyrinthine approach is used for patients with no functional hearing or tumors that are too large to preserve hearing. Surgeons must weigh the risks and benefits of completely removing the tumor and possible injury to the facial nerve, cochlear nerve, or brainstem.

CSF leak is the most commonly reported complication of vestibular schwannoma surgery. There is no significant difference in the frequency of CSF leaks between the three approaches. Post-operative meningitis is another feared complication and can be either aseptic or bacterial. Aseptic meningitis is more common; it is due to an inflammatory reaction against foreign material, such as blood, hemoglobin, and bone dust, within the subarachnoid space. Common presenting symptoms of aseptic meningitis include neck stiffness, fever, headache, and fatigue with negative bacterial cultures. Both types of meningitis are associated with CSF leaks. Dural sinus thrombosis, seizures, and hemorrhages are less common complications. Early diagnosis and treatment are important to decrease the likelihood of these complications.