Rehydrate sections in descending concentration of alcohol solution.

**Haematoxylin and Eosin****:**

- Place the rehydrated section on a slide.

- Stain with standard Haemotoxylin for 5 to 10 minutes.

- Wash with tap water for 4 to 5 minutes.

- Stain with Eosin for 5 minutes.

- Wash in tap water.

- Mount and observe in a microscope.

- Results: Osteoid looks pink; calcified bone looks purplish brown, nuclei look blue.

**Von Kossa staining (Chemical Mechanisms of Staining Methods: Von Kossa's Technique)****:**

- Put the section in silver nitrate solution approximately for at least 10 minutes under strong light; the section should be turned black.

- Wash with distilled water for 3 to 5 times and then treat put in sodium thiosulfate for 4 to 6 minutes.

- Wash with distilled water for 1 to 2 minutes then counterstain with safranin O.

- Clear with xylene and mount on the glass slide.

- Mineralized bone looks black with red to pink osteoids.

**Masson Goldner's Trichrome**

- Use alkaline alcohol (90 ml 80% ethanol mixed with 10mls 25% ammonia) to wash the section then rinse with tap water.

- Wash with distilled water

- Stain with Weigert s Haematoxylin for 10 minutes

- Wash with distilled water

- Wash with 1% acetic acid for 20 to 30 seconds

- Stain with reagent 1, e.g., stain with Ponceau-Fuchsin final solution 5 minutes

- Wash with 1% acetic acid for 20 to 30 seconds

- Stain with reagent 2, e.g., phosphomolybdic acid-orange G solution for 5 minutes

- Wash with 1% acetic acid for 20 to 30 seconds

- Stain with Reagent 3 e.g., light green for 5 minutes

- Wash with 1% acetic acid for 20 to 30 seconds

- Wash with distilled water

- Mount with non-aqueous mounting media

- Mineralized bone looks green, osteoid looks orange or red, nuclei look blue-grey, and cartilage looks purple.

**Immunohistochemical Staining and Fluorescence Microscopy****:**

- Incubate cells for 15 mins in acetate buffer (110mM, pH 5.2) for 14-16 minutes ELF97 substrate. Stain nuclei with DAPI (4′,6-diamidine-2′-phenylindole dihydrochloride, 10 ng/mL)

-  Antibody for the desired epitope can be used for immunohistochemical staining e.g., Stro-1, alkaline phosphatase, vimentin, MHC Class-II, CD3, core-binding factor alpha-1.

- Mount the stained section in fluorescence mounting medium; study the section under a confocal microscope.

Recombinant DNA produced via coating formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded PCL/PLLA specimens with PLLA nanofibers can be used to demonstrate the inner chemistry of the periosteum.

Mayer's hematoxylin counterstain helps to mark cells underlying PCL/PLLA scaffold, within the periosteum, and layers of PLLA nanofibers. (PCL=polycaprolactone-co-lactide ) Calcium is stained with alizarin red stain and is visible at the interface between the PCL/PLLA inner scaffold. Phosphate, marked with a black stain by von Kossa treatment, reflects the same traits as the area stained with alizarin red.

**For Electron Microscopy**

Fix the bone in glutaraldehyde for 2 hours. Wash the tissue using a saccharose solution overnight and postfix the sample in osmium tetroxide for about 1 hour. After dehydrating the sample with propylene oxide and alcohol, embed the sample in Epon B. Prepare thin slices and stain the sample using toluidine blue, followed by another cut using an ultramicrotome with a diamond knife to gain ultrathin samples. Use uranyl acetate to stain the ultrathin sections and lead with citrate before viewing it under the transmission electron microscope.