The management of CKTR remains challenging, mainly due to irreversibility at the time of diagnosis. Management, therefore, focuses on the prevention and early management of AR rather than treating CKTR. Adequacy of immunosuppression and patient adherence are pivotal for preventing AR, which later translates into a lower incidence of CKTR. Optimizing HLA matching reduces the chances of early allograft injury, further decreasing the risk of chronic allograft loss.

Most immunosuppressive regimens in the United States include a CNI, an antimetabolite, and corticosteroids. Although extremely effective, CNIs carry a high risk of chronic nephrotoxicity. Two methods that were suggested to balance efficacy and toxicity are (1) Guiding dosage by monitoring blood drug levels and (2) CNI sparing strategies. The four main approaches to minimize CNI exposure are CNI minimization, conversion, withdrawal, and avoidance.

**CNI Minimization:**Minimization refers to lowering target blood trough levels of CNIs, with or without another immunosuppressive agent. A systematic review and meta-analysis showed that CNI minimization was associated with a relatively low risk of AR and overall improved allograft function.

Combining low dose CNI with mycophenolic acid (MPA) preparations also reduced the risk of AR with no difference in mortality. Pairing CNI minimization with a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor (such as sirolimus or everolimus) did not increase the risk of biopsy-proven AR. It led to an improvement in kidney function in some studies. It is worth noting, however, that full dose CNI plus mTOR inhibitor therapy increases the risk of nephrotoxicity.

**CNI****Conversion:**Conversion refers to switching CNI to another maintenance drug. Converting from CNI to an mTOR inhibitor showed improvement in kidney function, which was more observed with the conversion from cyclosporine compared to tacrolimus.

**CNI****Withdrawal:**Withdrawal refers to tapering CNIs until completely discontinued. CNI withdrawal with either MPA or mTOR inhibitor-based regimens was associated with an increased risk of rejection. Early withdrawal (<6 months post-transplant) was associated with an increased risk of graft loss, with insufficient evidence for both rejection and a decrease in renal function. Late withdrawal with the continuation of MPA preparations was associated with an overall greater risk of rejection.

**CNI****Avoidance:**Avoidance refers to CNI free regimens planned from the start. Initial trials to avoid CNIs while using daclizumab or anti-thymocyte globulin were associated with an increased risk of AR, which required reintroduction of CNIs in some patients.

Belatacept, a novel fusion protein that inhibits T cell activation, was also compared to CNI based regimens. Vincenti et al. randomized patients into three groups; a cyclosporine, an intensive belatacept, and a less intensive belatacept-based regimen. Patients were followed for seven years. Patients on belatacept-based regimens showed a 43% reduction in risk of graft loss and death, compared to cyclosporine. Kidney function improved in both belatacept-based regimens, while it declined with cyclosporine.

Non-immunological management of CKTR includes tight control of blood pressure and lipid levels.