NaHCO3 comes in various forms, including oral tablets, IV injections, and IV infusions.

Oral formulations are available via powder, 325 mg, and 650 mg oral tablets.

1 mEq NaHCO3 is 84 mg. 1000 mg = 1 gram of NaHCO3 contains 11.9 mEq of sodium and bicarbonate ions. One 650 mg tablet of NaHCO3 has 7.7 mEq of sodium and bicarbonate ions.

The two primary IV injection formulations of NaHCO3 are as follows:

- 7.5% concentration = 44.6 mEq NaHCO3 in 50 mL. 7.5% concentration supplies 75 mg/mL, which also consists 0.9 mEq/mL for each sodium and bicarbonate.

- 8.4% concentration = 50 mEq in 50 mL. 8.4% concentration supplies 84 mg/mL, which also consists 1 mEq/mL for each sodium and bicarbonate. One ampoule of 50 ml contains 50 mEq sodium and 50 mEq bicarbonate to a total of 100 mEq/50 mL and corresponds to 2000 mosm per liter. This formulation is a hypertonic solution and can raise serum sodium concentration with the attraction of water to the extracellular areas from the intracellular area.

- A 4.2% and 5% solution are also available, though not as often used given the dosing availability of larger concentrations.

NaHCO3 IV infusions are available in the following formulations:

- 50 mEq, 75 mEq, 100 mEq NaHCO3 in 1L of 0.45% NS, 0.45%NS+D5W, or D5W

- 50 mEq, 75 mEq, 100 mEq and 150 mEq NaHCO3 in 1L D5W or Sterile water

- Bicarbonate tablets are available as 650mg NaHCO3, 25 to 50 mEq KHCO3, 20 to 40 mEq KHCO3-citric acid, and 20 to 50 mEq KHCO3-KCl tablets.

**Common Uses of Sodium Bicarbonate**

Cardiac arrest: Currently, routine bicarbonate administration for cardiac arrest is no longer a recommendation. It should only be administered for cardiac arrest due to hyperkalemia or tricyclic antidepressant overdose, or metabolic acidosis.

Acute metabolic acidosis: If pH is less than 7.1 or pH less than 7.1 to 7.2 in patients with severe acute kidney injury (oliguria or 2-fold or larger increase in serum creatinine level)

Chronic metabolic acidosis: 50 to 100 mEq oral tablet can be initiated and titrated according to the ongoing evaluation of acid-base balance.

Lactic acidosis: The use of sodium bicarbonate remains controversial but is an option if pH is below 7.

Diabetic ketoacidosis: The use of sodium bicarbonate remains controversial in diabetic ketoacidosis since recovery outcome is similar with or without NaHCO3. However, sodium bicarbonate is still recommended if the pH is below 7 after 1 hour of fluid administration. Sodium bicarbonate should be given in hypotonic fluid every two hours until pH is at least 7.

Hyperkalemia: When patients with severe hyperkalemia (serum potassium level of more than 6 mEq/L or more than 5.5 mEq/L with arrhythmia or EKG changes) have metabolic acidosis, sodium bicarbonate should be administered. The dose needed is empirical and is unpredictable. Initially, 150 mEq of sodium bicarbonate can be given in 1 liter of 5% dextrose over 4 hours. More can be given if acidosis does not correct with this regimen.

Sodium bicarbonate administration can be at varying doses for renal tubular acidosis, and to achieve urine alkalization, it can be given IV for some intoxications such as salicylate overdose and as a preventative measure against contrast-induced nephropathy.