The mechanism by which LSD works is mainly mediated by activation of serotonin receptors (namely 5HT2A receptors or 5hydroxytryptamine 2A receptor, 5-HT2AR) with modulation of the 5HT2C and 5HT1A receptors. The interactions between the receptor activation and the resulting impairment in cognition and induction of hallucinations are still poorly understood. One study suggests that LSD-induced 5-HT2AR activation leads to a breakdown of inhibitory processes in the hippocampal prefrontal cortex. Specifically, it has been demonstrated to reduce brain activity in the right middle temporal gyrus, superior/middle/inferior frontal gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex, and the left superior frontal and postcentral gyrus and cerebellum. Studies also have shown activation of the right hemisphere, altered thalamic functioning, and increased activity in the paralimbic structures and the frontal cortex; this all leads to the formation of induced visual imageries.

In substance abuse, it is well established that anxiety and stress are important triggers for relapse. It is possible that 5HT2A receptor downregulation by hallucinogens could help in stress-induced relapses. LSD may also affect the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor(GDNF). Both of these play critical roles in neurogenesis, synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory. There is some evidence that LSD can induce neuroplastic changes suggesting a basis for the persistent behavioral changes. LSD also induces remodeling of pyramidal cell dendrites.