Cancer is an uncontrolled growth of cells leading to phenotypic expression in many forms, from mild to life-threatening. Cancer can develop in many ways, either from DNA damage, a mutation in the DNA or any product of that DNA, or by loss of function of the regulatory and repressor systems in the cycle.

In many cancer cells, there must be an issue on both alleles of a chromatid for cancer to occur. This is known as the two-hit hypothesis, and is the reason why cancer is often time heritable. Both alleles must be defective for cancer to occur; otherwise, the functioning allele will be favored, and cancer will be suppressed normally. Besides being passed down in genetics, environmental factors may also play a crucial role in developing cancer. Radical oxygens could lead to changes in the DNA and could lead to cancer if not corrected. Another common environmental factor that can damage DNA is UV light that radiates from the sun. This radiation can lead to the formation of thymidine dimers, which are normally fixed by nucleotide excision repair (NER); however, errors in this process can lead to misreading of the DNA and thus lead to cancer.

There are many reasons that cancer can occur; however, overall, cancer develops due to the inability of the cell to repress the growth once it has occurred. Overall, the cell cycle has many regulatory steps that are crucial to maintaining homeostasis inside of the cells during the replication of DNA and the division of cells. Mutation inside specific genes can lead to the loss of balance inside the cells, thus resulting in cancer growth. Cancer cells can also use specific telomerase to create long repeated sequences of telomeres that prevent the cell from going through apoptosis even after many repeats. The maintenance of all cell functions is important to prevent cancer growth; even small changes in certain genes can cause the over division of cells.