The navicular bone has a major oblique axis that is oriented in dorsoplantar and mediolateral direction as an adaptation to the talus head that has a minus 45-degree angle of rotation. It has a round base, which is located in the dorsolateral end, and its apex is situated plantar-medially. Morphologically, the navicular bone consist of four sides (anterior, posterior, dorsal, and plantar aspect) and two ends (medial and lateral ends).

**Anterior Aspect**

The anterior aspect of the navicular bone has a kidney-shaped appearance with its convex side on the dorsal aspect. This anterior plane divides into three articular surfaces by two slight crests that extend in a dorsoplantar direction. Overall, the anterior surface is convex; however, the articular surface division into the medial, intermediate, and lateral articular surface, generates a different direction of each articulation. The medial articular surface is the largest, is convex, and has a triangular-shaped surface. It articulates with the medial cuneiform bone. The intermediate articular surface is flat but also has a triangular shape morphology. It articulates with the intermediate or middle cuneiform bone. The lateral articular surface is the smallest among the three. It has a quadrangular surface and articulates to the lateral cuneiform bone. These three articulations converge at the plantar aspect and form the transverse tarsal arch of the foot.

**Posterior Aspect**

The posterior aspect is concave and completely covered with articular cartilage. It connects with the head of the talus to form a triplanar ball-and-socket joint.

**Dorsal Aspect**

The dorsal aspect provides insertion to various capsule-ligamentous structures. It is markedly convex with the highest point of convexity at the intermediate articular surface.

**Plantar Aspect**

Similar to the dorsal aspect, the plantar aspect also provides insertion to various capsule-ligamentous structures. It is continuous medially to the navicular tuberosity and has an irregular morphology. The navicular beak often presents as an osseous prominence extending downwards, giving a quadrangular morphology of the navicular bone.

**Medial End**

The navicular tuberosity is an osseous prominence that arises on the medial aspect of the navicular bone. It is responsible for the insertion of plantar and medial navicular ligaments, and the posterior tibial tendon as well. The accessory navicular refers to a condition where a supernumerary ossicle exists adjacent to the navicular tuberosity, giving a bony prominence on the medial side that may be symptomatic.

**Lateral End**

The lateral end divides into two noticeable segments, which are the superior or dorsal segment and the inferior or plantar segment. While the inferior segment provides articulation to the cuboid bone, the superior segment arranges for the insertion of the medial component of the lateral calcaneonavicular ligament (bifurcate ligament).

**Joints and Ligaments**

**Acetabulum Pedis**

The talocalcaneonavicular joint, also called acetabulum pedis, concurrently with the posterior talocalcaneal joint forming the subtalar articular complex. Its name comes from its similarity to the hip joint morphology and a nearly ball-and-socket resemblant function. The acetabulum pedis is made up of two basic elements, which are the osseous and ligament components. The skeletal structures included are the posterior articular surface of the navicular bone, the anterior and middle articular surface of the calcaneus that articulate with the head, and the anteromedial surface of the talus. These bones are stabilized by the plantar calcaneonavicular ligament (spring ligament) on the medial aspect and the lateral calcaneonavicular ligament (a component of the bifurcate ligament) on the lateral aspect.

**Plantar Calcaneonavicular Ligament**

The plantar calcaneonavicular ligament, otherwise known as the spring ligament, is a group of ligaments that bond the calcaneus and the navicular to perform as a “socket” for the head of the talus. There are some controversies regarding the morphology of this ligament. While some former researchers believed that it is made up of two fascicles of fibrocartilaginous component, more current studies describe that the spring ligament is composed of two different ligaments: the superomedial and the inferior calcaneonavicular ligaments. Some recent investigators even include the talonavicular fascicle of the superficial component of the deltoid ligament as a part of the spring ligament complex.

The superomedial calcaneonavicular ligament, also known as the ligamentum neglectum, is a quadrangular ligament originally considered a component of the tibiocalcaneonavicular ligament. It originates from the anteromedial margins of the sustentaculum tali which extended to the anterior margin of the calcaneal anterior articular surface. From its origin, the superomedial calcaneonavicular ligament concavely fans out in an antero-dorso-lateral direction to a broad insertion at the margin of the navicular posterior articular surface. On the dorsal aspect, it attaches to the thick fibrocartilaginous surface that performs as the base of the fibrous tunnel of the posterior tibial tendon.

The inferior calcaneonavicular ligament is a trapezoidal-shaped ligament that arises from the superior portion of the coronoid fossa of os calcis, just anterior to the sustentaculum tali. Its insertion is on the lateral aspect of the navicular beak on the plantar aspect of the navicular, just lateral to the superomedial calcaneonavicular ligament insertion. The inferior calcaneonavicular ligament performs as one of the main static stabilizers of the longitudinal arch of the foot.

**Bifurcate Ligament**

Also known as the Chopart ligament, the bifurcate ligament is a Y-shaped ligament that consists of two components that have different insertions, which are the calcaneonavicular ligament and the calcaneocuboid ligament.  The proximal origin of the calcaneonavicular ligament is located at the sinus tarsi. The ligament then courses anterodorsomedially and inserts in the superior segment of the lateral end of the navicular. Two bundles of fibers form this ligament. While the superior fibers are long, resistant, and lays superficial, the inferior fibers are short and rest deep. The lateral calcaneocuboid ligament originates from the lateral side of the calcaneonavicular ligament’s origin, on the anterior aspect of the intermediary tubercle. It extends anteroinferior and attaches to the dorsal side of the cuboid. Together, these fibers form a durable band that facilitates lateral foot stabilization.