The TORCH titer is a test that is often run in this setting. Basically, it is usually a panel of IgG tests for the pathogens noted. It may provide some useful insight into whether a mother has been infected if high titers are detected, it is not that useful in making a definitive diagnosis of any pathogen associated with congenital infections. Therefore, the investigation of each pathogen is warranted if the clinical syndrome is suggestive of that disease. The evaluation of each illness is noted in the following passages.

Toxoplasmosis: In newborns with a concern for congenital toxoplasmosis, evaluation should include laboratory testing, consultations, and radiologic studies. Due to the possibility of ocular involvement, an ophthalmologist should be consulted to assess for possible chorioretinitis. Neuroimaging studies should be conducted to assess intracranial calcifications and/or hydrocephalus. Laboratory testing can be a bit complicated. The most sensitive and specific testing includes a mixture of tests to assess for IgA, IgG, and IgM. Most experts recommend the use of a reference laboratory that can assess the newborn with IgG (Dye test), IgM ISAGA, and IgA ELISA. If the child has not been born, maternal testing can also be conducted, which may include either an Avidity panel or a differential agglutination test depending on the week of pregnancy.

Congenital rubella syndrome: If concerns exist for this infectious syndrome, consultations with specialists and laboratory testing should occur. In order to investigate for clinical stigmata, ophthalmology (cataracts, glaucoma) and cardiology (patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), ventriculoseptal defect (VSD), and pulmonary artery stenosis) should be consulted early in the patient's course. As hearing loss is very common, audiology consultation with hearing tests should be conducted in all patients. Laboratory testing could include attempts to culture the virus from the nasopharynx or the assessment for IgM in the newborn.

Congenital cytomegalovirus: Evaluation of the being considered for the diagnosis of congenital CMV, should begin with confirmation of CMV infection. Infection is usually confirmed by the isolation of the virus within the first month of life. While any sterile site can be used, the urine is the most common source of isolation. Traditional viral culture or PCR testing is sufficient. CMV has been found in the blood and CSF as well. After confirmation, subspecialty consultation with ophthalmology (cataracts, chorioretinitis) and audiology (hearing loss) are essential. The workup usually includes neuroimaging to assess for the presence or absence of intracranial, periventricular calcifications. Laboratory evaluation should include assessment for liver transaminitis as well as liver function and bone marrow suppression by obtaining chemistries, liver function tests, PT/PTT, and a complete blood count.

Herpes simplex virus infections: Any child who presents with a concern for neonatal HSV should be aggressively evaluated. They should undergo a complete sepsis evaluation to include a lumbar puncture. It is recommended that swabs from the mouth, nasopharynx, conjunctivae, and anus. Be obtained for HSV culture and PCR. If skin vesicles are present, they should be unroofed and sent for culture and PCR as well. CSF and whole blood should also be sent for HSV culture and PCR. Measurement of liver transaminases should be conducted as they are an early clue that disseminated disease may be present. Further evaluation and consultation may depend on the type of infection the child has to include consultation with ophthalmology, neurology, and audiology. Hearing tests must be conducted as they may help with decision-making with regard to treatment.

HIV: Patients with concern for mother-to-child transmission of HIV should be evaluated. Children should have a PCR test sent at birth as infants will receive transplacental antibodies from their mothers. The first PCR can be sent within the first two days of life to determine if in utero infection occurred. Children are considered HIV negative if they have two tests conducted, and negative, after two weeks of age with one after four weeks of age. Alternatively, one negative PCR obtained after eight weeks is sufficient. Children should not breastfeed. Obtaining a complete blood count and baseline chemistries to include renal and hepatic function is also warranted. Complete guidance can be found at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Syphilis: The evaluation of a child with congenital syphilis depends on whether the mother was diagnosed during pregnancy and properly treated or not. All children should have a rapid plasma reagin (RPR) to be compared to the mother's RPR titer. If a mother is inadequately treated during pregnancy or the child has evidence of an elevated RPR with findings consistent with syphilis, the child needs a robust evaluation. The evaluation includes a complete blood count, CSF examination for cell count, protein, and venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL). Additionally, long bone radiographs, neuroimaging, ophthalmologic examination, liver function testing, and hearing tests can be conducted.