1) Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI):

MRI is one of the first tests to perform in the diagnostic algorithm because it is sensitive and noninvasive. MRI is usually helpful to determine hemorrhages and/or strokes in brain parenchyma. Old ischemic lesions are often seen as white matter hyperintensities in the distal vasculatures and/ border zone areas in FLAIR and T2 weighted sequences. Slowing of flow can be demonstrated by the linear hyperintensities following the sulcal pattern, known as 'ivy sign' in the FLAIR sequence

2) Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA):

MRA is a gold standard test and provides preliminary information on cerebral arteries and the degree of narrowing. MRA also shows the development of collaterals around the steno-occlusive lesions in the form of 'puff of smoke'. Based on MRA, diagnosis can be formed as either probable or definite moyamoya disease. 'Probable moyamoya' is the presence of a unilateral occlusive process in adults while 'Definite moyamoya' is the bilateral occlusive process in adults and even a unilateral occlusion in children as the rate of progression from unilateral to bilateral occlusion among children is very high. 'Quasi-moyamoya disease' (also known as Moyamoya syndrome) is a unilateral and/or bilateral occlusive process in the association of any underlying disease. Moyamoya disease does not involve posterior circulation while moyamoya syndrome could involve the steno-occlusive process in the posterior circulation

2) Conventional cerebral angiography:

- Cerebral angiography carries the highest specificity and provides accurate information about the area and degree of narrowing. However, use is limited owing to its nature of being an invasive technique and includes the uncertainty of diagnosis by MRI/MRA, presurgical evaluation, mapping postsurgical revascularization and/or worsening of narrowing during follow-up with noninvasive methods. Call for conventional angiography is purely subjective and depends on the knowledge as well as an experience of a neurologist.

- Suzuki and Kodoma classified the severity of moyamoya disease by progression of an occlusive process and the eventual appearance of collaterals based on serial cerebral angiographic evaluations and staged them, known as 'Suzuki stages of Moyamoya disease' which are mentioned under staging.

- Two kinds of collaterals are observed in angiography, each progressing from extracranial to the intracranial vasculature.

- Ethmoidal moyamoya: Commonly seen in children, these collaterals are perfused from ophthalmic artery and ethmoidal (anterior and posterior) arteries. Ethmoidal moyamoya communicates with basal moyamoya.
- Vault moyamoya: Commonly seen in adults, vault moyamoya are derived from transdural anastomosis of middle meningeal and superficial temporal arteries. Both types are directly proportionate to the angiographic stages of disease progression in children. Proof of co-relation among adults is not clear

3) Transcranial Doppler (TCD):

TCD is an adjunctive method for monitoring cerebral hemodynamics and data of its ability to determine the stage and/or treatment method is scarce. Additionally, it is operator dependent, hence, it is not as useful as MRI, MRA or conventional angiography. Major parameters of monitoring using TCD are mean blood flow velocity and the pulsatility index

4) Electroencephalography (EEG):

EEG evaluations are necessary for patients presenting with seizures. Suzuki and Kodoma mentioned a distinctive EEG finding among ~50% of moyamoya patients, known as the 'Rebuild-up' phenomenon. The rebuild-up phenomenon is referred to as a reappearance of slow waves of higher amplitude (normally seen during hyperventilation), within 20-60 seconds following termination of hyperventilation which is not seen in any other pathology. Rebuild-up is different than initial slowing due to hyperventilation and signifies the diminished blood flow. Slowing due to rebuild-up is resolved in approximately 10 minutes

5) Cerebral perfusion measurement:

Important tools are single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and xenon-enhanced CT and MRI based methods. Xenon-enhanced CT and MRI based methods include positron emission tomography scan (PET scan) and arterial spin labeling. Both normally shows,

- Increase in oxygen fraction extraction

- Reduction of global cerebral blood flow with posterior cerebral flow distribution

- Impaired cerebrovascular reactivity to carbon dioxide and acetazolamide in ICA territory, suggesting low cerebrovascular reserve

Apart from the mentioned above, diagnostic tests specific to the other conditions are required if moyamoya syndrome is suspected.