Complications threatening the viability of a replanted hand are most prevalent in the immediate postoperative period. These complications are often vascular in nature, with arterial thrombosis secondary to persistent vasospasm as the most common cause of replanting failure in the first 12 hours postoperatively. Several interventions are available to prevent catastrophic failure. Nonadherent dressings around the replant site should remain moist to avoid the drying of blood and wound drainage, which can result in the formation of a constricting circumferential tourniquet.

Anticoagulation is useful in the majority of patients following replantation.  While many options are available, there is currently no consensus protocol.

Monitoring of the circulatory function is possible in a number of ways, including skin temperature, skin color, oxygen tension, and hydrogen dilution. Skin temperature is the most sensitive means of monitoring circulation.  A decrease of more than 2 degrees celsius within 1 hour or an absolute temperature of less than 30 degrees, in the replanted part, is indicative of a circulatory compromise. Decreased temperature, skin pallor, and loss of skin turgor may indicate loss of arterial inflow. Loosening of constricting bandages and placement of the hand in a dependent position are the first steps in managing arterial insufficiency. The next steps include the initiation of heparin therapy and the administration of a sympathetic block to the affected hand.Aeromonas hydrophila infection following leech application, which is preventable with the use of antibiotic prophylaxis.

The most common overall complication, affecting nearly all replant patients, is cold sensitivity.  Although it is rarely functionally limiting and improves with time, few patients experience complete resolution over the long term.

The complications and resulting prognosis following revision amputation of the hand are quite different from those of replantation.  Loss of forearm pronation and supination can occur with more proximal amputation. As with any amputation, neuroma formation is a concern and one that can be mitigated with purposeful surgical technique. Cosmesis is often a concern as well, particularly dependent upon the level of amputation and type of prosthesis. Revision amputation, particularly of the dominant hand, generally has a lower patient-reported quality of life outcome as compared to successful replantation.