Typically, femoral shaft fractures are readily identified injuries due to thigh deformity and instability; however, occasionally, these injuries are not evident, and further assessment and imaging are required, such as radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scanning. Obtunded patients may necessitate more imaging to identify their injuries.

**Imaging**

X-rays of the chest and pelvis are obtained as part of the ATLS protocol. When the patient is stabilized, orthogonal radiographs of the suspected injured extremity, including the ipsilateral joints proximal and distal to the injury, should be obtained to characterize the fracture. These images help identify potential fractures to the acetabulum, proximal femur, proximal tibia, and patella and help identify a possible floating knee injury.

CT is typically not the initial imaging modality of the femur, but it is often the first form of imaging obtained in a polytraumatized individual. It has utility in identifying occult injuries and characterizing the fracture for operative planning. Thin cut imaging can help identify occult femoral neck fractures not seen on standard radiographs. Combined with contrast, vascular lesions can be identified and expeditiously treated.

**Classification**

Classification of femoral shaft fractures may be descriptive in which the location, type, angulation, shortening, comminution, rotation, and displacement is described.

The most commonly used fracture classification system used is the****AO/Orthopaedic Trauma Association classification because of its high interobserver reliability and accuracy. The system utilizes a coding system to identify the fracture type resulting in 27 different patterns. 3= femur, 2 = diaphysis.

32A – Simple

- A1 – Spiral

- A2 – Oblique, angle > 30 deg

- A3 – Transverse, angle < 30 deg

32B – Wedge

- B1 – Spiral wedge

- B2 – Bending wedge

- B3 – Fragmented wedge

32C – Complex

- C1 – Spiral

- C2 – Segmental

- C3 – Irregular

The Winquist classification system is mostly of historical significance. It described the cortical comminution and served as a guide on whether to lock the nail and determined weight-bearing status. With the advancement in nailing techniques and nail design, most intramedullary nails are locked, and full weight-bearing is permitted postoperatively.