Cytochrome p450 is a superfamily of membrane-bound hemoprotein isozymes with distinct classifications. While present in most body tissues, CYP enzymes predominantly occupy the liver, intestines, and kidneys, with their highest concentration in the liver. Of the total 57 isozymes discovered to date, 6 of these are responsible for  90% of drug metabolism. These six isozymes include CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4.

Of most importance, figuring out which drugs are inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes is crucial. Most drugs undergo deactivation, either directly or by facilitated excretion, through metabolism. Typically, if a drug acts as a CYP inducer, then that causes concurrently administered drugs targeting the same CYP isozyme to be metabolized faster and excreted. Under these circumstances, plasma levels of a specific drug may not reach a threshold value of benefit if it is cleared more rapidly by the body, leading to treatment failure. On the contrary, if a drug acts as a CYP inhibitor, then that causes other drugs to accumulate to toxic levels where overdoses and side effects may occur. These scenarios do not hold out to be true with prodrugs, which receives further review below.

Additionally, patients can fall into separate groups based on their inherited rate of drug metabolism. These groups are known as extensive, intermediate, poor, or ultrarapid metabolizers. Each of these scenarios presents its own issues that clinicians must be aware of as they can significantly impact a patient’s response to drug therapy.