Nuclear medicine plays a major role in assessing infectious processes. Newer advanced imaging techniques using hybrid PET-CT, SPECT-CT, and less commonly available PET-MR scanning are essential to provide added value and the highest sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of diagnosing infection.

Intraabdominal foci can also be evaluated with Tc99m WBC scans, but early imaging before 4 hours is recommended. When available, monoclonal antibodies using hybrid imaging techniques can offer a great value beyond standard morphological imaging. Sulesomab may offer a better safety profile than besilesomab when available, although severe reactions have been seen even with sulesomab.

- **Fever of unknown origin:**A variety of etiologies can be explored using 18-F-FDG PET scans ranging from systemic inflammatory conditions, rheumatologic diseases/vasculidities, infectious processes, and oncology pathology.

- **Evaluation of device infections:**18-F-FDG PET scans are used to evaluate cardiovascular devices and implanted musculoskeletal hardware.

- **Endocarditis:**FDG PET scans, labeled WBC scans, gallium 67, and monoclonal antibody scans have also been used effectively in assessing native valve and prosthetic valve endocarditis with high accuracy.

- **Osteomyelitis and soft tissue infections:**FDG PET scans have been added recently successfully to the armamentarium of musculoskeletal imaging infections.

- **Diabetic foot and Charcot joint:**Diagnosis can be challenging in patients with Charcot arthropathy. Diabetes is a frequent cause of Charcot's foot. However, even in the absence of Charcot arthropathy, diagnosing an infection in a diabetic foot can be challenging. The diabetic foot can have open sores and changes that can be chronic and either get acutely infected superficially or extend deep into the bone. Accurate clinical and imaging evaluation is paramount to guide management properly. Labeled WBC scans have shown similar accuracy to MRI in diagnosing foot osteomyelitis when using SPECT-CT techniques in the diabetic foot.

Although morphological/anatomical imaging is usually the first study ordered in evaluating infectious foci, it frequently fails to address the clinical question. A variety of nuclear medicine techniques can significantly impact clinical management when used in the appropriate setting, in the appropriate timing (acute, subacute, or acute on chronic), as well as with the appropriate technique and choice of the radiopharmaceutical.