**Initiation of a Low-Carb Lifestyle**

After a shared decision-making process with the patient, there are numerous ways to start a patient on a low-carb diet. Low-carb nutrition may be advisable for those who desire healthy or athletic performance, weight loss, improvement of glycemic control for type 1 or 2 diabetes, or a seizure disorder.

- First, understanding what macronutrients are and their relation to food is a critical part of counseling.

- Secondly, determine the patient's desire for either small steps or a rapid induction phase through motivational interviewing and S.M.A.R.T goal setting.

- Limitation of added sugar (sucrose) and refined carbohydrates is critical in the overall improvement of food quality and will generally reach a moderate carbohydrate (less than 45% carbohydrates) level.

- A way to initiate low-carb is through a rapid induction phase of 2 to 4 weeks, with 20 to 50 gms of carbohydrates to induce nutritional ketosis. Ad libitum vegetables that grow above the ground and are lower in carbohydrate content are encouraged. Additionally, carbs should be limited to those found in whole, unprocessed food.

- Finally, after the induction phase, depending on goals, patients can remain in the keto phase or slowly add healthy carbohydrates from whole, unprocessed vegetables and low-glycemic, high fiber fruit (i.e., berries).

**Maintenance of a Low-Carb Lifestyle**

If limited initially or during the induction phase, full-fat dairy, legumes, and whole grains can also be added during this maintenance phase as long as goals are maintained and tolerated without any hypersensitivity or an adverse response. The lifelong maintenance phase can then continue in accordance with patient preference. Periodic monitoring of cardiovascular risk markers and control of cardiometabolic disease should also be a priority. Those with type 2 diabetes require close monitoring for hypoglycemia, and reduction of insulin or hypoglycemic medications is prudent with rapid reductions in fasting glucose.