The successful execution of obtaining radiology studies is a complex, interdisciplinary, multifaceted process. First, the ordering provider must decide on the appropriate imaging study to evaluate a given patient in order to establish an appropriate and accurate diagnosis. Then they must communicate the history, differential diagnosis, and requested the study to the radiology department (both technician and radiologist). Subsequently, the radiology technician must obtain the correct study, employing the correct technique at a diagnostic level, and provide the images to the radiologist in a timely fashion. Finally, the radiologist is responsible for the interpretation of the images and providing/communicating a clear, concise, and accurate report to the ordering provider. Not surprisingly this complex, multi-step process is a common issue resulting in medical errors. Various studies have explored the important role of interprofessional communication in patient care and outcome. One study determined that non-medical radiology staff expressed notable difficulty in oral and written inter-professional communication with other members of the healthcare team.

This often results from unclear language or differences in terminology used between professions possibly leading to the inappropriate study being performed or inaccurate clinical information being passed on to the radiologist. Lack of feedback from clinicians and radiologists especially due to an environment of decreased face-to-face communication were also described as possible reasons for difficulties in providing patient care. Clear communication between technologists, nurses, and physicians plays an important role in obtaining diagnostic images with an adequate field of view and decreasing medical errors. A 2009 study by Verhovsek et al. determined that radiology technicians most often had trouble communicating adequately with nurses and surgeons. Several studies have investigated the communication of the ordering provider with the department of radiology. One such study found that between 24% to 41% of orders failed to identify the target condition leading to the request.

Radiologists' communication of critical results is also an important medicolegal issue with one report indicating that 83% of primary care providers are dissatisfied with the communication of results (laboratory, pathology, and radiology).