**Synthesis**

- GABA is formed from glutamate via the addition of glutamate decarboxylase and vitamin B6. GABA can then be used to form succinate, which is involved in the citric acid cycle. Once GABA is formed, is it released into the post-synaptic terminals of neurons.

- Although glutamate is a precursor for GABA, their roles are opposite in the nervous system. Glutamate is considered an excitatory neurotransmitter, while GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter. The imbalance of glutamate and GABA can play a role in various pathologies, as discussed in Clinical Significance.

**Receptors**

- GABA receptors are receptors that respond when GABA is released into the post-synaptic nerve terminal. They are considered the chief inhibitory receptors for the central nervous system. GABA receptors are subdivided into GABAa and GABAb.

- GABAa is classified as a ligand-gated ion channel/inotropic receptor. GABAa is considered in fast synaptic inhibition. Upon the receptor binding to GABA, an ion pore opens to allow chloride to move across the cell membrane. Chloride is a negatively charged ion and will follow into the area of positive charge. Typically, chloride will flow into the intracellular space. The addition of negative charge will decrease the resting potential of the cell, thus causing an inhibitory effect. GABAa receptors are located throughout the central nervous system. However, they have high concentrations in the limbic system and the retina.

- GABAb receptor is a G-couple protein receptor. GABAb receptors are considered slow synaptic inhibitors. After GABA has bound to the receptor, potassium conductance is increased. Adenylyl cyclase is activated, which prevents calcium entry thus inhibits presynaptic release of other neurotransmitters. GABAb locations include the thalamic pathways and cerebral cortex.

**Brain Development**

- Within the adult central nervous system, GABA is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter. However, during embryonic development, GABA acts as an excitatory neurotransmitter. GABA is thought to be the first neurotransmitter active within the developing brain and plays a role in the proliferation of neuronal progenitor cells. High levels of GABA in ventricular areas increased proliferation and neural progenitor cell size; however, in the subventricular zone, GABA decreased proliferation.