**Required Response to a Reviewable Sentinel Event**

The reporting organization should prepare and submit a thorough root cause analysis and action plan within 45 days of the sentinel event. The process should commence within 72 hours of the event. The steps in an RCA include identifying the team, information gathering, organizing information, identifying contributing factors, and drilling down to the root cause. The Joint Commission provides a framework for the RCA. The hospital can utilize this template, consisting of multiple analysis questions and prompts, or utilize a similar framework for identifying the causal factors. The RCA involves repeatedly asking a series of “why” questions until the root systemic causal factor(s) that culminated in the sentinel event is identified. The RCA should focus on vulnerabilities in systems and processes, not on the individual(s). It identifies the risk points and their potential contributions. Various root causes can be related to communication, equipment, environmental, human, process, staff, supervisory, team, and culture. Several attempts to improve the RCA process have been developed to formulate effective solutions. However, a recent study showed that most of the proposed solutions were weaker actions that were unlikely to reduce the event recurrence.

The National Patient Safety Foundation developed guidelines to standardize the RCA process and direct organizations for improvement efforts. They emphasized that action steps are needed after the analysis is completed and renamed them as root cause analysis and action (RCA2).

An RCA2 must be thorough and credible. The sequential steps in an RCA2 are:

- Identifying multidisciplinary team members for RCA2

- Gathering all the relevant information

- Organizing the collected information

- Identifying the root cause

- Developing a strong action plan

- Reporting

An interprofessional team requires individuals with leadership involved in the process under review, helping for an effective analysis. It should also include patients or family representatives when appropriate. All the critical information is collected by individual and group interviews, medical records, and literature review. Various tools like flow charts, Pareto charts, affinity diagrams, and fishbone diagrams are used to visualize and organize information.

The action hierarchy of RCA2 helps in identifying the corrective actions that will have the strongest effect on an effective and sustained system change. More strong actions require less reliance on human factors and memory. Action strengths are known to be based on the principles of human factors. The most effective actions accommodate or control the limitations of human behavior. It also involves how people interact with systems, tasks, tools, and the environment through using design and standardization. Stronger actions should be prioritized to sustain the system change. Things like forcing functions, barcodes for medication administration, process or equipment standardization, pre-procedural timeout with all members, and simplification of the process are examples of stronger actions. Checklists serve to force improved function and utilize the principles of human factor engineering.

The mental health environment of the care checklist was developed by Veteran Affairs of the USA in 2007. It is comprised of environmental modification strategies in psychiatric rooms and restrooms to reduce inpatient suicide rates. Some of the checklist components include reducing pointed objects, minimizing anchoring points, and decreasing fixtures. The checklist has been found to have a sustained effect in decreasing inpatient suicide. Using a whiteboard in the operating room and using a red marker for the surgical site are intermediate corrective action examples. Two independent nurses checking the dose of a medication is another example of intermediate corrective action. Simulation training and education is an example of weak corrective action. The action plan should be specific. It should identify the person responsible, timelines, oversight, pilot testing (if applicable), and strategies to measure the actions' effectiveness.

One of the most critical surgical safety measures is the timeout process, which involves a pause before the surgery commences involving all team members. This process occurs before surgery begins with the patient inside the operating room to ensure that the correct patient, the correct procedure, and the correct site are verified to minimize mistakes.

**Sentinel Event Measure of Success (SEMOS)**

SEMOS is a quantifiable measure to evaluate if the action plan was effective and sustained. It has a numerator and denominator. The organization follows up on the data via chart audit and observation to measure compliance. Every organization should have a clear framework for reporting and responding to a sentinel event that is non-punitive, fosters teamwork, and promotes a just culture.