HSV encephalitis management requires close coordination between the treating interprofessional team. Interprofessional discussions and coordination between various specialties are necessary to improve patient outcomes. Internists, emergency physicians, neurologists, neurosurgeons, infectious disease specialists, intensivists, pharmacists (particularly infectious disease specialty pharmacists), physiatrists, psychologists, and psychiatrists are usually involved in the care. All interprofessional team members must maintain accurate and meticulous records of their interventions and observations so that everyone involved in the case can access the same updated patient information. The interprofessional model also requires open lines of communication between all team members so that the right caregiver can intervene promptly in the event of patient status changes. Interprofessional care coordination will result in improved patient outcomes. [Level 5]

Herpes simplex encephalitis is a neurologic emergency that requires a high degree of suspicion, rapid diagnostic workup, and treatment. Patients might need intubation either for airway protection (in case of a significant drop in consciousness) or for persistent seizures. Lumbar puncture needs to be done promptly after brain imaging rules out intracranial hypertension or space-occupying lesions, and CSF analysis should be reported as soon as possible. Intravenous acyclovir must be administered as soon as possible in all suspected or confirmed cases of HSV encephalitis. Intensive care unit admission is indicated once the patient is intubated or requires other organ support. Continued neurology review is a must, and infectious disease consultation will be indicated if no other cause can be established despite initial evaluations, especially if the patient is not improving or is deteriorating.

HSE causes significant morbidity in the survivors. After the acute phase, there needs to be continued follow-up by the rehabilitation and neurology team. A psychiatry or psychology consultation may be necessary for patients and their family members to cope with the stress of long-term rehabilitation.