Ruxolitinib is taken orally and is available in 5 mg, 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, and 25 mg tablets. The dosing regimen is based on the patient’s individual situation as well as blood results. For example, when treating myelofibrosis, the dose is dependent on the patient’s baseline platelet counts. Patients with myelofibrosis who have a platelet count between 50 to 100 x 10^9/L can take up to a maximum of 5 mg twice daily, while patients with a platelet count of above 100 x 10^9/L can take a maximum of 15 mg twice daily.

In contrast, patients with polycythemia vera should be started on 10 mg twice daily as a starting dose. In non-responders dose can be increased to 25 mg twice daily if hemoglobin, neutrophil counts, and platelets are normal. It is important to keep in mind that ruxolitinib should not be taken with grapefruit or grapefruit juice due to possible interaction causing increased exposure to ruxolitinib; however, patients can take it with other food or without depending on patient preference.

Dosing for acute graft-versus-host disease is 5 to 10 mg orally twice daily, starting a 5 mg twice daily for 3 days, then increasing to 10 mg twice daily. For chronic graft-versus-host disease, the recommended dosing is 10 mg twice daily. Dose adjustments may be necessary for patients who have failed prior treatment based on their bilirubin, ANC, or platelet responses.

Clinicians need to consult advanced prescribing information in cases of renal or hepatic impairment. In dialysis patients, dosing should be after dialysis on dialysis days.

Ruxolitinib may also be used in pediatric patients with graft-versus-host disease; dosing is similar to adult dosing, and the clinician should consult package inserts for the most precise dosing and adjustments based on hepatic or renal status in pediatric patients.