Hyperuricemia is a common adverse effect due to competitive inhibition of uric acid secretion and a decrease in extracellular fluid from diuretic effects. Other fluid and electrolyte imbalances may occur, especially hyponatremia, hypokalemia, and hypomagnesemia. Any electrolyte imbalances must be corrected before starting treatment.

Diuretic therapy may be associated with increased serum cholesterol and triglycerides; however, long-term studies have found that serum cholesterol levels return to normal or below the baseline after approximately one year of therapy. These temporary effects do not significantly increase the risk of coronary heart disease.

The patient may experience orthostatic hypotension, which can be worsened by other antihypertensive agents, alcohol, or narcotic medications. A weak association has been made between diuretic use and falls in the elderly, so caution should be used in patients 60 years and older.

Other rare adverse effects include agranulocytosis, photosensitization, aplastic anemia, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.

In a study of acute decompensated heart failure treatment metolazone with loop diuretics, metolazone therapy was associated with hypokalemia, hyponatremia, and deteriorating renal function in some patients.

The BRASH syndrome is the term used for (Bradycardia, Renal failure, AV blockade, Shock, and Hyperkalaemia) and has been associated with metolazone therapy.

Drug-induced cholestasis and hepatotoxicity have been reported.