The clustering of genes involved in a metabolic pathway and their co-regulation under a single promoter helps in rapid adaptation to fluctuating levels of food supplies in the environment. The lac operon enables bacterial cells to take full advantage of the available carbon sources by assimilating and utilizing rapidly metabolizable substrates (such as glucose) and switching to other food supplies only after its supply is exhausted. Regulation at the level of transcription prevents metabolic energy from getting lost in the process of transcription and translation. The formation of a single polycistronic mRNA decreases gene expression noise and ensures better stoichiometry.

Many other inducible operons have been identified that function to protect the bacterial cells from host defense mechanisms. Inducible operons also play an important role in rendering anti-microbial resistance to pathogenic organisms. The mef(E)/mel operon carried on the Macrolide Efflux Genetic Assembly(MEGA) confers resistance to macrolides in Streptococcus pneumoniae. This inducible operon encodes for a macrolide efflux pump and a ribosomal protection protein preventing the entry of macrolides and their action on ribosomes. The expression of anti-microbial resistance proteins is controlled at the level of transcription and induced in the presence of 14-and 15-membered macrolides, tilmicosin and rosamicin, and tetracyclines.

The marRAB operon in Escherichia coli belongs to the multidrug resistance (mdr) system and confers resistance to a wide range of functionally and structurally diverse compounds by decreasing the synthesis of porins and activating efflux pumps. It is induced in the presence of tetracycline, chloramphenicol, and salicylates.