**Treatment of Myopia**

Myopia treatment can be classified into non-surgical and surgical.

**Non-surgical Management**

**Spectacle Correction**

Spectacle correction is the most widely used form of management in patients with myopia.

Additionally, a proper back vertex distance and centralization of the optics corresponding to the center of the pupil are vital for providing the best-corrected and clearest vision. Patients who are uncomfortable with their glasses beyond a period of 15 days should be evaluated for appropriate optical dispensing. Any error in the power of the lenses or the axis of the cylinder and the improper fitting of lenses can accentuate blurring and cause eye strain. Many advances have been made in materials available for optical lenses. With the advent of high-index materials such as polycarbonate, traditional materials used for lenses, including crown glass and CR39, have become obsolete.

These high-index glasses considerably reduce the weight of glasses, particularly those that correct high refractive errors.

The detrimental effect of blue light on the retinal photoreceptors and retinal pigment epithelium is another concern. Newer optical aids or spectacles have spectral filters that eliminate harmful blue light. With these blue light–filtering spectacles, patients experience a reduction in digital eye strain and accommodative microfluctuation; however, some studies have reported these issues.

**Contact Lenses**

Contact lenses have revolutionized the management of myopia.

Soft contact lenses are made of HEMA hydrogel, silicone hydrogel, and polyvinyl alcohol. Contact lenses made of HEMA and silicone hydrogels have approximately 50% water content with high oxygen permeability and can be worn for 1 to 5 days. Although soft contact lenses have high water content owing to the presence of polyvinyl alcohol, they have relatively low oxygen permeability; thus, they should be removed before sleep. These lenses are popular and extensively used to provide spectacle-free vision in adolescents and young adults.

The power of contact lenses is calculated based on that used for spectacle correction and the vertex factor. The vertex factor is the power to be added to correct the back vertex distance. The correction factor is lower for eyes with fewer refractive errors and vice versa. The cylindrical power can be prescribed by ordering a toric contact lens. However, the cylindrical power can be nullified by adding the spherical equivalent of the cylinder (cylindrical power divided by 2) to the sphere, and the total spherical power can be prescribed after correcting for the back vertex distance.

However, all contact lenses are prone to complications, broadly classified as noninfectious or infectious.

The cornea is considerably affected by the overwearing of contact lenses, resulting in corneal hypoxia and blurred vision, which subsides after lens removal. Moreover, lenses produce infiltrates ranging from a single asymptomatic infiltrate to diffuse infiltrates. These infiltrates may be infectious or noninfectious. Infectious corneal ulcers are mostly caused by gram-negative bacteria, particularly Pseudomonas, and free-water parasites, such as acanthamoeba.

**Surgical Management**

Surgical management of myopia has advanced rapidly in the past two decades. It can be broadly classified into laser vision correction at the corneal level and lenticular correction at the crystalline lens level.

**Laser Refractive Correction or Laser Vision Correction**

Laser vision correction is the surgical correction of refractive errors by remodeling the corneal surface using lasers. This procedure involves using an excimer laser, which is essentially an excited dimer composed of argon fluoride with a wavelength of 193 nm.

As the cornea has a prolate shape, the corneal periphery is flat, and its center is relatively steep. The aspheric shape of the cornea reduces a considerable number of spherical and chromatic aberrations. With central flattening post-laser correction, the cornea assumes an oblate shape, which accentuates aberrations and deteriorates vision quality. Excimer laser platforms have changed substantially over the past two decades. Laser delivery systems for excimer lasers are available in three patterns: broad beam, scanning slit, and flying spot. Broad-beam and scanning-slit lasers have become obsolete and unavailable on new platforms. The latest versions of laser machines have a flying-spot delivery system, which precisely and rapidly delivers lasers.

Lasers can be delivered to the cornea with or without flap creation. Flap surgeries are termed laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK), wherein a microkeratome or femtosecond laser is used to create a corneal flap with thicknesses ranging from 90 to 160 µm.

Flapless surgery is termed photorefractive keratectomy (PRK). The cornea is de-epithelialized using 20% alcohol or excimer lasers. Photoablation is performed over the Bowman membrane, followed by the application of 0.02% mitomycin-C for 30 s to prevent postsurgical corneal haze. After the procedure, a contact lens is placed to facilitate the growth of the corneal epithelium. Once epithelialization is complete, the contact lens is removed. PRK is considered the most favorable technique for maintaining the biomechanical integrity of the cornea.

Femtosecond lasers are the most novel treatment for myopia.

These lasers can be utilized to correct myopia from 0.5 D to 14 D if the cornea is stable and biomechanically strong. Because these lasers weaken the cornea, eyes with a subclinically weak architecture can experience adverse effects, including conical protrusion and poor vision.

Various intraoperative and postoperative complications may occur. Intraoperative complications are mostly related to the flap observed in LASIK, including incomplete and free flaps and flaps with a buttonhole. Postoperative complications can be classified into early- and late-stage complications. Early postoperative complications include diffuse lamellar keratitis, epithelial ingrowth leading to the sterile melting of the flap, and sterile stromal infiltrates. Late postoperative complications included myopic regression, post-PRK haze, and post-LASIK ectasia.

**Lenticular Correction of Myopia**

This procedure involves implanting a biocompatible IOL or replacing the lens. Replacement of the crystalline lens with an artificial IOL results in a high risk of posterior-segment complications. Hence, a phakic IOL can be implemented in patients in whom keratorefractive procedures are contraindicated.

**Phakic Intraocular Lens**

Phakic IOLs can be classified according to the implantation position, that is, the anterior or posterior chambers.

This lens eventually became obsolete owing to its high complication rates. With the advent of the posterior chamber phakic IOL, other lenses have been introduced on the market. The posterior chamber phakic IOL, which is placed behind the iris and supported at the sulcus, has been considered the most successful technique in recent times.

The W–W diameter is typically measured using a digital caliper. The accuracy of digital calipers far outweighs that of optical biometry.

These lenses have an optical zone of 6 mm; hence, any form of misalignment may lead to the loss of vision and create new aberrations, causing optical discomfort. Thus, the W–W diameter is the most critical component of postoperative vision.

The proper sizing of the phakic IOL is critical for providing an adequate vault over the crystalline lens. An oversized or larger diameter of the phakic IOL may produce larger vaults, causing the shallowing of the anterior chamber, eventually leading to angle closure and excessive rubbing of the posterior surface of the iris, resulting in pigment dispersion.

The power of the phakic IOL is determined by the subjective refraction of patients. It can be spherical or toric, depending on the refractive status. Certain lenses are manufactured so that they can be implanted in the horizontal meridian irrespective of their toricity.

The basic structure of the posterior chamber phakic IOL is uniform across all companies; however, two types of lenses are available: lenses with or without a central hole. These lenses have plate haptics and a central optical zone of 6 mm with a vault or elevation to prevent contact with the crystalline lens. Multiple holes exist in these lenses, which facilitate aqueous flow from the posterior chamber to the anterior chamber. The presence of a central hole determines whether a peripheral iris opening should be performed. Lenses without a central hole require peripheral iris opening to prevent any postoperative increase in intraocular pressure.

Complications of phakic IOL implantation include cataract formation, pigment dispersion, loss of pupillary sphincters, angle-closure glaucoma, and corneal decompensation. Cataract formation and pupillary sphincter damage are observed with the posterior chamber IOL, whereas corneal decompensation is observed with the anterior chamber phakic IOL.

**Lenticular Replacement**

Lenticular replacement can be considered in patients with poor keratorefractive dynamics and a low anterior chamber depth.

Lenticular replacement is associated with a high incidence of postoperative complications. Posterior-segment complications, such as retinal detachment, are the most significant limitations of this procedure. With the removal of the crystalline lens, the iris lens diaphragm moves forward, pulling the anterior retina and eventually opening the stretched peripheral retina. Retinal detachment is a severe complication that can lead to permanent vision loss.