Anemia has multiple etiologies that can be attributed to one of 3 processes:

- Decreased production of red blood cells (RBCs): As RBCs have a limited lifespan of 90 to 120 days, hematopoiesis must be an ongoing process to keep pace with this natural attrition. Any process disruptive to hematopoiesis can cause a net loss of RBC mass over time, leading to anemia.

- Increased destruction of RBCs: Any process that either destroys RBCs or significantly shortens the lifespan of the cell in such a fashion that hematopoiesis cannot keep up with destruction will cause anemia.

- Loss of blood: Any loss of blood, microscopic or macroscopic that exceeds hematopoiesis will result in anemia.

The above processes can be further subdivided into their specific causative etiologies. These include but are not limited to:

- Frank loss of blood via trauma, bleeding from an organ or visceral system [otolaryngological (ENT), gastrointestinal (GI), genitourinary (GU), gynecological (GYN), among others].

- Lack of a nutritional substrate for hematopoiesis including iron, vitamin B-12, or folate, or generalized malnutrition.

- Chronic disease and/or chronic inflammation. Common culprits include chronic hepatic or renal disease, cancer, chronic infection, and collagen vascular disease.

- Genetic illness: Common syndromes include but are not limited to the thalassemia, hemoglobinopathies, and enzyme abnormalities of the glycolytic pathways. Less common genetic syndromes include Fanconi anemia, abetalipoproteinemia, and hereditary xerocytosis.

- Infectious etiologies include bacterial, viral and protozoan infections. Of note, malaria is a major global infectious cause of anemia.

- Drug and chemical exposures are common etiologies for bone marrow suppression and resultant anemia.

- Primary or idiosyncratic bone marrow suppression.

- Autoimmune disease.

Epidemiological reporting of anemia is fragmented because of the use of different diagnostic criteria in the United States as opposed to the WHO criteria used for the rest of the world. Also, demographic subsets, genetic subsets and geographic subsets of anemia prevalence exist. Best estimates indicate that anemia prevalence is statistically similar in the United States, Canada, and northern Europe, and around 4% of males and 8% of females qualify for the diagnosis of anemia in these territories. There is substantially more limited data for the rest of the world. Estimates from the available data are inexact but do suggest that anemia frequency is between 2 and 5 times greater worldwide than in the US, Canada, and northern Europe.

Regions in which populations commonly show higher rates of anemia include:

- Regions of the African, Indian and Mediterranean basin where sickle cell disease is more prevalent.

- Regions of the Mediterranean basin where thalassemia is more common.

- Regions with endemic malaria/protozoal illness where anemia of chronic disease is common.

- Impoverished areas, where there is a higher risk of nutritional anemia.