All white blood cells or leukocytes are involved in immune system function; however, the specific roles and functions vary for each blood cell type.

**Diapedesis (also called Extravasation, or Leukocyte Adhesion Cascade)**

Leukocyte migration to sites of injury or infection is mediated by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) present on microbes and damaged tissue respectfully.  Local inflammatory cells, such as macrophages and mast cells, detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and release cytokines as a signal for leukocytes to migrate out of circulation. Histamine and heparin released by perivascular masts cell aid in opening intracellular junctions between the capillary endothelial cells. Furthermore, endothelial cells secrete chemoattractants, and express surface markers including selectins, integrin, and cellular adhesion molecules (CAMs) on their lumen that cause leukocyte adhesion, rolling, arrest, and eventual migration into the affected tissues.

**Myeloid**

Myeloid cells include the leukocytes (granulocytes, monocytes) as well as erythrocytic (red blood cell) lineages, but does not include the lymphoid cell lineages.

Neutrophils comprise 50% to 70% of circulating leukocytes and represent the body's initial line of defense. They are involved in the acute inflammatory response to bacterial infection and removal of the bacteria by phagocytosis. They are also the most numerous cells to arrive at the site of injury or infection. There they undergo diapedesis, to the site of infection nor injury. They then recognize foreign antigens on bacteria, infectious agents, dead cells, and debris via a variety of membrane receptors. These are then phagocytosed and degraded by enzymes within intracellular phagolysosomes. Specific and azurophilic granules containing myeloperoxidase fuse with the lysosome, with respiratory bursts resulting in the generation of reactive oxygen species and degradation of bacteria within the phagolysosomes.

Basophils have similar functions to mast cells and supplement their activity. They make up less than 1% of all leukocytes. Their primary function is inflammation and allergic reaction. Basophils have a high affinity for binding IgE antibodies on their surface. Antigens (allergens) binding to the IgE on the basophils surface results in degranulation and release of substances such as mediators of inflammation like histamine, eosinophil chemotactic factor, platelet-activating factor, and phospholipase A.

Eosinophils make up about 1 to 4% of the leukocytes on average. They are involved in chronic inflammation, allergic reactions, and host deference against parasitic infections. They also modulate potentially deleterious effects of inflammatory vasoactive mediators. This modulatory effect is via specific substances, arylsulfatase, and histaminase, enzymes that decompose leukotrienes and histamine, respectively. Eosinophils combat parasitic infections by releasing their specific granules, of which the cationic protein, major basic protein, has toxicity against helminth parasites.

Monocytes make up between 2% to 8% of leukocytes. They differentiate and only become functional once they leave the blood. Once in the tissues, they differentiate into cells of the mononuclear phagocytic system such as macrophages (in the lung, connective tissue and lymphatic tissues, and bone), osteoclasts, and Kupffer cells.  There they phagocytose bacteria, cells, debris, and function as antigen-presenting cells.

**Lymphoid**

Lymphocytes are agranulocytes, consisting of 20 to 40% of the leukocytes counts, and are part of the adaptive immune system. Lymphocytes are circulating immunocompetent cells; cells that developed the ability to recognize and react to antigens and are in transit from and to various lymphatic tissues.