The presentation is usually consistent with premature development of pubertal signs. The initial clinical signs are breast development in females and increased testicular volume (greater than 4 ml) in males. The other signs and symptoms include increased linear growth, acne, muscular changes, body odor, and pubic and axillary hair development.

The initial step is to verify whether pubertal development is occurring before the normal age of onset or not. Rapid progression of puberty, although started at a normal age, is also considered abnormal. The clinician should inquire about neurological symptoms such as headache, increased head circumference, seizures, visual and cognitive changes along with symptoms of anterior and posterior pituitary deficiency (polyuria, polydipsia, and decreased growth velocity). Ovarian pathology might present with abdominal pain. Any relevant history of head trauma, brain infections, or use of unusual creams, pills, or diet that might expose them to estrogen or testosterone should be explored.   It is also essential to take a complete family history about the onset of puberty in parents and siblings, which may point to the possibility of a familial condition.

Linear growth acceleration is one of the important features of early puberty. So the exact height, weight, growth velocity (cm/year) and BMI should be documented.  In females, accurate Tanner staging of the breast should take place, which is particularly challenging in obese or overweight girls to differentiate between adipose tissue and the glandular breast tissue. In males, an orchidometer should be used to determine the testicular volume. Volumes of more than 4 ml confirm pubertal development.  In males and females with pubic hair and body odor, the absence of increased testicular volume and breast development should prompt investigation of peripheral causes. Unilateral testicular enlargement is likely due to testicular tumors.

A thorough examination should be done to look for acanthosis nigricans, café au lait macules, neurofibromas which might indicate specific causes such as neurofibromatosis type 1 and McCune-Albright syndrome.