# Introduction

First described in the anesthesia literature in the late 1980s, medical simulation has become an essential part of training in medical education at the undergraduate and graduate level, as well as in nursing and pharmacy education.

In situ simulation differs from a center-based simulation in that it occurs in the actual clinical environment, often using providers and staff who are currently on shift. Because it occurs in the real working environment, it provides opportunities for learning on the unit and organizational level as well.

# Function

Experiential learning is the pillar of adult learning theory, which posits that learners gain knowledge from participating in and reflecting upon real-life experiences.

Many models of debriefing have been described in the literature.

# Curriculum Development

There is currently no “gold standard” for conducting a post-simulation debriefing in either center-based settings or in situ settings. A review of trends for in situ simulations suggests the majority of in situ simulation debriefings use post-simulation facilitated debriefings (55%) or facilitated debriefings combined with a review of video taken during the simulation itself (31%).

Some authors recommend learner self-assessment or directive feedback as the primary method for in situ simulation debriefing; this allows facilitators to address more topics with limited time.

**Learner Self-Assessment**

A common learner self-assessment model of debriefing is the Plus/Delta model.

Another form of learner self-assessment is the SHARP method.

1. Set learning objectives: Determine what learners want to obtain from participating in the case and what the educator's goals are2. Ask, "How did it go?": Ask students to self-identify areas of strength and weakness. 3. Address concerns: Discuss with students where improvements are possible.4. Review specific teaching points: This can include basic science and pathophysiology to students' communication and teamwork. 4. Plan ahead: Have students identify what they will take away from the case and incorporate it into their practice.

Because the SHARP method includes both opportunities for teaching as well as incorporation into clinical practice, it may be a useful tool for in situ simulation debriefs.

**Directive Feedback**

Directive feedback is a form of feedback that does not depend on the assessment learners make of their own performance.

**Conversational Models**

Despite time constraints, facilitators are not limited to these learner self-assessment or directive feedback models. Conversational models of debriefing have been successful with in situ simulations. Facilitators have successfully used the “debriefing with good judgment” model during in situ debriefings while maintaining a short simulation-to-debriefing time ratio.

The advocacy-inquiry model (AIM) is another conversational debriefing model that seeks to understand a participant’s underlying thought process. This form of debriefing, though not specific to the in situ setting, is preferred by learners who are farther along in their training and thus may be more applicable to the varied experience levels in the in situ team.

Multiple other conversational models exist, as do blended models. The “Promoting Excellence And Reflective Learning in Simulation” (PEARLS) method is an example of a blended model, which combines learner self-assessment with focused facilitated discussion and directive feedback.

# Clinical Clerkships

All debriefing methods are appropriate to use for learners across various levels of training and specialties.

# Continuing Education

Several tools exist to aid in the evaluation of the debriefing itself. These include the Debriefing Assessment for Simulation in Healthcare (DASH) and the Objective Structured Assessment of Debriefing (OSAD).

# Clinical Significance

The popularity of simulation is continuously increasing as a model of experiential learning that is preferred by adult learners. Debriefing is an intrinsic component of the simulation exercise to ensure meaningful teaching points. The approaches to debriefing are variable and can be adapted depending on the environment and the needs of the learners.

Written tools, such as the PEARLS debriefing tool, attempt to provide structure to the debriefing process in the form of a script and a guide.

# Pearls and Other Issues

- Debriefing needs to occur following simulation exercises to be effective.

- The scheduled debriefing time should be for at least the anticipated duration of the simulation exercise. For example, a 10-minute simulation will need at least a 10-minute debriefing.

- Learner self-assessment, facilitator directed feedback, and conversational feedback is three options that facilitators can use to address their feedback. These methods can be blended to best suit the needs of the simulation.

- Reflective observation is an opportunity for simulation participants to reflect upon and evaluate their performance.

- The Advocacy Inquiry Method (AIM) seeks to understand the underlying reason a simulation participant performed a particular action.

- Directive feedback is a useful technique when addressing a gap in procedural knowledge, but maybe less preferred by learners than other models.

- Novice facilitators will need support to be proficient at debriefing simulation exercises. Written tools or formal training can provide a framework for a debriefing for novice facilitators.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

In situ simulation has been shown to improve teamwork