An interprofessional approach includes a gastroenterologist, oncologist, colorectal surgeon, primary care provider, nurse practitioner (physician and mid-level practitioners), geneticist, nurse genetics counselor, other nursing staff, and pharmacist. Consider offering genetic testing to people with suspected hereditary colorectal cancer and their family members after genetic counseling.

- In the population with suspicion or family history of HNPCC, suggestions are that the screening strategy is a colonoscopy every two years, from 20 to 25 years, or five to ten years before the age of the youngest case diagnosed in the family.

- Studies consistently report that registration and screening reduce CRC incidence and mortality in patients with FAP and LS.

- The MSI test is an effective screening test for Lynch syndrome. However, it must correlate with the panel of markers used or the thresholds used to denote a positive test.

- The studies indicate that in adenomatous polyposis coli patients with APC promoter, hypermethylation is an early event in carcinogenesis of CRC and could be a valuable diagnostic marker for early-stage CRC.

- Currently, the evidence of chemoprevention is for NSAIDs, sulindac, and aspirin in low doses that reduce the progression of polyps and the long-term incidence of colorectal cancers in patients with FAP  and HNPCC, respectively.

- Strict vigilance is necessary for the syndromes associated with CCR and extracolonic manifestations, especially LS with endometrial cancer, as well as those mentioned in the differential diagnosis section.

- The risk factors that increase mortality are advanced age, male sex, African-American race, elevated CEA, and not undergoing curative surgery. Likewise, patients with CRC have an association with an increased risk of cardiovascular death, especially during the first year after diagnosis.

- Overall, FOLFOX was the most effective first-line treatment [Level I], and FOLFIRI plus cetuximab (KRAS/NRAS wild) was the most effective treatment in terms of long-term survival, Wang and colleagues, in their analysis of 75 RCTs published after 1997. This treatment is preferable for patients with CRC in clinical practice.

- The use of bevacizumab represents hope for increased survival and a chance of metastasectomy for patients with metastatic CRC. However, serious adverse events are associated with its use, especially severe hypertension and gastrointestinal perforation, that merit consideration.

- The treating physician should recommend a diet rich in dietary fiber because it decreases CRC risk and post-operative relapses.

Irrespective of the path of treatment (chemotherapy, surgery, etc.), all members of the interprofessional team must follow the patient, off counsel, and alert other team members as necessary when they note a change in the patient's status, including adverse drug events or therapeutic failure or relapse, recording their observations in the patient's medical record. This way, the appropriate measures can be taken to change the treatment regimen to optimize patient outcomes. The interprofessional approach to patient care will benefit the patient and ensure proper therapeutic care. [Level 5]