Clonazepam is available as an immediate-release tablet of 0.5 mg, 1 mg, 2 mg, and orally disintegrated tablets (ODT) of 0.125 mg, 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg, and 2 mg strength. The medication may be administered once at bedtime to minimize somnolence. The patient should take the ODT tablet with water by swallowing it immediately after removing it from the package.

**Treatment of Absence Seizures, Petit Mal Variant (Lennox-Gastaut syndrome), and Akinetic and Myoclonic Seizures (myoclonia)**

- Adults and adolescents (weight > 30 kg): Therapy should start with 0.5 mg tablets taken orally three times daily. The dosage may be increased by 0.5 to 1 mg every three days until seizures are under control. The maximum daily dose should not exceed 20 mg.

- Geriatric patients: The same dosage as adults. However, they require lower initial dosages as elderly patients may be more sensitive to the effects of benzodiazepines.

- Pediatric patients (weight < 30 kg): Initially, for pediatric patients, 0.01 to 0.03 mg/kg/day orally (not to exceed 0.05 mg/kg/day) divided into two or three doses is recommended. The maximum dose in this population should not exceed 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg in 3 doses.

**Treatment of Panic Disorder**

- Treatment should start at a dose of 0.25 mg tablets, taken twice a day orally for three days, after which the dose should be increased to 0.5 mg tablets twice daily. The maximum daily dose should not exceed 1 to 4 mg.

**Treatment of REM Sleep Behavior Disorder**

- The recommended dose by AASM is 0.25 mg to 2 mg clonazepam 30 minutes before bedtime.

**Use in Specific Patient Population**

**Pregnancy Considerations:**Clonazepam is a former FDA pregnancy class D drug. It has links with some facial and cardiac malformations of the human fetus. However, the data are equivocal. The use of clonazepam in late pregnancy can lead to either floppy infant syndrome or severe withdrawal symptoms in the neonate, including hypotonia, cyanosis, apneic spells, and impaired metabolic responses to cold stress. Clonazepam should only be used during pregnancy if the clinical benefits outweigh the clinical risks to the fetus.

**Breastfeeding Considerations:**Clonazepam is excreted into the breastmilk, although not in a significant amount. But for the premature neonate or those exposed during the pregnancy, it may cause problems because the pathway by which it undergoes metabolism is usually impaired in newborns. Therefore, such neonates should be monitored for the development of symptoms, and ideally, patients should be advised not to use clonazepam if they are breastfeeding.

**Liver Impairment and/or Renal Impairment:**No dosage adjustment information is given in the manufacturer's labeling; use it with caution. Clonazepam is hepatically metabolized and renally excreted; its level requires monitoring in hepatic or renal impairment as it can lead to toxic drug accumulation in the body in either condition. Clonazepam is contraindicated in severe liver disease.

**Geriatric Population:**According to the American Geriatric Society (AGS Beers Criteria), benzodiazepines(including clonazepam) AGS Beers Criteria are recognized as Potentially Inappropriate Medication (PIM). Benzodiazepines can cause cognitive dysfunction, delirium, falls, and fractures in older adults. However, use may be justified for seizure disorders and severe generalized anxiety disorder.