# Continuing Education Activity

According to the National Safety Council’s statistics, foreign-body airway obstruction (FBAO) is the fourth leading cause of unintentional death, resulting in 5,051 documented deaths in 2015. In children under the age of 16, foreign-body airway obstruction is one of the leading causes of accidental deaths. Due to the prevalence and rapidity of unconsciousness and death associated with choking, all persons, including those outside of the health field, should have a basic understanding of how to care for a choking victim. Simple maneuvers taught to laypeople such as the Heimlich maneuver have been proven to save lives. This activity reviews presentation, causes, and evaluation of foreign-body airway obstruction (FBAO) and highlights risk factors and interventions that should be used by an interprofessional team to recognize and manage patients presenting with this condition.

**Objectives:**
- Review the risk factors causing a foreign body airway obstruction.
- Describe the range of presentation and physical exam findings of a patient with a foreign body airway obstruction and explain other possible diagnoses.
- Explain the evaluation and treatment of complete and partial foreign body airway obstruction.
- Summarize the importance of collaboration and communication amongst the interprofessional team to improve outcomes for patients suffering from foreign body airway obstruction.

# Introduction

According to the National Safety Council’s statistics, foreign-body airway obstruction (FBAO) is the fourth leading cause of unintentional death, resulting in 5,051 documented deaths in 2015. In children under the age of 16, foreign-body airway obstruction is one of the leading causes of accidental deaths.

# Etiology

Choking is the blockage or hindrance of respiration by a foreign body obstruction in the airway.

Several factors make children especially prone to choking. A child’s airway is much smaller than that of an adult. Since air resistance is inversely proportional to the cross-sectional radius to the fourth power (Poiseuille's law), a small object can have a drastic effect on a child’s ability to breathe. A child does not generate the same force when coughing as an adult, so their efforts may not be enough to dislodge a foreign body.

Round foods are more likely to cause fatal choking in children, with hot dogs being the most common, followed by candy, nuts, and grapes.

For adults, autopsy results from 200 choking victims showed meat, fish, and sausage to be responsible for death in 71% of cases followed by bread and bread products (12%) and fruits and vegetables (7%).

# Epidemiology

The incidence of nonfatal choking episodes is difficult to measure because many of these events are transient and do not result in visits to a hospital.

Among children, choking rates were highest among infants less than one year, and over 75% of choking incidents occurred in children under 3. No significant difference appeared in the choking rates between boys and girls.

Among adults, conditions associated with a higher risk of choking include Alzheimer disease, parkinsonism, prior stroke, intellectual or developmental disability, poor dentition, intoxication, dysphagia along with psychotropic medications, and advanced age.

# Pathophysiology

Airway obstruction can occur anywhere from the pharynx to the bronchi.  Obstruction in the larynx, above the vocal cords, has a better prognosis as therapeutic maneuvers tend to be more effective than when the obstruction occurs below the larynx, which may necessitate removal by instrumentation.

Stridor, a variably high pitched respiratory sound, is a common physical exam finding in airway obstruction. The cause is attributed to rapid, turbulent flow through a narrow airway opening. The reduction of airflow increases the energy expended to move air across the airway, resulting in turbulent airflow and, subsequently, stridor and respiratory distress.

# History and Physical

The approach to a choking patient should begin with an assessment of the ABCs (airway, breathing, and circulation). The clinician should focus on skin color, level of consciousness, and work of breathing, noting chest wall retractions, nasal flaring, and the use of accessory muscles.

The classical physical exam features include stridor and hoarseness for laryngotracheal foreign bodies and unilateral wheezing and decreased breath sounds for foreign bodies in the bronchi. A pharyngeal examination should is necessary, and if there is a visible foreign body, it may be removed but avoid blind finger sweeps. The pharyngeal exam should also evaluate for other causes of stridor and respiratory distress such as epiglottis and peritonsillar abscess.

While a history of sudden coughing and choking is most predictive of FBAO, providers must have a high clinical suspicion for FBAO as a significant number of patients present with no cough, stridor, or wheezes. In the absence of these physical exam findings, providers should pay particular attention to risk factors such as age or disability and chest x-ray findings of atelectasis, lung hyperinflation, or pneumonia. While the sudden onset of symptoms is most common, the diagnosis cannot be excluded based on the duration of symptoms as many patients present greater than 24 hours after foreign body aspiration.

# Evaluation

While the diagnosis of FBAO often has its basis on history and physical, radiographs may be useful to confirm the diagnosis but should not be used to exclude the diagnosis, as radiographs are normal in greater than 50% of tracheal foreign bodies.

# Treatment / Management

A child with a presumed airway obstruction that is still able to maintain some degree of ventilation should be allowed to clear the airway by coughing. If the child cannot cough, vocalize, or breathe, emergent steps are necessary to clear the airway. For infants under one year of age, alternating sequences of five back blows and five chest thrusts are performed until the object clears or the infant becomes unresponsive. Abdominal thrusts should not be performed in infants as their livers are more prone to injury.

The treatment for an adult with complete FBAO is similar to that of a child where a bystander performs the Heimlich maneuver until expelling the foreign body or CPR if the patient loses consciousness. If nobody is present to assist in the Heimlich maneuver, the choking individual may self-administer thrusts with his or her fist or by forcibly leaning against a firm object such as the back of a chair. For patients who are pregnant or morbidly obese, abdominal thrusts may not be feasible, and chest thrusts against the patient’s sternum may be performed.

If the above described basic life support measures do not clear the obstruction, direct laryngoscopy should be performed with attempts to remove the foreign object with Magill forceps and/or suction. If the object is still causing obstruction and the clinician believes the foreign body is above the level of the vocal cords, a cricothyrotomy with trans-tracheal ventilation is appropriate. If the foreign body lodges below the level of the vocal cords, the provider may attempt endotracheal intubation with the endotracheal (ET) tube used to advance the foreign body into the right mainstem bronchus. The ET tube should then be withdrawn above the carina to allow ventilation of the left lung, and preparations should be made for bronchoscopy in the operating room.

When a partial FBAO is suspected, a diagnostic bronchoscopy should be strongly considered, even in the absence of radiological findings. History of a witnessed aspiration event, physical exam findings, and radiological findings should merit consideration to determine the necessity of bronchoscopy. However, negative physical exam and radiological findings alone should not be used to rule out FBAO.  A multi-year study with 431 patients determined that despite negative physical exam and radiological findings, one-third of these patients were still found to have a foreign body by bronchoscopy.

# Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for a patient with stridor, respiratory distress, and cough is vast and includes FBAO. An approach to help narrow the differential is to determine the onset of symptoms and the presence of fever.

# Pertinent Studies and Ongoing Trials

Given the acute nature with which foreign body airway obstructions frequently present and the subsequent need for emergent resuscitation, much of the ongoing research into this and other cardiopulmonary science is reviewed regularly by the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ICOR). The ILCOR consists of members of the leading global resuscitative organizations and is engaged in an ongoing Continuous Evidence Evaluation (CEE) system for ongoing review of resuscitative science. This CEE system has replaced the previous system where resuscitative care recommendations were made on a 5-year cyclic basis.

# Prognosis

The prognosis of FBAO depends on the degree of obstruction and duration of hypoxia. Patients with partial FBAO that can clear the airway have little to no complications and can be managed based on any existing risk factors for future aspiration events. In a complete FBAO, loss of consciousness occurs in seconds to minutes. For patients requiring CPR, outcomes are particularly grim as mortality reaches 90% for out of hospital cardiac arrests, and of those who survive to hospital admission, mortality reaches 60%-70%.

# Complications

The most feared complication of FBAO is hypoxia resulting in respiratory arrest, anoxic brain injury, and death. Long term complications of undiagnosed airway foreign bodies are atelectasis, pneumonia, or bronchiectasis, occasionally requiring lobectomy or segmentectomy. It is also not uncommon for the treatment of FBAO to have deleterious side effects. Complications of the Heimlich maneuver include injury to the abdominal or thoracic viscera and regurgitation of stomach contents. For patients requiring bronchoscopy, potential complications include bleeding, infection, airway perforation, and pneumothorax.

# Deterrence and Patient Education

Multiple measures reduce the risk of choking. For adults, food texture modification should be based on the sufficiency of the airway defense mechanism and cough strength.

For children, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) provides guidance for introducing solid foods to infants and recommends that pureed foods be introduced between 4 and 6 months.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

Complete foreign body airway obstruction is a medical emergency and requires immediate action by untrained bystanders to restore the victim's airway. The AAP recommends choking first aid and CPR training for parents, teachers, child care providers, and others who care for children.