Hunter syndrome has a wide clinical spectrum with the involvement of multiple organs.

**Central Nervous System**

The Hunter syndrome initially presents as hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus results in an increased diameter of skull manifesting clinically as macrocephaly. It is followed by behavioral symptoms, attention difficulties, hyperactivity, and seizures. The decreased attention span is attributed to reduced volumes of the corpus callosum. Patients also have cognitive decline is school years with below-average school performance.

**Oral Cavity**

Patients have an abnormal number of teeth, enamel defects (in both milk and permanent teeth), morphological problems, malocclusion, and jaw defects. There is an increased incidence of dental caries, cysts, and abscesses. Patients should have an early follow-up with the dental surgeon prior to the development of the symptoms.

**Respiratory System**

There is an increased amount of deposition of GAG in the respiratory tract, lymphoid organs, and tongue. It manifests as macroglossia, hypertrophied tonsils, adenoids, thickened vocal cords, and constriction of the trachea.

**Cardiovascular System**

Dermatan and heparan sulfate is an important and primary constituent of heart valves. In Hunter syndrome, an abnormal accumulation of these substances results in a thick valve. This results in valvular heart disease, mitral and aortic regurgitation, left ventricular hypertrophy, and hypertension. There is an overall decrease in cardiac efficiency. A survey in Hunter syndrome patients showed that 63% of patients have valvular heart disease.

**Gastrointestinal System**

The progressive accumulation of GAG in the abdominal viscera causes hepatosplenomegaly. One of the first clinical signs of Hunter syndrome is protruded abdomen. Hepatosplenomegaly elevates intra-abdominal pressure, causing increased tension on the abdominal wall. This may result in an inguinal and umbilical hernia. Patients complain of chronic diarrhea with voluminous, mucoid stools.

**Musculoskeletal System**

Patients present with coarse facial features, short stature, joint contractures, joint stiffness, and myopathy. The skeletal manifestations in Hunter syndrome cause a rare congenital condition known as dysostosis multiplex. The failure of endochondral ossification due to GAG accumulation in the growth plate results in short stature. It also results in kyphosis, scoliosis, and structural deformities in the rib cage.

The structural deformities in the vertebral column compress spinal cord and nerve roots, which can cause muscle weakness, paralysis, urinary bladder, and bowel incontinence. Progressive accumulation of dermatan and heparan sulfate damages articular and hyaline cartilage at a joint. It causes joint pain, stiffness, decreased range of motion, and contractures.

GAGs also accumulate in muscles and tendons, resulting in myopathy and death of muscle spindle cells. Both these factors produce stiffness and contractures at the hip, knee, ankle, shoulder, and wrist joints. It decreases the range of movement, grip, and muscle power of hand muscles. The contractures produce claw hand deformity. The accumulation of GAGs around tendons can compress the median nerve at the wrist joint, producing carpal tunnel syndrome.