**Mechanism of Action**

Patisiran, a novel treatment for polyneuropathy associated with hATTR, is a small, double-stranded interfering RNA molecule (ALN-18328) formulated in a lipid covering using micro nanotechnology.

Patisiran is administered via intravenous infusion and transported to the liver by blood. The apolipoprotein opsonized in the lipid capsule of the nanoparticle is recognized by the apolipoprotein-E receptors of hepatocytes, and the drug internalizes by endocytosis. The disruption of the nanoparticles in hepatocytes releases the pharmacologically active moiety siRNA. Then, siRNA processing by the ribonuclease, also known as the Dicer enzyme, occurs. This processing involves cleaving the overhanging nucleotides on the edges of the siRNA. The processed siRNA binds to the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC).

This RISC separates the strands of the siRNA sequence. One strand releases, and the other one remains bound to the RISC. Then, the bound strand of siRNA functions as a targeting sequence for the complementary mRNA sequence. The bound patisiran strand binds to the genetically conserved sequence located in the 3' untranslated region of the complementary mRNA encoding abnormal transthyretin (TTR) and the alignment of the RISC complex with it.

Subsequently, transthyretin mRNA is cleaved to render it nonfunctional. The degradation of mRNA coding wild-type and mutant transthyretin (TTR), a process of post-transcriptional gene silencing, results in reduced levels of TTR protein in the serum and ultimately deposition of TTR protein, also called amyloid, in tissues.

**Pharmacodynamics**

The pharmacodynamic effects have been evaluated in patients suffering from hATTR amyloidosis and on treatment with 0.3 mg/kg of patisiran, administered intravenously through infusion every three weeks. The mean reduction of serum TTR was approximately 80% within ten days to 2 weeks after a single dosage. Chronic dosing every three weeks, mean serum TTR decreased by 83% and 84% after 9 and 18 months of treatment, respectively.

The mean maximum reduction in serum TTR over one and a half years was 88%. Serial TTR reductions were comparable regardless of the demographic characteristics of age, sex, race (Caucasian or non-Caucasian), weight, type of TTR mutation, mild to moderate hepatic dysfunction, and mild hepatic impairment.

Knockdown of TTR remained stable for a minimum of 2 years.

**Pharmacokinetics**

Following administration of a single dosage via intravenous route, systemic exposure to patisiran rises linearly, directly proportional to the dosage, over the dosage range of 0.01 to 0.5 mg per kg. The drug is stable in blood circulation, with more than 95% of the dosage remaining enclosed in lipid nanoparticles.

When patisiran is given at the recommended dosing regimen of 0.3 mg/kg every three weeks, it achieves a steady state within 24 weeks of therapy. The estimated mean +/- SD area under the curve (AUC), Ctrough (trough concentrations), and steady-state peak concentrations (Cmax) were 184 +/- 159 µg·h/mL, 0.021 +/- 0.044 µg/mL, and 7.15 +/- 2.14 µg/mL, respectively.

Compared to the first dose, the accumulation of AUC was 3.2-fold at a steady-state and is attributable to the association of patisiran with the lipid DLin-MC3-DMA.

**Distribution**

Plasma protein binding of patisiran is low, with 2.1% or less binding with human serum albumin and human α1-acid glycoprotein observed in vitro. The primary site for patisiran distribution is the liver, the principal organ for TTR production. The (mean +/- SD) value for the steady-state volume of distribution (Vss) was 0.26 +/- 0.20 L/kg with chronic therapy using the recommended dosing regimen of 0.3 mg/kg every three weeks.

**Elimination**

**Metabolism**

Patisiran metabolizes by the enzymes called ribonucleases into oligonucleotide chains of various lengths and individual nucleotides, similar to endogenous RNA.

**Excretion**

Less than 1% of the patisiran dosage administered through intravenous infusion is excreted unchanged into urine.

**Specific Populations**

Age, sex, and race (non-Caucasian vs. Caucasian) did not impact the patisiran pharmacokinetics at a steady-state or TTR reduction. According to population pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analyses, mild or moderate renal dysfunction (eGFR ≥30 to <90 mL/min/1.73m) or mild hepatic impairment (bilirubin >1.0 to 1.5 x ULN alone, or both bilirubin ≤1 x ULN and AST >1 x ULN,) had no impact on patisiran exposure or reduction of TTR burden.

No data exist to inform about the patisiran use in patients with severe or end-stage renal disease, moderate or severe degree of hepatic impairment, and patients who have received prior liver transplant treatment.

**Drug Interaction Studies**

No formal clinical studies have performed to learn about drug-to-drug interactions were not formally studies. The components of commercially available patisiran are not inducers or inhibitors of cytochrome P-450(CYP) enzymes or transporters at clinically relevant concentrations in plasma. Patisiran is not a substrate of CYP-450 enzymes.

The population pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that concomitant use of moderate or potent CYP3A inhibitors and inducers did not affect the pharmacokinetic parameters of patisiran. Patisiran is unanticipated to interact with other drugs or be impacted by inducers or inhibitors of cytochrome P450 enzymes.

Serum transthyretin (TTR) binds the retinol-binding protein that carries vitamin-A in the plasma. Hence, TTR plays a physiological role in transporting vitamin-A to the liver. In the absence of normal TTR, transportation of vitamin-A will be disabled.

**Efficacy Analysis**

In indirect comparisons, the research indicates patisiran has greater therapeutic efficacy than tafamidis and inotersen on neuropathy and Quality of Life (QoL) in patients with polyneuropathy associated with hATTR amyloidosis.

**Use and Risk Summary in Specific Populations**

**Pregnancy:**There is a pregnancy exposure registry for monitoring outcomes in women with a history of patisiran exposure during the pregnancy. Motivate the physicians to enroll the pregnant females in the registry. Encourage pregnant patients also to register themselves in the program.

The clinical trials have not been conducted on pregnant women to know the patisiran-associated adverse developmental outcomes. Patisiran therapy leads to a reduction in serum vitamin-A levels, and therefore, pregnant patients on patisiran will take vitamin-A supplements daily. Vitamin-A is an essential nutrient for the normal development of the embryo and fetus.

However, excessive vitamin A, also known as hypervitaminosis, is associated with congenital malformations.

In preclinical studies, intravenous administration of patisiran-LC (lipid complex) to pregnant rabbit females during organogenesis resulted in developmental toxicity such as embryofetal mortality and low fetal body weight at mid and high dosages. These dosages were also associated with toxicity in mothers. Low dosages had no negative impact on fertility or embryo-fetal development. Studies in rats revealed no adverse developmental effects in offspring when patisiran-LC or a pharmacologically active and rodent-specific surrogate were administered intravenously to pregnant and lactating females.

For the general population in the USA, the estimated background risk of miscarriage and the major congenital malformations in clinically confirmed pregnancies are 15 to 20% and 2 to 4%, respectively. The background risk of miscarriage and the significant birth deformities is unknown for the indicated population.

**Lactation:**There is no scientific data on the secretion of patisiran in human milk, the effects on the nursing infant, or the effects on lactogenesis. While prescribing the patisiran to a lactating mother, consider the developmental and overall health benefits of breastfeeding together with the maternal need for therapy and any potential detrimental effects of patisiran or underlying mother's medical condition on the breastfeeding infant.

**Pediatric Use:**There is no information on the safety and effectiveness of patisiran in pediatric patients.

**Geriatric Use:**Dose adjustment is unnecessary for patients 65 years and older. A total of 62 patients aged 65 years and younger, including nine patients aged 75 years and older, received patisiran treatment in the placebo-controlled study. There were no notable differences in safety or effectiveness between these age groups and younger patients. However, some older individuals appear to have more sensitivity to patisiran.

**Hepatic Impairment:**No dose adjustment is necessary for patients with mild hepatic impairment (bilirubin >1.0 to 1.5 x ULN alone or both bilirubin ≤1 x ULN and AST >1 x ULN). The research data for patisiran use in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment does not exist.

**Renal Impairment:**No dose adjustment is essential in patients suffering from mild or moderate renal impairment with an estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] in the 30 to less than 90 mL/min/1.73m of range. The research data for patisiran use in patients suffering from severe renal dysfunction or end-stage renal disease does not exist.