The pituitary gland is located in a saddle-shaped depression in the body of the sphenoid bone, sella turcica/pituitary fossa. The floor of the pituitary fossa forms the roof of sphenoid sinuses posteriorly. The anterior wall of the pituitary fossa, which ends at the tuberculum sellae, is bounded laterally by the middle clinoid processes, and the posterior boundary is a vertical projection of bone, dorsum sellae, with its posterolateral angles forming the posterior clinoid processes. Anterior to tuberculum sellae is the grooved sulcus chiasmaticus, which leads to the optic canals laterally. Optic chiasma is located posterosuperior to this sulcus and anterior to the pituitary stalk. Planum sphenoidale, the smooth roof of the sphenoid body, lies anterior to sulcus chiasmaticus. The cavernous sinuses lie lateral to the pituitary fossa.

**Endoscopic Anatomy**

Sphenoid sinuses are approached via passing the endoscope in a medial corridor, between the nasal septum and middle turbinate. Sphenoid ostia are located medial to superior turbinate, at the same level as the superior border of the natural ostium of the maxillary sinus. It is 1 to 1.5 cm from the choanal roof, 7 cm from the nasal sill at a 30-degree angle, and 11 mm from the skull base.

The main structures encountered in a well-pneumatized sinus are the optic nerve, carotid artery, and sella turcica. Once the inter-sinus septum is removed, all structures can be identified. The pituitary fossa in the midline is flanked by the cavernous sinus and anterior genu of the cavernous segment of the carotid artery. The optic nerve is located at the junction of the sidewall and roof, as the carotid arteries are followed superiorly. Above the pituitary fossa is the tuberculum sella, at the junction of the anterior face of the pituitary fossa and roof of the sphenoid sinus (planum sphenoidale). The lateral opticocarotid recess (OCR) is a triangular bony depression that represents the ventral surface of the optic strut. Medial OCR is a teardrop-shaped depression at the medial junction of the paraclinoid carotid and optic canal. The lateral end (tail) of medial OCR meets the medial aspect of lateral OCR, where the paraclinoid carotid artery and optic canal intersect.

The presence of various anatomical variations makes endonasal transsphenoidal access challenging. Deviation of the nasal septum or a concha bullosa (pneumatization of the middle turbinate) can narrow the nasal passage. A gross septal deviation or prior septal surgery can potentially impair the harvest of a nasoseptal flap, a common reconstructive technique in sellar surgery. Sinonasal disease or nasal polyps can obliterate the nasal passage and warrant sinus surgery. The anatomy of the sphenoid sinus and its adjacent structures need critical evaluation. Computed tomography (CT) scans need to be studied meticulously by the surgeon for the extent of pneumatization of sphenoid sinuses (including the presence of lateral recesses), posterior attachment of intersinus septum and its relation to the paracavernous carotid artery, sphenoethmoidal cell/Onodi cell, and dehiscence over bony walls covering optic nerve or carotid artery. The optic nerve canal is dehiscent in 4% to 8% of cases.