Patients with cardiogenic shock dependent on IABP support require certified/accredited intensive care unit nurses to monitor the hemodynamics of the patient. Therefore and to ensure adequate augmentation with IABP. Vitals should be observed frequently over the day, and any adverse change in hemodynamics should be reported to the intensivist immediately. Patients with IABP catheter inserted in the femoral artery need bedrest with as minimal as possible movement of the lower extremity to avoid displacement of the intra-aortic balloon from its recommended position. Bending of leg and movement of the patient can lead to migration of balloon proximal to the origin of the subclavian artery and can result in vascular complications including compromise of blood supply to the left upper extremity and stroke. Migration of the balloon below the origin of the renal artery can result in renal injury.

Patients with IABP in place are at risk of developing bacteremia and sepsis. Therefore, sepsis workup should be initiated promptly if the patient developed fever, leukocytosis, or other signs of infection, and, if clinically warranted, empiric antibiotic therapy should commence.

Another significant complication of IABP is the thrombosis or thromboembolic phenomena. To reduce the risk of thrombosis, the patients requiring IABP are usually anticoagulated unless there is a pre-existing contraindication to anticoagulation. These patients should be monitored closely for bleeding complications, and hemoglobin/hematocrit should be monitored closely.

Daily chest X-ray should be obtained to confirm the position of the IABP catheter tip. The carina may be the best landmark to confirm the positioning of the IABP catheter tip, and the IAPB catheter tip 2 cm above the carina results in adequate positioning of the IABP in 95.3% of the patients (1.5 to 3.5 cm distal to the origin of the Left subclavian artery).

Daily monitoring of hemoglobin/hematocrit, platelet count, serum creatinine is advised.

Adequate anticoagulation management requires collaborative efforts of ICU pharmacist, nurses, and the physician to monitor for activated clotting times and an early sign of the bleeding complication. [Level 5]