Plum and Posner described cephalic-caudal sequential progressions of the brain during herniation.

Brain herniation is classified as follows:

- Subfalcine herniation

- Transalar (transsphenoidal) herniation

- Transtentorial uncal herniation

- Central (trans-tentorial) herniation (descending and ascending)

- Cerebellar tonsillar herniation

- Transcalvarial herniation

**1. Subfalcine Herniation**

In subfalcine herniation, the ipsilateral cingulate gyrus gets migrated beneath the anterior falx, resulting in infarction along with the distal territory of the anterior cerebral artery.

**2. Transalar (transsphenoidal) Herniation**

In the posterior (descending) variant of transalar herniation, there may be infarction within the middle cerebral artery territory resulting from its compression within the sphenoid ridge. In anterior (ascending) transalar herniation, compression of the supra-clinoid segment of the internal carotid artery against the anterior clinoid process leads to infarction within the territory of anterior and middle cerebral arteries.

**3. Transtentorial Uncal Herniation**

Transtentorial uncal herniation leads to compression of the third nerve against the tentorial edge, resulting in a constriction followed by dilatation of the ipsilateral pupil.  There may be infarction within the temporal or occipital lobe owing to compression of the calcarine branch of the posterior cerebral artery as well. The lateral displacement of the brain may be the primer for compression of the aqueduct of Sylvius, thereby leading to obstructive hydrocephalus. As the midbrain is further displaced, sometimes the contralateral cerebral peduncle is forced against the tentorium edge, creating Kernohan’s notch and damaging contralateral corticospinal tract, thereby resulting in paresis or paralysis ipsilateral to the mass lesion.

**4. Central Herniation (descending and ascending)**

As the pathological descent of the brainstem through the incisura progresses, venous congestion along with stretching and tearing of small perforators create Duret hemorrhages. Clinically there is a progression from abnormal flexor posturing to abnormal extensor response through the involvement of rubrospinal and the vestibulospinal tracts. Soon following this stage comes either a vegetative state or impending death due to damage to respiratory and cardiac centers in medulla by the herniated cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum. Patients may exhibit characteristic triple components of Cushing triad constituting of hypertension, bradycardia, and irregular respirations.

Ascending transtentorial herniation can compression posterior cerebral or superior cerebellar arteries against the tentorium.

**5. Cerebellar Tonsillar Herniation**

Increased pressure in the posterior fossa forces the cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum. These will compress the lower part of the brain stem and upper cervical cord, resulting in life-threatening consequences. It usually occurs along with ascending or descending transtentorial herniation. Acute herniation can compress the posterior inferior cerebellar arteries, vertebral arteries, and their branches or the origin of the anterior spinal artery, which can lead to ischemia of brainstem, tonsils, and lower cerebellum.

**6. Transcalvarial Herniation**

In cases of calvarial defects such as in decompressive hemicraniectomy, the edematous brain may mushroom out through the defect, the path of least resistance, owing to the axonal stretch; this can sometimes lead to compression of cortical vessels by the bony margins thereby predisposing to hemorrhagic infarction.