As soon as there is suspicion of Pott puffy tumor, rapid imaging should be obtained. The imaging of choice between a head computed tomographic (CT) scan with contrast or a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is controversial. One of them is necessary, not only to confirm the diagnosis but to identify any intracranial complication. Imaging should not be delayed, since rapid diagnosis and treatment influence the outcome and prognosis.

- **Head CT with contrast**: It is an excellent initial study because it is fast and confirms the diagnosis. It can show the frontal sinusitis, bone erosion, subperiosteal collection, and intracranial extension. It provides the best visualization of the air-bone and air-soft tissue interface but involves a radiation dose. It is may not recommended for follow up imaging due to the increased risk for the development of malignancy from repetitive radiation exposure.

- **Brain MRI with contrast**: It is the study of choice if possible and available. It characterizes better the intracranial pathology and the extent of the infection, dural sinus thrombosis, and abscess showing restricted diffusion. It has a superior soft-tissue resolution, and excellent evaluation of brain and subdural space, but poorly characterizes bone destruction. This is the study of choice for follow up during the postoperative period because it eliminates radiation exposure. It can delay diagnosis and treatment in some centers due to difficulty in obtaining an available MRI.

Bone scintigraphy has also been described, although not often used in the modern setting. It is more sensitive than CT for early osteomyelitis but has little use if clinical signs are present.

Laboratory workup may include complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein.