Both maternal and fetal complications can occur with amniocentesis.

**Maternal Complications**

- There is an estimated 2.6% risk of fetomaternal hemorrhage.

- Maternal isoimmunization in Rh-negative cases.

- There is minimal chance of introducing skin bacteria into the amniotic cavity. The risk of chorioamnionitis and uterine infections is less than 0.1%.

- The procedure increases the risk of preterm labor in the third-trimester amniocentesis. Preterm premature rupture of membrane and oligohydramnios are common complications encountered following amniocentesis.

- There is a 2% to 3% risk of vaginal bleeding.

- Post-procedure pain and maternal discomfort: Mean pain intensity described is 1.6+/-1.3 when noted on a scale of 0 to 7.

- Amniotic fluid embolism, very rare

- There can be hematoma of maternal skin or intestinal or internal organ injuries.

**Fetal Complications**

- On average, the fetal loss rate associated with amniocentesis is 0.11%. The loss is 0.56% within 28 days and 0.09% within 42 days.
- The risk of fetal loss is higher in women who are otherwise at a higher risk of miscarriage, such as women carrying fetuses with structural malformations, fibroids, obese women, and women with vaginal infections at the time of the procedure. Amniocentesis in up to 86.0% of the patients is safe and free from complications.

- Amniotic fluid leak: 1% to 2%, and usually associated with spontaneous sealing of membranes.
- Fetal lung hypoplasia
- Respiratory distress

- Fetal injuries like bleeding from the cord, ocular injuries, and postural deformities like talipes equinovarus (clubfoot) might occur.

- The risk of complications is high when more than or equal to 3 pricks are used to obtain amniotic fluid. In ideal conditions, if an adequate fluid sample is not obtained in two pricks, the procedure should be abandoned for 24 hours, after which it can be re-attempted. The risk is less in experienced hands, i.e., people who perform more than 300 procedures/year.