Below guidelines are derived from the Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines

**Source Control**

- Broad-spectrum antibiotics within one hour of diagnosis for all patients. Initial empiric anti-infective therapy should have activity against all likely pathogens and adequate penetration of source tissue.

- Removal of infected/necrotic tissue, if it is the source of septic shock, i.e. patients with cellulitis, abscess, infected devices, purulent wounds.

**Management of Shock**

- Measures most effective if achieved within the first six hours of diagnosis

- Restore central venous pressure (CVP) to 8 mmHg to 12 mmHg

- Restore mean arterial pressure (MAP) greater than 65 mmHg

- Restore superior vena cava saturation to 70% or mixed venous saturation to 65%

- Fluid resuscitation with crystalloid (NS or albumin) and colloid (blood products) up to 80 ml/kg

- Mechanical ventilation to reduce metabolic demand

- First line vasoactive agents (epinephrine in cold shock versus norepinephrine in warm shock) when fluid-refractoryNote: dopamine as a first line agent has fallen out of favor given its inhibitory effect on the HPA axis, namely prolactin and growth hormone, which can confer immunologic dysfunction

**Enhancing Host Response**

- Corticosteroids indicated in vasoactive-refractory shock and or in patients with low (unstimulated) basal cortisol levels less than 150 ug/L)

- Addition of vasopressin indicated in vasoactive-refractory shock

While central lines are not required for the resuscitation of patients with septic shock, they provide an accurate means of monitoring CVP and mixed venous saturations. Remember that CVP and MVO2 are most accurate from a central line that lies within the right atrium; lower extremity central lines do not provide the most accurate data for monitoring these indices of resuscitation. Regarding the need for central venous access for administration of vasoactive agents, a recent study showed that both dopamine, norepinephrine, and phenylephrine at high doses could be safely administered via peripheral venous access.

Of note, early goal-directed therapy (EGDT) has not been shown to confer a survival benefit in more recent studies.

The placement of an arterial line becomes important in the management of vasoactive-refractory shock for close monitoring of blood pressure and tissue oxygenation status via regular blood gasses with key attention to lactate levels and pO2.