The key component of all iodinated contrast agents is a tri-iodinated benzene ring. The atomic radius of a tri-iodinated benzene ring falls within the wavelength range of X-rays, 10 to 10,000 picometers, which allows for their visualization on X-ray films and their ability to help delineate between different tissues. Variations of the tri-iodinated benzene ring arrangement help give the four basic categories of iodinated contrast agents. The contrast agent can either be classified as a monomer (one tri-iodinated benzene ring) or a dimer (two tri-iodinated benzene rings connected with an organic functional group). Contrast agents are further classified by their ionic tendency. The presence of a carboxylate functional group (-COO-) produces a net negative charge making the contrast agent ionic, whereas the absence of a carboxylate group infers that the contrast media is non-ionic. Thus, the four basic categories of contrast agents are as follows

- Ionic monomer

- Ionic dimer

- Nonionic monomer

- Nonionic dimer

Examples of Contrast Agents by Classification

The chemical makeup of each classification of contrast agent imparts different clinical utilities and toxicity profiles.  The charged, ionic contrast agents disrupt the electrical potentials of cell membranes and impart increased toxicity compared to their non-ionic counterparts.  Ionic monomers have the lowest ability to attenuate X-rays and thus must be administered in high osmolarity concentrations to be effective clinically (1,500 to 2,000 mOsm/L). Due to concerns about renal toxicity with higher osmolarity agents, contrast agents can be further divided into three broad categories: high-osmolar (>1,400 mOsm/kg), low-osmolar (600 to 1,000 mOsm/kg), and iso-osmolar (280 to 290 mOsm/kg). With increased side effects and a higher incidence of kidney injury amongst high-osmolar contrast media, low-osmolar and iso-osmolar contrast media are the preferred contrast agent for direct and intravascular injections.

High-osmolarity contrast agents are still utilized for gastrointestinal and cystouretheral administration due to their limited systemic uptake and adverse effects when administered enterically. Blood and tissue have a similar radiodensity making the differentiation between structures on fluoroscopy challenging. The addition of contrast with its increased radiodensity allows for a sharper differentiation between tissue due to the contrast's ability to absorb more ionizing radiation than the surrounding tissue.

**Gadolinium-based Contrast Agents**

Gadolinium-based contrast agents are typically used for magnetic resonance imaging but can also be used as an alternative to iodinated contrast media.  Much like iodinated contrast media, gadolinium-based contrast agents also exist in ionic and non-ionic forms.  However, instead of being arranged as monomers and dimers, they are arranged as linear and macrocyclic structures.  The gadolinium ion must be bound to a chelating agent since the sole ion is toxic to humans.  Linear gadolinium-based contrast agents arrange the chelating agent as an open-chain chemical structure that wraps around the gadolinium ion.  Macrocyclic agents cage the gadolinium ion in the center of the chelator.  Macrocyclic agents are considered more stable since the gadolinium ion is less likely to dissociate.  Ionic gadolinium-based agents are more thermodynamically stable than their nonionic counterparts.