The pathogenesis of CVID is very complex and involves various alterations at the cellular level. Many studies have investigated the pathogenesis of CVID, and our understanding of this disease has increased in recent years. Genetic and molecular defects, immune cell abnormalities, epigenetic and microbiome dysbiosis may have some roles in the pathogenesis of CVID.

**Genetic and Molecular Defects**

Genetic defects in CVID can involve mutations at 3 cellular levels (nucleus, cytoplasm, and surface). Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) receptor superfamily gene defects have been investigated to be involved in this disease. These TNF receptors are involved in pathways that affect TACI, B-cell activating factor that belongs to tumor necrosis factor family BAFF (BAFF-R) receptor, and apoptosis inducer. TACI and BAFF-R participate in B-cell development and its activation. TACI regulates both B-cell receptor (BCR) and Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 and 9 molecules hence mutations in TACI could impact B-cell development/maturation and may lead to autoimmunity.

**Epigenetic Changes**

Epigenetic changes influence gene expression without changing the germline DNA gene sequences. In other words, a change in phenotype without a change in genotype. These changes involve DNA methylation, histone modification, non-coding RNAs, transcription factor expression, and chromatin remodeling. These mechanisms can alter B-cell development in both early and late stages and causing hypogammaglobulinemia, decreased number of naïve and memory B cells, and an increase in the CD21 with a low B-cell population.

**Immune Cell Abnormalities**

CVID can involve both innate and adaptive immune systems, especially defects in B-cell and T-cell. Most patients with common variable immunodeficiency have normal B-cell counts, denoting the defect affects the terminal stages of B-cell differentiation. Further studies have shown that B-cell subsets disruption might increase terminal B-cell apoptosis and interrupt the differentiation of B cells into memory and plasma cells that can lead to impaired antibody production.

**Microbiome Dysbiosis**

Bacteria in the gut can produce lipopolysaccharide that may activate our immune system by recognizing the microbe-associated molecular patterns by the innate immune system. Overgrowth of proinflammatory products the bacteria can lead to further disruption in the immune system. These disruptions may involve decreased plasma IgA levels and increased T-cell activation markers.