Most patients with low urinary citrate can be managed with oral alkali therapy. If hyperkalemia, rapid intestinal transit time, or stomach upset limit potassium citrate administration, a lower potassium alkalinizing supplement or plain sodium bicarbonate can be used. For those with poor absorption from tablets, liquid preparations can be substituted. Nephrolithiasis patients with irritable bowel problems typically improve when their bowel issues are successfully managed.

Randomized controlled trials looking at citrate therapy for hypocitraturic stone formers have generally found significant reductions in new stone formation in subjects who receive treatment compared to controls.

Over two-thirds (69%) of untreated stone formers will continue to manufacture stones compared to only 2% of patients receiving optimized prophylactic medical therapy.

Overall compliance with citrate supplementation is somewhat less than optimal at an overall 73.3% after six months. This is due to the need for a dosage schedule that is usually three or four times a day, the large size of the tablet formations, poor absorption requiring increasing doses, hyperkalemia, the appearance of "ghost" tablets appearing in the stool which some patients incorrectly interpret as being ineffective, and the lack of any appreciable clinical benefit. If patients deliberately or accidentally stop therapy briefly, there is no immediate or obvious clinical effect or harm. Clinicians should make every effort to reinforce the many benefits of continuing therapy long-term even if there is no obvious clinical improvement and no apparent harm if therapy is temporarilystopped.

In general, with proper treatment, hypocitraturia can be successfully managed, if not completely reversed, and patients can expect substantially fewer new renal calculi while taking adequate citrate therapy.