Retroperitoneal fibrosis is a disorder that is rare and most commonly encountered during the workup of a patient with renal insufficiency being caused by ureteral compression by a retroperitoneal mass. During the initial management, it is vital to determine the severity of the patient's renal impairment and to perform a procedure to allow decompression of the collecting system to protect the kidneys. This will be dependent on the patient's overall status at the time of diagnosis. After decompression of the collecting system, it is critical to monitor for post-obstructive diuresis and replace fluids/electrolytes as necessary.

After the kidneys are protected, the next step in the workup of retroperitoneal fibrosis is to obtain a diagnosis. It is argued that if CT imaging studies are characteristic of RPF, no biopsy is necessary. In this case, the clinician can begin medical therapy with steroids and follow the regimen as outlined in the treatment section. If surgical intervention is deemed necessary, an open biopsy can be obtained at that time. There are certain scenarios when a CT-guided biopsy may be performed to aid in diagnosis and guide medical therapy. These reasons are listed above.

Surgical management is necessary if ureteral stents and/or percutaneous nephrostomy tubes are unable to be placed, medical therapy is ineffective in the treatment of RPF. or if it is felt that there could be an underlying malignancy. This can be approached robotically, laparoscopically or open and numerous maneuvers are discussed to increase the likelihood of a surgical procedure being effective.