Treatment consists of supportive management for the symptoms and management of associated morbidities and/or complications. The prognosis of the patients with hydranencephaly is poor. Patients affected by this condition usually die in-utero. Those that survive usually die within the first year of life. For these reasons, therapeutic abortion is an option if diagnosed during pregnancy. If the diagnosis is confirmed during pregnancy, discussion in detail with all family members is done. Given the prognosis, to prevent or reduce maternal morbidity (medical, psychological, and economical), the option of medical abortion is discussed and offered. This could be done as late as the third trimester if justified.

Treatment management of associated symptoms and/or complications includes:

- Hydrocephalus: A condition that presents commonly in patients with hydranencephaly. To treat the hydrocephalus, placement of a ventriculoperitoneal or ventriculoatrial shunt system to reduce the intracranial pressure can be performed.

- Anti-epileptic drugs: Seizures are one of the most common conditions that patients with hydranencephaly present with.

- Tracheostomy and/or mechanical ventilation: Used for patients with respiratory failure.

- Physical therapy: Hydranencephalic patients have poor psychomotor development and need physical and occupational therapy.

- Nutritional intervention: This will improve the outcome.

Even though shunts are the most commonly used treatment for hydrocephalus, there are many complications associated with them. They have to be frequently revised due to malfunctions and have a high rate of infections, especially in the pediatric population. Approximately 25% to 40% of pediatric patients with a shunt will undergo revision in 1 year, and 81% will require revision in the next 12 years.

Nonetheless, it is clearly noted that ECPC can have better results in treating high CSF production only in patients with hydranencephaly and not in other forms of hydrocephalus.