Approach syncope by getting the vital signs and assessing for orthostatic hypotension and getting the history of dehydration-induced by coughing, micturition, or by exercise i.e., hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and aortic stenosis. A family history of sudden cardiac death, medical and surgical history (postprandial syncope after gastrointestinal surgery), complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and fingerstick glucose (hypoglycemia causes unconsciousness) should be obtained. It is also important to have an electrocardiogram (ECG) and, in certain cases, an echocardiogram. Performing a neurologic exam to screen for transient ischemic attack (TIA) or strokes is needed. Tilt table test is also helpful for the diagnosis of vasovagal syncope and orthostatic hypotension. Performing a brain CT-scan or electroencephalogram EEG if the presentation suggests neurologic etiology is helpful as well.

Other diagnostic options can be used (i.e., Holter monitor and cardiac electrophysiologic study). However, the best method to diagnose CSH is via monitored carotid massage (but again, other causes of syncope must be ruled out, and history helps to choose the proper diagnostic option). Non-accidental falls in the elderly following a sudden loss of consciousness must be approached wisely to avoid misdiagnosing and event recurrence.

**Massage Technique:**With the patient in the supine position, use the second and third fingers over the carotid sinus, which is located anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle at the level of the upper border of the thyroid cartilage. First, massage the right carotid sinus as there are a bunch of receptors, and there is greater response than the left, massage for 5 to 10 seconds with a circular motion. If there is no response, switch to left carotid sinus unless it is contraindicated, and if there is asystole for 3 seconds or more and/or a drop in systolic blood pressure 50 mmHg or more, the test is considered positive regardless of symptoms evolution. If the test is not diagnostic may repeat the test with the patient in the upright position or using a tilt-table (prepared emergency equipment and skillful staff must be at the scene of the carotid massage).

Contraindications to carotid sinus massage:

- **Absolute contraindications**are stroke, transient ischemic attack (TIA), and myocardial infarction in the previous three months.

- **Relative contraindications**include arrhythmia (ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation) and bruit over the carotid artery, in case of bruit presence an echo-doppler should be done, if showing stenosis of 70% or more, then it is a contraindication for carotid massage (it is acceptable to do a carotid massage with a stenosis level of 50 to 69%).****