The foot is supplied by branches from the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. The anterior tibial artery continues as the dorsalis pedis artery when it passes between the line joining two malleoli and enters into the foot. The dorsalis pedis artery provides branches like medial malleolar, lateral malleolar, medial tarsal, lateral tarsal, arcuate, and first dorsal metatarsal arteries, which supply the dorsum of the foot.

It then runs toward the first web space and passes between two heads of the dorsal interossei, and enters into the sole to join the plantar arch. Dorsal metatarsal arteries, except the first one, arise from the arcuate artery, which further divides into dorsal digital arteries to supply the adjacent side of the toes. Perforating arteries connect the dorsal and plantar arteries.

The plantar aspect of the foot is supplied by medial calcaneal, medial plantar, and lateral plantar arteries (branches of the posterior tibial artery). The medial plantar run along the medial border of the sole, while the lateral plantar artery runs along the lateral side of the sole.

The heel of the foot is supplied by anastomosis of the lateral calcaneal (branch of peroneal artery) and medial calcaneal arteries.

In the foot, digital veins join to form dorsal and plantar venous arches on the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the foot, respectively. Digital veins run in the interdigital cleft and drain blood from the adjacent side of the toes.

Superficial lymphatics of the foot converge on the medial and lateral sides. Superficial lymphatics from the medial side pass along with the great saphenous vein to drain into the superficial inguinal group of lymph nodes. In contrast, superficial lymphatic from the lateral side runs along with a small saphenous vein and drains into the popliteal group of lymph nodes, Which also receives deep lymphatics of the foot and leg. The Popliteal group ultimately drains into the deep inguinal group of lymph nodes.