Treatment of manganism toxicity involves the treatment of the acute threats from toxicity and the management of chronic exposure. The most accessible form of treatment for manganism is the removal of the patient from the source exposure, whether the source is occupational, environmental, or iatrogenic.

Chelation therapy for manganism involves the use of CaNa2EDTA (EDTA) and Para-aminosalicylic Acid (PAS). The use of EDTA has been shown to effectively increase urine concentration of Mn and decrease blood levels of Mn. These findings did not coincide with the finding of decreased observed clinical toxicity, owing to the chronic nature of toxicity and incomplete reversibility.

Another chelation molecule, Para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS) - typically used as an anti-tuberculosis medication - has shown clinical benefit for use in patients with manganism. PAS and its metabolites concentrate within the choroid plexus, brain parenchyma, and CSF, making it an ideal chelator for this toxicity.

Previously attempted treatments included Levodopa (L-dopa) supplementation. Initial studies supported a benefit with L-dopa administration, but more recent data suggests prolonged treatment results in poor clinical response.

Several vitamins and supplements appear to augment clinical response and provide a means of prevention for patients. In addition to chelation therapy, iron supplementation was shown to improve neurological symptom improvement compared to a treatment group that received chelation alone.

Newer therapies being investigated include the use of taurine and Rasagiline. Taurine use decreases the toxic effects of Mn in vitro, mostly through the preservation of mitochondrial functionality in CNS tissues.