**Routine recommended antibiotics regimens and duration for common enterococcal infections:**

**Disease**

**Sensitive strains**

**Ampicillin Resistant Enterococci**

**Ampicillin resistant + VRE (b)**

UTI

Simple Female UTI:

- Nitrofurantoin for 5 days

- Amoxicillin for 3-5 days

- Fosfomycin for 1 dose

Simple Male UTI:

- Nitrofurantoin for 7 days

- Amoxicillin for 7 days

- Fosfomycin for 2-3 doses

Complicated UTI:

- Ampicillin for 7-14 days

- Quinolones for 7-14 days

Used in cases of treatment failure on previous agents:

- Linezolid (Oral)

- Vancomycin (IV)

Used in cases of treatment failure on previous agents:

- Linezolid (Oral)

- Daptomycin (IV)

Bacteremia

-Ampicillin/Penicillin +/- Ceftriaxone/Aminoglycoside for 7-14 days

- Vancomycin +/- Aminoglycoside for 7-14 days

- Unasyn/High-dose Ampicillin for 7-14 days

- Daptomycin for 7-14 days

- Linezolid for 7-14 days

Infective endocarditis

(a)

- Ampicillin + Ceftriaxone for 6 weeks

- Ampicillin/Penicillin + Aminoglycoside for 4-6 weeks.

- Vancomycin + Aminoglycoside for 6 weeks

- Daptomycin + Ampicillin/Ceftaroline for 6-8 weeks

- Linezolid for 6-8 weeks

Intra-abdominal

It is not recommended to empirically cover enterococcus unless identified in persistent collections, peritonitis, immunocompromised, or severely septic patients.

Meningitis

- Ampicillin + Aminoglycoside +/- Ceftriaxone for 10-14 days

- Vancomycin + Aminoglycoside for 10-14 days (can add intrathecally)

- Linezolid for 10-14 days

- Daptomycin (IV+intrathecal) +/- Rifampicin/Aminoglycoside

(a) Given the bacteriostatic effect of beta-lactams on enterococci at the usual doses, combination therapy with a beta-lactam (usually ampicillin) plus an aminoglycoside (specifically gentamicin or streptomycin) for 4 to 6 weeks has been the standard to achieve bacteriocidal action against enterococci in cases of IE. This prolonged use of aminoglycosides often causes nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity, as highlighted in the old paper “Deaf or Dead” Most recently, a two beta-lactam combination with ampicillin and ceftriaxone for 6 weeks duration has shown to be an equal alternative, with less toxicity leading to less interruption, and an effective option for HLAR isolates.E. faecalis than E. faecium.

(b) VRE treatment options are outlined below:

- Linezolid is the only FDA-approved agent for VRE. It has also been studied in combination with gentamicin, doxycycline, or rifampicin.

- Daptomycin has been used alone or in combinations with ceftaroline, ampicillin, ertapenem, tigecycline, and fosfomycin. For high MICs, a high dose >6 mg/kg/day is used.

- Quinupristin/Dalfopristin was used against E. faecium only but was subsequently withdrawn from the market for causing phlebitis and myalgias

- Oritavancin.

- Most recently, Tedizolid was shown efficacious, but robust clinical data is still lacking.

- Tigecycline is the last salvage treatment for VRE.

There have been several studies comparing linezolid and daptomycin for VRE bacteremia and endocarditis, with mixed results. However, linezolid and high dose daptomycin are both equally more effective than low dose daptomycin.

**Newer Therapies**

Commensal probiotic cocktails are suggested to prevent and reverse gut colonization with VRE. They mainly contain four species; Clostridium bolteae, Parabacteroides distasonis, Bacteroides sartorii, and Blautia producta, which secretes a lantibiotic that is highly effective against VRE.

Methods to significantly limit enterococcal adherence with its related infections and biofilm formation include:

a) Use of surface coatings with specific antimicrobial and antiadhesive properties on catheters and implants like non-leachable cationic film coatings.

b) Vaccination or antibody therapy directed against the enterococcal pilus tip EbpA.

Propionate, one of the short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), has shown antimicrobial effects on enterococci in the mouth to treat dental plaques and infections.in vitro and in vivo, with one study even on humans with chronic prostatitis.

Phage therapy has also shown to induce anti-phage modifications in the enterococcal cell wall, rendering them less capable of intestinal colonization, expansion, or antibiotics resistance.