Substance use disorders are heterogeneous conditions with multiple contributing biological, psychological, and environmental risk factors. There is no one approach to treating SUDs, and optimal healthcare outcomes require individualized care.

The primary goal is to engage and retain patients in care, which requires a multidisciplinary approach involving case managers, physicians, pharmacists, nurses, and therapists. In the context of an interprofessional team, team members have both overlapping and unique roles. Psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, and mental health counselors can all work with patients in an individual or group psychotherapeutic setting.

For example, although the physician’s primary role in the team may be to prescribe medications and treat medical and psychiatric complications, motivational interviewing techniques are useful for exploring ambivalence toward medication adherence and overall treatment engagement. These same techniques may be helpful for nurses working with patients in a CM program to provide positive reinforcement for treatment attendance and continued sobriety.

Understanding the basic concepts of addiction psychotherapy will help the provider in building a therapeutic alliance of understanding and trust, avoiding a lost opportunity for treatment engagement. Learning basic concepts of addiction psychotherapy can help build understanding, trust, and therapeutic alliance, which provide universal benefits to treatment engagement regardless of the discipline. Psychotherapy for SUDs is a crucial part of a comprehensive treatment program. Medication alone is often insufficient to address all of the triggers and risk factors resulting in ongoing use.

Although there are different schools of psychotherapy used to treat SUDs with a seemingly different theoretical basis, there is substantial overlap between different forms of therapy. Many head-to-head studies comparing two or more specific kinds of therapy have demonstrated similar efficacy for different forms of therapy. Therefore, various therapies may rely on common drivers of change, such as exploring triggers and developing coping skills upon a strong therapeutic alliance. Increased knowledge and training in addiction psychotherapeutic care will improve the quality of addiction care.