Current choices for treatment are based on classifying patients by the extent of involvement in limited or severe disease. Severe disease constitutes a life-threatening disease or organ-threatening disease, which includes active glomerulonephritis, pulmonary hemorrhage, cerebral vasculitis, progressive peripheral or cranial neuropathy, gastrointestinal bleeding, pericarditis, orbital pseudotumor, or myocarditis. Limited disease involves a process that does not pose such threats. The diagnosis of severe disease warrants the use of cyclophosphamide.

The treatment of GPA involves the use of immunosuppressive agents in a variety of combinations. Treatment is classified into two phases: The induction phase and the maintenance phase. Commonly used agents are cyclophosphamide, glucocorticoids, rituximab, azathioprine, methotrexate, and plasmapheresis if indicated.

Induction of remission with severe disease: Cyclophosphamide, in combination with glucocorticoids, has been proven to be effective in the treatment of life/organ-threatening disease. Pulse steroids for 3 days before initiating oral glucocorticoids are frequently used. The choice is based upon the patient preference, clinician preference, and adverse effects associated with each. According to the rituximab versus cyclophosphamide for induction of remission for ANCA-associated vasculitis trial (RAVE trial),

Maintenance therapy is initiated after induction of remission is achieved (usually within 3-6 months). Patients are transitioned to maintenance therapy to avoid relapses. Methotrexate, azathioprine, and rituximab are effective. The preference of one of these agents depends on if the patient has been newly diagnosed or has more than one relapse. Other factors that influence the choice of the maintenance agent used include a prior history of toxicity or comorbidity that increases the risk of toxicity to a particular agent. Duration of maintenance therapy is usually for 12-36 months after remission has been induced. In patients who are at high risk of relapse, maintenance therapy is continued indefinitely.

Other therapies showing efficacy for induction and/or maintenance of remission are mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine, and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole has been reported to be used in patients with a limited form of GPA without renal involvement.