Adverse reactions can be either immediate or delayed and can be of different severity. Immediate reactions can be mild, moderate, and serious. These occur within 30 to 60 minutes of the start of IVIG infusion and are reported in 5% of patients. The most common generalized side effects are mild in severity and include headache, fever, chills, and fatigue. These effects are attributable to the excipients and stabilizers contained in the preparation. Sugar-depleted preparations are now available with only amino acids as a stabilizing agents. Most of these reactions are mild and transient and attributed to a particular IVIG product and its infusion rate.

Serious adverse reactions are more common in geriatric patients than in any other age group due to pre-existing co-morbidities.

Less than 1% of patients may have a delayed reaction, including renal impairment, transfusion-related infection, and hematological and neurological disorders. Solvent-related adverse effects such as the high volume of infusions as needed in some liquid formulations can lead to volume overload in patients with cardiac or renal conditions and require appropriate attention using concentrated IVIG preparations or subcutaneous immunoglobulin (SCIG) therapy.

There are certain reported drawbacks or risks, but due to stringent regulation of IVIG product approval, there are no recently reported cases. These include:

- As a blood product, IVIG has the potential risk of transmission of viral infectious agents (HIV, hepatitis B, etc.), and there are only a few reported cases of hepatitis C transmission in the distant past.

- Drawbacks of IVIG therapy are possible when the IgG pool is from the donors with no exposure to specific pathogens, and these microorganisms can still cause infection in the patient. Though these are significantly mitigated in the current scenario, this is still a distinct possibility in case of infection by a rare pathogen.

- IgA or IgM have unique functions, and if an IVIG product lacks these immunoglobulins, then those functions may not be substituted**.******