Retinal hemorrhage is commonly seen in patients with underlying disease processes that predispose to retinal endothelial dysfunction and rupture.  Roth spots may be seen on a routine ophthalmologic exam in asymptomatic patients prompting further diagnosis and evaluation. However, patients may also present with signs and symptoms of systemic illness and retinal hemorrhages noted during acute evaluation. The presence of Roth spots on physical examination should prompt the physician to evaluate for an underlying systemic disease. The clinician should take a thorough history and complete a careful physical exam.

A detailed history with a full review of the system can help to narrow the differential diagnosis and identify the underlying disease process. Attention must be paid to symptoms associated with the more common etiologies of Roth spots. Symptoms of endocarditis and infection including fever, chills and night sweats must be reviewed. Symptoms commonly seen in hematologic disease should also be assessed such as unexplained weight loss, fatigue, abnormal bleeding or bruising and shortness of breath.  Review of personal past medical history, as well as family history, may also be helpful in determining the etiology.

Roth spots are seen on fundoscopic examination. A complete ophthalmologic examination should be performed as other retinal abnormalities may accompany Roth spots. After Roth spots are identified, the physician must carefully examine the patient to assess for physical signs of systemic illness. It is important to note the patient's vital signs, particularly blood pressure, temperature, and pulse. Several etiologies of white-centered retinal hemorrhages have classical physical examination findings associated with them; therefore, the physician must have a high index of suspension during the examination. In patients that present with concerns for endocarditis and Roth spots, the clinician must carefully examine for other stigmata of endocarditis including Janeway lesions, Osler nodes, splinter hemorrhages, petechiae and cardiac murmurs. Assessment of digital clubbing, the presence or absence of splenomegaly and respiratory abnormalities is also helpful.