Transvaginal ultrasound is the most common and efficient technique in imaging pelvic structures. Findings on ultrasound may appear nonspecific with diffuse or localized, echogenic endometrial thickening.

Another method to evaluate the endometrial cavity is saline-infusion sonography (SIS). This modality involves instilling about 5 to 30 mL of warmed saline into the uterine cavity using a thin catheter during the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle. Polyps are better visualized with fluid outlining the mass. Contraindications include active uterine or cervical infection and pregnancy. SIS provides a better evaluation of the adnexa and cornua compared to transvaginal ultrasound. In addition, SIS provides better differentiation between submucosal fibroids and endometrial polyps by visualizing the location in relation to the endometrial layer. A polyp will be seen arising from the endometrial layer, and a submucosal fibroid will be visualized under this layer. Other methods of evaluation include hysterosalpingograms or hysteroscopy.

More importantly, these methods will not provide tissue diagnosis. Tissue sampling should be considered due to the risk of malignancy associated with endometrial polyps. To obtain tissue diagnosis, an endometrial biopsy, dilation, and curettage (D&C) or hysteroscopic polypectomy must be completed. Blind tissue sampling with endometrial biopsy or D&C is inaccurate in the diagnosis of endometrial polyps and should only be used in settings where hysteroscopic treatment is unavailable.

Laboratory studies are also considered in the evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding. Studies should include a urine pregnancy test, a complete blood count, and a coagulation panel to rule out anemia and coagulopathy.