Management of patients with osteopetrosis must be tailored to the individual patient. Treatment is predominantly supportive with no known cure, and interprofessional care and surveillance are treatment mainstays.

Fractures and arthritis associated with osteopetrosis are best managed by an experienced orthopedic surgeon since fracture treatment, and arthroplasty in these patients is frequently plagued by the following complications: non-union, delayed union, and osteomyelitis.

Due to the frequency of cranial nerve compression neuropathies, most frequently of the optic nerve, routine ophthalmologic evaluation is needed, and in some patients, surgical decompression of the optic nerve may be required to preserve eyesight.

Routine dental evaluation is needed in these patients to prevent the complications of abscesses, cysts, and osteomyelitis that can occur more frequently in these patients due to altered bone anatomy of the mandible

Bone marrow transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) is reserved for the malignant, autosomal recessive form of osteopetrosis due to the risk of rejection and other possible complications. HSC therapy from HLA-matched donors does not necessarily reverse disease complications but has been found to have 73% 5-year disease-free survival.

Interferon-gamma 1b therapy has been used in some patients found unfit for bone marrow transplantation or as bridging therapy until HSC therapy can be used. It shows benefit in increasing immune function and bone resorption.