Skin cancer prevention comes in many forms, including mindfulness, proper clothing, and the use of sunscreen. The primary form of prevention is avoiding excessive exposure to the sun’s ultraviolet radiation. Additionally, patients should discontinue the use of tanning beds.

Other than avoiding the sun at peak hours and wearing protective clothing, using sunscreen is the single-best habit patients can develop to reduce their risk of skin cancer. Sunscreens come in various types and contain different ingredients that protect against the sun in different ways. Chemical ingredients, such as the frequently used para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) and cinnamates, absorb solar rays and change UV rays into heat energy. Ingredients like zinc oxide and titanium dioxide work as a physical barrier that deflects UV rays off of the skin. Selecting sunscreens that are labeled as broad-spectrum is important because that indicates that the patient will be protected from both UVA and UVB rays. Zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, aside from creating great barrier protection, are excellent ingredients to look for in sunscreens due to their broad-spectrum UV coverage.

Choosing the right sunscreen for your patient will depend on the patient’s skin type, any allergies the patient may have, and the age of the patient. Sunscreen should be applied 20 to 30 minutes before sun exposure and reapplied every 90 minutes after. There is no such thing as waterproof sunscreen; however, the FDA has approved 3 levels of water resistance based on a product's ability to resist an 80 minute period of water immersion. Sunscreens with a higher water resistance factor should be encouraged with reapplication of sunscreen at least every 90 minutes. This is especially true when involved in water activities. If the sunscreen has a lower water resistance factor, reapplication should be even more frequent.