There are three phases of the development of the Müllerian ducts: initiation, invagination, and elongationin utero. Without the presence of both testis-derived testosterone and AMH, the Müllerian ducts continue to develop into the female internal genitalia and produce the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and upper third of the vagina.

Both the Müllerian and Wolffian ducts develop on the mesonephric kidneys. Müllerian duct precursors are present on the mesonephros in a specific region of the coelomic epithelium referred to as the Müllerian ridge. The specification of this region is the first step of Müllerian duct development and begins at the cranial pole of the mesonephric kidney. The Müllerian ducts develop lateral and parallel to the Wolffian ducts at the cranial end. At the caudal end, the ducts cross ventrally, resulting in a location internal to the mesonephric duct. Next, the Müllerian surface epithelium (MSE) invaginates and proliferates caudally in the mesenchyme between the coelomic epithelium and Wolffian ducts; this forms the Müllerian duct mesenchyme (MDM). Then, the invaginating MSE fuses with the Wolffian ducts to form the Müllerian duct epithelium (MDE), a canalized tube that will proliferate and migrate in a craniocaudal direction.

Around six weeks post-fertilization, the terminal ends from both Müllerian ducts make contact and fuse to form the uterovaginal duct. This duct later develops into the fornix of the vagina. Later, the basement membrane of the two Müllerian ducts fuse. Around ten weeks post-fertilization, the basement membranes of the two Müllerian ducts disappear, creating the uterus. At this time, a septum separates the primordial uterine cavity into two, each derived from one of the paired Müllerian ducts. The uterine septum represents the fusion site of the Müllerian ducts and is typically resorbed through apoptosis later in development. The BCL2 gene appears to regulate this process in humans. The distal end of the uterovaginal duct contacts the posterior wall of the urogenital sinus resulting in the Müllerian tubercle. Further, after the fusion of the distal ducts, the broad ligament of the uterus is formed by an extension of peritoneal folds and connects the pelvic walls to the fused Müllerian ducts. The cranial end of the uterovaginal duct becomes the abdominal ostium of the fallopian tubes. The hymen appears to be formed by the urogenital sinus and the Müllerian ducts.