The history and physical exam are essential in the evaluation for periorbital cellulitis. In many cases, there will be a history of sinusitis or upper respiratory infection, trauma, infection from a nearby area, or insect bites. It is important to note ophthalmic complaints, temperature, and swelling. Periorbital and orbital cellulitis present similarly making diagnoses difficult in some scenarios.

Periorbital cellulitis presents with periorbital erythema, edema, and eyelid swelling, Complaints are normally unilateral. Vision, globe motility, and intraocular pressures are usually normal because the infection and inflammation are superficial and anterior to periocular tissue with no involvement of extraocular muscles. In contrast, orbital cellulitis occurs after more extensive infection posterior to the orbital septum. This leads to symptoms such as proptosis, limited extraocular movement, ophthalmoplegia, and decreased vision in addition to eyelid erythema and edema. The absence of fever usually suggests that the infection is preseptal. However, some instances of orbital cellulitis may not have a fever. Also, some cases of periorbital cellulitis have been associated with fever, injected conjunctiva, chemosis, teary eyes, discharge, and some reduction in vision, making it difficult to differentiate from orbital cellulitis.

Furthermore, it is important to differentiate periorbital cellulitis from allergic reactions, trauma without cellulitis, orbital tumors, dysthyroid exophthalmos, chalazion, and hordeolum.

With inadequate treatment, periorbital cellulitis can lead to complications such as orbital cellulitis, subperiosteal abscess, orbital abscess, or cavernous sinus thrombosis, as seen in the Chandler classification of orbital complications. Group 1 of this classification is preseptal cellulitis, inflammation, and edema affecting the soft tissues of the eyelid and other superficial structures. Group 2, orbital cellulitis, is the infection of bacteria within the orbits causing inflammation of the periorbital and orbital adipose tissues causing impaired vision, ophthalmoplegia, pain with eye movement, chemosis, injected conjunctiva, proptosis, fever, and leukocytosis. Group 3, subperiosteal abscess, is the collection of pus between the wall of the orbit and the surrounding periorbital structures causing a displaced globe in the lateral or downward direction. Patients will have limited movement and present with proptosis. This abscess can rupture through the orbital septum and present in the eyelids or rupture posteriorly into the orbital space to form a true orbital abscess, which is group 4. Group 4, orbital abscesses, is a discrete collection of pus that develops within the orbital tissue leading to exophthalmos, chemosis, severe vision impairment, and ophthalmoplegia. This abscess can also extend anteriorly and rupture into the eyelids. Group 5, cavernous sinus thrombosis, results from the further progression into the cavernous sinuses leading to symptoms in the opposite eye. In very severe cases, patients may have meningitis. Although not always a true continuum, the conditions in this classification system present similarly and must be considered during the evaluation of a patient with ophthalmic complaints.