**Fetal Echocardiogram**

A fetal echocardiogram should be performed in all fetuses with a suspected cardiac abnormality noted on obstetric ultrasound. Prenatal ultrasound can identify structural heart disease. However, the sensitivity of congestive heart disease detection is highly variable, depends on the operator expertise, gestational age fetal position, and type of cardiac defect.

**Pulse Oximetry Screening**

The pulse oximetry screening for CCHD in newborns was added to the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel in the United States in 2011, and it was endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics in 2012. Screening is performed in the well-infant nursery when the baby is at least 24 hours of age, or as late as possible if the baby is to be discharged from the hospital before 24 hours of life. Earlier screening can lead to false-positive results.

CCHD screening will only identify cardiac lesions with the right to left shunt and cyanosis. Screening is recommended in the right hand and either foot. Positive screen result includes one of the following:

- Any Oxygen Saturation less than 90%

- Oxygen Saturation less than 95% in both extremities, on 3 measures, each separated by 1 hour

- More than 3% absolute difference in oxygen saturation between the right hand and foot on 3 measures, each separated by 1 hour

Differential cyanosis, lower oxygen saturation in the lower extremities, can be seen in PPHN with interrupted aortic arch, and coarctation of the aorta. Reverse cyanosis, lower oxygen saturation in the right hand, is a manifestation of TGA with concurrent CoA or IAA. Positive pulse oximetry screen will require prompt evaluation, including 4-limb blood pressure measurement, chest radiography, ECG, and echocardiography.

The seven primary CCHD screening targets are hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), pulmonary atresia (PA), Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), transposition of great arteries (TGA), tricuspid atresia, and truncus arteriosus. Secondary screening targets are coarctation of the aorta (CoA), interrupted aortic arch (IAA), critical aortic stenosis, DORV, Ebstein anomaly and single ventricle complex. CCHD screening would miss about 15% of all CCHD cases; COA/IAA, TAPVR and TOF cases are the most common conditions missed. A failed newborn screen may also indicate other disease processes, such as pulmonary hypertension, primary pulmonary parenchymal disease, or hemoglobinopathies.

**Hyperoxia Test**

Hyperoxia test is the initial method to distinguish CCHD from pulmonary disease. The test consists in measuring an arterial blood gas at room air and 100% inspired oxygen after 10 minutes. Neonates with congenital heart disease are usually not able to increase PaO2 above 100 mm Hg during 100% oxygen administration. In patients with pulmonary disease, PaO2 generally increased greater than or equal to 100 mm Hg with 100% oxygen as ventilation-perfusion discrepancies are overcome. A positive result indicates the cardiac origin and further cardiac workup is indicated to rule out CCHD.

**Electrocardiogram (ECG)
**

ECG identifies rhythm abnormalities, auricular or ventricular hypertrophy, dextrocardias, or abnormal axis deviation.

**Chest X-Ray**

Chest x-ray indicates whether pulmonary blood flow is increased, normal, or decreased. Can identify specific unique findings of CCHD - “egg-shaped” heart seen in TGA, “snowman” in TAPVR, “boot-shaped” heart in TOF, extreme cardiomegaly in Ebstein’s anomaly.  May also be helpful in the differentiation of pulmonary and cardiac disease.

**Two-Dimensional Echocardiography**

The definitive noninvasive test to determine the presence of CHD. Echocardiography with Doppler can determine the degree and direction of the shunt and the gradient of outflow tract obstruction.

**Additional Imaging Modalities**

These include cardiac catheterization and angiography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and CT scanning, to further visualize cardiac anatomy in preparation for cardiac surgery.

**Summary of CCHD Evaluation Findings**

****Right Heart Obstructive Lesions****

- Pulmonary atresia (PA)

- Tricuspid atresia

- Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF)

- Critical pulmonary stenosis

Right heart obstructive lesions lead to decrease pulmonary flow. PDA supplies pulmonary blood flow by shunting blood from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. There is a right-to-left intracardiac shunt. PFO shunts deoxygenated blood from the right atrium to the left atrium, and when  VSD is present, blood is shunted from the right ventricle to the left ventricle.

Screening Findings

Positive CCHD screening with oxygen saturation less than 90% without a difference in oxygenation between upper and lower extremities. Hyperoxia test is positive in these conditions. Chest x-ray shows decreased or normal pulmonary blood flow. ECG is an important tool to differentiate among these lesions. Left axis (0 to 90 degrees) is characteristic of pulmonary atresia; left superior axis (0 to -90 degrees) for tricuspid atresia, and right axis (90 to 180 degrees) for critical pulmonary stenosis and TOF.

**Left Heart Obstructive Lesions**

- Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS)

- Interrupted aortic arch (IAA)/coarctation of the aorta (CoA)

- Critical aortic stenosis.

Left heart obstructive lesions lead to decreased systemic flow. PDA supplies systemic blood flow by shunting blood from the pulmonary artery to the aorta. There is a Left-to-right intracardiac shunt with secondary pulmonary over-circulation. PFO shunts oxygenated blood from the left atrium to the right atrium, and when VSD is present, blood is shunted from the left ventricle to the right ventricle.

Screening Findings

Positive CCHD screening with oxygen saturation less than 95%; there is a greater than 3% difference between upper and lower oxygen saturation. Negative hyperoxia test. Positive BP gradient between upper and lower extremities is seen in this lesions, except for HLHS. Chest x-ray shows increase pulmonary blood flow. ECG shows normal axis for a newborn (90 to 180 degrees), except for critical aortic stenosis which has left axis for a newborn (0 to 90 degrees).

**Mixing Lesions**

- Transposition of the great arteries (TGA)

- Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR)

- Truncus arteriosus

Cyanosis presents from mixing pulmonary and systemic blood flow. These conditions are considered Ductal-independent lesions. PDA is not required, but they can present with or without PFO.

Screening Findings

Positive CCHD screening with oxygen saturation less than 95%. There is no difference between upper and lower oxygen saturation, except for d-TGA with pulmonary hypertension or coarctation of the aorta, where O2 saturation is higher in the foot than in the right arm. Negative Hyperoxia Test. Chest x-ray shows normal to increased pulmonary blood flow. ECG shows normal axis for a newborn (90 to 180 degrees).