Work culture is an organizational management concept which deals with the attitudes, beliefs, and perceptions of employees relative to the principles and practices adhered to by the institution. In the healthcare setting, work culture determines how medical, nursing, ancillary staff and other professionals actually work together in the pursuit of achieving organizational goals -- whether they work in clinics, hospitals, health centers, and other health institutions.

Major components of the work culture as it applies in healthcare practice include the statement of its mission and vision, institutional policies, work procedures, and organizational rules. Additionally, the current state of organizational development is an essential element for every healthcare setting as it determines the maturity of the organization which could directly influence the work culture as a whole. Considering these essential elements, every member of the organization, both from healthcare managers and staff, expects that a strong work culture must exist to maximize potentials in serving patients. Positive work culture is geared towards progressive improvement for the individual staff and the organization while a negative work culture fosters disintegration, loss of cooperation and collaboration among staff. Thus, this will result in regressing organizational value and overall performance. With this, it is crucial that work culture is assessed and improved in every health organization as it will significantly impact healthcare staff, leaders and managers, the organization itself and more importantly patient outcomes in terms of health.