NO upregulation of intracellular cGMP has been tied to many effects, mainly mediated by PKGI, including relaxation of GI and vascular smooth muscle, inhibition of platelet aggregation, improvement in cognitive function, and cardioprotection (both hypertrophy and reperfusion injury).

cGMP direct ligand binding to CNG channels is required to open and promote maximal current flow through the channels fully. In photoreceptors and olfactory sensory neurons, cGMP amplification of light stimulation contributes to high visual and olfactory discrimination in humans. cGMP and CNG channels are also involved in calcium homeostasis – low intracellular calcium levels can activate GC activating proteins, leading to increased cGMP and calcium influx through open CNG channels. Hyperpolarization-activated and cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels, a subset of CNG channels, can be activated by cGMP, although mainly regulated by cAMP. Found mostly in the heart and brain, they often act as pacemaker channels, establishing rhythmically coordinated cardiologic (heartbeat) and neurologic (e.g., movement) activity.

The PDE superfamily expresses heterogeneously throughout the body, and members with an affinity for cGMP will merit brief mention here.

- PDE1 is mainly present in neurons and appears to mediate brain function and activity through synaptic modulation.

- PDE2 appears to mediate vascular changes and function.

- PDE3 may be required for functional meiosis in oocytes and has implications in insulin sensitivity and metabolic activity.

- PDE5 helps regulate vasomotor tone and blood pressure and has been a primary target of pharmacologic therapies to treat hypertension and erectile dysfunction.

- PDE6 has been identified as the key phosphodiesterase involved in visual transduction and localizes to the retina.

- PDE9 is widely expressed throughout the brain and may modulate behavior and learning.

- PDE10 has also been associated with brain activity and may play a role in neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington disease.

- PDE11, though poorly characterized, is highly expressed in prostate and testicular cells and may play a role in reproductive function.