**Short-Term Effects of Exercise**

**Pathophysiology
**

Type 2 Diabetes: Exercise leads to an increase in insulin sensitivity. Patients on oral hypoglycemic have decreased blood glucose concentration after exercise. Studies have suggested that patients who were fasting, no change in blood glucose concentrations noted; whereas, blood concentrations decreased in patients who exercised after eating.

Type 1 
Diabetes

- Patients with well-controlled diabetes on insulin regimen: Higher serum insulin concertation is noted during exercise due to increased temperature and blood flow leading to increased absorption from subcutaneous depots. Exogenous insulin can’t be shut off. Hence, these patients have a drop in blood glucose levels much larger than in normal individuals.

- Patients with diabetes and poor metabolic control: Exercise causes a paradoxical elevation in blood glucose concentrations

**Long-Term Effects of Exercise**

**Pathophysiology
**

Patients have impaired exercise capacity due to generally increased body mass index and advanced age. Reduced skeletal muscle oxidative capacity due to mitochondrial dysfunction has been responsible for impaired exercise capacity. Patients are insulin resistant due to many defects in glucose metabolism.

- Decreased number and function of both insulin receptors and glucose transporters

- Decreased activity of some intracellular enzymes

- Low maximal oxygen uptake during exercise

An exercise program leads to increased activity of mitochondrial enzymes, increased insulin sensitivity, and muscle capillary recruitment. Adding resistance training to aerobic exercise provides an additional benefit of increased insulin sensitivity.

**Blood Glucose Management During Exercise**

General principles for patients with diabetes mellitus for exercise regimens:

- Maintain a high level of fluid intake before, during, and after exercise

- Maintaining blood sugar logs before, during, and after exercise

- If blood glucose is less than 100 mg/dL, it is recommended to ingest food, such as glucose tablets, juice. About 15 to 30 grams of quickly absorbed carbohydrate is recommended to be ingested 15 to 30 minutes before exercise. Extra ingestion of food may be warranted during exercise based on blood glucose testing during the exercise.  Immediately after excise slowly absorbed carbohydrates such as dried fruit, granola bars or trail mix are recommended as patients are at risk of late hypoglycemia.

- Vigorous exercise is to be avoided in the presence of substantial hyperglycemia greater than 250 mg/dl.

- Hypoglycemia is not common in patients with type 2 diabetes not treated with insulin or oral hypoglycemics. Ingestion of extra carbohydrates is not required.

- Use insulin about 60 to 90 minutes before exercise to prevent increased insulin absorption along with injecting in a site other than muscle to be exercised. For example, inject into arms when cycling exercise and into the abdomen when the exercise involves both the arms and legs.