The patients with recurrent, advanced, or metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors can often be poor candidates for surgical resection. This makes medical therapy the next best option for pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Medical therapy can be either symptom directed or for controlling the growth of the tumor.

Patients with gastrinoma often produce acid in high amounts, which requires the use of high dose proton pump inhibitors. For insulinoma, small meals with nutritional adjustments are required. Diazoxide is also used to suppress the secretion of insulin in such patients. Parenteral nutrition with the inclusion of vitamin supplementation is necessary for patients with glucagonoma.

Persistent diarrhea in carcinoid syndrome can be controlled with telotristat ethyl. It is a tryptophan hydroxylase inhibitor that decreases the bowel movements and the amount of 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid in urine.

The tumor growth has been effectively controlled to an extent with chemotherapy (temozolomide, capecitabine, streptozotocin, dacarbazine, oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil), somatostatin analogs (lanreotide and octreotide) and targeted molecular treatment (sunitinib, everolimus, etc.).

The secretion of a wide range of hormones is inhibited by somatostatin. Somatostatin analogs, like lanreotide and octreotide, have similar effects. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors express somatostatin receptors, especially somatostatin receptor type 2. These somatostatin analogs decrease the secretion of hormones by binding to somatostatin receptors in the tumor. As far as the antiproliferative efficacy of somatostatin analogs is concerned, the CLARINET trial confirmed it. The results showed a significant progression-free survival in the long term when lanreotide was used in patients with well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors. However, there was no significant increase in overall survival among the patients treated with lanreotide.

Everolimus bind with the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) to inhibit it. Sunitinib is a multiple receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Both of these drugs are a second-line treatment for patients with progressive pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Both of the drugs have shown a significant increase in the progression-free survival and overall survival of the patients.

There are a number of cytotoxic chemotherapeutics agents like capecitabine, 5 fluorouracil (5-FU), oxaliplatin, streptozocin, dacarbazine, temozolomide. There is no accepted best cytotoxic agent. Moreover, these agents are often used in combinations like temozolomide-capecitabine, streptozocin with doxorubicin or with 5-FU, or a combination of streptozocin, 5-FU, and doxorubicin (FAS).

FAS combination had a response rate of 39%, which resulted in increased overall survival and progression-free disease. The chosen population was patients with metastatic or locally advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.

Temozolomide is an effective treatment both as a monotherapy or in combination with bevacizumab and capecitabine. A 70% objective response rate was reported when a combination of temozolomide and capecitabine (CAPTEM) was used in patients with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. This was a retrospective study conducted in 2011 and showed an overall survival of 92% and progression-free survival of 18 months at the endpoint of 2 years.