Development of MDS may occur due through various mechanisms such as environmental exposures to chemicals like benzene, radiation, prior exposure to chemotherapeutic agents, or may be idiopathic, which is typically seen in the elderly population.

The mechanism for the development of MDS has been implicated by various genetic and chromosomal abnormalities, which may occur de novo or secondary to one of the above etiologies. Cytogenetic abnormalities are seen in more than 80% of patients and include translocations or more commonly, aneuploidy (loss or gain of a chromosome).

Over 100 somatic point mutations have been implicated in MDS, and there is some overlap with AML. The most common somatic alterations include mutations in TET2, SF3B1, ASXL1, DNMT3A, SRSF2, RUNX1, TP53, U2AF1, EZH2, ZRSR2, STAG2, CBL, NRAS, JAK2, SETBP1, IDH1, IDH2, and ETV6. These mutations have been shown to correlate with various features. TP53 mutations are associated with complex cytogenetics and poor overall survival. RUNX1 and TP53 tend to correlate with worse thrombocytopenia. TET2 mutations have a better response to hypomethylating agents.

The World Health Organization (WHO) 2016 Classification of Myeloid Neoplasms describes several subcategories of myelodysplastic neoplasms, in addition to overlap syndromes which have both myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic features. This classification is based on differences in morphology, dysplasia and karyotype, particularly 5q deletion.

The classification of MDS by WHO (2016) is as follows:

- Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with single lineage dysplasia

- MDS with ring sideroblasts (MDS-RS)

- MDS with multi-lineage dysplasia (MDS-MLD)

- MDS with excess blasts (MDS-EB-1), with 5% to 9% blasts in the bone marrow

- MDS with excess blasts (MDS-EB-2), with 10% to 19% blasts in the bone marrow

- MDS with isolated del(5q)

- MDS, unclassifiable (MDS-U)

Additionally, there are overlap syndromes included in the WHO 2016 classification, including:

- Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm with ring sideroblasts and thrombocytosis (MDS/MPN-RS-T)

- Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm, unclassifiable

There are also a number of other overlap syndromes with myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic features such as chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML.)