The significant primary complications of double J stents are almost always associated with leaving the stent indwelling too long, which causes stent migration, encrustation, stone formation, and fragmentation of the stent. Urinary tract infections, renal failure, and sporadic fistula formation to the iliac vessels have also been reported.

Stent migration is most likely to occur in a patient who is long overdue for stent removal or replacement. The stent can end up entirely within the renal pelvis or the bladder. A lesser degree of migration can be due to selecting a stent that is much too short. In this case, the distal end of the stent, the portion that is usually in the bladder, will migrate up the ureter and not be visible on cystoscopy. These will need to be removed with ureteroscopy.

Stents that make full coiled circles at either end when placed are less likely to migrate than those with only partial coiling.

Stones and stent encrustation will occur in any stent left in the urinary system long enough. Risk factors include lengthy indwelling stent time (3 months or more), chronic renal failure, pregnancy, history of previous nephrolithiasis, chemotherapy, and preexisting metabolic or anatomical abnormalities. Standard extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) is frequently used for this problem; it works best on lower volume stent encrustation and stone disease.

Stents are manufactured with strong materials. However, they can sometimes fracture and fragment into pieces. While this is usually associated with prolonged indwelling time, it can happen much quicker. The fracture points are almost always at the sites of the stent drainage holes. Fortunately, this complication is quite rare.

The best treatment for these complications is prevention, which is why it is so important to avoid prolonged stent indwelling time. As stated earlier, most stents should be changed optimally at three-month intervals and certainly by six months. In pregnancy, we recommend stent changes even more frequently: every 4 to 6 weeks due to the accelerated encrustation that occurs.

Treatment of existing complications usually involves ureteroscopy and percutaneous endourological procedures and is almost always successful.

Three months is the usual recommended maximal indwelling stent time, but six months should be the absolute maximum limit. Patients with stents that are lost to follow-up or "forgotten" are much more likely to encounter these complications.

Rarely, complications from "forgotten" double J stents can be serious, and several deaths have been reported.