**Laboratory Testing**

Labs are typically nondiagnostic and are predominantly normal. A minority of patients may be mild elevations in liver enzymes, most commonly in alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA 19-9 may be elevated. CA 19-9 is expressed in the inner epithelial lining of a simple cyst; it might be beneficial as a diagnostic or follow-up biomarker.

In the context of PCLD, more significant changes in Liver function test results are found, but liver failure is uncommon. Renal function test results, including blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels, are often abnormal and should be performed on initial evaluation and followed up over the course of the disease.

Higher enzyme levels in BCAC over BCA occur due to the invasion of the adjacent biliary tree.

**Imaging Modalities**

HCs were discovered incidentally while performing surgery. Physicians have several options for imaging the liver in patients with HCs. Abdominal Ultrasonography is readily available, noninvasive, highly sensitive, and lacks harmful radiation exposure. CT scan is sensitive and is easier for most clinicians to interpret, particularly for treatment planning. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), hepatic angiography, and nuclear medicine scanning have a limited part in managing hepatic cysts.

The Ultrasound can generally differentiate a simple cyst from a complicated one. Different characteristics to differentiate between these lesions. In simple hepatic cysts, it appears anechoic, homogeneous, no septate, thin, with smooth margins, and there is a posterior acoustic enhancement. However, a hemorrhagic simple cyst can lead to confusion in the U/S findings between a simple cyst and a mucinous cystic neoplasm. On CT scan shows sharply defined homogeneous hypodense lesions. The well-demarcated homogenous lesion does not enhance following the administration of intravenous contrast.

Radiologically, simple cyst and PCLD carries similar findings. There are no specific radiological criteria to differentiate liver cysts in the case of ADPKD and isolated PCLD. The diagnosis is usually made through the presence of >20 liver cysts as measured by an imaging modality. An ultrasound to identify cysts in the liver and kidney is recommended as the initial test. ADPKD should be tested for and excluded before making the diagnosis of isolated PCLD; unfortunately, up to one-third of patients with isolated PCLD can have a few kidney cysts, making it difficult to distinguish between the two. The diagnostic criteria for ADPKD1 for high risks patients with a family history are through the presence of at least two cysts in 1 kidney or 1 cyst in each kidney in a patient younger than 30 years, at least two cysts in each kidney in a patient between 30 and 59 years. and at least 4 cysts in each kidney for a patient at 60 years or older.

Patients with ADPKD with a reasonably estimated life expectancy should undergo periodic evaluation every 3 to 5 years with MRA or CTA for cerebral aneurysm. In contrast, screening for intracranial aneurysms and extrahepatic manifestation is not needed for patients with Isolated PCLD.

Cysts with features of neoplastic or infectious causes, including internal septations, fenestrations, edge calcifications, irregular walls, and associated daughter cysts within ultrasound, should be evaluated with CT or MRI for features of BCA or hydatid cysts. Neoplastic cysts are slow-growing, single, multilocular filled with a clear mucinous or serous fluid. These lesions show capsular and septal enhancement following contrast administration. The presence of internal fragments, bile duct expansion, and enhancing mural nodularity raise concerns for BCACs. MRI is preferred for pre-surgical evaluation to assess biliary communication and evaluate cystic content materials.

**Histology and Needle Aspiration**

It is seldom needed for establishing the diagnosis since they have a typical sonographic appearance. In simple cysts, the aspirated fluid is typically sterile. It varies from clear straw color to brown. PCLD cysts are microscopically similar to simple hepatic cysts.

High levels of carcinoembryonic antigen in the cyst fluid have been reported in neoplastic cysts with associated invasive carcinoma, but the diagnostic accuracy of this finding has not been established. Fine-needle aspiration of cyst fluid is no longer the first recommendation for neoplastic patients due to the increased risk of tumor seeding and the development of peritoneal carcinosis.

BCAs have numerous septa on the gross specimen, surrounded by a thick fibrous capsule that might include calcifications. Microscopically, BCAs have three characteristic layers, including a mucin-producing, with a stratified or pseudo-stratified non-ciliated cuboidal or columnar epithelial layer; a second layer of cellular stroma; and an innermost layer of thick collagenous connective tissue. They consist of a bloody or chocolate-colored material.

Biopsy and histological findings remain the gold standard for BCA diagnosis and differentiation from BCAC. However, it is usually done following surgical resection.

**Genetic Testing**

PCLD has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, and it has a recurrence risk is 50% within the next generation. However, genetic testing for patients with ADPKD and PCLD is available but is not usually performed regularly as it does not interfere with the management. However, patients with a family history of ADPKD or PCLD could consider molecular genetic testing. Screening mutations of the genes causing ADPKD (PKD1 and PKD2) or Isolated PCLD (PRKCSH and SEC63) confirm the clinical diagnosis. The prevalence of the disease is too low, so no recommendations for screening for the general population.