All nerve blocks risk nerve injuries such as neuropraxia or neurotmesis due to multiple factors, including inadvertent intraneural injection, local anesthetic neurotoxic properties, hematoma formation, and physical damage from the block needle. However, a recent systematic review found no association between the type of brachial plexus block and the peripheral nerve injury incidence.

The interscalene brachial plexus block may cause ipsilateral phrenic nerve palsy resulting in hemidiaphragmatic paralysis, vascular injury including vertebral artery puncture, Horner syndrome, subdural block, and injury to brachial plexus.

The superior trunk block may also cause ipsilateral phrenic nerve palsy, although at a possibly lower incidence than the interscalene block. Other complications include injury to the brachial plexus, surrounding vasculature, or the dorsal scapular nerve, which typically courses through the middle scalene muscle where the superior trunk inserts.

The supraclavicular brachial plexus block carries the clinically-significant risks of pneumothorax and subclavian arterial puncture. Ipsilateral hemidiaphragmatic paralysis is a known complication, but the risk is much lower than an interscalene block. In addition, ulnar nerve sparing may occur if full anesthetic spread is not achieved between the first rib and the plexus.

Complications of the infraclavicular brachial plexus block include injury to the brachial plexus, specifically the lateral and posterior cords, and injury to axillary vessels. Sparing of the medial cord may occur with the inadequate spread of local anesthetic around the axillary artery. In addition, the thoracoacromial artery and cephalic vein may lie in the needle path of the traditional approach.

The axillary brachial plexus block has virtually no risk of causing a pneumothorax. The color Doppler is recommended to avoid an inadvertent vascular puncture and injection resulting in local anesthetic systemic toxicity.