As with many other safety standards, education and training are some of the most important factors that can be addressed to reduce chemical exposures. While this is a requirement set by OSHA, a specific emphasis should be placed on longitudinal training to revisit topics that may not be part of daily practice and therefore forgotten. A recent survey of over 12,000 hospital employees showed that chemical-specific training for handling high-risk chemicals like antineoplastic or aerosolized medications, strong disinfectants and sterilants, and surgical smoke was as low as 52% and 57% for aerosolized antibiotics and surgical smoke, respectively.

Further, the survey also showed that responders only reported having employer procedures to reduce the risk of exposure to surgical smoke or anesthetic gases 32% and 56% of the time, respectively.

Just as this improves safety for hospital employees, this process may also involve the hospital outreach team collaborating with local businesses carrying out high-risk work to educate on the acute and long-term implications of chemical exposures. Awareness campaigns may be an actionable step taken by the healthcare team to promote chemical handling safety and proper identification of hazardous chemicals.

When patients present with chemical exposures, the interprofessional team must act quickly to determine the chemical causing the insult. In some scenarios, the patient may not communicate this, so the EMS and emergency department teams must gather as much history as possible from witnesses or coworkers to determine the chemical. Appropriate treatment can better be determined with this crucial piece of history. At the hospital, specific antidotes should be determined by the pharmacy team and administered by the emergency department medical and nursing teams. Depending on the nature of the exposure and symptoms, the specialist team associated with the organ system(s) involved should be consulted. After stabilization, the extent of injury should be determined, and an appropriate follow-up should be scheduled. If the exposure was debilitating, the physical therapy and occupational therapy teams should be involved to rehabilitate the patient. Finally, the social work team should work with the patient and employer to further exposure to the patient or other employees.