Current counter-measures to preserve health maintenance in the microgravity environment focus on mitigating the effects of fluid shift and decreased workload discovered from the earliest expeditions into space. Our understanding has steadily increased over subsequent decades as research and knowledge accumulated with the technological advances that allowed humans to spend progressively more time in space from brief visits to the current orbiting facility, where astronauts now work and live in space for periods that can extend to a year and more.

**Mercury**

Initial experience with microgravity left scientists wondering whether it was possible to ingest food and absorb nutrients in microgravity. In 1962, John Glenn became the first American to eat in space by consuming applesauce that was packed in a tube. This successful meal established that it was indeed possible to eat, swallow, and digest food in a weightless environment.

**Gemini**

Because effort is significantly less in the absence of gravity, astronauts were given 2500 calories/day (instead of their normal 3000 Cal/day).

Weight and size are primary considerations for anything launched into space, so the food brought for each mission was freeze dried, involving a process where cooked food is quickly frozen and then dehydrated with all but one percent of the water removed. Immediately prior to eating, the food was moistened with onboard water in orbit; however, since only cold water was available, all meals were eaten cold.

On Gemini 3, astronaut John Young surprised fellow astronaut Virgil Grissom with a corned beef sandwich on rye, which was purchased at a delicatessen in Cocoa Beach and one of two meals smuggled on board by the enterprising crew member to sample during the 5-hour mission). Unfortunately, Grissom did not finish the sandwich because it was producing crumbs; this is an important consideration with the potential for eye foreign body or aspiration in the absence of gravity. This lesson caused bread, in subsequent years, to be primarily replaced with tortillas.

**Apollo**

Calories were increased to 2800/day and hot water was now available for food preparation.

On Christmas Eve, 1968, astronauts enjoyed thermo-stabilized turkey with gravy and cranberry sauce that they could eat with a spoon. It was the first time a meal did not require rehydration.

Still, the majority of meals were freeze-dried.

While deconditioning became obvious in space travelers returning from longer missions which included orbiting, landing on, and brief exploration of the moon, capsule size constraints precluded much in the way of counter-measures.

**Skylab**

Fortunate advances occurred for astronauts. The space station used solar cells for power, rather than the water-producing fuel cells used until this time, so dehydrated foods were used less in order to conserve the water supply. Skylab had a full galley, and astronauts could prepare and eat the meals they chose. The menu was expanded to 72 items, and there was refrigeration so frozen food could be carried and stored including what would become an astronaut favorite, ice cream.

Of significance was that the larger structure permitted a key component of health maintenance in the space environment: exercise to mitigate bone loss. Astronauts would begin to use resistive bands as well as a stationary bike to stave off the deconditioning effects of microgravity.

**Shuttle**

From 1981 to 2011, the first re-usable spacecraft flew a total of 135 missions. The average mission was approximately 10 days; the shortest was just over one minute (STS-51-L when Challenger tragically broke apart during launch) and the longest was 17 days (STS-80 flown by Columbia).

Each crew member was provided three meals a day and snacks, with the menu repeating after 7 days. Food was stored and identified by a colored dot specific to each astronaut. Diet requirements were calculated to accommodate Basal Energy Expenditure (BEE):  BEE for men = 66 + (13.7 x W) + (5 x H) - (6.8 x A) and BEE for women = 655 + (9.6 x W) + (1.7 x H) - (4.7 x A). W = weight in kilograms, H = height in centimeters, and A = age in years.

The Space Shuttle, like Skylab, had a galley. This galley contained a water dispenser for rehydrating meals and an oven for heating food to a suitable temperature. Conventional utensils such as forks, spoons, and knives were used as well as a pair of scissors for cutting open food container bags.

Although there was a galley and a refrigerator, almost all food was precooked or processed, making it ready-to-eat after adding water or heating. A small amount of fresh fruit and vegetables were available, stowed in a food locker.

Weight remained a primary consideration, so food was restricted to 3.8 pounds (1.7 kg) per crew member per day and included 1 pound (0.5 kg) of packaging for each astronaut each day.

Although the missions were relatively short, conditioning remained a priority in part because of the obligation to pilot a spaceship turned glider to landing after being re-subjected to the forces of gravity. Consequently, a treadmill was flown and regular exercise performed by the crew.

**International Space Station (ISS)**

Besides sleeping and eating, astronauts spend the most amount of their time, 2.5 hours each day, exercising and acknowledge this as the number one health priority.

A consideration for future space travel is preserving the 1G environment of Earth by rotating an entire spacecraft; however, size and cost restraints remain prohibitive at this time. Rotating a portion of the spacecraft may be possible but is expensive and presents engineering challenges. A possible solution is currently being developed at National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Ames Research center which involves a human powered, one to two person, centrifugal bicycle to be used in the spacecraft, thereby simultaneously taking advantage of both exercise and rotation components. Combining the benefit of exercise with the resulting effect of a generated 1 G force, while preserving a reasonable footprint, could potentially mitigate the effects of microgravity in a long duration space mission.

At present, conditioning in space is provided by the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device (ARED) which simulates free weight exercise in the 1 G environment maintaining muscle strength and muscle mass in the astronaut needed for productivity such as upper body translation during extravehicular activity (EVA) and safety when transitioning from microgravity to gravity imposed by the Moon (one-sixth of Earth), Mars (one-third of Earth), and as well as for return to Earth itself. Cardiovascular health is maintained with a treadmill in addition to a stationary bicycle (located in the laboratory module) and is a key component of many experiments which require monitoring while in motion including measuring aerobic fitness.

The current diet on the International Space Station (ISS) is well-balanced but repetitive, and durable food (dehydrated, thermostabilized) predominates. Although energy requirements are reduced in microgravity as a result of the decreased work needed to accomplish a task in the absence of gravity, nutrition and palatability remain important considerations and challenges.

As on Earth, the sight, texture, and type of palatable food is an important component of both physical as well as psychological health in astronauts who will take on the daunting task of a long duration mission (for example going to Mars which is a goal for NASA as well as commercial businesses).

Growing food in space is still in its infancy, with the first successful crop yielded at the end of 2015, and limited to a few vegetables. Because calories in and calories out are closely monitored and weight is a premium, nutrient dense pre-packaged food with extended shelf life will remain the standard for the foreseeable future supplemented by fresh produce, the extent to which is being actively deliberated.

Canned food, the traditional Russian method of nourishment adopted early in their space program and relatively unchanged, carries an additional risk of injury/infection from packaging as well as weight burden.