Investigations to diagnose the cause of a petechial rash depend on the clinical presentation and can differ from one PED to another. Adhering to the local protocol is advised. In general, investigations will depend on the location of petechiae, associated pyrexia, or clinical suspicion for any of the concerning patterns of signs and symptoms for particular illnesses such as IMD, HSP and HUS. A healthy child with scattered petechiae of obvious causation, e.g., known trauma or petechiae confined to above the nipple line, may not require any investigations, and a period of observation in the PED may be sufficient. Petechia and fever is often concerning for IMD and poses as a clinical dilemma, though IMD accounted for only 1.4% of cases with fever and petechiae in a recent large-scale prospective UK cohort study.

Investigations may include:

- Complete blood count (CBC) to check platelet number, a raised or decreased white cell count or decreased hemoglobin.

- If concerns about IMD or other infection: C-reactive protein, blood culture and procalcitonin if available, along with blood gas, renal, liver and coagulation profiles.

- Renal, liver and coagulation profiles may also be necessary in other cases (DIC, IMD, HSP, HUS). A prolonged prothrombin time can indicate factor deficiencies, vitamin K deficiency, DIC, liver, or renal disease.

- Urine dipstick and microscopy are useful when renal causes are part of the differential (HSP, HUS, SLE), to check for proteinuria in particular.

- Further tests may be later requested when narrowed down to a more specific diagnosis.