The ASCCP (American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology) has published standardization guidelines for the performance of colposcopy. The ASCCP makes recommendations for extensive and minimum requirements for a colposcopy. The colposcopist should examine the vulva, vagina, and cervix grossly in the natural state and also after the application of 5% acetic acid.

Directed biopsies of lesions should be taken of each abnormal finding. Documentation in a minimum of text format should comment on the visibility extent, size, location, and description of each lesion (color/contour/border/vascular changes), presence or absence of acetowhitening, complete or incomplete visibility of the SCJ, documentation of biopsies and locations, if an endocervical curettage was performed, and finally the impression of the colposcopy (benign-normal/low grade/high grade/cancer).

Documentation

Grade of cytological abnormality, colposcopic adequacy, visibility, and type of SCJ should be documented. The location of lesion, size, and extent of lesion, endocervical, or vaginal extension of the lesion should also be clearly documented. Abnormal colposcopic findings should be described location wise in detail, and colposcopic impression should be made in terms of low grade or high-grade lesion along with Reid’s/ Swede score. Histopathologic diagnosis should never be made on colposcopy only.

2011 IFCPC Nomenclature

General assessment

·         Adequate/Inadequate for the reason (e.g., Cervix obscured by inflammation, bleeding, scar)

·         Squamocolumnar Junction visibility: completely visible, partially visible, not visible

·         Transformation zone types 1,2 and 3



Normal colposcopic findings

Original squamous epithelium:

· Mature

· Atrophic Columnar epithelium

· Ectopy

Metaplastic squamous epithelium

· Nabothian cysts

· Crypt (gland) openings

Abnormal colposcopic findings

General principles

Location of the lesion:

Inside or outside the T-zone, Location of the lesion by clock position.

Size of the lesion:

Number of cervical quadrants the lesion covers, Size of the lesion in the percentage of the cervix,



Grade 1 (Minor)

Thin aceto-white epithelium Irregular, geographic border

Fine mosaic, Fine punctation



Grade 2 (Major)

Dense aceto-white epithelium, Rapid appearance of acetowhitening, Cuffed crypt (gland) openings

Coarse mosaic, Coarse punctuation, Sharp border, Inner border sign, Ridge sign



Non-specific

Leukoplakia (keratosis, hyperkeratosis), Erosion Lugol’s staining (Schiller’s test): stained/non-stained

Suspicious for invasion

Atypical vessels Additional signs: Fragile vessels, Irregular surface, Exophytic lesion, Necrosis, Ulceration (necrotic), tumor/gross neoplasm

Miscellaneous finding

Congenital transformation zone, Condyloma, Polyp (Ectocervical/ endocervical) Inflammation,

Stenosis, Congenital anomaly, Post-treatment consequence, Endometriosis

The Swede score is used to score the colposcopic findings and to have uniformity in the reporting system. The total score is 10.

Score

0

1

2

Aceto uptake

Zero or transparent

Shady, Milky (not transparent; not opaque)

Distinct, opaque white

Margins/Surface

Diffuse

Sharp but irregular, jagged, ‘geographical’ satellites

Sharp and even, the difference in surface level, including ‘cuffing.’

Vessels

Fine, regular

Absent

Coarse or atypical

Lesion size

<5mm

5-15mm or 2 quadrants

>15mm or 3-4 quadrants/ endocervical undefined

Iodine staining

Brown

Faintly or patchy yellow

Distinct yellow

Overall Swede score

Colposcopic prediction of probable histology

0-4

Low grade/normal

CIN 1

5-6

High grade/non-invasive cancer

CIN 2+

7-10

High grade/suspected invasive cancer

CIN 2+