Color blindness is a group of eye disorders that affect the perception of color. The most common color vision deficiency is a red-green color vision. Affected individuals often have difficulty differentiating between shades of yellow, red and green. Blue-yellow color vision defects are rare. Color vision problems can also be due to medications, chemical exposure, and old age. Once diagnosed, there is no cure for inherited color deficiency but those related to medications, injury or illness can be improved. Thus, besides the ophthalmologist, the nurse and pharmacist must be aware of color vision defects and their causes. Any drug known to affect color vision should be discontinued. The patient should be referred to the ophthalmologist or optometrist for specially designed tinted eyeglasses or red-tinted contact lens.

**Outcomes**

Color vision deficiency may limit jobs in certain professions but the condition is not life-threatening. While the Occupational and Safety Health Administration (OSHA) neither precludes employers from requiring normal vision for essential job duties nor requires employers to maintain a color-blind aware environment, the organization has deferred to the society standards of specific professions. For example, the standard ASME (American Society of Mechanical Engineers) B30.2-2001, Overhead, and Gantry Cranes requires that operators of cab-operated and pulpit-operated cranes be able to distinguish between colors if such is needed for proper equipment operation.

The recent availability of a tinted lens and glasses has allowed most people to adapt to various deficits. In the future, gene therapy may be available to restore vision in those with hereditary disorders of colored vision deficiency.