The pathophysiology of hyperthyroidism depends on the particular variant of hyperthyroidism.

**Graves Disease**

This is an autoimmune process with antibodies against the TSH receptor. An interplay between genetic and environmental factors influences this autoimmune process. The antibodies stimulate the TSH receptor (TSHR), leading to increased production and release of thyroid hormones. The trophic effects on the thyroid also lead to the growth of the thyroid gland.

**Toxic Multinodular Goiter**

Pathogenesis of TMNG includes the initial phase of development of the nodular disease. This phase is prolonged and present for years before the nodules develop autonomy for thyroid hormone production. The somatic mutations involving the TSHR lead to constitutive activation of the cAMP signaling pathway, resulting the thyroid autonomy.

**Toxic Adenoma**

These are solitary nodules with autonomous thyroid hormone production due to somatic mutations in the TSHR

**Iodine-Induced Hyperthyroidism (Jod-Basedow Phenomenon)**

This is typically iatrogenic, resulting from excessive iodine intake through diet or administration of iodine-containing medications such as contrast media or amiodarone.

**Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis**

There are two subtypes of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT): type 1 and type 2. Type 1 AIT leads to increased thyroid hormone production secondary to excess iodine exposure from amiodarone in the setting of pre-existing thyroid disease (as seen in the Jod-Basedow phenomenon).

**Thyroiditis**results in the transient increase in circulating thyroid hormone resulting from inflammation or destruction of the thyroid follicular cells. Various etiologies of thyroiditis have this common pathophysiology but vary in their clinical presentations. The inflammation or destruction of the thyroid follicular cells can result from autoimmunity (Hashimoto's thyroiditis, painless sporadic thyroiditis, and painless postpartum thyroiditis) or the result of external factors (infections in painful subacute thyroiditis, suppurative thyroiditis, drug-induced thyroiditis).