Short-term complications of Er:YAG therapy include the development of erythema and bleeding, as well as reactivation of herpes simplex virus infection. In some cases, bacteria (such as Staphylococcus sp) or even fungi (such as Candida sp) may cause secondary facial infections, but these are usually managed easily with appropriate antimicrobials. Post-inflammatory changes in pigmentation and the development of scarring may also occur. Hypo- and hyperpigmentation are among the most common side effects of ablative laser therapy.

Increased Er:YAG pulse duration is associated with an increased risk of pigment changes, potentially because a longer pulse duration deposits more energy per pulse and thereby causes more thermal damage to surrounding tissue. The use of a fractionated beam delivery system decreases the risk of pigmentary changes. Pigmentary changes often fade with time; hyperpigmentation is more common than hypopigmentation and more likely to resolve. For persistent hyperpigmentation, 4% topical hydroquinone will help lighten the skin. For hypopigmentation, which is thought to result from inflammation that compromises melanocyte function, topical steroids may be helpful. Other options include sun exposure, blue laser therapy, intense pulsed light, and fractionated CO2 laser treatments.

The risks of prolonged post-procedure erythema and pigment changes are greater in patients with darker skin (Fitzpatrick skin types III-VI). Other noted complications include the appearance of acne, milia, and dermatitis in the treated region. Some patients will complain of a persistently visible grid or checkerboard pattern after fractionated beam treatment, but this usually fades over time. It may be addressed with topical steroids or additional laser resurfacing when it does not resolve spontaneously. More problematic is when too much energy is delivered, resulting in a burn and subsequent scar. This may also be treated with laser resurfacing, as any other scar could be, but patients are often understandably reluctant to pursue this option due to prior experience with adverse laser treatment outcomes.

Ocular injury is among the most serious complications that may result from Er:YAG laser treatment. The cornea is the most likely structure to be damaged because of the Er:YAG laser's chromophore water. Ocular injury may be prevented with the use of ocular lubricant and corneal shields for the patient during treatment. Members of the healthcare team should wear protective glasses that will block light at 2,940 nm. An ophthalmologist should be consulted in the event of corneal injury.

The risk for complications can be reduced by performing a thorough pre-procedure history and physical examination. Appropriate patient selection is critical. Patient education also improves the chance of achieving satisfactory outcomes. The importance of sun protection in reducing the occurrence of post-inflammatory pigmentation changes should be emphasized. Patients should be educated on post-procedure wound care and informed about the normal post-treatment course and changes that occur during healing. The risk for infection, scarring, and delays with healing should be clearly outlined.