Workup for secondary causes of osteoporosis is indicated for premenopausal women with osteoporosis, as well as men aged less than 50 years old who present with fragility fractures or osteopenia.

Bone mineral density should be evaluated using a DXA scan. Spine x-rays should also be obtained, including vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) if needed. Bone microarchitecture can be assessed using HRp QCT. A bone biopsy can also be helpful in certain select situations for severe secondary osteoporosis where the exact cause cannot be established with the rest of the workup, as it happens in some select cases of adynamic bone disease. The diagnosis of osteoporosis can be made by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) if the t-score is less than or equal to -2.5 or if the individual has had low-trauma fractures.

FRAX score calculation involves ages 40 to 90 years old, so it has a limited value for patients less than 40 years of age. It also only involves femoral neck BMD and can underestimate the osteoporosis risk in patients with a worse spinal BMD. FRAX score calculates the 10-year risk for major osteoporotic fracture as well as the 10-year risk of hip fracture. Assessing the trabecular bone score (TBS) is another way of looking into the bone microarchitecture that can also help evaluate the fracture risk, especially in cases of normal bone mass. One of the most indicative examples would be diabetes, where patients fracture their bones while they are shown to have higher bone mass (as measured with a DXA scan) but lower TBS scores.

A comprehensive list of investigations to work up for secondary causes of osteoporosis may include:

**General Screening**

- Complete blood count to screen for inflammatory conditions, including myeloproliferative and other hematological disorders.

- ESR or CRP helps in assisting and supplementing the diagnosis of inflammatory conditions.

- Serum calcium, phosphate, magnesium, and renal function to look for PHPT and renal disease.

- iPTH levels also help with Primary hyperparathyroidism and understanding the nature of CKD-MBD.

- 25 OH vitamin D: Vitamin D deficiency or malabsorption.

- Alkaline phosphatase: Osteomalacia, Paget's disease of bone, renal disease, metastatic bone disease.

- Liver function tests: Chronic liver disease.

- TSH and FT4 to look for clinical or subclinical hyperthyroidism.

- Hemoglobin A1c to diagnose diabetes mellitus.

- SPEP/UPEP, free light chains in older men and women >40 years to look for Multiple myeloma or MGUS.

- Testosterone levels, LH, and FSH in men and estradiol levels in premenopausal women to evaluate for the hypogonadal state.

- Transglutaminase IgA and Deamidated gliadin peptide IgG to diagnose Celiac disease.

- 24-hour urinary calcium excretion to evaluate for idiopathic hypercalciuria and also malabsorption.

**Selected Conditions**

- HIV testing

- Hep B and hep C testing

- Ferritin levels to assess for hemochromatosis

- Alkaline phosphatase and pyridoxal 5-phosphate levels to assess for hypophosphatasia

- Tryptase and IgE to assess for mastocytosis

- 24-hour urinary free cortisol, overnight dexamethasone suppression, or midnight salivary cortisol to assess for Cushing syndrome

- EDSCL 1 and other gene tests for Ehlers-Danlos.

**Others**

- Bone resorption and formation markers

- Plain X-rays (lumbar and thoracic spine) to look for vertebral fractures.