Dysphagia is defined as objective impairment or difficulty in swallowing, resulting in an abnormal delay in the transit of a liquid or solid bolus. The delay may be during the oropharyngeal or esophageal phase of swallowing. The second aspect of the definition of dysphagia is the subjective definition – the patient’s sensation of a delay in transit of a liquid or solid bolus during swallowing. Both descriptions are relevant because some patients may lose the sensation of a delay in swallowing, while objective tests could show that they have dysphagia. Also, the patient’s symptoms of a delay in swallowing may be potentiated or attenuated through sensory neural dysfunction.

Dysphagia is a common problem in the elderly, and it can occur in patients due to two leading causes. First mechanical obstructive causes such as Schatzki ring, esophageal stricture, esophageal carcinoma, or eosinophilic esophagitis. Second motility disorders of the esophagus (esophageal spasm, achalasia, and ineffective esophageal motility/scleroderma). The dysphagia could be intermittent or persistent and limited only to solid food (mechanical obstruction), or solids and liquids (motility disorders). Clinical presentation includes history and physical examination. Bedside testing, barium swallow, endoscopy, and high-resolution impedance manometry are essential for the diagnosis. Dysphagia-associated complications include increased risk of aspiration, aspiration-induced pneumonia, malnutrition, decreased life quality, and prolonged hospital or intensive care unit stay, and increased morbidity and mortality. The management of dysphagia is dependent on the cause of dysphagia and associated conditions.