**Vasoconstriction and Hemostasis**

Vasoconstriction is essential in order to control any hemorrhage, especially in the setting of endoscopic DCR.

Various measures can be employed in the peri-operative period to reduce bleeding:

- Adequate nasal preparation of the nose (as described above) regardless if LA or GA is used.

- Reverse Trendelenburg position

- If the patient is under GA, they should be maintained at slight hypotension.

- Tranexamic acid may be given intraoperatively, but care must be taken in patients with significant renal impairment or recent thromboembolic events.

- If external DCR is performed under LA, the orbicularis dissection should be performed gently using blunt dissection only. Once the bony osteotomy has been made, the nasal mucosa can be infiltrated with further LA, aiding both analgesia and hemostasis.

**External DCR**

- The face and nose are prepared with a standard surgical skin preparation. Chlorhexidine skin preparation is preferred.

- When draping a patient under LA, the entire face may be left exposed. When the patient is under GA, the endotracheal tube should be covered with the drape, leaving good access to the nose.

- One dose of intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotic is recommended prior to skin incision.

- While there are a variety of skin incisions, a straight incision using a number 15 blade from just above the MCT (about 2mm) to approximately 15 mm below is recommended, taking care to avoid the angular artery.

- The skin flap is then gently dissected off orbicularis.

- Orbicularis muscle is dissected off the MCT using blunt dissection. Cotton tipped applicators work very well, or blunt-tipped scissors may be used.

- The junction of the preseptal and pretarsal orbicularis fibers at the bony attachment of the MCT is relatively avascular and should be divided here.

- A number 15 blade or Rollett's rongine is then used to cut or disinsert the anterior limb of the MCT, and the Rollett's rongine is then used to cut the periosteum down the anterior lacrimal crest.

- The periosteum can be peeled away until the entire lacrimal fossa is exposed.

- A right-angled periosteal elevator is used to perforate the thin bone between the sac and anterior ethmoids along the suture line.

- The same right-angled periosteal elevator is placed within the perforated bone and turned gently to lift away the nasal mucosa, in order to avoid catching it during the creation of the osteotomy.

- Using a Kerrison rongeur, a bony ostium is created. This should extend:

- Superiorly to just above the MCT
- Anteriorly, to 10 to 15 mm anterior to the lacrimal crest
- Inferiorly to the nasolacrimal duct.

- The sac can then be probed using a "00" probe via the lower punctum.

- With the lacrimal sac tented, an "H" shaped incision is made. This may be made with a cataract surgery keratome, a number 11 blade, or Wescott scissors. It is essential to avoid damage to the internal ostium at this point and open the sac fully. Any stones can be removed, and biopsies may be taken as needed.

- The internal ostium is then inspected. If a membranectomy is required, this can be performed at this stage.

- Another "H" shaped incision is placed in the nasal mucosa. Care should be taken to match the shape and length of the mucosal flaps to each other to avoid excision of tissues.

- If bicanalicular or monocanalicular tubes are being used, these can be placed at this point.

- The flaps are then sutured to one another, with the posterior flaps being approximated first using polyglactin 910 suture. For this step, it is advantageous to have a half circle need as this assists greatly with the passage of the suture. Once the tubes (if used) are placed in the nose, the anterior flaps can be sutured in the same fashion. When suturing the anterior flaps, a small amount of orbicularis may be captured in the same bite.

- The MCT can be sutured into its approximate position using the same suture.

- The orbicularis should not be closed separately to avoid scarring.

- The skin should be closed with a non-absorbable suture. We prefer 6.0 polypropylene, passed in a continuous subcutaneous fashion.

- Steristrips are placed over the wound.

**Useful Tips**

- Ensure good anesthesia and hemostasis.

- After the initial incision, raise the skin flap and work between orbicularis and skin to avoid damaging the angular vein.

- Orbicularis fibers can be divided with blunt dissection using cotton buds.

- Avoid orbicularis sutures to avoid an unsightly scar.

- A back cut towards the upper eyelid can be made perpendicular to the upper edge of the incision when the patient's skin is thin and prone to tearing.

- An adequate bony ostium is essential to ensure long term success.

**Endoscopic DCR**

- The face and nose are prepared with a standard surgical skin preparation. Chlorhexidine skin preparation is preferred.

- When draping, the endotracheal tube should be covered with the drape, leaving good access to the nose.

- One dose of intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics is recommended.

- The nose should be prepared with a decongestant, as described in the anesthesia section.

- The surgeon should familiarize themselves with the individual anatomy, including the roof of the nose, the location of the middle turbinate and axilla as well as the inferior turbinate using the endoscope (a 30-degree angle is preferred).

- Local anesthetic such as 2% lidocaine with 1: 800 000 adrenaline in a dental syringe is infiltrated into the lateral nasal wall above and in front of the middle turbinate. For easier infiltration, it is useful to bend the needle at a 30-degree angle, approximately 1 cm from the tip. This LA will provide both analgesia and hemostasis.

- The initial mucosal incision is critical and can be performed with a number 15 blade, but a crescent blade is preferred, used routinely in corneal surgery, such as a small-angled crescent blade.

- The incision is created as 2 long parallel cuts: One mucosal incision is made on the lateral nasal wall approximately 3 mm posterior to the maxillary line, starting 8 mm above the insertion of the middle turbinate and extending vertically down to a level just below the body of the middle turbinate. A parallel vertical incision is made 8 mm anterior to this, and the 2 were joined superiorly by using a no. 15 scalpel blade. **(Fig 2 Mucosal flaps)**

- A back cut / relieving cut is then made from the inferior edge of the posterior cut, backward into the nose.

- The mucosal flap is then elevated from the underlying bone using suction Freer. The flap should be peeled inferiorly and placed "on the floor" to avoid catching it during the procedure. The mucosa posteriorly is peeled off slightly to enhance access.

- The bone should now be exposed, and a Kerrison punch can be used to enter the lacrimal bone. Using both Kerrison punch and Malhotra nibbler, the bone should be removed to above the middle turbinate as far towards the roof as possible, as only this thorough removal reduces the risk of surgical failure.

- Anteriorly the osteotomy should extend to the border of the flap created. Note that orbicularis fibers may be caught if bone removal extends too anteriorly and can cause a hematoma. Any sudden sheen or glistening of the view may be indicative of the breach of orbital fat, and the position of the instruments needs to be re-evaluated.

- At this point, some surgeons prefer to use a powered drill; however, most feel that manual instruments are sufficient. **(Fig 3- Osteotomy creation)**

- Once the entire lacrimal sac is exposed, a "00" probe should be placed via the lower punctum. This tents the sac, and the need for further bone removal can be visualized.

- The lacrimal sac flaps are then created by using a crescent blade, starting from inferiorly, cutting in an upward fashion. Care should be taken to avoid damage to the internal ostium. Once the entire lacrimal sac has been incised vertically, "I" shaped flaps superiorly and inferiorly are made to open the sac.

- At this stage, the surgeon must observe the quality of the internal ostium, along with the sac mucosa. Biopsies may be taken at this point, and dacryoliths can be removed. If the sac mucosa is thickened due to chronic inflammation, multiple radial cuts are often required to lie the flaps flat. **(Fig 4- Probe within internal ostium, sac flaps opened)**

- Monocanalicular or bicanalicular tubes can then be placed via the puncta. **(Fig 5- Placement of O'Donoghue tubes)**

- The nasal mucosa flap is then repositioned, and care should be taken to approximate the nasal mucosa to the sac flaps.

- Alginate hemostat/gel foam is cut up in small squares, approximately 3x3 mm, then soaked in triamcinolone and placed into the nose. Care should be taken to cover the internal ostium, the sac flaps, and all bleeding areas (including septum) in order to minimize postoperative bleeding and epistaxis.

- The pharynx should then be suctioned via the inferior meatus prior to the cessation of the case.

**Useful Tips**

- Ensure good anesthesia and hemostasis.

- The bony ostium must be sufficiently sized to avoid surgical failure.

- Care must be taken to avoid touching the internal ostium during the creation of sac flaps. Any trauma may contribute to scarring and subsequent surgical failure.

- Should excessive bleeding occur intra-operatively, it is useful to pack the nose with neurosurgical patties soaked in Moffett's solution or adrenaline. Warm water irrigation may also help.

- Generous use of alginate-based dressing at the end of the procedure reduces postoperative epistaxis.

**Notes on Equipment Used in Endoscopic DCR**

Mechanical instruments or a powered drill may be used for the creation of the bony ostium. As emphasized previously, especially the superior bone removal is important. While powered instruments such as diamond burrs have been used widely and yield good results, the use of a bone nibbler is associated with lower cost and possibly quicker operating time.****It allows effective removal of the superior bone. As described by Patel et al., it is important to avoid twisting motions for the most superior aspect of bone removal and employ a crushing motion instead, in order to avoid a spiral base of skull fracture. The angled anterior aspect of the bone nibbler makes it ideal for removing the most superior bone to create a large ostium. Despite the bone being thicker in people of Asian descent, there have usually been no problems with removing this manually, when utilizing the crushing technique (Malhotra, personal correspondence).

**Pediatric DCR**

Pediatric DCR is a safe procedure with high success rates (over 90%) for congenital and acquired nasolacrimal duct obstruction.

Both endonasal and external DCR may be used.

- Most cases of congenital NLDO resolve spontaneously by age 1.

- Patients should have undergone previous syringing and probing +/- intubation or balloon dilation in order to be considered for DCR.

- Patients should only undergo surgery once they have been deemed to be safe from an anesthetic point of view. It is essential to recall that children with Down syndrome may have undiagnosed cardiac abnormalities and more difficult airways. Children with craniofacial abnormalities may pose a considerable anesthetic challenge. Prematurely born children may only be considered for surgery once they have achieved at least 12 months of corrected age.

- As babies and some toddlers are obligate nasal breathers, DCR should only be performed one side at a time.

- The skull base in children may also be slightly lower than in adults. The nasal space is overall much narrower than in adult endo DCR, which is mostly an issue for children under 2 years but resolves by the time they reach school age.

- Pediatric patients require a high heart rate in order to maintain their cardiac output, which makes intraoperative bleeding more likely.

- Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVO) may create a drier surgical field and less bleeding.

- Nasal packing: Cocaine is contra-indicated in children and should be avoided. Oxymetazoline and/or epinephrine-soaked gauze or neuro-patties may be used, depending on the anesthetic preference.

- Pediatric endoscopic DCR should only be attempted by surgeons comfortable with adult endoscopic DCR.

**Use of Lacrimal Intubation in DCR**

Lacrimal intubation or transcanalicular stenting is commonly performed, assuming that the stenting prevents membranous occlusion or fibrotic stenosis of the internal ostium. Stents may have both functional and mechanical effects. On a functional level, the surface tension of the silicone stent allows the flow of tears along the periphery of the stent. The stent also mechanically dilates the lumen and straighten canalicular bends – therefore causing better flow through these narrow conduits.

A large variety of materials (synthetic, metal, and organic) have been used as stents for stenotic puncta or canaliculi. These include silk, nylon, dacron, silver wires, malleable metal, polyethylene, and polypropylene. Stent design has evolved in an ever-continuing effort to improve success rates and to reduce complication rates. The ideal stent should be simple to use, widely available, affordable, inert, pliable, self-retaining, and cause minimal damage to surrounding tissue. Silicone, which holds many of these properties, is the commonest material used in stents.

Transcanalicular stents can be classified into monocanalicular and bicanalicular stents. Monocanalicular stents usually traverse a single canaliculus to the lacrimal sac and sometimes to the NLD, while bicanalicular stents pass via both canaliculi to the sac and nasal cavity where they are tied in a loop. Bicanalicular stents are made from silicone with blunt steel guides that are used to intubate the nasolacrimal system. Monocanalicular stents are increasingly utilized in DCR surgeries due to their ease of insertion and removal.  Detorakis et al. showed monocanalicular intubation using mini-Monoka in external DCR to be safe and effective.

Monocanalicular stents have the advantage that only one patent canaliculus is required for their usage. Insertion and removal are relatively straightforward, and their stable anchoring mechanism in the punctum avoids bothersome protrusion or cheese wiring.

Bicanalicular stents address both canaliculi and are secured on both ends of the lacrimal system and are therefore less prone to migration or extrusion. They may also function as a mechanical barrier to prevent the closure of the internal ostium and keep the soft ostium between the sac and nasal cavity patent during DCR healing. It is, however, important to remember that DCR surgery is more likely to fail if the bony ostium is too small. Canalicular intubation will not be able to counteract an insufficiently sized ostium regardless of the type of stent utilized.

There are no well-established indications or guidelines for canalicular intubation in DCR. Definitive canalicular pathology is an evidence-based indication for lacrimal intubation during DCR surgery. Patients with previous DCR and anatomic success but functional failure appear to benefit from intubation, as do patients with canalicular obstruction.

When endoscopic DCR surgery is performed by less experienced or trainee surgeons, there is likely to be more mucosal trauma, which can increase the chance of scarring and failure. These patients, therefore, appear to benefit from intubation.

A recent randomized trial compared the outcomes after endoscopic DCR after 12 months with and without silicone tubes.

No clear data exists on the timeframe for the removal of the lacrimal stents in the postoperative period. While some surgeons choose to remove lacrimal stents after 3 months, and others advocate earlier removal after around 4 weeks.

Complications of lacrimal stents depend upon their type: bicanalicular tubes can cheese wire or prolapse, each of which occurs in approximately 4% of patients.