**Ischemic Stroke**

- Before any treatment can be administered, the patient must be assessed for a stable airway, breathing, and circulation.

- The first-line treatment for patients with an ischemic stroke is intravenous thrombolytic therapy which is administered as an intravenous bolus of alteplase given over 1 minute, followed by an infusion over 60 minutes.

- The exclusion criteria for this treatment are based on guidelines from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.
- This therapy aims to dissolve the clot and restore blood flow to the affected regions.

- Time management is of the utmost importance in patients with an ischemic stroke because the fibrinolytic/thrombolytic therapy must be administered within 3 to 4.5 hours after symptom onset to be effective.

- In recent years significant advancements have been made in acute stroke care with the emergence of mechanical thrombectomy to remove the occluding clot and reestablish blood flow to the brain.

- Within 24 to 48 hours of symptoms onset, patients should be placed on oral anti-platelet therapy, typically 325 mg of aspirin.

- Blood pressure should be maintained at slightly elevated levels for the first few days after a stroke to counter vasoconstriction. Blood pressure should also be lowered gradually over the next few days to treat underlying hypertension.

**Hemorrhagic Stroke**

- Some patients will undergo catheter-directed intracranial intervention for the cause of a spontaneous hemorrhagic stroke

- Most patients with this type of stroke are managed with intervention to relieve intracranial pressure, such as ventricular drain placement and/or a craniotomy

- Patients who were previously on anticoagulation agents will need reversal agents and plasma product transfusions to reverse coagulopathy

- Blood pressure should be monitored frequently with a goal systolic pressure of 140 mmHg

- To avoid over or under-correction, systolic blood pressure is acceptable within the range of 130 to 150 mmHg in these patients

- Some patients will be on seizure medications prophylactically to prevent spontaneous epileptiform discharges