The underlying mechanism of IPL therapy involves four crucial concepts (wavelength, pulse duration, fluence, and spot size):

**Wavelength**

Flashlamps emit polychromatic light within a wavelength spectrum of approximately 400 to 1400 nm.

**Pulse Duration**

Pulse duration is based on the thermal relaxation time (TRT) of the chromophore, or the time required for the temperature in a heated tissue to decrease to 37% of its peak.

**Fluence**

Fluence (J/cm2) describes the amount of energy delivered per unit area. IPL can deliver a fluence up to 40 J/cm^2, while pigmented lesions are usually treated with a fluence of only 16–20 J/cm2. A higher fluence may be used if a target is located deep within the skin or the chromophores are inefficient at absorbing light. Importantly, side effects tend to occur more frequently at higher fluences and in darker-skinned individuals.

**Spot Size**

Spot size is the diameter of light that is emitted from the flashlamp. Increased spot size allows for light to penetrate deeper because scattering is minimized. Thus, a smaller spot size will require higher fluences to target deeper dermal targets effectively.

**Cooling Systems**

Cooling systems provide epidermal protection and permit greater fluences to reach deeper targets. Cooling systems can be internal, such as integrated chilled tips, pulsed cryogen sprays, or cooled glass chambers. External cooling methods include ice packs, forced-air cooling, or cold ultrasound gel applied to the skin before a treatment session. The cold gel reduces the friction of the handpiece on the skin, diffuses the surface heat released from the handpiece, and decreases the refractive index between air and skin, allowing for better penetration and light absorption.