Coronaviruses (CoVs) are positive-stranded RNA(+ssRNA) viruses with a crown-like appearance under an electron microscope (coronam is the Latin term for crown) due to the presence of spike glycoproteins on the envelope. The subfamily Orthocoronavirinae of the Coronaviridae family (order Nidovirales) classifies into four genera of CoVs:

- **Alphacoronavirus**(alphaCoV)

- **Betacoronavirus**(betaCoV)

- **Deltacoronavirus**(deltaCoV)

- **Gammacoronavirus**(gammaCoV)

BetaCoV genus is further divided into five sub-genera or lineages.

- **Common human CoVs**: HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-HKU1 (betaCoVs of the A lineage); HCoV-229E, and HCoV-NL63 (alphaCoVs). These viruses can cause common colds and self-limiting upper respiratory tract infections in immunocompetent individuals. However, in immunocompromised subjects and the elderly, lower respiratory tract infections can occur due to these viruses.

- **Other human CoVs**: SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (betaCoVs of the B and C lineage, respectively). These viruses are considered to be more virulent and capable of causing epidemics manifesting with respiratory and extra-respiratory manifestations of variable clinical severity.

SARS-CoV-2 is a novel betaCoV belonging to the same subgenus as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), which have been previously implicated in SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV epidemics with mortality rates up to 10% and 35%, respectively.

Genomic characterization of the new HCoV, isolated from a cluster-patient with atypical pneumonia after visiting Wuhan, had 89% nucleotide identity with bat SARS-like-CoVZXC21 and 82% with that of human SARS-CoV. Hence, it was termed SARS-CoV-2 by experts of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. The single-stranded RNA genome of SARS-CoV-2 contains 29891 nucleotides, encoding for 9860 amino acids.

Although the origin of SARS-CoV-2 is currently unknown, it is widely postulated to have originated from an animal implicating zoonotic transmission. Genomic analyses suggest that SARS-CoV-2 probably evolved from a strain found in bats. The genomic comparison between the human SARS-CoV-2 sequence and known animal coronaviruses indeed revealed high homology (96%) between the SARS-CoV-2 and the betaCoV RaTG13 of bats (Rhinolophus affinis)

**SARS-CoV-2 Variants**

As mentioned earlier, SARS-CoV-2 is prone to genetic evolution resulting in multiple variants that may have different characteristics compared to its ancestral strains. Periodic genomic sequencing of viral samples is of fundamental importance, especially in a global pandemic setting, as it helps detect any new genetic variants of SARS-CoV-2. Notably, the genetic evolution was minimal initially with the emergence of the globally dominant D614G variant, which was associated with increased transmissibility but without the ability to cause severe illness.**variants of concern (VOCs)**due to their potential to cause enhanced transmissibility or virulence, reduction in neutralization by antibodies obtained through natural infection or vaccination, the ability to evade detection, or a decrease in therapeutics or vaccination effectiveness. With the continued emergence of multiple variants, the CDC and the WHO have independently established a classification system for distinguishing the emerging variants of SARS-CoV-2 into variants of concern(VOCs) and**variants of interest(VOIs)**.

**SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Concern (VOCs)**

- 
**Alpha (B.1.1.7 lineage)**

- 
              
- In late December 2020, a new SARS-CoV-2 variant of concern, **B.1.1.7 lineage**, also referred to as**Alpha variant**or**GRY**(formerly GR/501Y.V1), was reported in the UK based on whole-genome sequencing of samples from patients who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.
              
              
- In addition to being detected by genomic sequencing, **the B.1.1.7**variant****was identified in a frequently used commercial assay characterized by the absence of the S gene (S-gene target failure, SGTF) PCR samples. The B.1.1.7 variant includes 17 mutations in the viral genome. Of these, eight mutations (Δ69-70 deletion, Δ144 deletion, N501Y, A570D, P681H, T716I, S982A, D1118H) are in the spike (S) protein. N501Y shows an increased affinity of the spike protein to ACE 2 receptors, enhancing the viral attachment and subsequent entry into host cells.
              
              
- This variant of concern was circulating in the UK as early as September 2020 and was based on various model projections. It was reported to be 43% to 82% more transmissible, surpassing preexisting variants of SARS-CoV-2 to emerge as the dominant SARS-CoV-2 variant in the UK.
              
              
- An initial matched case-control study reported no significant difference in the risk of hospitalization or associated mortality with the B.1.1.7 lineage variant compared to other existing variants. However, subsequent studies have since reported that people infected with B.1.1.7 lineage variant had increased severity of disease compared to people infected with other circulating forms of virus variants.
              
              
- A large matched cohort study performed in the UK reported that the mortality hazard ratio of patients infected with B.1.1.7 lineage variant was 1.64 (95% confidence interval 1.32 to 2.04, P<0.0001) patients with previously circulating strains.
              
              
- The B.1.1.7 variant emerged as one of the most dominant SARS-CoV-2 strains circulating in the US during the early stage of the pandemic.

- 
**Beta (B.1.351 lineage)**

- 
              
- Another variant of SARS-CoV-2, **B.1.351**also referred to as**Beta variant**or**GH501Y.V2**with multiple spike mutations, resulted in the second wave of COVID-19 infections, was first detected in South Africa in October 2020.
              
              
- The B.1.351 variant includes nine mutations (L18F, D80A, D215G, R246I, K417N, E484K, N501Y, D614G, and A701V) in the spike protein, of which three mutations (K417N, E484K, and N501Y) are located in the RBD and increase the binding affinity for the ACE receptors.
              
              
- This variant is reported to have an increased risk of transmission and reduced neutralization by monoclonal antibody therapy, convalescent sera, and post-vaccination sera.

- 
**Gamma(P.1 lineage)**

- 
              
- The third variant of concern, the **P.1 variant**also known as**Gamma variant**or**GR/501Y.V3**, was identified in December 2020 in Brazil and was first detected in the US in January 2021.
              
              
- The B.1.1.28 variant harbors ten mutations in the spike protein (L18F, T20N, P26S, D138Y, R190S, H655Y, T1027I V1176, K417T, E484K, and N501Y). Three mutations (L18F, K417N, E484K) are located in the RBD, similar to the B.1.351 variant.
              
              
- Notably, this variant may have reduced neutralization by monoclonal antibody therapies, convalescent sera, and post-vaccination sera.

- **Delta (B.1.617.2 lineage)**
- The fourth variant of concern, B.1.617.2 also referred to as the **Delta variant**was initially identified in December 2020 in India and was responsible for the deadly second wave of COVID-19 infections in April 2021 in India. In the United States, this variant was first detected in March 2021
- The Delta variant was initially considered a variant of interest. However, this variant rapidly spread around the world prompting the WHO to classify it as a VOC in May 2021
- The B.1.617.2 variant harbors ten mutations ( T19R, (G142D*), 156del, 157del, R158G, L452R, T478K, D614G, P681R, D950N) in the spike protein.

- **Omicron (B.1.1.529 lineage)**
- The fifth variant of concern **B.1.1.529**, also designated as the**Omicron variant**by the WHO was first identified in South Africa on 23 November 2021 after an uptick in the number of cases of COVID-19 .****
- Omicron was quickly recognized as a VOC due to more than 30 changes to the spike protein of the virus along with the sharp rise in the number of cases observed in South Africa.
- Initial modeling suggests that Omicron shows a 13-fold increase in viral infectivity, and is 2.8 times more infectious than the Delta variant.
- The Spike mutation K417N (also seen in the Beta variant) along with E484A is predicted to have an overwhelmingly disruptive effect, making Omicron more likely to have vaccine breakthroughs
- The **Omicron (B.1.1.529)**became the dominant VOC in many countries and many subvariants such as**BA.1, BA.2, BA.3, BA.4, BA.5**were identified.
- The Omicron VOC is currently the dominant SARS-CoV-2 variant in the US according to the CDC.

**SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Interest (VOIs)**

VOIs are defined as variants with specific genetic markers that have been associated with changes that may cause enhanced transmissibility or virulence, reduction in neutralization by antibodies obtained through natural infection or vaccination, the ability to evade detection, or a decrease in the effectiveness of therapeutics or vaccination. Since the beginning of the pandemic, WHO has described eight variants of interest (VOIs), namely **Epsilon**(B.1.427 and B.1.429);**Zeta**(P.2);**Eta**( B.1.525);**Theta**(P.3); Iota (B.1.526);**Kappa**(B.1.617.1);**Lambda**(C.37) and**Mu**(B.1.621); and the CDC has designated the**Epsilon**(B.1.427 and B.1.429),**Eta**(B.1.525)**; Iota**(B.1.526)**; Kappa**(B.1.617.1)**; Zeta**(P.2)**; Mu(B.1.621, B.1.621.1)**and**B.1.617.3**as VOIs.

In comparison to the current circulating SARS-CoV-2 variants ,previously designated VOCs and VOIs which that are circulating in at negligible levels or are undetectable and do not pose a significant risk to global public health are designated as previously circulating VOCs or VOIs by the WHO and Variants Being Monitored (VBM) by the CDC.

**Transmission of SARS-CoV-2**

- The primary mode of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is via exposure to respiratory droplets carrying the infectious virus from close contact or droplet transmission from presymptomatic, asymptomatic, or symptomatic individuals harboring the virus.

- Airborne transmission with aerosol-generating procedures has also been implicated in the spread of COVID-19. However, data implicating airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the absence of aerosol-generating procedures are emerging and being evaluated. However, this mode of transmission has not been universally acknowledged.

- Fomite transmission from contamination of inanimate surfaces with SARS-CoV-2 has been well characterized based on many studies reporting the viability of SARS-CoV-2 on various porous and nonporous surfaces.

- Under experimental conditions, SARS-CoV-2 was noted to be stable on stainless steel and plastic surfaces compared to copper and cardboard surfaces, with the viable virus being detected up to 72 hours after inoculating the surfaces with the virus.

- Viable virus was isolated for up to 28 days at 20 degrees C from nonporous surfaces such as glass, stainless steel. Conversely, recovery of SARS-CoV-2 on porous materials was reduced compared with nonporous surfaces.

- A study evaluating the duration of the viability of the virus on objects and surfaces showed that SARS-CoV-2 can be found on plastic and stainless steel for up to 2-3 days, cardboard for up to 1 day, copper for up to 4 hours. Moreover, it seems that contamination was higher in intensive care units (ICUs) than in general wards, and SARS-CoV-2 can be found on floors, computer mice, trash cans, and sickbed handrails as well as in the air up to 4 meters from patients implicating nosocomial transmission as well in addition to fomite transmission.

- The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC) recently released an update stating that individuals can be infected with SARS-CoV-2 via contact with surfaces contaminated by the virus, but the risk is low and is not the main route of transmission of this virus.

- Epidemiologic data from several case studies have reported that patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection have the live virus present in feces implying possible fecal-oral transmission.

- A meta-analysis that included 936 neonates from mothers with COVID-19 showed vertical transmission is possible but occurs in a minority of cases.