While prompt reperfusion after ischemia/infarction is essential for preserving neurological function, it can precipitate tissue dysfunction and cell necrosis from the destruction of reversibly damaged cells. Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury can occur after thrombolysis or mechanical thrombectomy. While this restores brain flow and salvages reversibly damaged tissue, reperfusion after a longer ischemic period can cause a larger infarct than the initial occlusion. The mechanism of this injury involves leukocyte infiltration, platelet activation, complement activation, and breakdown of the blood-brain barrier leading to vasogenic ischemia.

Conversion to hemorrhagic stroke after tPA is another complication. It should be seriously considered if the patient's condition worsens after thrombolytic administrations. Symptoms can include a change in awareness or consciousness, worsening neurologic exam, increased weakness, new or worsening headache, or changes in blood pressure or pulse. If this happens, the first step should be immediate Head CT, baseline labs, and neurosurgery consult.

Patients with acute ischemic stroke are also at risk for complications of immobility, including infections and thromboembolic complications. Due to the risk of aspiration, patients should receive a swallow screen prior to being offered food or drink by mouth. Care should be taken to minimize infection by using aspiration precautions and minimizing the use of invasive devices such as urinary catheters. Additionally, mechanical deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis (DVT) should be employed whenever possible. Pharmacological DVT prophylaxis should also be considered, though this is contraindicated within 24 hours of TPA administration and may be contraindicated for patients with a hemorrhagic conversion.