The subtrochanteric region is defined as within 5 centimeters distal to the lesser trochanter. Subtrochanteric fractures often are associated with intertrochanteric fractures.

The strong gluteal and thigh muscles create a classic deformity. The proximal fragment is held in abduction, flexion, and external rotation. The gluteus medius and minimus attach at the greater trochanter and provide an abduction force. The short external rotators also attach along the greater trochanter and intertrochanteric crest and provide an external rotation force. The iliopsoas attaches at the lesser trochanter and provides a flexion force. The distal fragment is held shortened and in adduction due to the pull of the adductors on the medial femoral condyle.

Immense load-bearing forces are exerted through the peri-trochanteric region. The medial cortex is subjected to compressive forces, while the lateral cortex is subjected to tensile forces.

The proximal femur obtains its blood supply from primary nutrient vessels and periosteal vessels. The nutrient artery enters at the linea aspera in the proximal third of the femur. It is important not to expose or strip the proximal linea aspera for this reason. The femoral head obtains its blood supply from the medial femoral circumflex artery, and it is important to be cognizant of its proximity to the piriformis fossa. Though an injury to the medial femoral circumflex artery is not commonly reported during piriformis entry nailing in adults, it is a known, devastating complication in skeletally immature patients.