# Introduction

Inter-facility transport is defined as the transport of patients between two healthcare facilities. The process is generally accomplished through ground transportation or air vehicles. Inter-facility transport is a crucial part of today's healthcare system that allows facilities to transfer patients needing specialized care that cannot be adequately performed at their current facility. Financial constraints of integrated hospital systems and managed care organizations also necessitate the use of inter-facility transport to help maintain high practice standards and reduce financial burdens.

# Issues of Concern

Inter-facility transport has the potential for complications, especially in an emergency setting. Healthcare providers need to learn about the system, understand optimal uses, coordinate with administrative personnel for preplanning, and consider the risk-benefits when contemplating transfer.

The use of inter-facility transport is worthwhile even without established planning. Investigation of the benefit of interfacility transport services, using the delta REMS score, showed that non-optimal utilization was not associated with patient deterioration.

Another area with an opportunity for improvement is the inter-facility transportation systems. A lack of research and literature makes the development of an optimal setup unlikely in the near future. Improvements at the level of the transport service may not be implemented as efficiently as hospital safety programs due to limited data, management, and finances.

# Clinical Significance

Transferring a patient between medical facilities is an essential aspect of the healthcare system, which ensures continuity and proper levels of care. A patient may receive a transfer due to a multitude of reasons, including regionalization, specialization, the designation of facilities, and continuity of care. Despite its commonality and significance in the continuity of healthcare delivery, there is a severe lack of formal education about the subject.

This subject matter is especially concerning for physicians, as they are responsible, by law, for the selection of transport modalities and personnel.

**Transportation Designations and Modalities of Services**

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration categorizes the transportation of patients by acuity level. Stable patients are separated into four levels of potential deterioration, and unstable patients are designated under an independent category. Patient factors, equipment used, and further descriptions for each category are available online in the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's guide for interfacility transport.

Transportation of patients may occur by air or ground. Ground-based systems are the most commonly used, when available. Ground-based transport systems are beneficial, particularly when the distance is short, economic responsibilities are considered, and geographical features allow for an automobile to complete the task. Air-based systems, such as helicopters, are better suited for situations in which a wheeled vehicle could not reasonably transport a patient in a timely or safe manner. Air-based systems present some challenges for transportation, such as atmospheric pressure changes, vibration, and reduced space for equipment and personnel. When correctly employed, air transport has shown improved survival outcomes.

**Hospital ownership, private companies, and use of 911 systems**

A variety of owners and operators may provide inter-facility transportation. In regional-based hospital systems, ownership of the transportation units might be by the regional system or one of its subsidiaries. Private independent companies also commonly transport patients between facilities. These private companies may be under contract or used on a fee for service basis. Government-based emergency services are sometimes used as inter-facility transports, though significantly less often.

The use of government-based emergency services for transportation is a potential issue for some jurisdictions.

**The Reasoning of Typical Transfers**

Inter-hospital transfer of a patient may occur in emergent and non-emergent situations. An emergent need typically involves transferring a patient to a tertiary care hospital for evaluation and treatment by specialists. Emergency transfers are commonly seen in patients experiencing a stroke or acute cardiac event. While a patient may arrive at the closest hospital, that facility may not have the expertise or equipment to provide the appropriate care. In a situation where a healthcare facility unable to effectively manage a patient's condition, it is necessary for that patient to be transferred to a higher level of care where the expertise, advanced interventions, and specially trained providers are available. In an emergent situation and where time is critical, the decision to transfer must be made rapidly.  Delaying transfer can put patients outside the allotted time window for specialty interventions. For example, the recommended goal of door-to-balloon time of under 90 minutes for a STEMI can be affected by transport times.

Non-emergent inter-hospital transfers are for stable patients. Reasons for transfer include non-emergent surgery, elective procedures, inter-regional hospital designations, or for non-acute patients who will receive care closer to their desired location. The decision to transfer should weigh the cost-benefit factor and the chance for deterioration during transport.

Transfers between hospitals and other healthcare facilities are generally performed on a non-emergent basis. Typical scenarios include transfers between a hospital and a skilled nursing facility or an acute rehabilitation center. Although most transfers occur without urgency or primary concern for deterioration, the potential for a patient's condition to worsen is still present.

Transfers between non-hospital facilities are completed on a non-emergent or without urgency in most cases. For example, transfers between a nursing facility and a dialysis center can typically be completed without with more basic transport and fewer resources.  Potential adverse reactions to dialysis, such as hypotension, can warrant increased urgency, emergent transport, or a possible change in destination.