A detailed history and meticulous evaluation play a vital role in ruling out IOFB in ocular trauma. Initial presenting features of siderosis bulbi include gradually progressive diminution of vision and night blindness.

A seidel’s test must be performed in all cases of suspected open-globe injuries to detect the entry wound. In cases of a negative seidel’s test, signs such as corneal edema, subconjunctival hemorrhage, or an iris hole may be suggestive of an entry wound. Apart from the clinical features usually seen in a case of suspected IOFB following penetrating trauma, there are certain signs specific to siderosis bulbi.

A slit-lamp examination may reveal rust-colored or yellowish pigment deposits within the corneal stroma or endothelium.

Iron deposition within the layers of iris, particularly stroma and epithelium, results in greenish-brown discoloration, which is reversible in eliminating the foreign body (FB). It is an early sign of ocular siderosis.

The pupillary examination may reveal a fixed, dilated pupil which may be the earliest sign of siderosis bulbi. An exaggerated pupillary constriction to 0.1% (low-dose) concentration of pilocarpine is seen owing to denervation hypersensitivity.

Secondary open-angle glaucoma may develop due to iron deposition in the trabecular meshwork. Eventually, trabecular fibrosclerosis may result due to iron toxicity, resulting in medically uncontrollable glaucoma. The incidence of glaucoma is, however, uncommon in siderosis bulbi (5%).

Intra-lenticular foreign bodies constitute 10% of all IOFBs and are mostly associated with cataract formation.

Siderosis bulbi classically affects the RPE resulting in pigmentary degeneration of the retina. Iron toxicity may also lead to optic disc edema, though it may resolve after the removal of IOFB.