To increase the chances of harvesting a viable temporoparietal fascia flap, it is critical to understand the relevant anatomy.

Layers (from superficial to deep) potentially encountered during harvesting of the TPFF include:

- Skin

- Subcutaneous tissue

- Temporoparietal fascia (within which the temporoparietalis muscle may be encountered)

- Loose areolar tissue

- The superficial layer of the deep temporal fascia

- Temporalis muscle

- The deep layer of the deep temporal fascia

- Pericranium

- Bone

The temporoparietal fascia (also known as the superficial temporal fascia) is a thin layer of connective tissue lying below the level of the subcutaneous adipose tissue and superficial to the fascia of the temporalis muscle (the deep temporal fascia).

**Blood Supply**

- The superficial temporal artery (STA) has a well-described course within the substance of the flap itself. The main STA divides into multiple segments, roughly 3 cm above the level of the zygomatic arch. The terminal branches of the STA arborize with the vessels supplying the pericranium.

- The STA also gives rise to the middle temporal artery, which supplies the temporalis muscle. When dissected together, the surgeon may concomitantly harvest the deep temporal fascia and/or temporalis muscle during the TPFF harvest.

NOTE: Dissection along the anterior/frontal branch of the STA may put the frontotemporal branch of the facial nerve at risk. Injury to this nerve will result in ipsilateral brow ptosis and forehead paralysis. Various anatomic landmarks can be used to help identify the course and/or location of this nerve, including:

- Pitanguy’s line - line drawn from 0.5 cm inferior to the tragus to a 1.5 cm superolateral to the lateral brow (see image)

- A point 2.85 cm superior and 2.54 cm lateral to the lateral canthus

- A point 6.4 mm cephalad to the sentinel vein (useful landmark for endoscopic brow lifts)

- A point 2.4 cm anterior to where the zygomatic arch meets the helix