Reye syndrome is a rare diagnosis with fewer than 2 cases reported annually since 1994. However, the true incidence may not be known for reporting cases to the CDC is no longer mandated. The peak age of onset is 5 to 14 years of age; however, cases have been reported in children less than one year of age. Gender has not been reported as a risk factor. There is seasonal variation with the majority of cases being reported from December through April.

National surveillance of Reye syndrome began in 1973. The CDC reported 555 cases between 1979 and 1980. Between December 1980 through November 1997, the CDC reported 1207 cases of Reye syndrome in the United States. The incidence fell from an average of 100 cases per year in 1985 and 1986 to an average of 36 cases per year between 1987 and 1993. Incidence has fallen off sharply since 1991 with 0.2 to 1.1 case per million reported in the United States between 1991 and 1994.

Widespread warnings again the use of aspirin in children were issued in the United States in 1980. A sharp decline in the number of reported cases of Reye syndrome followed this issuance. Similar patterns of incidence were observed in the United Kingdom. In 1986, the United Kingdon warned against the use of aspirin in children under the age of 12. Following that warning, the incidence fell from 0.63 cases per 100,000 in 1983-1984 to 0.11 cases per 100,000 in 1990 through 1991. Similar declines were also observed in France.

It should be noted that aspirin remains a mainstay of treatment for children diagnosed with Kawasaki disease. In children who require long-term salicylate therapy, clinicians and caregivers should remain vigilant in monitoring for signs and symptoms of Reye syndrome.