The primary nerves in the anterolateral wall are the thoracoabdominal nerves, which originate from T7-T11 and supply the anterolateral abdominal wall muscles and overlying skin. Next, are the lateral cutaneous branches which come from T7-T9 and supplies the skin over the right and left hypochondriac regions. Then there are the subcostal nerves that come from the anterior rami of T12, which also supplies the muscles of the anterolateral abdominal wall to include the most inferior portion of the external oblique muscles along with the overlying skin. Lastly, we have the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves, which are terminal branches of L1. The iliohypogastric supplies the skin overlying the upper iliac, inguinal, and hypogastric regions. The ilioinguinal supplies the lower inguinal regions, mons pubis, and anterior scrotal area.

The main innervation of the pelvis comes from the sacral and coccygeal nerves. There is also some aid coming from the autonomic nervous system. The obturator nerve forms from the anterior rami of L2-L4 and enters the pelvis. It passes through the obturator foramen, where it divides into its anterior and posterior parts. There are no pelvic structures supplied by the obturator nerve.

The lumbosacral trunk is a thick nerve that forms as the L4 unites with the anterior ramus of the L5. This trunk will then join the sacral plexus. The sacral plexus is located at the posterolateral wall of the lesser pelvis. It gives rise to two primary nerves, namely the sciatic and pudendal nerves. The sciatic nerve is the thickest of the nerves of the body and forms by the anterior rami of L4-S3. It descends and supplies the posterior aspect of the thigh and the leg and foot. The pudendal nerve is the key nerve of the perineum. It is also the chief sensory nerve of the external genitalia. The coccygeal plexus is a tiny network of nerves that come from the anterior rami of S4 and S5. It supplies part of the pelvic diaphragm. Small nerves arise from this plexus named anococcygeal nerves, which supply the small area of skin between the coccyx and anus.