The reduction of coronary blood flow causes myocardial infarction. Classically this occurs due to atherosclerotic plaque rupture or intraluminal thrombus and is referred to as type I myocardial infarction. However, ischemia may also occur due to either increased oxygen demand or decreased supply and is called type II myocardial infarction; this may be triggered by many conditions such as hypertension, hypotension, coronary artery spasm, anemia, sepsis, and arrhythmias.

Posterior myocardial infarction occurs when the posterior coronary circulation becomes disrupted. The two main branches of the coronary circulation are the right coronary artery and the left main coronary artery. The left main coronary artery is a short, wide caliber vessel that divides into the left anterior descending (LAD) artery and the left circumflex artery (LCx). On occasion, there may be a small branch called the ramus intermedius, which comes off the angle between the LAD and LCx. In approximately 70% of the population, the right coronary artery (RCA) supplies the posterior descending artery (PDA), which supplies the posterior circulation. This arrangement is known as "right dominant" circulation. In about 10% of the population, the posterior descending artery originates from the LCx artery, known as "left dominant" circulation. In the remaining 20% of the population, the RCA and LCx both supply the posterior descending artery, known as co-dominant circulation. Occlusion of the vasculature will lead to ischemia in the territory supplied, but the patient's anatomy determines what provides the posterior circulation.

There are a number of risk factors for coronary artery disease and, by extension, myocardial infarction. The HEART score is a diagnostic pathway used in patients older than 21 years of age who present with symptoms suggestive of ACS. It is used to stratify risk and is predictive of the 6-week risk of a major adverse cardiac event. It is not for use in patients with ST-elevation or other new EKG changes, hypotension, or other comorbid conditions requiring admission, but the risk factors apply to any patient in whom there is a concern for acute coronary syndrome (ACS). Risk factors considered as a component of the HEART score include hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus, obesity (BMI over 30 kg/m^2), smoking (current or smoking cessation three months), positive family history (parent or sibling with coronary vascular disease [CVD] before age 65); atherosclerotic disease: prior MI, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), cerebrovascular accident (CVA), transient ischemic attack (TIA), or peripheral arterial disease.