The hypothalamus functions in conjunction with the pituitary gland through the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. The hypothalamus itself contains several types of neurons that release different hormones. The thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), somatostatin, and dopamine are released from the hypothalamus into the blood and travel to the anterior pituitary.

The thyrotropin-releasing hormone is a tripeptide that stimulates the release of thyroid-stimulating hormone and prolactin from the anterior pituitary gland. The gonadotropin-releasing hormone triggers sexual development at the onset of puberty and maintains female and male physiology after that by controlling the release of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone. The growth hormone-releasing hormone stimulates the secretion of growth hormone by the anterior pituitary. The corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulates the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone from the anterior pituitary. Somatostatin inhibits the release of both growth hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone, and various intestinal hormones. Dopamine inhibits the release of prolactin from the anterior pituitary, modulates motor-control centers, and activates the reward centers of the brain. Prolactin functions mainly to promote lactation but also helps regulate reproduction, metabolism, and the immune system.

Vasopressin and oxytocin are 2 hormones made in the hypothalamus itself which travel in hypothalamic neurons directly to the posterior pituitary. Vasopressin, also known as the anti-diuretic hormone or ADH, acts on the collecting ducts in the kidneys to facilitate reabsorption of water. Oxytocin stimulates contractions of the uterus at birth and release of milk when an infant begins to breastfeed.