Scientists have studied specific examples of pseudogenes for their observed roles regarding the regulation of biochemical processes. An example of pseudogene regulation is with Oct4, a transcription factor, and its associated pseudogene. The Oct4 pseudogene’s RNA transcript has been observed to inhibit differentiation with the original Oct4’s RNA transcript. Additionally, researchers found a knockdown or Oct4 pseudogene antisense RNA to increase concentrations of Oct4 and its associated pseudogene.

siRNAs additionally regulate gene expression. In one study, pseudogene transcripts were observed to form hairpin structures through folding and become functional siRNAs that repressed gene expression. The study additionally removed Dicer, a protein responsible for producing siRNAs, and observed a decreased concentration of pseudogene-derived siRNAs with subsequent increased expression of the coding gene’s mRNA products. The study further supports the idea of pseudogene derived siRNA regulation.

Another mechanism of pseudogene function lies in its ability to affect mRNA stability through interactions with miRNA.  miRNA typically pairs with the 3’ untranslated region of an mRNA transcript and causes degradation or lower expression levels. One example of how pseudogene mRNA transcripts interact with miRNA is in the relationship between PTEN, a tumor suppressor, and its pseudogene PTENP1. In one study, the PTENP1 pseudogene mRNA binds to miRNA and has decreased the concentration of the functional miRNA within the cell. In this way, PTENP1 allows the PTEN mRNA to escape miRNA repression.  Another study is exploring the regulatory relationship between heat shock proteins, Hsp90, and its associated pseudogenes HSP90AA1 and HSP90AA2. Heat shock proteins actively express and account for two percent of all expressed proteins. These proteins, through microarray data, have numerous retrotransposed pseudogenes.