**Syphilis******

The oral manifestation of syphilis is usually the first sign of the disease. The initial oral lesion characteristic of primary syphilis, known as a chancre, appears at the site of inoculation around two weeks after the exposure. The most common locations are the buccal mucosa, tongue, and lips.

The chancre usually presents as a solitary, painless, round, and indurated nodule, with firm margins accompanied by regional lymphadenopathy. The chancre begins as a macule that evolves into a papule. The papule may erode and transform into an ulcer of around 0.5 to 1.5 cm in diameter.

Secondary syphilis is a highly contagious stage that appears 2 to 8 weeks after the primary chancre emerges. In this period, oral lesions can be maculopapular or mucosal patches. The mucosal patches are more common, appearing as slightly raised or shallow oval ulcers surrounded by an erythematous border with a gray pseudomembrane. Lesions on the tongue may appear as irregular fissures or pronounced ulcerations.

Systemic symptoms include fever and lymphadenopathy. In the skin, a maculopapular rash involving the palms and soles and alopecia may be found. Condylomata lata, a painless, smooth wart-like lesion, can be observed on the genitals during this period.

Tertiary syphilis is a destructive stage that manifests months or years after the initial infection in patients who have not received effective treatment during the primary or secondary stages of the disease. Oral manifestations of this phase include a chronic granulomatous gumma usually located on the hard palate, which may perforate into the nasal septum. The tongue may present with leukoplakia dorsally or appear atrophic and fissured.

Tertiary syphilis symptoms result from complications of previous stages. They include Argyll Robertson pupil that constricts with accommodation but is not reactive to light, aortitis due to the vasa vasorum destruction, and neurosyphilis, such as tabes dorsalis.

Congenital syphilis is transferred from an infected mother to the fetus, usually after 16 weeks of pregnancy. Before this period, Langerhans cells prevent the transmission of the spirochete to the fetus. As the fetus develops, Langerhans cells' number decreases, allowing the passage of the spirochetes.

When pregnant women transmit syphilis to their children, various developmental defects commonly arise, including dental abnormalities. Hutchinson's incisors are characteristic of congenital syphilis patients, small, widely spaced, and peg-shaped incisors; semitranslucent rather than ivory, with a screwdriver-shaped incisal edge. Another dental abnormality that may be seen is Moon molars or mulberry molars, where molar anatomy is replaced by small, dome-shaped teeth, with dental cusps set closer together. Mulberry molars have also been associated with enamel hypoplasia.

**Gonorrhea**

Transmission of gonorrhea to the oral cavity and pharynx is more common via oral-penile contact than oral-vaginal contact.

Untreated oral gonorrhea may lead to disseminated gonococcal infection, causing fever, chills, skin sores, joint inflammation, and joint pain.

**Tuberculosis**

Oral tuberculosis lesions are more commonly located in the posterior aspect of the dorsum of the tongue, followed by the buccal mucosa, gingiva, lips, and the floor of the mouth.

Primary oral tuberculosis manifests as a single painful, necrotic ulcer that can expand from the sulcular epithelium and the epithelium of the oral cavity to the base of the bordering vestibule.

Secondary tuberculosis presents as slowly growing, irregular, and painful oral ulcers that exhibit a thick white mucus at the base and do not self resolve. Like primary lesions, secondary lesions are usually exposed to mechanical trauma.

**Scarlet Fever**

Scarlet fever is typically associated with acute pharyngitis with accompanying symptoms such as sore throat, fever, odynophagia, cervical adenopathy. The skin presents with a papular-blanching rash, covering most of the body. This rash is described as a "sandpaper rash" because of the lesions' lack of confluence. It develops on the face, trunk, underarms, and groin first, spreading to the extremities later, sparing the palms and soles.

Scarlet fever has a common oral manifestation known as "strawberry tongue" because of the hyperplastic fungiform papillae and white coating; as the white coating resolves, the remaining papules give the tongue a red, bumpy appearance. The throat may also appear erythematous along with white or yellowish patches making swallowing painful.