Mature vegetations consist of an amalgamation of inflammatory cells, fibrin, platelets, and erythrocyte debris. The initial platelet-fibrin clot provides a nidus for bacterial adherence and further platelet aggregation. Confocal laser scanning microscopic analysis of infected valve tissue demonstrates bacterial biofilms embedded with platelet collections. In a self-revolving fashion, platelets facilitate bacterial colonization, which in turn propagates further bacterial aggregation through the binding of surface proteins.

Both the gross and histologic appearance of valvular tissue will vary based on the infecting organism. Virulent pathogens such as S. aureus characteristically generate an inflammatory milieu predominated by neutrophils and large bacterial colonies. A macroscopic evaluation may demonstrate friable tissue with frank destruction. The inflammation associated with less virulent organisms such as viridans group streptococci involves more mononuclear cell infiltration.

The staining of histologic samples will often demonstrate focal bacterial colonies. Although rarely culture-positive following initiation of antibiotic therapy, valve tissue Gram staining remains positive in over 60% of cases undergoing active treatment.Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis.

In regard to prosthetic valve endocarditis, one study found that the associated inflammatory cells remain relegated to the vegetation on the surface of the valve cusp. Compared to the inflammatory response that characterizes degenerative valve calcification, prosthetic valve endocarditis primarily involves neutrophilic infiltrates rather than macrophages and lymphocytes.