The body contains many sesamoid bones, often offering an added strength advantage to t­­he muscles and supporting tendon stability. For example, the patella increases joint leverage and contributes to our knee's extensor properties. This unique mechanism allows for the knee's range of motion and increased weight-bearing activities. Injuries to the patella greatly reduce its leverage and extensor capabilities; these injuries commonly result from trauma and increased tension.

Based on their positioning and attachment, sesamoid bones can be divided into two broad categories, type A and B. Bony surfaces are surrounded by cartilage and incorporated within the cavity, forming the synovium. Together a sesamoid bone and its relation to other tendons form a joint.

Type A sesamoid bones are adjacent to a joint, becoming a part of the joint capsule. Common examples of this type include the hallucis and pollicis sesamoids along with the patella, allowing for increased leverage. Type B sesamoid bones overlie a bony prominence and are separated by an underlying bursa. An example of a Type B sesamoid bone is the sesamoid of the peroneus (fibularis) longus tendon.

Another type of sesamoid bone is the fibrocartilaginous sesamoid. This type of sesamoid allows the maintenance of tendon structure and provides immense flexibility from the fibrous component and elasticity via the cartilage tissue.

In the upper extremities, notable sesamoid bones are found in the hand and wrist. Most individuals usually have five sesamoid bones in each hand. Two sesamoid bones are located in the distal portions of the first metacarpal bones of the hand, more specifically within the tendons of the flexor pollicis brevis and adductor pollicis. A third sesamoid bone exists within the interphalangeal joint. In addition, the other two sesamoid bones are present in the distal portion of the second metacarpal bone and the distal portion of the fifth metacarpal joint.

In the lower extremities, the patella is found in the knee and is the largest sesamoid bone. Other lower limb sesamoids that can be seen as normal variants in humans include the fabella (often near the lateral head of the gastrocnemius), cyamella (within the popliteus tendon), os peroneum (located within the peroneus longus tendon), and the hallux sesamoid pair (one on the medial and the lateral side of the first metatarsal bone of the foot).

Another sesamoid bone within the ear is the lenticular process of the incus, often known as the fourth ossicle of the middle ear.