**Legal Considerations**

- Due to widespread abuse and misuse concerns, the Drug Enforcement Agency(DEA) changed hydrocodone from a schedule III substance to a schedule II substance in October 2014. According to a study, rescheduling hydrocodone to a schedule II is associated with a substantial decrease in hydrocodone overdose.

**Medical Assessment**

- Clinicians should monitor the patients for pain relief, constipation, respiratory depression, and other adverse effects.

- The risk of respiratory depression is highest following the initiation of therapy or after an increase in dose. Patients should also undergo monitoring for signs of abuse, misuse, and addiction. Opioids have a narrow therapeutic index and wide variability in response between patients.

- Urine or serum drug testing is recommended before opioid initiation and should merit consideration annually and as needed. In addition, close follow-up should be performed soon after treatment initiation with a re-evaluation of the risks and benefits of continued opioid therapy at least every three months.

- Clinicians can use the Opioid Risk Tool (ORT) to identify aberrant behaviors in high-risk patients.

- Morphine milligram equivalence (MME) should be used for conversion. Age, pharmacogenetics, hepatic and renal dysfunction, and concomitant use of benzodiazepines should always be considered. The Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC) recommends that caution be used when the dose exceeds 50 MME per day.

**Prevention of Medical Errors**

- Hydrocodone may be confused with oxycodone. ISMP (institute of safe medical practices) suggests using Tallman lettering (oxyCODONE/HYDROcodon) to prevent prescribing errors.