Like sonography of most other joints, sonography of the ankle is performed less commonly than other imaging modalities. Sonographic evaluation is highly dependent on operator skill and is often performed directly by a musculoskeletal subspecialty-trained radiologist. The facility provided by sonography is the dynamic characterization of findings and the high spatial resolution. Sonographic confirmation and evaluation of soft tissue masses yield complementary information, but other imaging studies are often needed to fully characterize most masses.

Appropriate probe positioning to evaluate specific pieces of anatomy is crucial but beyond the scope of this article. A high-frequency (12 MHz to 17 MHz) linear transducer is used to maximize the evaluation of superficial structures.

Though a discussion of ultrasound physics and artifacts is beyond the scope of this article, it must be mentioned that excessive system gain and near field reverberation artifacts, among others, need to be minimized by adjusting the focal zone, scanning plane, and system gain. Some ultrasound “artifacts,” such as posterior acoustic enhancement or shadowing, provide valuable information, demonstrating a lesion as cystic or solid, respectively.

Ultrasound is not useful for the evaluation of most osseous structures and lesions because of the dense posterior acoustic shadowing deep to the highly echogenic cortex. The sonographic appearance of normal anatomic structures has been previously described. We will limit this discussion to the appearance of muscles, tendons, and ligaments for the sake of brevity, as these structures are the most commonly investigated structures in the acute or traumatic setting. Muscles appear hypoechoic, and linear hyperechoic striations corresponding to fascial lines are often seen. Tendons are hypoechoic and demonstrate a linear fibrillary echotexture. Ligaments appear similar to tendons, though the linear striations are more compact than those of tendons.