The primary goal of obtaining a medical history from the patient is to understand the state of health of the patient further and to determine within the history is related to any acute complaints to direct you toward a diagnosis

Often information from the history can direct treatment or may indicate a need for further workup of patient complaints. The history may also inform the provider of certain aspects of the patient's health which will direct care, especially avoidance of potential harm to the patient with regard to allergies or previous treatments limiting care at the time of the encounter.

Family history may help risk-stratify patients with conditions with genetic links.

A key area of concern is the patient's health literacy and how the questions to obtain the histories are asked so the patient understands and can give the appropriate answer. Often patients will not regard their chronic illnesses when asked about “medical problems” especially in acute treatment settings where the patient may not realize the significance or relevance of the chronic disease. In some instances, a question may need to be asked in multiple ways to acquire the necessary information adequately.

Another concern about asking questions of this nature is it may concern the patients about a physician asking personal questions and may withhold information for fear of judgment or legal consequences. Patients should be reassured the information is gathered in an effort to best find the cause of their illness and treat them in the most effective and efficient manner. Once this information has been obtained it should be treated with care for the patients' privacy under laws such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) in the United States.