# Continuing Education Activity

The tongue is a muscular organ that plays a central role in a person’s ability to communicate and to experience food via taste, chewing and swallowing. Injuries to the tongue, therefore, have a considerable impact on quality of life. Tongue lacerations can result from a variety of means including seizures, self-harm, blunt force facial trauma, oral trauma while intubated, and child abuse. This activity describes the causes, pathophysiology, and presentation of tongue lacerations and highlights the role of the interprofessional team in managing the lacerations.

**Objectives:**
- Describe the epidemiology of tongue lacerations.
- Describe the etiology of tongue lacerations.
- Summarize the treatment options for tongue lacerations.
- Outline the importance of collaboration and coordination amongst the interprofessional team in optimizing the care of patients with tongue lacerations.

# Introduction

The tongue is a muscular organ essential to a person’s ability to communicate and to experience food via taste, chewing and swallowing. Injuries to the tongue, therefore, have a considerable impact on quality of life. Tongue lacerations can result from a variety of means including seizures, self-harm, blunt force facial trauma, oral trauma while intubated, and child abuse.

# Anatomy and Physiology

Most tongue lacerations are on the anterior dorsum of the tongue followed by the mid-dorsum and anterior ventrum. Posterior tongue lacerations are less common.  Complete loss of tissue from the tip or lateral edge of the tongue leaves nothing to be repaired and is unlikely to cause a permanent deficit. After these types of injuries, the tongue will hypertrophy and obscure the deficit over time. An injury to the base of the tongue is potentially more problematic than other locations due to the location of the hypoglossal nerve.

# Indications

The decision to suture a tongue laceration depends on the size of the laceration or the gaping nature of the wound. Performing tongue assessment is best when the tongue is at rest inside the mouth as this is the most common position, as opposed to protruding outside the mouth. Complex lacerations are those that involve large flaps, active bleeding or through-and-through injuries of the tongue and are more likely to require repair. Lacerations or avulsions that are small can potentially be left to heal without intervention due to the tongue’s ability to bulk up via hypertrophy. The ability to hypertrophy can often fill in the gaps of the wound so that no deficit is identifiable.

# Contraindications

Contraindication to repair in the emergency department would include a significant delay in presentation after the injury in which case the wound can be allowed to heal secondarily. Tongue amputation requires specialist repair and is not suitable for emergency medicine or primary care independent management.

# Equipment

Required equipment could include the following:

- Suction

- Gauze

- Laceration repair kit/Instruments: needle driver, scissors

- Anesthetic (topical, local, block): Lidocaine with or without epinephrine, LET, bupivacaine with or without epinephrine

- Normal saline

- Needles

- Syringes

- Absorbable suture: 3-0, 4-0 chromic gut or vicryl

- Tongue depressor

- Bite block

*Repair in children may also require procedural sedation, or intranasal pain medications to facilitate the procedure.

# Personnel

Personnel could include an emergency medicine physician, advanced practice provider, oral maxillofacial surgeon, ear nose and throat specialist, other specialist or nursing staff depending on the complexity of the injury, patient population, and resources available.

# Preparation

Once wound assessment is complete and a decision is made to repair the wound, it should undergo inspection for retained foreign bodies; specifically, broken pieces of teeth are a concern. The wound should be irrigated thoroughly and hemostasis achieved before repair.

# Technique or Treatment

Large lacerations may require deep sutures or layered repair to relieve muscle tension and allow approximation.

# Complications

Sutures in tongue lacerations with a non-absorbable suture can develop a granuloma because of a foreign body reaction. As with all laceration repairs, there is a possibility of a noticeable scar, but this is also possible in patients that heal by secondary intention.

# Clinical Significance

Tongue lacerations can occur in any age group with a variety of injuries making the development of a standard of care difficult. Initial assessment for severity of injury, contamination, and barriers to healing can be considered similar to lacerations on other parts of the body. The decision to repair a tongue laceration or allow it to heal by secondary intention has been a hotly debated topic. A large population study comparing the two management methods does not exist, so the decision has been left up to individual clinicians. General descriptions of suture repair and the use of dermabond in repair exist, as well as examples of well-healed wounds that received no intervention. The Zurich Tongue Scheme aims to give the practitioner an idea of factors that favor repair, ways to repair and common complications to consider when they need to care for a patient with a tongue laceration.

# Enhancing Healthcare Team Outcomes

From minor tongue lacerations to tongue amputation, the repair of a tongue injury requires a range of abilities and specialties to achieve a good result. More complex lacerations will need the primary physician, emergency department physician, and nurse practitioner to adequately communicate the nature of the wound to advanced care specialists such as otolaryngologist and oral maxillofacial surgeons. Lacerations in children might require the teamwork of physician, nursing and respiratory therapist to sedate and repair the wound. The pharmacy may have involvement depending on the decision to use antibiotics prophylactically. The lack of large trial or comparison studies on the repair of tongue lacerations means that communication between providers on past experiences will be an integral part of each new patient's plan of care as part of an interprofessional team approach. [Level V]