The etiology of monoarticular arthritis can be acute or chronic. Acute causes include infection, trauma, crystal-induced arthritis, avascular necrosis, and mechanical derangement.

Virtually every bacterium can potentially cause septic arthritis, but depending on host risk factors, it can subdivide into gonococcal and non-gonococcal septic arthritis. Gonococcal arthritis results from sexually transmitted bacteria Neisseria gonorrhea; a gram-negative diplococcus, when spread in blood, can lead to disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI).

Staphylococcal aureus (S. aureus) is the most common cause of nongonococcal septic arthritis; followed by Streptococcus species and gram-negative bacteria.

Late stages of Lyme disease can also present as monoarticular arthritis and frequently involves the knee joint. Lyme serology is necessary for the diagnosis because synovial or tissue culture is always negative. Certain viruses like hepatitis B, hepatitis C, parvovirus, Epstein Barr virus (EBV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), alphavirus (e.g., chikungunya virus) and Zika virus can manifest with monoarticular arthritis/ arthralgia.

Crystal-induced arthritis characteristically presents with deposition of chemical compounds, monosodium urate (MSU) in gout, calcium pyrophosphate dehydrates (CPPD) in pseudo-gout, and calcium hydroxyapatite in calcific periarthritis (calcium crystal disease).

Pseudogout is an acute attack of synovitis by deposition of CPPD crystals in a joint. The crystals are positively birefringent under the polarized light, as seen in the joint aspirate and connective tissues of the body.