Patients with CS loss can have glare and halos during the night and may need extra illumination to read an object. After straining, the eyes may have congestion; the eyes may not be able to see clothes, dishes, and small objects. The patients may not be able to notice facial gestures.

The clinical significance of CS is governed by the factors which affect the CS.

- **Refractive errors -**Low spatial frequencies are not affected; only high spatial frequencies are affected by refractive error.

- **Cataract**- Early cataract reduces CS for low spatial frequencies; this is not related to visual acuity. Brannan et al., in their analysis, found that CS reduced from 37% to 19% within six months of performing the cataract surgery.

- **Age**- The CS decreases with age. After the second decade, it has been documented that CS scores decline by 10% each decade. The average decline is equal to the CS range within the normal population at any age.

- **Systemic disease**- Contrast sensitivity is reduced in several systemic diseases listed above.

**Diagnostic Applications**

Contrast sensitivity is labeled as a diagnostic indicator of visual function. It is reduced in various ocular and systemic conditions, as listed above. It is also known that CS (modulation transfer function) is a complete statement for the relationship between spatial frequency and visual field intricacies, the contrast needed for resolution, and stimulus luminance. The use of yellow-tinted glasses helps in improving CS. These glasses increase the sharpness perception during the daytime. These should be avoided while driving to prevent glare, and anti-reflective coating glasses can be used to reduce glare. Yellow or copper tinted lenses help improve contrast and working environment in low ambient light.