Popliteal artery aneurysms are usually managed by an interprofessional team of healthcare professionals that include a vascular surgeon, an interventional radiologist, an endocrinologist, an internist, and a critical care specialist. While elective management of these aneurysms yields good results, patients who present with a rupture, frequently end up losing their limb. Given the very high risk of losing a limb following the rupture of a popliteal artery aneurysm, patient education is vital. The nurse plays a vital role in monitoring and educating patients with a popliteal artery aneurysm. The patient must understand that once they receive a diagnosis of an aneurysm, they should follow up with a vascular surgeon and undergo elective surgery or have an endovascular procedure performed. More importantly, the patient must stop smoking, manage the high blood pressure, and control blood sugars; these are areas where the clinician can enlist the assistance of pharmacists. Finally, it is important to examine the patient for a popliteal artery aneurysm in the contralateral leg and abdomen. All patients with a pulsatile mass behind the knee should get referred to the radiologist for an ultrasound.

**Outcomes**

For patients who have the popliteal artery aneurysm repaired electively, the prognosis is good. Outcomes with both surgery and an endovascular procedure appear to be similar in the short term. However, the long-term outcome of an endovascular procedure on the popliteal artery aneurysm remains unknown. In patients who present with rupture of a popliteal artery aneurysm, the outcome is usually poor. Limb loss is common. The amputations may be above or below the knee. The only way to reduce these poor outcomes and is by thoroughly examining the pulses in all patients.