One of the most advanced techniques in manual osteopathic medicine is the unwinding approach, conceived by the American osteopath Dr. Frymann. It is a technique that can also be used in the pediatric sphere, as it exploits the principle of the patient's intrinsic force without inducing any manual force on the part of the operator.

The osteopath can perform a treatment on every single structure that makes up that particular diaphragm if the latter is considered dysfunctional, or the clinician can perform a treatment that involves more than one diaphragm simultaneously. Another choice is to treat all the diaphragms with general approaches. The technique used for each component, or a single component of a specific diaphragm, will depend on the clinician's choice.

When it is decided to work with more than one diaphragm, since the evaluation has brought the clinician's attention to two dysfunctional diaphragms, it is feasible to use the unwinding technique, the latter used in previous trials. Also, in this case, you can choose to work with a manual grip that reflects that of the evaluation and pass, once the technique is finished, on the second diaphragm, using the manual grip of the evaluation to perform the technique. Another possibility is to place a hand (the cranial hand) on one diaphragm and the caudal hand on the second diaphragm, using the Dr. Frymann technique. The manual grip will depend on the comfort of the osteopath, as it is a systemic technique. With this second possibility, the diaphragms may not necessarily be close (tentorium and tongue) but also distant (tentorium and pelvic floor). Finally, if the clinician considers that all diaphragms have to be worked, a manual grip can be used for each diaphragm and proceeded to the next. The time required to carry out the technique will depend on the skill of the operator, as well as the procedure's effectiveness on the patient.

When placing the hands on the patient's tissue, the osteopath must not add force or induce movement. The hands follow the inherent tissue movements. Initially, the perceived movement will be chaotic or unsymmetrical. The technique ends only when the clinician perceives the inherent movement of the patient's tissue with a symmetrical pattern in amplitude, entity, and duration. The hands will move but, in reality, they will always be still. This happens because the hands follow the various tissues and not vice versa. We have to imagine a seagull on the waves of the sea. Apparently, the seagull makes multiple movements, but, in reality, it is the sea that makes the seagull move.