Monitoring mixed venous oxygen saturation may be indicated in certain instances of patient care for monitoring, guiding therapy, and evaluating response to treatment. Such cases include the management of perioperative, critical care, heart failure, and septic patients. Therefore, it is crucial that any changes in the value of venous oxygen saturation undergo correct interpretation in a clinical scenario. Like any other monitoring technique, it is essential to integrate the numerical value of mixed venous saturation with other hemodynamic variables and to correlate the measured SvO2 with the patient's clinical situation.

Whenever there is a mismatch of oxygen demand and supply, such that there is an overall oxygen deficit at the level of the tissues, oxygen extraction will increase, leading to decreasing mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2). If such a mismatch exists and SvO2 decreases in the setting of increased oxygen demand, this could reflect the response to fever, shivering, pain, or stress with inadequate oxygen delivery compensation. When SvO2 decreases in the setting of decreased oxygen supply, this could reflect the response to anemia, hypoxemia, or reduced cardiac output during cardiogenic shock. When SvO2 increases in the setting of decreased oxygen demand, this could indicate a reaction to analgesia, sedation, mechanical ventilation, or hypothermia.

When oxygen supply increases while venous oxygen saturation remains high (greater than 90%), this reflects impaired oxygen extraction, which is also unfavorable. Such is the case with reduced oxidative metabolism at the level of the mitochondria, leading to lactic acid accumulation and cell death. A possible scenario could be one in which cell damage has occurred, leading to impaired oxygen usage, as in the case of mitochondrial poisoning with cyanide. Other processes include septic shock or arteriovenous shunting, where flow is redistributed to areas of regional vasodilation. Similar trends can also present in instances of afterload reduction and cardiac function improvement.