- Clotting tests: The prolongation of prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), and thrombin time (TT) usually detect fibrinogen less than 100mg/dL. Although TT is a screening test, its specificity is poor because various common causes can lead to its prolongation. Reptilase time (RT), another screening test, is useful as it is not affected by heparin. Mixing study done in any of these tests may show correction in afibrinogenemia and hypofibrinogenemia but not in dysfibrinogenemia because dysfunctional fibrinogen acts as an inhibitor in mixing study.

- Fibrinogen antigen test: A quantitative test uses the fibrinogen antibody to check the amount of fibrinogen in a blood sample.

- Fibrinogen activity test: It measures the time taken to form a fibrin clot after adding a standard amount of thrombin to the plasma. Since this test requires the addition of thrombin, it bypasses other coagulation factors and tests specifically for fibrinogen. The time required for clot formation depends on the amount of active fibrinogen in a test sample. Prolonged time can result from a decreased amount of fibrinogen or the presence of dysfunctional fibrinogen.

- Thromboelastography (TEG): It is a viscoelastic hemostatic assay that measures the physical properties of clot formation. It is a point-of-care test that can be rapidly performed and easily compared and contrasted and requires multiple daily calibrations. It measures the speed and strength of clot formation and helps in analyzing the coagulation, platelet function, and fibrinolysis. The various parameters studied include:
            
              
-  R time (reaction time): It is the latency time from the start of the test to initial fibrin formation. It is dependent on clotting factors.
              
              
-  K (seconds): It is dependent on fibrinogen and signifies the time taken to achieve a specific clot strength (amplitude of 20 mm).
              
              
-  Alpha angle (degrees): It measures the rate at which fibrin builds up and cross-linking occurs and thus assesses the rate of clot formation. It also depends on fibrinogen levels.
              
              
-  Maximum amplitude (mm): It represents the ultimate clot strength which is a function of platelets (80%) and fibrin (20%). It helps to identify whether the source of bleeding is due to coagulopathy or mechanical disruption.
              
              
-  LY30 (%): It is the percentage decrease in amplitude 30 minutes post maximum amplitude. It provides information about fibrinolysis. The CRASH-2 randomized controlled trial data signifies the importance of using antifibrinolytic within three hours of trauma in reducing mortality.

- Rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM): It is an alternative viscoelastic hemostatic assay similar to TEG with different nomenclature and technical differences. The corresponding terminology for ROTEM is:
            
              
-  Clotting time (CT) - R-value
              
              
-  Alpha angle and clot formation time - K value and alpha angle
              
              
-  Maximum clot firmness (MCF) - MA
              
              
-  Clot lysis - LY30