The goals of management are:

- To halt the active disease progression and induce remission

- Treatment of acute exacerbations like seizures and uveitis

- Cosmetic rehabilitation after complete remission

**Medical Management**

The standard management is systemic immunosuppression.

- **Methotrexate (MTX) -**The preferred agent. The dose is 0.3 to 1 milligram/kilogram/week (mg/kg/wk). MTX is administered in oral or parenteral form. Therapy is continued for 12 to 24 months to prevent relapses.

- **Corticosteroids -**MTX is combined with oral prednisolone or intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP).

- **Other agents -**Mycophenolate mofetil, cyclophosphamide, hydroxychloroquine, and cyclosporine are employed for resistant cases.

- **Psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA)**- variable efficacy in halting the disease activity.

**Ophthalmic Management**

- **Acute uveitis:**Topical cycloplegics, topical and systemic steroids are the mainstay treatment. Acute trabeculitis is treated with topical antiglaucoma medications. Relapses are common and aggressive management is the norm.

- **Keratitis:**Lid tapping and profuse topical lubrication are advised for exposure keratopathy. Early diagnosis and treatment of super-added infective keratitis is a must.

- **Corneal opacity:**An optical penetrating keratoplasty offers a good visual outcome for severely opacified corneas due to exposure keratopathy, infective keratitis, and primary endothelial failure.

- **Scleral melt:**Scleral patch graft is the preferred management option.

- **Glaucoma:**Antiglaucoma medications can control the IOP in early cases. The severe cases with inadequate control on topical medications require trabeculectomy surgery.

- **Restrictive strabismus:**The small-angle deviations are corrected by the prism glasses. The large-angle strabismus cases need definitive surgical correction.

- **Retinal vasculitis:**The active disease shows vascular lesions in the mid-peripheral retina and mild vitritis. Topical and systemic immunosuppression is the primary treatment. The advanced disease shows neovascularization, vitreous hemorrhage (VH), or tractional retinal detachment (TRD). The visible non-perfused retina is lasered in cases with posterior segment neovascularization. Vitreoretinal surgery with intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) is needed for cases of non-resolving VH and TRD.

**Neurological Management**

- **Seizures:**The anti-epileptic drugs are titrated as per response for long-term management.

- **Neuropsychiatric disorders:**An expert psychiatrist consultation is essential.

**Rehabilitation Strategies**

Cosmetic rehabilitation is attempted after at least one to two years of halt in the progression of the disease.

**Oculoplastic Management**

- **Enophthalmos:**Intra-orbital injection of fillers like silicone gel, hyaluronate derivates, or autologous fat graft with adipose-derived stem cells has good cosmetic results.

- **Ptosis:**Primary correction of the enophthalmos often provides satisfactory cosmesis. Frontalis sling surgery is reserved for severe cases.

- **Eyelid retraction:**Surgically treated with levator recession or levator lengthening with relaxing myotomy technique.

- **Lagophthalmos:**Persistent lagophthalmos requires surgical correction with permanent lateral tarsorrhaphy.

- **Drooping of eyebrow:**Browpexy or Z-plasty are good treatment options

- **Atrophic/Phthisis bulbi:**A painless involutional globe with adequately formed conjunctival fornices requires a primary trial of the prosthetic shell. The painful phthisical eye may require enucleation surgery with a silicone implant.

- **Contracted socket:**The mucous membrane and fat grafting are needed for a total surgical socket reconstruction in severe cases with forniceal shelving. A healthy socket is then given a trial of the prosthetic shell.

**Plastic Surgery Management**

- **Synthetic tissue fillers:**Minimally invasive modality to correct facial asymmetry. The commonly employed fillers are silicone gel, polyethylene, hydroxyapatite, and poly L-lactate.

- **Autologous fat grafting:**The Coleman technique has acceptable cosmetic outcomes for most cases.

- **Skeletal reconstruction:**Bone paste cranioplasty, bone implants, bone/cartilage grafts, and orthognathic surgery have variable success rates.

- **Free soft tissue transplantation:**Extensively used for large volume reconstruction. Commonly used flap sites are greater omentum, lateral thigh, parascapular muscles, latissimus dorsi muscle, and dorsal thoracic adipofascial flap. This procedure provides satisfactory cosmetic outcomes.