The goals of laboratory and imaging evaluation in excited delirium syndrome are to identify an underlying causative pathology, to identify acute life-and-limb threatening pathology masked by excited delirium syndrome, and to evaluate the progression of the disease state into further physiologic derangement. Vital signs, including temperature and point-of-care serum glucose, should be obtained as soon as possible. Initial laboratory analysis should include a hepatic panel, complete blood count, and standard electrolyte panel including calcium, magnesium, and phosphorous. Ammonia level is also necessary if there is clinical or laboratory evidence of hepatotoxicity. Thyroid studies should likewise be performed as clinically indicated. Depending on clinical suspicion for infection, further studies and treatment for infection may be necessary, including serum lactate, chest radiograph, urinalysis, and blood/urine/sputum/wound cultures. Clinical suspicion for central nervous system infection should undergo an evaluation with a timely lumbar puncture. An EKG should be performed, both to diagnose acute pathology and to guide the use of treatment agents. CPK and urinalysis should be performed to assess for rhabdomyolysis. Toxic ingestion merit evaluation with toxicology screens, as well as serum acetaminophen, salicylates, and alcohol level, as clinically indicated. It is important to remember that ED toxicology testing only provides a limited picture as many drugs of abuse cannot be screened for with routine ED drug screens. Serum levels of all neurologic/psychiatric drugs that the patient is known to be taking are also beneficial in diagnosis (e.g., lithium, valproic acid, carbamazepine). CT imaging of the head is an option if there is any clinical suspicion of acute intracranial pathology. Imaging via ultrasound, radiography, and CT should be performed as indicated based on suspected or identified injuries. The injuries may be the cause of the excited delirium or a result of the disease state. Cardiac enzymes may be added depending on clinical suspicion of myocardial injury and EKG changes.