The advances in cognitive and learning sciences theories inform educators about best learning and teaching practices and their impact on the process of evaluation under differing circumstances. An understanding of these theories provides a sound rationale for choosing specific instructional and assessment strategies that measure that the curricular objectives.

**Implications for Teachers**

In behaviorism, the teacher needs to be active and have a good knowledge base to set up the appropriate learning environment and elicit the correct responses from the learners. On the other hand, in cognitivism, the role of the teacher is to structure the content of the learning material. Under the structure of constructivism, the role of a facilitator is played by the teacher, who acts as a guide to the students, each of whom brings a unique set of previous experiences to approach the knowledge they are acquiring. Connectivism requires teachers to guide learners to related areas of knowledge outside their focus. Humanism focuses on learner autonomy and potential, having where teachers encourage learners to be self-directed. Thus we see how behaviorism is teacher-centered, whereas constructivism, connectivism, humanism, and cognitivism are learner-centered approaches.

**Curriculum Design and Delivery**

Behaviorism: It can be very useful in the sphere of clinical and communication skills because as students are provided feedback over a while, they learn the correct responses while performing skills. Their learning can occur in small chunks with repetition that help learn the intended behavior over some time. Behaviourism also enforces the mastery of prerequisite steps before moving onto other further modules, which ensures reinforcement of the correct skills. While teaching certain skills, the teacher can first demonstrate the technique or manner in which a particular skill is to be performed, after which the students try to imitate the same technique. They would then be assessed based on the perfectly they were able to perform the skill-based on what was demonstrated and receive positive or negative reinforcement.

Cognitivism: Conventional basic science courses that occur in isolation to the clinical course make can use of cognitivism, as new information and knowledge are given and then processed internally to come to new ideas and improve the schemata of knowledge.

Constructivism: For basic science courses that occur integrated with clinical science courses, the theory of constructivism would be more appropriate as the student needs to grasp the concepts of the basic sciences and then be able to construct connections to the clinical aspect of it. Any area that requires knowledge to be acquired and then applied to a different sphere would benefit significantly from constructivism.

Connectivism: The learning process in connectivism is similar to that seen with constructivism. Since learning is through the process of forming connections between previous knowledge and an individual’s innate qualities, this approach is appropriate for areas that require the application of knowledge between different disciplines. It has a particular application for learning and teaching in this digital age.

Humanistic: In the humanistic approach, a teacher would allow students to learn by their own free will and desire for knowledge. Since humanists believe that the desire to learn is innate and aimed towards the ultimate goal of self-actualization, the motivation must come from the learner. Although there is often a clear minimal structure for the teaching, the responsibility is on the students to learn as they wish to.