# Definition/Introduction

Adolescence is the critical transition from childhood to adulthood, characterized by unique biological, cognitive, emotional, and social changes.

**What is an emancipated minor?**

As minors grow into adolescence, they begin to develop more mature cognitive skills and decision-making capacity, similar to adults.

# Issues of Concern

Emancipation laws in the US vary by state with little guidance from federal law. In general, minors who are married, on active duty status in the military, or living separately from their parents or legal guardians and independently managing their own financial affairs are considered emancipated.

The “mature minor” doctrine legally recognizes the medical decision-making capacity of adolescents, even though they are still minors under parental or legal guardian control. Very few states recognize a version of the “mature minor” doctrine. Minors usually 12 years or older who demonstrate adequate cognitive maturity and capacity to understand the risks, benefits, alternatives, and likely outcomes of medical evaluation and treatment are authorized to provide consent or refuse without parental permission.

Emergency medical care also presents another exception to the necessity of parental or legal guardian consent to treat a minor. Current federal law under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) mandates that a medical screening exam must be performed on all individuals, including minors, presenting to any federally funded emergency department regardless of consent and ability to pay.

In general, adolescents can consent to specific medical services that provide an important public health benefit without parental permission or notification.

- Rape or sexual assault services

- Contraception services

- Sexually transmitted infections

- Prenatal care

- Abortion

- Pediatric care for children of minors

- Substance use disorder treatment

- Mental health treatment

- Immunizations

# Clinical Significance

All healthcare providers (i.e., nurses, physicians, and prehospital healthcare providers) need to be aware of and understand the various exceptions when a minor can be medically evaluated and treated without the presence or consent of a parent or legal guardian. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that health care providers support adolescents' growing autonomy and transition to adulthood by including their viewpoint and consent in a shared, family-based decision-making model. Providers have a duty to serve the pediatric patient's best interest and not necessarily the parents' desires. Parental consent should be considered a responsibility that supports the minor's best interests and preserves a family's interests, rather than a parent's right to express their own autonomous choices.  Reframing parental consent as parental responsibility may help clinicians minimize conflict during difficult medical decision-making in a child's health care.

# Nursing, Allied Health, and Interprofessional Team Interventions

All health care providers involved with the medical care of minors should learn more about their state’s laws regarding emancipated minors, mature minor exceptions, and specific medical services that do not require parental permission to best serve their adolescent patients.

Furthermore, health care providers are urged by the American Medical Association and AAP to make all efforts to respect the adolescent’s privacy from their parents or legal guardians with a clear explanation that confidentiality is conditional in certain circumstances.