Flaps, in the setting of reconstructive surgery, refer to tissue (generally including skin or mucosa) that is transferred into a defect to facilitate wound closure. They can be employed when closing wounds by second intention, primary linear closure, or when skin grafting would result in functionally or aesthetically unsatisfactory results.

Overall, flaps are divided into three main categories: free flaps, in which tissue is taken from a distant site, brought to the wound, then reperfused via microsurgical vascular anastomoses; regional flaps, in which nonadjacent tissue near the defect is moved into the wound, maintaining a vascular pedicle for perfusion; and local flaps, in which adjacent tissue is transferred into the wound. By their nature, free flaps and regional flaps tend to have axial blood supplies. Local flaps, more often than not, have random blood supplies.

The type of primary movement required for transfer can further divide local flaps into three categories: advancement, rotation, and transposition. Advancement and rotation flaps, also called sliding flaps, recruit adjacent tissue and move in either a linear or arced motion, respectively, to fill in the primary defect. Transposition flaps, also called lifting flaps, recruit noncontiguous donor tissue that is incised and shifted to trade places with intact tissue in order to close a wound. Transposition flaps most commonly used in cutaneous surgery include the bilobed, rhombic, and nasolabial (melolabial) transposition flaps, as well as z-plasties. The fourth category of flap movement, interpolation, is often listed as well; however, because it involves transferring nonadjacent tissue across or underneath intact tissue that remains undisturbed by the procedure, these flaps are usually more correctly considered regional flaps.