Acute presentation of symptoms and ECG findings lead to the diagnosis.

**ECG Findings
**

- Fibrillation waves of varying amplitude and shape.

- No identifiable P waves, QRS complexes, or T waves

- Heart rate anywhere between 150 to 500 per minute

VF storm: Identified by 3 or more episodes of VF or appropriate shocks from ICD within 24 hours

Patients surviving VF should have a thorough history and physical examination. A family history of unexplained cardiac death should be noted. Physicians should review c the patient's cardiac history and the medication list for arrhythmogenic drugs closely. They should also look for and correct reversible causes of VF such as electrolyte abnormalities, acidosis, and hypoxia. The healthcare professional should also evaluate patients for underlying ischemic heart disease with an echocardiogram and emergency angiogram. Of all OHCA, more than 50% have significant coronary artery disease on angiogram.

Appropriate laboratory studies include:

- Serum electrolytes

- Arterial blood gas

- Complete blood cell count

- Cardiac enzymes

- Levels of drugs

- Toxicology screen

- BNP levels

The ECG may reveal:

- MI

- Brugada syndrome

- Long or short QT interval

- WPW

- Digitalis toxicity

- Epsilon sign (arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy)

ECHO is usually done to assess the wall motion, ejection fraction and any valvular problems. In addition, Echo will identify any pericardial fluid that may have resulted from CPR.

EPS is done after the patient is stable to differentiate patients with inducible VF from those with noninducible VF. Patients with induced monomorphic ventricular arrhythmias may be candidates for an ICD.