**Troponin Assays**

Troponin I and Troponin T subtypes can serve as markers of cardiac muscle damage. Levels of troponin found in the blood are used to differentiate between unstable angina and myocardial infarction (MI), as they may present with similar symptoms; the elevated troponin levels in myocardial infarction would not be seen in unstable angina. Troponin levels peak a few hours following injury and can remain elevated for up to two weeks after the event.

Troponin release is not specific to MI, as troponin release merely indicates cardiac muscle damage has occurred. As such, troponin levels may also be elevated in conditions such as heart failure, pericarditis, and amyloidosis. In addition, non-cardiac diseases such as sepsis or renal failure can also cause elevated troponin levels.

**Muscle Spasm**

Muscle spasms, also known as muscle cramps, are involuntary, painful, and localized contractions of an entire muscle group, individual muscle, or select muscle fibers. Muscle spasms can last anywhere from a few seconds to a few weeks, depending on the muscle affected and the mechanism of the spasm.

In sports, exercise-associated muscle spasms are the most frequent condition requiring therapeutic intervention.

In certain clinical scenarios, the underlying etiology may be related to persistent spastic muscle contractions that can significantly impact body function. A common example of this condition is manifested in the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Clinically, this is recognized as congenital torticollis or spasmodic torticollis.

**Manual Muscle Testing (MMT)**

As previously discussed, MMT is used as a clinical tool to assess muscle strength and is graded on a scale from 0 to 5. MMT is also used in rehabilitation and recovery practices to assess impairments and deficits in muscle performance, including strength, power, and endurance. Identifying impairment in specific muscles or groups of muscles is vital in determining the course of rehabilitation, which may include particular therapy exercises, bracing, or functional movement training.

**Pharmacology**

Clinically, it is essential to recognize that many medications today will affect muscle contraction at some level. Therefore, whether it be the main effect of the drug or a side effect, it is crucial to understand the uses and consequences of administering medications to patients. Pharmacological agents that directly affect muscle contraction include, but are not limited to:

- Skeletal muscle relaxants (e.g., botulinum toxin, cyclobenzaprine, methocarbamol)

- Vasodilating medications (e.g., hydralazine, nitrates, milrinone)

- Volatile anesthetics or succinylcholine can lead to malignant hyperthermia