Although the mainstay of treatment is systemic antibiotics, topically administered drugs are useful in alleviating acute ocular symptoms. Topical steroids, NSAIDs, mydriatics like atropine and lubricating agents are all helpful and can be used as indicated by the ophthalmologist.

Systemic therapy is administered according to the stage of the disease. Patients with ocular syphilis are treated as neurosyphilis.

The following are treatment protocols recommended by the center for disease control and prevention (CDC):

- Primary and secondary syphilis is treated with a single dose of intramuscular (IM) penicillin G benzathine 2.4 million units, or procaine penicillin, 2.4 million units IM daily, and probenecid, 1 g orally 4 times a day for 14 days. In patients who are allergic to penicillin, doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily for 14 days or ceftriaxone 1 to 2 gm IM or intravenously (IV) daily for 10 to 14 days or tetracycline 100 mg orally 4 times daily for 14 days, can be used. Azithromycin has also been used.

- Latent and tertiary syphilis, including neurosyphilis, is treated with aqueous crystalline penicillin G, 3 to 4 million units IV every 4 hourly for 10 to 14 days, or benzathine penicillin G, 2.4 million units IM weekly for 3 weeks. Ceftriaxone and azithromycin also have been used in patients allergic to penicillin.

Penicillin is the only antibiotic with documented efficacy for treating syphilis in pregnant patients. Pregnant females with syphilis who report penicillin allergy should be desensitized first and then treated with penicillin G.

Oral steroids, along with supplements, are often required to control ocular inflammation along with antibiotic therapy. The use of intravitreal dexamethasone implant for refractory macular edema in syphilitic uveitis has also been reported.

Patients treated for syphilis should have the VDRL test repeated every three months for a period of 1-year post-treatment as titers should become nonreactive within a year after therapy. Patients should be retreated, if an initially high-titer VDRL test does not decrease fourfold within a year, or if a previously nonreactive VDRL test becomes reactive again.