An interprofessional team that provides a holistic and integrated approach to postoperative care can help achieve the best possible outcomes in the inpatient and outpatient setting. It is essential to train the care team how to detect signs and symptoms of flap ischemia in the immediate postoperative period and how to relay this message. A prompt return to the operating room might prevent breast fat necrosis and possible total flap loss. The patient can also present with delayed flap ischemia, and that is often due to a lack of understanding of physical activity restrictions post-operatively. Educational handouts and various teaching strategies are useful in an attempt to educate patients and families about the post-operative period. However, changes can often be made to improve compliance. Collaboration, shared decision making, and communication are key elements for a good outcome in this patient population, as restrictions given a patient such as "do not pick up your toddler" or "stop smoking" may not be a realistic option. Health care providers must listen to their patients and provide them with an option with which they might be able to comply, enhancing patient-centered care, and also improving outcomes.

Breast fat necrosis can be found immediately in the postoperative period or months after surgery or breast trauma. With inpatients, it is important to not only treat the symptoms of the patient but to keep in mind the emotional burden that a flap loss or breast deformity might cause. Such complications can require a patient to have multiple trips to the operating room. In the outpatient setting, it is important for all providers in the care team to recognize risk factors and address the patient's concerns. Reassurance and close clinical follow-up are necessary when caring for the patient with breast fat necrosis.

Most importantly, a thorough informed consent should be part of the pre-operative visit.  This discussion would include the general risks associated with any surgery, but it should also encompass possible outcomes and complications specific to breast surgery. A patient's recollection and understanding of informed consent can often be lacking, particularly with the anxiety and emotion associated with breast surgery.  Therefore, with breast surgery, it is essential to consider adding to the informed consent a discussion of the risk of fat necrosis, hypertrophic scar formation, asymmetry, loss of sensitivity/numbness, cosmetic deformity, skin necrosis, and/or and flap loss, all which could result to a return to the operating room.  Additionally, it is essential to mention how the healthcare team will address these complications; this not only makes for a more complete informed consent, but it also may result in better ultimate patient satisfaction and experience with these outcomes.