Prognosis varies considerably based on subtype and whether morbidity or mortality is a more significant consideration. Regarding morbidity, it correlates highly with the patient’s environment and subtype. If a patient with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome hypermobile type receives early education and heeds the warnings regarding the avoidance of potentially traumatic activities such as weightlifting, they may experience relatively low disease morbidity throughout their life. On the contrary, significant morbidity can be expected if that patient undergoes physical trauma, causing repeated joint injuries that may require surgical intervention.

In general, the mortality of patients with hypermobile and classic subtypes is not affected by the disease. However, the lifespan of patients with vascular and kyphoscoliotic subtypes is significantly affected. A patient with the vascular subtype will likely experience a major vascular event by age 40 with a median lifespan of 48.

In addition to the purely medical prognosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, there is now more of an understanding of the psychosocial impact of the disease. Due to the lack of a cure and what can be seen by the patient as failed treatments by their provider, patients can lose faith in the healthcare system; this may discourage EDS patients from accessing needed healthcare as the disease progresses.

As with any chronic condition, EDS can have significant psychosocial implications. Not only due to the symptoms and sequelae of the disease itself but also from the activity restrictions recommended by clinicians meant to reduce risk to the patient. Also, patients report a lack of support from clinicians, especially when reported symptoms don’t correlate with visible or quantifiable pathology.