There are multiple classification systems for diabetic foot wound evaluation. The most common systems are Meggitt-Wagner (often referred to as Wagner), Texas University classification system, S(AD)SAD, PEDIS, and WIFI. There are many studies that evaluate the reliability and comparisons between the systems, and the general conclusion is that the Wagner classification system and Texas University remain reliable and simple to use for classifying diabetic foot ulcers, and WIFI provides the added ability to classify the ischemia with prognostic correlates.

The Wagner Classification system is based on a grading system from 0-5. A grade 0 ulceration is considered a pre-ulcerative lesion with skin that remains intact, with the potential of breakdown. A grade 1 ulceration presents with the breakdown of superficial skin or subcutaneous tissue. A grade 2 ulceration has an exposed tendon, bone, or capsule. A grade 3 ulceration is deep with osteomyelitis or an abscess present. A grade 4 ulceration is one with gangrene of the partial foot. A grade 5 ulceration is one with gangrene of the entirety of the foot. This system has been shown reliable; however, it does not address the blood flow or infectious properties of the ulceration and is merely a grading system for the ulcer itself.

The University of Texas Diabetic Foot Ulcer Classification System considers blood flow and infectious properties. It is a dual system with four separate grades and stages. The four grades from 0-3 are as follows: grade 0- pre-ulcerative site or post-ulcerative site that has healed, grade 1- superficial wound not involving the tendon, capsule, or bone, grade 2- wound penetrating to tendon or capsule, grade 3- wound penetrating bone or joint. Within each of these wound grades, the staging of the ulceration is achieved by establishing the blood flow and infectious qualities of the ulceration. This is divided into four stages: A- clean wounds with adequate blood flow, B- non-ischemic wounds that are infected, C- noninfected wounds that are ischemic, and D- infected and ischemic wounds. This provides a more in-depth classification system for use in medicine; however, it lacks information on determining ischemia and infectious qualities.

The society for vascular surgery developed a risk stratification system based on wound, ischemic, and foot infection (WIFI), and detail of the WIFI classification system can provide further insight into the analysis of vascular status and infection and how these correlate to the healing potential within the staging system. This system has three separate portions. The wound portion is from grades 0-3 and is as follows: grade 0- no ulcer and no gangrene with the possibility of ischemic rest pain, grade 1- minimal tissue loss and the ulcer has no exposed bone, grade 2- the ulcer extends to the tendon, joint or bone with gangrenous changes to the digits and grade 3- the ulcer involves extensive tissue loss of the forefoot and/or midfoot with or without hindfoot involvement with extensive gangrenous changes to the forefoot and midfoot. The ischemia aspect is broken down using ankle-brachial index (ABI) measurements, transcutaneous oximetry, pulse volume recording, and skin perfusion or toe pressure. It must be taken into account whether or not the patient has calcified vessels, which can alter many of these readings.

The ischemia portion is also broken down into four grades: grade 0- no ischemia with an ABI greater than or equal to 0.80 and toe pressure greater than or equal to 60 mmHg, grade 1- mild ischemia with an ABI between 0.6-0.79 with a toe pressure ranging from 40 to 59, grade 2- moderate ischemia with an ABI between 0.4 to 0.59 and a toe pressure between 30 to 39, and grade 3- severe ischemia with an ABI less than or equal to 0.39 and a toe pressure less than 30. The final portion of this describes the foot infection portion: grade 0- no infection present, grade 1- superficial infection with cellulitis/erythema that is localized and within 2 cm of the ulceration edge, grade 2- moderate infection with cellulitis/erythema greater than 2 cm from the wound edge with abscess present or infection extending into the bones or joints, and grade 3- severe infection with both local and systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Upon completion of the grading system, each ulceration is then staged from 1 to 5, with stage 1 being a low amputation risk and stage 5 being unsalvageable, with low, moderate, and high risk from stages 2 to 4.