The management of LVH depends on the etiology. Treatment involves lifestyle changes, and depending upon the cause, may include medication, surgery, and an implantable device for the prevention of sudden cardiac death. LVH treatment should be aggressive because patients with LVH are at the highest risk for cardiovascular events and mortality. The goal is to regress LVH and prevent LV dysfunction and progression to heart failure. Two-third of the patients with LVH are hypertensive. Blood pressure (BP) control is essential for preventing further deterioration and complications. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-Is), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), long-acting calcium channel blockers (CCBs), or thiazide/thiazide-like diuretics are the recommended antihypertensives for LVH. The antihypertensive therapy benefits the patient by reducing BP and may regress LVH independent of BP reduction, leading to reduced adverse cardiovascular events and mortality.

The other common cause of LVH is aortic stenosis. Patients with aortic stenosis usually have a 10 to 20 years asymptomatic latent period, during which increasing LV outflow obstruction and pressure load on the myocardium, may gradually change the composition of myocardial extracellular matrix leading to LVH. Usually, aortic valve replacement (AVR) is recommended in symptomatic patients, but if the echocardiographic findings show rapidly progressing aortic stenosis with LV dysfunction, AVR would be recommended in asymptomatic patients to improve LV function and reduce mortality.

Athletic heart with physiological LVH does not require treatment. Discontinuation of training for a few months (3 to 6 months) is usually needed to regress LVH. LVH regression is monitored for a few months to distinguish it from cardiomyopathy. In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients, beta-blockers and CCBs are used to reduce the heart rate and decrease myocardial contractility so that diastolic filling can be prolonged. If symptoms persist despite medical therapy, surgical myomectomy, or septal ablation is indicated. In these specific cases, drugs like diuretics, ACEI, or ARBs are avoided because they decrease the preload and worsen the ventricular function.