Management of DDS is primarily aimed at prevention rather than treatment after the onset of symptoms. However, once a patient develops symptoms, below are the measures that should be considered:

- Initiate sodium remodeling: Regardless of severity, DDS is initially treated by modifying the dialysis prescription. This is done by changing the sodium dialysate bath or engaging the changed prescription on the dialysis machine.

- Failure of sodium remodeling: In patients with severe symptoms of DDS despite sodium remodeling, a trial to decrease intracerebral pressure could be taken. Some experts suggest using 5 milliliters of 23% saline or 12.5 milligrams of intravenous mannitol to increase the plasma osmolarity and simultaneously decrease further osmotic shift, but these are based on anecdotal evidence and limited data. The addition of urea to the dialysate has also been reported to allow for repeated and intensive dialysis sessions, avoiding potential neurological problems.

Modalities to prevent the development of DDS include implementing a slow and gentle initial hemodialysis, limiting the clearance of urea to prevent the development of an osmotic gradient, increasing dialysate sodium level, and administration of osmotically active substances. Evidence-based guidelines are lacking, but most experts agree on the gradual clearance of urea.

For patients new to dialysis, short two-hour sessions at 150-200ml/min or sustained low-efficiency dialysis can be done, which can be followed by consecutive dialysis sessions in the following days.

In patients who frequently miss dialysis, it is not always possible to repeatedly hospitalize them to initiate slow dialysis;  thus, the sodium modeling technique is used in such patients.