If a patient is successfully resuscitated after a hypoxic blackout, there are four main complications with which to be concerned.

Respiratory complications are the most common following a drowning event. Patients are usually managed on a ventilator for about 48 hours. This period allows for surfactant regeneration as surfactant is often destroyed and washed out by the presence of water in the alveoli.

Pneumonia is not commonly a result of aspirated water during a drowning event.

Pulmonary edema should improve within 3 to 4 days following a drowning incident. If there are new or persistent pulmonary infiltrates in the setting of fever and sustained or worsening leukocytosis, this is a sign of developing pneumonia, and antibiotic treatment should be initiated.

With this in mind, a low threshold for initiating empiric antimicrobials is reasonable in patients who have evidence of systemic toxicity or hemodynamic instability without a clear source.

Cardiac complications can also arise after drowning incidents. Decreased cardiac output is common immediately after a severe drowning event.

Prolonged hypoxia can lead to cerebral hypoxia and long-term cerebral tissue damage. Most late-term morbidity and mortality are of neurological etiology. The key to prevent this is aggressive oxygenation during and after resuscitation. Patients who remain unresponsive after successful CPR should undergo frequent neurological function reevaluation.

Lastly, metabolic acidosis occurs in 70% of hospital patients following drowning.