Adiponectin holds a variety of critical metabolic and cellular functions that ultimately mediate its role in a variety of disease processes.

Adiponectin performs many metabolic functions that link to energy metabolism. For instance, it mediates insulin sensitivity in skeletal muscle through AMP kinase and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha). In the liver, adiponectin up-regulates glucose transport and down-regulates gluconeogenesis through AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) while activating fatty acid oxidation and decreasing inflammation via PPAR-alpha. Adiponectin increases insulin sensitivity in the liver as well through upregulating phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and insulin substrate receptor 1. Additionally, it also increases insulin secretion from the pancreas. Via AMPK, adiponectin enhances basal glucose and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in adipose tissues.

Adiponectin has been shown to play a significant role in the modulation of inflammation. More specifically, studies have exhibited that adiponectin decreases inflammation in macrophages, endothelial tissue, muscle, and epithelial cells through cyclic AMP-protein kinase A and AMPK activation. There is evidence that adiponectin prevents the production of reactive oxidative species and promotes down-regulation of inflammation. Moreover, it has been shown to inhibit CRP secretion and suppression of pathways involving NF-kB signaling and TNF-Alpha. These functions elucidate adiponectin as exhibiting potential protective functions in inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis.

Recently, adiponectin has shown to exhibit activity in functions of cell proliferation, where it has been shown to counter cell growth and induce apoptosis. For instance, one study highlighted adiponectin’s role in counteracting carcinogenesis through AMPK stimulation and consequent activation of p21 and p23 in colon cancer cells. The tumor-suppressing effects of adiponectin have also shown promise in lung and pancreatic cell lines. It is also noteworthy, however, that several recent studies have also demonstrated adiponectin to have antiapoptotic and proliferative roles.