Different clinical conditions including, strokes, brain aneurysms, traumatic brain injuries, primitive or metastatic neoplasms, and infectious diseases (e.g., encephalitis) may impair various components of STM. However, the damage to the STM is seldom selective. For example, aneurysm rupture can lead to STM loss, as well as LTM loss. Apart from diseases which induce STM alterations through direct neural damage, a wide range of medical conditions such as systemic infections, thyroid diseases, surgery (e.g., neuroinflammation-mediated postoperative delirium and postoperative cognitive dysfunction,

Neurodegenerative conditions are paramount causes of memory impairment. For instance, one of the first signs of dementia is STM loss. In particular, memory loss (without interference in daily life or independent function) is the main feature of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) which represents the stage between the expected cognitive decline of normal aging and the more severe decline observed in Alzheimer disease (AD). Moreover, alterations in different memory domains have been shown in Parkinson disease (PD),

Other conditions that can impair memory tasks are alcohol and drug abuse (e.g., marijuana), heavy cigarette smoking, sleep deprivation, severe stress, and vitamin B12 deficiency. Prolonged high alcohol intake can lead to Korsakoff syndrome, which is a complex amnestic disorder with neuropsychological sequelae caused by vitamin B1 (thiamine) deficiency. In addition to alcohol, other causes can lead to vitamin B1 deficiency (non-alcoholic Korsakoff syndrome) with related memory disorders, including dietary deficiencies, prolonged vomiting, and eating disorders. Again, Korsakoff-like amnestic syndromes have also presented after brain lesions involving anteromedian thalamus and hippocampus.

Among other causes of memory impairment, a common side effect of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is STM alteration during treatment. A special issue concerns medications-induced memory loss. The list of drugs implicated includes benzodiazepines (BDZs), antiepileptic drugs,