The venous system of the body has considerable variation, and the brain is no exception. This variation is present in the structure and courses of the medullary veins in the parenchyma and the superficial cortical veins. In the deep medullary veins, variation can be noted in the location of subependymal venous connections as the drainage system consolidates and grows in size. The significant variation is also apparent in the superficial veins and dural sinuses. The most common variation of the major dural sinuses is a hypoplastic left transverse sinus, occurring in up to 21% of cases in one study. The same study found that the anterior segment of the superior sagittal sinus was atretic in just under 1% of patients. The superficial anastomotic veins (the superficial middle cerebral vein, the vein of Trolard, and the vein of Labbe) showed significant variation in their dominance, connection, and degree of development. The predominating vein was usually the combination of the superficial middle cerebral vein and the vein of Labbe, although the dominance of any one of the three, or even co-dominance of all three vessels, were observed and did not change between patients with different dominant hemispheres. The primary connection of the superficial middle cerebral vein was to the sphenoparietal sinus in 57% or the cavernous sinus in 19%. The vein of Labbe entered the transverse sinus in 80% of cases. Interestingly, these two veins, despite often being dominant, were each noted to be underdeveloped in 16% of cases.