It is obvious that the improved availability of EC did not result in a decrease in unintended pregnancy due to so many barriers we discussed. Everyone involved in women's health, including physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and public educators, need to be aware of the available methods of EC. Clearly, it is important to collaborate to avoid misconceptions and provide accurate information to the adolescents and women at risk of unintended pregnancy in a timely manner overcoming the existing barriers. Counseling all women at risk of pregnancy as a part of health maintenance, providing patient education materials and reminders in electronic health records, providing a referral if the provider, pharmacy, or institution has objections are some of the recommendations by the ACOG committee to improve access to EC.

**Summary of Recommendations from the ACOG Practice Bulletin on Emergency Contraception**

Ulipristal acetate is more effective than LNG and combined methods and effective for up to 5 days. Cu-IUD is the most effective method with the advantage of providing long-term contraception (Level A- Based on good and consistent scientific evidence). No examination or tests are required to give a prescription for EC, and treatment should be initiated as soon as possible after UPSI and be available for up to 5 days after UPSI (Level B- based on limited or inconsistent scientific evidence). Consider Cu-IUD in obese women and women taking enzyme-inducing drugs as it has no impact on them (Level B). Advance provision of prescription for EC, information on effective contraception and arrangement for clinical evaluation in case of delay in cycles, lower abdominal pain or persistent irregular, bleeding and choosing Cu-IUD as EC in women who meet the criteria for IUD are good practice recommendations based on primary consensus and expert opinion (Level C- Based on consensus and expert opinion).