The most common etiology of anterior cord syndrome is aortic surgery. A protocol exists to reduce ischemia affecting the spinal cord after aortic surgery. It involves creating incremental increases in the patient’s mean arterial pressure by using IV fluids to increase intravascular volume and vasopressor medications to increase systemic vascular resistance. A lumbar drain is also placed to remove the cerebrospinal fluid. These interventions should increase blood flow to the affected region of the spine by optimizing vasculature as well as reducing overall pressure within the spinal canal.

For atherothrombotic or embolic etiologies of anterior cord syndrome, thrombolysis is not yet considered standard of care. However, throughout the literature, there have been several acute cord ischemia patients treated with intravenous thrombolysis within 4.5 hours of symptom onset with rapid improvement in neurologic symptoms and no hemorrhagic complications. There is a theory that thrombolysis for this condition can be an effective treatment within a time-frame similar to stroke patients, but further studies on safety and efficacy are needed.

Ultimately, the underlying cause of anterior cord syndrome should be the focus of treatment; this may be surgery to correct an aortic dissection, or immunosuppression therapy to treat vasculitis. Once cord infarction has occurred, symptomatic management is also paramount. This management could include fluid or pressor support for neurogenic hypotension, intubation, and mechanical ventilation for high cervical infarctions that affect the diaphragm or bladder catheterization for neurogenic dysfunction.

Long term sequelae of hospitalization must be addressed as well, including the risk of deep vein thrombosis and pressure sores in an immobilized patient, as well as gastrointestinal stress ulcers sometimes found in cervical infarctions. Physical and occupational therapy are also crucial in the process of regaining motor function in these patients.