The differential diagnosis in patients presenting with vertigo can be broken down to that of peripheral or central etiologies as well as those with or without hearing loss:

**Peripheral Causes**:

- Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV): Presents with episodic vertigo following predictable head movements that trigger symptoms. It is usually an acute onset with a duration of seconds to minutes.

- Meniere disease: Presents acutely with recurrent episodes of vertigo along with sensory symptoms (e.g., ear fullness, tinnitus, low-frequency hearing loss). Symptoms last minutes to hours.

- Labyrinthitis: Presents with similar symptoms to vestibular neuritis but will also include auditory symptoms such as unilateral hearing loss. Symptom duration lasts days to weeks.

**Central Causes**:

- Vestibular migraine: Can present with central or peripheral signs/symptoms. Patients will have a headache and will note recurrent episodes and must have a documented diagnosis of migraine. Symptoms duration is minutes to hours.

- Vertebrobasilar TIA: Patients will usually have vascular risk factors. Symptoms are shorter and of acute onset. Symptoms duration is minutes to hours

- Brainstem ischemia/infarct: Patients will often have vascular risk factors or a history of trauma. There is commonly noted to be a constellation of neurological symptoms along with vertigo present, known as a Wallenberg syndrome, which is an infarct of the lateral medulla. The onset is acute, and the duration of symptoms is days to weeks.

- Cerebellar infarct or hemorrhage - There are usually vascular risk factors or trauma present. Symptom onset is acute, and the duration is days to weeks.

**Hearing Loss Present**:

- Perilymphatic fistula

- Cholesteatoma

- Meniere disease

- Labyrinthitis

- Acoustic neuroma

- Autoimmune processes

- Psychogenic

**Hearing Loss Absent**:

- Benign positional paroxysmal vertigo

- Vertebral basilar insufficiency

- Migraines

- Vestibulopathy

- Vestibular neuronitis

- Central nervous system disorders

- Lyme disease

- Multiple sclerosis