**Congenitally**

There is strong support in recent literature to use the fibular shaft length to estimate infant bone age. This may be a more accurate alternative to the current methods of counting ossification centers or viewing hand/wrist or knee radiographs as means of estimating infant bone age.

Fibular hemimelia or fibular hypoplasia-aplasia is the most frequent long bone deficiency. This causes partial or complete absence of the fibula. This is usually diagnosed at birth when limb-length discrepancy and lack of digits are noted. Additionally, the absence of a lateral malleolus destabilizes the mortise in valgus. Thus, ankle fusion is usually needed.

**Neurologically**

The proximal end of the fibula has a slightly enlarged prominence which contains a facet that articulates with the lateral condyle of the tibia. Just lateral and posterior to the fibular neck runs the common fibular nerve (also known as the common peroneal nerve), which may become entrapped after trauma, direct injury or during its course near the fibular head. Common fibular nerve entrapment is the most prevalent entrapment neuropathy of the lower extremity. Symptoms may include foot drop and lateral limb sensory deficits, but given the lack of clear symptoms, misdiagnosis is common and may cause a delay in treatment.

**Fractures**

The fibula can develop an avulsion fracture when there is a sudden contraction of the biceps femoris muscle. This results in a significant pull on the fibula because the biceps femoris tendon attaches to the fibular head.

The distal fibula continues to become the lateral malleolus. The lateral malleolus is significantly more evident than the medial malleolus and can be palpated at the ankle. On the lateral aspect of the ankle, the distal fibula is also prone to fracture (usually spiral), that can occur during forced external rotation of the ankle. Another means of injury occurs during eversion of the foot (outward twisting of the foot) or direct trauma. The resulting fracture from an eversion injury is usually a transverse fracture of the fibula. A clinical decision-making tool called The Ottawa Ankle Rules (OAR) can be used in suspected lateral malleolus injuries. The OAR is beneficial in lessening unnecessary radiographs and are a reliable tool to exclude fractures in children over age 5.

Fibular fractures alone rarely cause compartment syndrome. However, when a tibial plateau fracture is present, there is a higher likelihood that the fibular fracture will contribute to the compartment syndrome.