Most food products contain complex carbohydrates, which are broken down to supply energy to the cells in our body. Once ingested, food containing carbohydrates is broken down in the gastrointestinal system into simpler sugars such as glucose. In the small intestine, glucose molecules are absorbed into the bloodstream and transported to cells across the body, including the liver.

In the postprandial phase, insulin facilitates the transportation of glucose from the bloodstream into cells.de novo lipogenesis (DNL)), which serve as short- and long-term stores of energy, respectively.

In conditions like diabetes mellitus, there is either a lack of insulin or the body does not appropriately respond to the actions of insulin; the latter is termed insulin resistance, wherein cellular uptake of glucose or storage of excess glucose is impaired. Dysfunction in the production or uptake of insulin can potentiate impaired blood glucose levels. Patients with impaired blood glucose homeostasis and elevated fasting blood glucose are at high risk for developing diabetes mellitus. Patients may be diagnosed with diabetes mellitus if their blood glucose levels are high.

Insulin is used to manage type 1 diabetes mellitus and some cases of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Insulin therapy has the well-known adverse side effect of hypoglycemia if its administration is not managed effectively. Patients with insulin-dependent diabetes will benefit from regular blood glucose monitoring. Regular daily blood glucose monitoring is recommended for those with diabetes mellitus using insulin therapy.

Blood glucose monitoring may support diagnosing and managing the client with impaired glucose metabolism or diabetes. Regular monitoring of blood glucose levels may not be recommended for all patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus on oral antidiabetic drugs or dietary management alone. However, blood glucose monitoring may be warranted during titration of oral hypoglycemic medications known to cause hypoglycemia, such as sulfonylureas.