Amoxicillin is a common antimicrobial often prescribed by nurse practitioners, primary care providers, and internists. The drug is safe, but it is essential always to get a good history of allergy before prescribing the medication. Due to the widespread use of amoxicillin, all healthcare providers should understand the mechanism, resistance patterns, adverse drug reactions, and toxicity management.

The clinician usually initiates amoxicillin therapy for appropriate indication. However, a pharmacist should verify the dosing and duration are correct for the infection being treated and confirm that no drug interactions could impede treatment. Nursing staff can counsel on administration, verify adherence. Additionally, nurses should educate the patient not to discontinue amoxicillin when they start to feel better. If the nurse or pharmacist encounters any issues, they should address them with the prescriber immediately.

In case of significant overdose, triage nurses should admit the patient. Emergency physicians need to evaluate and manage nephrotoxicity. Nephrologist consultation is necessary for hemodialysis. Consult a medical toxicologist or poison control center for the latest information.

As depicted above, clinicians(MDs, DOs, NPs, PAs), specialists, pharmacists, nurses, and other healthcare providers should collaborate to maximize efficacy and minimize adverse drug reactions related to amoxicillin therapy. This type of interprofessional team approach and antimicrobial stewardship will improve the likelihood of more favorable patient outcomes.