Both familial and sporadic cases of PVOD have been reported in humans. Description of familial cases of PVOD dates back to 1977.

Sporadic cases were linked to chemotherapeutic drugs such as mitomycin, occupational exposure to organic solvents such as trichloroethylene, autoimmune and connective tissue disorders such as systemic sclerosis, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, radiation, and bone marrow transplants.

Mitomycin C (MMC) is a relatively well-studied association with PVOD in both animal and human studies.

The same study has retrospectively identified 7 cases of PVOD in humans with squamous cell anal cancer, taking MMC between June 2012 and December 2014. 4 out of 7 patients were screened negative for genetic mutations, including EIF2AK4 and BMPR2; only one was HIV positive. Of these seven patients, two were exclusively treated with MMC, and five were treated with MMC and fluorouracil (FU). In this case series, the meantime for the development of PH after initiation of chemotherapy was four months (range 2 to 12 months).

MMC is often used in combination with other antineoplastic drugs, and it is unclear if other chemotherapeutic medications have a role in pathogenesis. For instance, in the French study mentioned above, five patients were also receiving fluorouracil, and the authors concluded that it is impossible to study the role of fluorouracil in the pathogenesis of PVOD. There are a few other case reports of MMC-induced PVOD in patients with different types of cancers, such as breast and cervical cancers. Other chemotherapeutic agents commonly reported to be associated with PVOD include cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, carmustine, doxorubicin, vincristine, etoposide, and methotrexate.

Chemical exposure to organic solvents, especially trichloroethylene, is also implicated in the development of PVOD.

The study identifies that the patients with EIF2AK4 mutations have very low exposure to trichloroethylene, and these patients are typically younger than patients with no mutation. This suggests an aggressive phenotypic response to the chemical agent in patients with EIF2AK4 mutation and suggests that the disease carries a long latency in patients with no mutation.

Autoimmune and connective disorders such as systemic sclerosis (SSc) are well-known causes of PAH and pulmonary hypertension from interstitial lung disease (PH-ILD).

A different study from the University of Pittsburgh in 2019 analyzed 18 samples from patients with a history of SSc-PH-ILD, and 15 had histological findings consistent with PVOD, suggesting a strong association.

Cigarette smoking is seen more in patients with PVOD compared to PAH.

Other risk factors anecdotally reported in case reports include radiation therapy for cancers, bone marrow transplants, and HIV infection.