IDET is indicated for disc-related chronic low back pain. Ideally, for a select subgroup of patients with non-radicular chronic LBP (usually for at least 3 to 6 months) who fail to respond to conservative treatment including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), stretching, light exercise, traction, bracing and/or bed rest.

Physical examination maneuvers such as straight leg raise test, neurologic assessments (limb strength, sensation, and deep tendon reflex) should be done to rule out the possibility of a nerve root compromise or impairment.

Patient selection and indication summary:

- Failed an intensive non-operative treatment protocol, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), traction, physical therapy and injections

- Patient with persistent low back pain with a normal neurologic exam and without sciatica

- Pain provocation by discography at the affected level and discordant pain at adjacent unaffected levels

- An MRI, which not demonstrate a neural compressive lesion or spinal stenosis

- Annular tears. Lumbar MRI T2-weighted may show a High-Intensity Zone (HIZ)  in the posterior or posterolateral intervertebral disc zone (outer annular fibers fissure)

- Disc protrusions of size less than 3 to 4 mm.

- Well to moderate disc hydration (at least 50% remaining disc height)

The gold standard for diagnosing lumbar discogenic pain is a provocative discography. It is a procedure done before IDET in which a contrast gets injected into the nucleus pulposus of the disc, and concordant pain gets reproduced as intradiscal pressures increases. Usually is performed in patients when other diagnostic tests have failed to clear confirmation of a suspected disc as the source of pain. On top of that, provocative discography may characterize the architecture of the disc, providing both anatomical and functional information about a disc

When patients with chronic lumbar back pain fail to respond to conservative treatment and/or minimal procedures such as injection therapy of the epidural space, Radiofrequency, or IDET, surgical treatment should merit consideration.