**Measles**: Worldwide, it is estimated that Measles accounted for 2.6 million deaths prior to immunizations. There are limited cases in the United States due to the vaccination program, however, there have been peaks of cases in recent years with immunization hesitancy among certain populations of parents. It is a reportable disease in the United States along with most countries across the globe.

Measles is transmitted via respiratory droplets or close contact from person to person. High-risk groups are malnourished, especially low in vitamin A supplement, or unvaccinated children, pregnant women, and immunocompromised individuals. An infected person is infectious four days prior and after developing a rash, during which, the classic cough, coryza, and conjunctivitis are also present.

**Mumps**: Since the introduction of its vaccine in 1967, mumps has decreased by 99.8% in documented infectious cases in the US. It is also a reportable disease in the United States.

Mumps is transmitted via respiratory droplets or direct contact with saliva or fomites. Some infected individuals, up to 1/3, could be asymptomatic while contagious. The most contagious days are typically a couple of days before the onset of symptoms, while the virus is primarily in the upper airways. Once the virus enters into the regional lymph nodes, it spreads throughout the body causing inflammation in the central nervous system, salivary glands, parotid glands, pancreas, testes/ovaries, and mammary glands.

**Parainfluenza virus/Croup**: Parainfluenza virus accounts for at least 1/3 of acute respiratory infections in the pediatric population each year. Parainfluenza types 1, 2, and 3 account for approximately 75% of the yearly croup cases as well as laryngotracheitis, laryngotracheobronchitis, and laryngotracheobronchopneumonitis. The remainder of croup cases (approximately 25%) have a bacterial etiology. In the United States, 7% of pediatric populations under age 5 will be admitted for croup. Type 3 parainfluenza virus could also cause bronchiolitis and pneumonia. Type 4 typically results in mild upper respiratory infection in adults and children.

Parainfluenza virus is transmitted via respiratory droplets or direct contact.

**Respiratory Syncytial Virus**: Respiratory Syncytial Virus accounts for 33 million infections across the world as well as nearly 200,000 pediatric death. 90% of the pediatric population under 2 years of age that contract RSV will present with an upper respiratory illness, mainly.  Occasionally,  lower respiratory symptoms will also be present. On most occasions, it presents as bronchiolitis.

Reinfection occurs frequently due to lack of long term immunity in humans, as the virus reinfects older children and adults frequently. RSV is transmitted via respiratory droplets. Patients with a history of prematurity, immunosuppression, and the elderly are at higher risk of morbidity and mortality from RSV infections.