Although there is no objective testing available to diagnose depression, routine laboratory work including complete blood account with differential, comprehensive metabolic panel, thyroid-stimulating hormone, free T4, vitamin D, urinalysis, and toxicology screening is done to rule out organic or medical causes of depression.

Individuals with depression often present to their primary care physicians for somatic complaints stemming from depression, rather than seeing a mental health professional. In almost half of the cases, patients deny having depressive feelings, and they are often brought for treatment by the family or sent by the employer to be evaluated for social withdrawal and decreased activity. It is very important to evaluate a patient for suicidal or homicidal ideations at each visit.

In primary care settings, the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), which is a self-report, standardized depression rating scale is commonly used for screening, diagnosing, and monitoring treatment response for MDD.

In most hospital settings, the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D), which is a clinician-administered depression rating scale is commonly used for the assessment of depression. The original HAM-D uses 21 items about symptoms of depression, but the scoring is based only on the first 17 items.

Other scales include the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS), the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), the Zung Self-Rating Depression Scale, the Raskin Depression Rating Scale, and other questionnaires.