Every surgical procedure requires a thorough patient evaluation before treatment. At a minimum, this includes a physical examination and review of the patient's medical history and medications. A complete acknowledgment of the patient's medical status allows the surgeon to mitigate intra-operative and post-operative complications.

It will also help guide post-operative management strategies for pain and healing of the surgical site. The surgeon should assess the surgical site intraorally and evaluate diagnostic radiographs before surgery. The intraoral and radiographic examination gives the surgeon an idea of the health of the associated periodontium, the extent of caries at the surgical site, the root segment's mobility, and the condition of adjacent teeth. Pre-operative evaluation will also aid in selecting specific instrumentation and hemostatic agents.

Radiographic examination is particularly important when dealing with retained roots. With the increasing availability and popularity of cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT), it has become much easier to determine the specific depth, position, size, curvature, and proximity of remaining root fragments to nearby anatomical landmarks like maxillary sinus and the Inferior Alveolar Nerve (IAN).

This is the primary limitation of traditional two-dimensional radiographs, though they are still indicated in the initial assessment of retained roots. Not all exodontia cases require a CBCT evaluation, but it becomes valuable when the anticipated surgery increases the risk of iatrogenic damage. Pre-operative evaluation not only gives the surgeon the means to generate an appropriate diagnosis but also determines the proper course of treatment.

The surgeon must exercise sound clinical judgment and base their decision-making on empirical evidence and best practices when treating retained root tips. Lastly, the surgeon must decide if they have the clinical skills and armamentarium necessary to perform the procedure safely and effectively. It is never the wrong answer to refer a patient to a higher level of care or to a provider with known expertise in treating a particular condition.