Approximately 15 percent of patients with interstitial lung disease have underlying collagen vascular disease, although the exact frequency of collagen vascular disease-associated interstitial lung disease is unknown.

Rheumatoid arthritis affects up to two percent of the population, most of whom are women, although rheumatoid arthritis-related interstitial lung disease is more common in middle-aged men. The highest incidence occurs between the ages of 25 and 50 years. Extra-articular involvement is seen in up to half of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, with pulmonary disease as the second most common cause of death.

Progressive systemic sclerosis (SSc), or scleroderma, is a multisystem disease occurring predominantly in women. The highest incidence occurs between the ages of 45 and 64 years.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex multisystem autoimmune disease that predominantly affects women (>90% of cases) and non-Whites. Interstitial lung disease is a rare yet insidious complication, affecting 1 in 1000 individuals, with the most common manifestation being nonspecific interstitial pneumonia.

Polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM) are inflammatory myopathies, which occur most commonly in women between the ages of 40 and 50 years. The frequency of ILD is purported to be between 5% and 30%, presenting most commonly as nonspecific interstitial pneumonia or cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, which may precede the development of clinical myositis.

Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD), as the name suggests, manifests as a combination of the above etiologies. Ninety percent of patients are female, with incidence highest in the second and third decades. Interstitial lung disease is the most common pulmonary manifestation, occurring in up to 66% of patients.

Sjogren's syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune disease characterized by T-cell infiltration of various organs, most often the lacrimal and salivary glands. It affects up to 3% of adults, most of whom are women aged 30 to 40 years. Interstitial lung disease is more common in primary Sjogren's syndrome, manifesting as lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia, nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, usual interstitial pneumonia, or cryptogenic organizing pneumonia.