Globally, it is estimated that more than 58 million people are living with HCV. In developed nations, the HCV prevalence is typically 1 to 2%. The number of acute cases of HCV reported in the United States increased each year from 2009 to 2013. After adjusting, an estimated 29,718 acute HCV cases occurred in 2013. Of the three types of viral hepatitis (hepatitis A, B, and C), HCV accounted for the greatest number of deaths and the highest mortality rate, 5.0 deaths per 100,000 population in 2013. HCV transmission requires that infectious virions contact susceptible cells that allow replication. HCV RNA can be detected in blood (including serum and plasma), saliva, tears, seminal fluid, ascitic fluid, and cerebrospinal fluid. Available data suggest that HCV may get transmitted during sexual intercourse, but this rarely occurs. Perinatal transmission frequency ranges from 0% to 4% in more extensive studies. But for most patients with HCV in the United States and Europe, the infection is acquired via intravenous drug abuse or poor medical practices in resource-limited areas of the world.

As per the most updated classification, there are seven genotypes of HCV based on their nucleotide variability in HCV sequences recovered from multiple geographic regions.

- Genotype 1: the most widely dispersed worldwide, 60% to 70% of isolates from the United States are subtype 1a or 1b

- Genotype 2: widely dispersed but most diverse in central and west Africa

- Genotype 3: widely distributed but most diverse in Asia, linked to illicit drug use

- Genotype 4: Northern Africa and the Middle East.

- Genotype 5: South Africa

- Genotype 6: Southeast Asia.

- Genotype 7: Central Africa (Congo)