Due to the significant degree of overlap with other conditions and varied range of presentation, it is essential to have a high index of suspicion when making the diagnosis. A triad of the following symptoms: visceral abdominal pain, neurological dysfunction, and psychiatric disturbances suggest acute porphyria.

The cornerstone of the diagnosis of acute porphyrias remains biochemical testing. The profile of heme precursors and porphyrins in urine, feces, or blood show a distinct pattern for the different porphyrias. Precursor concentrations are raised in acute attacks but may be normal in periods of remission or asymptomatic individuals.

In acute attacks, routine biochemical investigation analysis may show the presence of hyponatremia. Additionally, urea and creatinine may be elevated either due to dehydration or renal impairment. Mild elevation of transaminases is common. White cell count is generally normal in the absence of concomitant infection.

The acute porphyrias are characterized by an increase in the intermediate precursor porphobilinogen (PBG). Elevated PBG levels may present around tenfold or greater.

Fresh random urine samples are useful for screening. The use of Ehrlich's reagent in the Watson-Schwartz test provides a bedside qualitative assessment of the presence of PBG. The performance of the quantitative analysis of PBG in urine is by spectrophotometric or chromatographic analysis. In AIP, PBG is usually ten times the upper limit of normal.

Once the diagnosis of acute porphyria has been made, the next step is to determine which type of acute porphyria is present. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) can identify the different urine porphyrins. Additionally, total fecal porphyrin analysis via spectrophotometry, a fractionation with HPLC/paper chromatography, is used to distinguish AIP from HCP. Fecal porphyrins are generally within normal limits in AIP. In HCP, coproporphyrins are increased in both urine and feces, and this rise is greater than protoporphyrins in feces. In VP, protoporphyrin and coproporphyrin show increases in fecal analysis with a major rise in protoporphyrins. Plasma fluorescence scanning via a fluorescence spectrophotometer is also used to determine the type of porphyria with VP showing a characteristic emission peak at 624-627 nm. The enzymatic analysis may also be performed to determine the enzyme affected.

All urine, plasma, and fecal samples must be protected from the light on collection and transportation before analysis.

Genetic testing for mutational analysis can be used to assist the diagnosis in an individual or to screen family members. However, the failure to find a mutation in an individual with a diagnostic history of active acute porphyria does not exclude the diagnosis.