By definition, the diagnosis of hypocitraturia requires a 24-hour urine test. Some practitioners will recommend a second, 24-hour urine test if the original is "normal." This is intended to avoid any clinical confusion due to spurious, anecdotal, or incidental changes in diet, activities, fluid intake, or personal routine. Many stone clinics will frequently order a second 24-hour urine test 3 months after starting initial therapy. Not only does this allow the clinician to catch any "spurious" readings, but final adjustments to the patient's therapy can also be done.

It can be reasonably assumed that calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis patients who are post-Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, have IBS with chronic diarrhea, or are taking acetazolamide, thiazides, or topiramate will all have some degree of hypocitraturia even without a formal 24-hour urine test.

The optimal timing for 24-hour urine testing is somewhat controversial. 24-hour testing for stone prophylaxis should always be done on an outpatient basis and never performed in the hospital where diet and fluid intake are controlled. For optimal results, the patient must be back on their regular diet and activities after hospitalization or surgery. Many experts prefer to wait 30 days after the last kidney stone event or surgery before performing the 24-hour urine test. The urine chemistry may not change that much, but some patients who were very eager for preventive testing right after surgery are having second thoughts about making a serious long-term commitment to follow therapy when discussing testing again after 30 days.

The "official" hypocitraturia definition of 320 mg citrate/24 hours used by many laboratories has been questioned by numerous experts as it was picked arbitrarily from statistical analyses, did not consider age, gender, body mass, or stone composition, and was not based on solute concentrations, pH, normal median totals, supersaturation ratios nor any determination of what "optimal" urinary citrate levels should be for stone formers.

A group of patients will also have normal or even high urinary citrate levels but still need supplemental alkalinization therapy. These patients will demonstrate significant aciduria (low pH) even with above-average urinary citrate levels. Many of these patients will form uric acid stones based on their persistent aciduria despite high urinary citrate levels.

Many experts, therefore, recommend using an alternate level of urinary citrate as a target. Since the median daily average of urinary citrate in healthy, non-stone-forming adults is 640 mg. The minimum recommended daily urinary output for nephrolithaisis patients is 2,000 ml; 320 mg/liter of urine would seem to be a reasonable "optimal" concentration. This would suggest that many calcium stone-forming patients with marginal 24-hour urinary citrate totals between 320 mg and 640 mg would benefit from some degree of citrate supplementation therapy.

Another consideration is the urinary pH. Persistent, severely acidotic urine, especially in uric acid stone formers, should be aggressively treated with alkalinization (citrate) therapy sufficient to normalize their aciduria regardless of total urinary citrate levels. In other words, aciduria should also be treated in addition to just low urinary citrate levels, particularly in uric acid nephrolithiasis patients. The goal is to optimize the urinary citrate level and pH, if possible.

The citrate/creatinine ratio or the calcium/citrate ratio may also be used to help identify patients who would benefit from citrate supplementation therapy. Still, the gold standard remains 24-hour urine testing.

**Summary of Diagnostic Criteria for Hypocitraturia**

24-hour urine citrate of 320 mg or more. The "optimal" level should be 640 mg or more. Citrate supplemental therapy should generally be considered if the daily urinary citrate is <500 mg.

24-hour urinary citrate concentration should "optimally" be 320 mg/L or more. Consider treatment if the citrate concentration is <250 mg/L.

Consider citrate supplementation if citrate mg/creatinine g is <180 or calcium/citrate is >0.33.

Urine pH: For most stone formers, the optimal pH is from 6 to 6.5.

- In uric acid stone formers, the optimal pH would be 6.5 for maintenance and prophylaxis; 7 for stone dissolution.

- For cystinuria, the optimal pH is 7.5.