**Handling of Amputated Extremity Parts**

Transportation of the amputated part is paramount in preserving viability. The most widely utilized and effective method of preservation is wrapping the amputated extremity in gauze moistened with a physiologic solution (normal saline or lactated ringers), placing the wrapped amputated part in a plastic bag, then putting this plastic bag on ice. Alternatively, the part may be immersed in a physiologic solution in one bag, which is then placed on ice. Amputated extremity parts should never be placed directly on ice, as this may result in frostbite or other soft tissue injuries to the amputated part. Such damage may preclude replantation altogether or compromise the achievable functional result of replantation.

**Ischemia Time**

Timing is critical in replantation surgery. The amount of muscle in the amputated part determines the amount of ischemia time each part will tolerate. Digits contain no muscle, and the bone and soft tissue present in each digit have a relatively low metabolic rate and formation of toxic byproducts of ischemia. Therefore, digits amputated in Zone 1 and Zone 2 may tolerate up to 12 hours of warm ischemia time and up to 24 hours of cold ischemia time. In general, muscle makes up a substantial portion of the soft tissue in Zone 3 to 5 amputations. Extremities amputated at this level will tolerate no more than six hours of warm ischemia time or 12 hours of cold ischemia time. Because of this, vascular shunting to the amputated part may be necessary for forearm or elbow amputations before initiating the surgical repair.