Hydrops fetalis presents with an abnormal fluid collection in two or more cavities or compartments, mainly pleural effusion, ascites, pericardial effusion, and skin edema. The number of fluid collection sites is directly correlated to the neonatal prognosis. The diagnosis is mainly based on prenatal ultrasound or the postnatal evaluation of the fetus. Other features include anemia, placentomegaly, polyhydramnios, and hepatosplenomegaly. Pleural effusion can be unilateral or bilateral. Mild effusions can cause respiratory distress, and severe effusions result in lung hypoplasia and respiratory or circulatory diseases associated with poor prognosis after birth.

Ascites can be an early manifestation of hydrops fetalis and is seen as early as 20 weeks of gestation. As isolated fetal ascites is seen in many other systemic diseases, it is essential to differentiate hydrops fetalis from other causes. Larger ascites can cause bowel compression and pulmonary hypoplasia. The serum ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) ratio of ascites with hydrops fetalis will be less than 11 g/L, which indicates the etiology of non-portal hypertension. Spontaneous resolution with a good prognosis is seen in a few patients.

Anemia in hydrops fetalis is caused mainly by red cell alloimmunization and parvovirus-B19 infection. Other causes include alpha thalassemia, Bart hemoglobin, and a mutation in the alpha-globin chain.

Polyhydramnios is the vertically measured amniotic fluid volume in the single deepest pocket of more than 8 centimeters or amniotic fluid index of more than 24 centimeters.

Placentomegaly is an abnormally enlarged placenta which occurs due to disruption in the oncotic gradient. It is mainly seen in high cardiac output diseases like anemia and sacrococcygeal teratoma. Placentomegaly and polyhydramnios are considered as predictors of survival.

Hepatosplenomegaly is diagnosed in the second and third trimester of pregnancy. It is usually associated with myeloproliferative disease in trisomy 21.

Neonates with cyanosis and no response to oxygen supplement should raise the suspicion of the presence of underlying cardiac diseases.

Neonates with hypotonia suggest the presence of congenital myopathy and congenital hypothyroidism.