**CD**

Patients with classic celiac disease or gluten-sensitive enteropathy have symptoms of malabsorption, villous atrophy in pathology, and resolution of symptoms or pathology after avoidance of gluten for a few weeks to months. Usual symptoms are diarrhea, weight loss, malabsorption, steatorrhea, nutrient or vitamin deficiency, and positive antibodies. The degree of pathology varies in the intestine and can range from local infiltration with lymphocytes to advanced flat mucosa but is nevertheless not correlated with the severity of symptoms.

Patients with atypical celiac have minimal GI symptoms and mostly present with anemia, dental enamel defects, osteoporosis (vitamin D and calcium deficiency), arthritis, infertility, elevated liver function tests, and neurologic problems (vitamin B deficiencies). Asymptomatic celiac patients have antibodies and intestinal pathology features but no symptoms.

There is a worldwide shift from children with the classic disease to atypical adult patients, possibly because of breastfeeding and avoidance of gluten in childhood diets. Mortality does increase with this diagnosis; therefore, screening might be beneficial, although even with a gluten-free diet, the risk of lymphoma has been reported to be higher. Other than malignancy, many autoimmune diseases like diabetes mellitus 1, IgA deficiency, eosinophilic esophagitis, glossitis, and pancreatitis are present.

**NCGS**

Classical NCGS acts like IBS and/or wheat allergy. Also, there is a great resemblance with CD with almost identical intestinal and extra-intestinal manifestations. Wheat allergy can be differentiated from NCGS through fast onset (minutes to hours) and occasional anaphylactic reactions. Serology markers and duodenal biopsies are always negative in NCGS.

NCGS patients also have allergies to food (through IgE) and food preservatives/additives (sulfites, glutamates, nitrates, benzoates). Lactose and other food intolerances are common in 35%. These sensitivities will make the picture more complicated and diagnosis less straightforward. Some authors believe that the whole disease is a fabrication/imagination and the product of the gluten-free food industry.

**Wheat Allergy**

Non-IgE reactions include food protein-induced enterocolitis (vomiting and diarrhea 2 to 4 hours after ingestion of allergen in a child that can be severe and cause failure to thrive), proctitis (blood-streaked mucousy stool in breastfed or formula-fed infants), and enteropathy (malabsorption, failure to thrive and low proteins).

**Gluten Ataxia**

Ataxia and peripheral neuropathy are the most common neurological manifestations of gluten sensitivity, followed by inflammatory myopathy. Dementia is rare, but epilepsy associated with gluten has been described in Italy.

Gluten ataxia happens slowly in the fifth or sixth decades of life and is defined as an otherwise idiopathic sporadic ataxia with positive IgA TTG or other serologic markers of gluten sensitivity. It can occur with or without enteropathy. The most frequent clinical features are gait and limb ataxia, ocular signs of cerebellar dysfunction, and dysarthria. Neuroimaging reveals cerebellar atrophy in 60% or more. This is a difficult diagnosis to establish since many other causes of ataxia should be ruled out first.

**DH**

The intensely pruritic papules and vesicles are grouped and in different stages of maturation (herpetiform). Elbows and forearms are the most common sites. Face and groin are rarely affected. Erosion and excoriation (often due to excess itching) are commonly observed. The lesions resolve after a while with no scarring, although pigmentation might change. Oral lesions can happen as well, but the differential diagnosis is vast and definitive confirmation difficult. Enamel defects can happen as well with horizontal grooves or pits.

Although biopsies of the gut always show significant pathology compatible with CD, only a minority of patients develop GI symptoms. This may be related to the deposition of IgA mostly in the epidermis as opposed to the gut and, therefore, result in more skin manifestations than GI manifestations.