The pathophysiology of ETD and MEBT has been well described.

**External Auditory Canal BT**

External auditory canal (EAC) BT is less common as the canal typically communicates with the external environment.  Barotrauma of the EAC can result from cerumen impaction or a tight drysuit/wetsuit hood that inhibits this communication and results in an airspace vacuum on descent. Exostoses can lead to cerumen impaction which may increase the risk.

**Middle Ear BT (MEBT)**

The vacuum created in the middle ear-space causes an increase in blood flow through the subcutaneous vessels in the EAC, TM, ET, and middle ear space. This results in the vessels engorging with blood. As the pressure in the EAC rises and the vacuum in the middle ear space is further increased, blood vessels eventually extrude serum into the interstices and cause inflammation of the middle ear. This is otherwise known as a serous effusion or serous otitis. The effusion may contain small amounts of blood, converting it to a serosanguinous effusion, or trapped air bubbles. As pressure continues to increase without equalization of the middle ear space, blood vessels will eventually rupture, causing bleeding into or behind the TM. It will be appreciated as non-transparent frank blood. If allowed to continue, the increase in ambient pressure will eventually result in perforation of the TM and its associated complications. The exact pressure required to rupture the TM remains unclear, but it is thought to be approximately 100 kPA. TM rupture while diving allows for the asymmetric entrance of water into the middle ear, resulting in caloric stimulation and vestibular symptoms.

Similarly, during periods of decreased pressurization, such as decompressing the hyperbaric chamber at the end of patient treatment, or ending a SCUBA dive by beginning the swim to the surface, a decompression injury from a condition known as a reverse block can occur. This signifies the inability of the increasing pressure within this space due to expanding gas volume to be released via the ET. Reverse blockage of the ET will result in MEBT if the pressure change is allowed to persist by ascending. This reverse blockage may also occur due to middle ear effusion and tubal ET edema caused on descent, which impairs the ability to ventilate the middle ear on ascent.

Finally, a condition known as alternobaric vertigo results from a discrepancy in equalization between ears due to the asymmetric stimulation of the vestibular system. This commonly occurs on ascent and results in transient vertigo that resolves with middle ear equalization.

**Inner Ear BT (IEBT)**

IEBT occurs when pressure changes are transmitted to the inner ear from the middle ear space or cerebral spinal fluid (CSF), resulting in inner ear hemorrhage, labyrinthine membrane tear, or perilymphatic fistula (PLF). IEBT may result from either an ‘explosive’ or ‘implosive’ force.

The inner ear perilymph is connected to the CSF. Thus, any sudden increase in CSF pressures, such as Valsalva against a locked ET, can be transmitted through the perilymph to the labyrinthine windows, causing rupture of the round or oval windows into the middle ear space (explosive). Alternatively, sudden middle ear pressure increases transmitted via the labyrinthine windows to the perilymph fluid may result in an implosive force. As fluid is not compressible, this subjects the entire perilymph to higher pressures and turbulence, which are continuously transmitted to the round window. This may also cause disruptions of the basilar and Reissner’s membranes, as well as cochlear hemorrhage.  A forceful Valsalva with eustachian tube dysfunction can both transmit pressure from the middle ear as well as increase CSF. The rupture or tear of either labyrinthine window results in the creation of a PLF and a steady flow of perilymph into the middle ear space.