Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (also known as GLP-1 receptor agonists, GLP-1DAs, incretin mimetics, or GLP-1 analogs)) are a class of medications utilized in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity. Clinical trials show the superiority of GLP-1 RA to other antihyperglycemic drugs in improving glycemic efficacy, reducing weight and blood pressure, and having a cardioprotective effect, all without the risk of hypoglycemia. These drugs have transformed the guidelines for the management of patients with diabetes.

There are currently seven GLP-1 receptor agonists that include exenatide twice-daily, exenatide extended-release (ER) once-weekly, lixisenatide once-daily, liraglutide once-daily, dulaglutide once-weekly, semaglutide once-weekly, and oral semaglutide once-daily. Albiglutide was discontinued in 2017 due to a decrease in sales. The FDA approved the first GLP-1 receptor agonist exenatide in 2005. The oral semaglutide tablet was approved by the FDA in 2019. Except for oral semaglutide, all the other drugs are subcutaneous injections.

All GLP-1 receptor agonists are approved by the FDA to improve glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus as an adjunct to diet and exercise. All GLP-1 receptor agonists are not to be used in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). The American Diabetes Association guidelines state metformin as the initial first-line therapy for patients diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus. If a patient is intolerant to metformin or metformin is contraindicated, a GLP-1 receptor agonist should be introduced in their regimen. The addition of a GLP-1 analog should also be considered in those patients who are unable to reach their glycemic goal with other antidiabetic medications or if their HbA1c is 1.5% or greater above their target.

Subcutaneous semaglutide is FDA-approved to reduce the risk of major cardiovascular (CV) adverse events in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and established cardiovascular disease. Dulaglutide is FDA approved for improving HbA1c in patients with an increased risk of CV events. Lixisenatide can be used in combination with long-acting insulin. High-dose liraglutide has been FDA approved for chronic weight management in patients aged 12 or older with a BMI of 30 or greater.

High-dose semaglutide at 2.4mg once-weekly injection has been studied for weight loss and shown efficacy and has also been approved by the FDA for chronic weight management as of 2021.