Treatment of E. coli 0157: H7 gastrointestinal infection focuses on supportive care and maintenance of hydration status. Most enterohemorrhagic E. coli diarrheal patients recover without treatment within ten days other than fluid replacement. Antibiotic therapy has not had a beneficial effect in speeding resolution or preventing complications from E. coli 0157: H7; additionally, evidence exists that antibiotics worsen outcomes by increasing the likelihood of development of HUS, possibly secondary to antibiotic-induced lysis of infectious organisms with the sudden release of Shiga toxin into the systemic circulation. Patients with severe manifestations of HUS may benefit from hemodialysis to treat volume, electrolyte, and uremia issues related to acute renal failure. Limited data suggest that the monoclonal antibody eculizumab may expedite recovery from E. coli 0157: H7 HUS. Eculizumab acts by inhibiting the complement cascade, thereby interfering with the recruitment of inflammatory cells and attenuating damage to the renal vasculature. Notably, eculizumab, an extremely expensive pharmaceutical with a primary indication for treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal hematuria, lacks clinical consensus for the treatment of E. coli O157 associated HUS and typically gets utilized as a rescue agent in the sickest patients. Antiperistaltic agents, such as loperamide or dicyclomine, slow intestinal motility, and increase the risk of systemic complications; clinicians should avoid their utilization in this setting.