There is a complex interplay of pain with physiologic implications that impact morbidity and mortality. Psychological implications affect patients’ interpretation of the perioperative experience, quality of recovery, and patient satisfaction. Patients who manifest decreased pain postoperatively and an improved surgical experience assessment are less likely to have acute pain convert to chronic pain.

**Clinical Pearls**

It has long been taught that the spinal cord ends at L1 in adults. However, ultrasound used to visualize spinal anatomy has shown that the conus medullaris extends below L1 in some patients. Combined with the fact that palpation of the iliac crest – though to represent the L4-5 interspace, may on occasion represent a more cephalad interspace- suggests a possible cause of paresthesia in some patients.

Complaints of nausea, dizziness, or feeling strange sometimes occur shortly after the spinal performance and reflect hypotension that has not yet been measured on the blood pressure monitor. A small dose of phenylephrine or ephedrine, with the preferred agent selected based upon heart rate, can be administered at this time while the blood pressure cuff is recycled. This small dose of vasoconstrictor will help alleviate hypotension and these related symptoms if hypotension is, in fact, present, but will not harm the patient if hypotension is not present.

The night of surgery, pulse oximetry alone does not ensure patient safety, as patients receiving supplemental oxygen can maintain their saturation with a slow respiratory rate. Indeed, orders should be written to call a provider or provider assistant if the respiratory rate decreases below ten breaths per minute. There should also be a standing order to administer 40 mcg naloxone IV if the respiratory rate decreases to eight per minute and administer an additional 80 mcg IV if the respiratory rate does not climb to at least ten breaths per minute within two minutes of naloxone administration. If a patient’s level of arousal is decreased, an arterial blood gas should be performed. If arterial pressure of carbon dioxide is elevated, a low-dose naloxone infusion and/or some form of ventilatory support (BiPAP or controlled ventilation) may be indicated.

Some prefer to replace the stylet once clear CSF is seen and advance the needle an additional 1 mm. The logic is that the initial visualization of CSF might occur if only part of the needle bevel is inside the spinal canal. The additional 1 mm of distance is believed to ensure the entire bevel is in the spinal canal. This is important for if part of the bevel remains outside the spinal canal, an insufficient dose of medication may be injected, resulting in a failed block.

Some providers will, in a sterile manner, open an additional spinal needle onto the spinal tray. For example, in the elderly, spaces may be narrowed, and the risk of headache is lower; some may place a larger (22-gauge) needle on the spinal tray.

Although it is generally be assumed that an SEH that develops shortly after the spinal performance is due to the spinal, it is interesting to note that spontaneous SEH occurs as well.