Patients with supraventricular reentrant arrhythmias have a multitude of presentations. The common presentations of these arrhythmias include palpitations, shortness of breath, or chest pain; however, the patients may remain asymptomatic until a complication is developed, e.g., atrial fibrillation. If asymptomatic, the diagnosis is likely found on a routine electrocardiogram (ECG) or a rhythm strip while being worked up for another complaint. Other symptoms commonly seen in these patients are nervousness, anxiety, neck pounding, lightheadedness, and even syncopal episodes.

Ventricular reentrant arrhythmias are potentially life-threatening, and the patients may present with palpitations, chest pain, shortness of breath, syncope, or even cardiac arrest.

An accurate past medical and surgical history is paramount when working up a patient with suspected reentrant arrhythmia. Since these arrhythmias can be iatrogenic, any cardiac surgery would be an important history to gather from the patient. One should also derive information on medications, illicit drug use, and past medical history that need to be obtained to consider other differentials.

In symptomatic patients, the first thing that needs to be evaluated is the patient’s hemodynamic stability. A proper physical exam is required to work up possible differentials and rule out triggering conditions that would elicit another condition mimicking signs of this arrhythmia. Many patients who truly have a reentrant supraventricular arrhythmia will have a completely normal exam.