Medroxyprogesterone is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to medroxyprogesterone acetate. Cases of angioedema and anaphylactic reaction have occurred in patients utilizing medroxyprogesterone. Both forms of the drug (oral and injection) are contraindicated in patients with pre-existing breast cancer. In patients with a history of breast cancer, renal cancer, endometrial cancer, or a family history of breast cancer, medroxyprogesterone is contraindicated. Medroxyprogesterone injection has shown to have a slightly increased risk of developing breast cancer.

Medroxyprogesterone use requires caution in patients with diabetes mellitus. Hormonal contraceptives have known to alter insulin sensitivity and, as a result, glucose tolerance. Medroxyprogesterone injections are contraindicated in patients with a history of arterial or venous thromboembolic diseases or patients with increased risks for stroke, heart disease, and arterial vascular disease.

When using medroxyprogesterone in postmenopausal women along with estrogen therapy, it is associated with cardiovascular and thromboembolic risks.

In women with a history of major depression, migraine, or seizure disorder, medroxyprogesterone should be used with caution, as progestin can exacerbate these conditions.

Providers should counsel patients that using medroxyprogesterone does not protect against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or other sexually transmitted diseases.

Additionally, as stated in a boxed warning on medroxyprogesterone depot injections, medroxyprogesterone usage can alter the bone mineral density and may not be reversible in premenopausal women. Recommendations for patients include taking calcium and vitamin D when using medroxyprogesterone depot injections.