Causes of high-output cardiac failure can be simplified into two main categories: (1) there is an increase in the body’s demand for blood from increased metabolism or (2) there is a bypass of the arteriolar and capillary bed causing an increased flow into venous circulation from a lack of resistance, leading to increased oxygen consumption and a low systemic vascular resistance, respectively.

**Metabolic**

Several specific metabolic disease processes can increase metabolic demand, causing an increase in cardiac output.

Hyperthyroidism causes an increase in thyroid hormone affecting both the cardiac and systemic tissue.

Myeloproliferative disorders also have been associated with high-output cardiac failure. They are linked to increased cellular metabolism and high cell turnover.

**Myocardial**

Myocardial etiologies largely reflect diseases that have a direct myocardial effect but generally have multifactorial pathophysiology involving metabolic and vascular effects as well. An example of this is hyperthyroidism, where thyroid hormones have a global effect including a direct effect on myocardial tissue.

Sepsis causes a global inflammatory response to an infection, causing a wide range of hemodynamic changes and phases.

Thiamine is an essential vitamin used in the formation of thiamine pyrophosphate, an essential cofactor used in metabolism for energy production. Severe thiamine deficiency causes beriberi, which results from a buildup of pyruvate and lactate in the blood that leads to systemic vasodilation. Additionally, Ikram published a case series regarding cardiac beriberi showing that thiamine deficiency affects cardiac myocytes directly and describing vacuolation and intercellular edema with myofiber hypertrophy, fibrosis, and cellular infiltration in histopathology.

Chronic lung disease is associated with high-output cardiac failure, largely with right-sided heart failure. Chronic hypoxia and hypercapnia drive a reduced systemic arterial resistance, leading to chronic volume overload, while pulmonary vascular constriction causes increased right heart remodeling; the left heart remains largely functional and produces a high cardiac output.

**Peripheral Vascular Effects**

These effects are largely due to the bypass of the arteriolar and capillary bed, leading to increased direct flow into venous circulation. In the systemic vascular system, the majority of resistance is in the arteriolar system, considering the collective decrease in radius among all of the arterioles and thus decreasing flow into the venous circulation. If the arteriolar system is bypassed, flow increases to the venous circulation causing an increased venous return to the heart, eventually leading to cardiac volume overload.

Arteriovenous fistulas (AVF), either congenital or acquired, cause a shunt from an artery to a vein, bypassing the resistance of the arteriolar and capillary system. This causes an increased flow of blood to the heart, requiring an increase in heart rate and stroke volume, leading to increased cardiac output.

Liver cirrhosis is associated with arteriovenous shunts and decreased systemic vascular resistance.

The mechanism for obesity as an etiology is not well defined; however, it is associated with excessive vasodilation. Mechanisms of reduced arterial resistance secondary to vasoactive adipokines have been described in the literature.

Other etiologies that are less defined but mentioned in the literature include erythroderma, carcinoid syndrome, mitochondrial diseases, acromegaly, and Paget disease of bone. Stress, exercise, fever, and pregnancy are all contributors; however, they are not defined as direct causes of high-output cardiac failure.