Although numerous clinical practice guidelines exist for the treatment and management of bipolar disorder, there is not enough consistency to generate a ‘meta-consensus’ model.

**Manic Episode**

Mania is considered a medical emergency and often requires psychiatric hospitalization. Initial treatment is aimed at stabilization of the potentially or acutely agitated patient to help de-escalate distress, mitigate potentially dangerous behavior, and facilitate the patient assessment and evaluation. When possible, a calming environment with minimal stimuli should be provided. Adjunctive benzodiazepines may be used concomitantly with mood stabilizers and antipsychotic drugs to reduce agitation and promote sleep.

The patient’s current medications must be considered. For example, a second drug is recommended if the patient presents while the condition is already managed with lithium monotherapy. Also, antidepressants are usually tapered and discontinued in a manic phase. First-line monotherapy includes a mood stabilizer, such as lithium or valproate, or an antipsychotic, such as aripiprazole, asenapine, cariprazine, quetiapine, or risperidone.

Add another medication if symptoms are inadequately controlled, or the mania is very severe. Combination treatments include lithium or valproate with either aripiprazole, asenapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, or risperidone. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be considered as monotherapy or as part of combination therapy in patients whose mania is particularly severe or treatment-resistant and in women with severe mania who are pregnant.

Valproate should not be used for women of childbearing potential due to the unacceptable risk to the fetus of teratogenesis and impaired intellectual development.

**Hypomanic Episodes**

By definition, hypomanic episodes are not severe enough to cause marked impairment, and there is no psychosis; therefore, these episodes can be managed in an ambulatory setting. Pharmacotherapy is similar to that for mania, but higher doses may be required for the latter.

**Acute Bipolar Depression**

Suicidal and self-harm risk has priority in managing patients with bipolar disorder who present with an acute depressive episode because most suicide deaths in patients with BD occur during this phase. Patients may or may not require hospitalization.

For patients not already taking long-term medication for BD, first-line monotherapy includes quetiapine, olanzapine, or lurasidone (has not been studied in acute bipolar mania). Combination treatment with olanzapine-fluoxetine, lithium plus lamotrigine, and lurasidone plus lithium or valproate may also be considered.

Consider cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) as an add-on to pharmacotherapy. However, never consider CBT as monotherapy because there is minimal evidence to support psychological treatments without pharmacotherapy in treating acute bipolar depression.

Also, consider adding ECT for refractory bipolar depression or as a first-line treatment in the presence of psychotic features and a high risk of suicide.

For patients presenting with a depressive episode while taking long-term medication (breakthrough episode), make sure their current treatments are likely to protect them from a manic relapse (eg, mood stabilizer or antipsychotic). When applicable, check the medication dose, patient adherence, drug-drug interactions, and serum concentrations. Also, inquire about current stressors, alcohol or substance use, and psychosocial intervention adherence.

Generally, treatment options for BD-II depression are similar to those for BD-I depression.

Antidepressant medications should not be used as monotherapy in most patients with bipolar disorder, as available evidence does not support their efficacy, and there is a risk of a switch to mania or mood instability during an episode of bipolar depression. Antidepressants can be administered adjunctively to mood stabilizers (eg, lithium and lamotrigine) and second-generation antipsychotics.

**Maintenance Treatment**

Most patients with bipolar disorder will require maintenance treatment for many years, possibly lifelong, to prevent recurrent episodes and restore their pre-illness functioning. The current recommendation is for continuous rather than intermittent treatment, with treatments that were effective during the acute phase often continued initially to prevent early relapse. Mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics alone or in combination are the mainstays of maintenance pharmacotherapy.

There is substantial evidence showing lithium monotherapy’s effectiveness against manic, depressive, and mixed relapse. Additionally, lithium is associated with a decreased risk of suicide in patients with BD. Monitoring during treatment, including serum lithium concentrations, is a standard of care.

In addition to the individualized pharmacotherapy plan, essential components of maintenance treatment include medication adherence, primary prevention and treatment for psychiatric and medical comorbidities, and psychotherapy when appropriate. Suicidality surveillance is critical throughout the maintenance phase.