# Introduction

The flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS), formerly known as the flexor digitorum sublimis, is the largest of the extrinsic flexors of the forearm. It forms the intermediate muscle layer between the superficial and deep muscle groups of the forearm.

# Structure and Function

**Structure**

The flexor digitorum superficialis muscle has two origins. The humeroulnar head originates off the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the coronoid process of the ulna. The radial head originates on the upper half of the volar aspect of the radial shaft. The median nerve and ulnar artery enter the forearm by passing between the humeroulnar and radial heads of the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle. The flexor digitorum superficialis courses along the volar aspect of the forearm, superficial to the flexor digitorum profundus and flexor pollicis longus muscles, and deep to the palmaris longus, flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi ulnaris, and pronator teres.

As it courses down the forearm, the flexor digitorum superficialis separates into two planes of muscular fibers, superficial and deep:

- The superficial plane further divides to supply tendons for the middle and ring fingers.

- The deep plane provides a muscular slip to join the part of the superficial plane associated with the tendon of the ring finger and then divides to supply tendons for the index and little fingers.

The four flexor digitorum superficialis tendons pass deep to the transverse carpal ligament, constituting four of the nine total tendons in the carpal tunnel.

**Function**

The flexor digitorum superficialis flexes the middle phalanges of the medial four digits at the proximal interphalangeal joints. It also flexes the proximal phalanges at the metacarpophalangeal joints and the wrist joint. Flexor digitorum superficialis can flex each finger it serves independently.

# Embryology

In the fourth week of development, the small upper limb buds form.

# Blood Supply and Lymphatics

The primary blood supply to the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle is from the ulnar artery. Lymphatic drainage of the upper limb occurs via the axillary lymph nodes.

# Nerves

The flexor digitorum superficialis muscle receives innervation by the median nerve (C7, C8, and T1).

# Physiologic Variants

There are several physiological anomalies of the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle and tendon that have been described in the literature and typically occur in the palm.

These variations may include those involving muscle belly itself, the presence of additional accessory tendons, duplicate tendons, and variant tendon-tendon anastomoses.

The literature has classified the anatomical variations of the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle and tendon as followed

- Type I: A small muscle attached to the flexor digitorum superficialis tendon proximally and index finger distally. During digital flexion, this muscle invades the carpal tunnel and could cause intermittent symptoms related to median nerve compression.

- Type II: A small muscle arising from the flexor retinaculum is attached to the flexor digitorum superficialis tendon in the distal palm.

- Type III: An additional digastric muscle inserted on the base of the middle phalanx of the index finger, passes under the carpal tunnel, with an apparent proximal path.

- Type IV: The flexor digitorum superficialis muscle belly that corresponds to the index finger and extends into the carpal tunnel, that can cause similar symptoms as type I.

- Type V: A small muscle crossing the median nerve anteriorly attached to the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle of the middle finger by a tendon and deep surface of the transverse carpus ligament. The anomaly was found about 8 cm proximal to the wrist fold and was unlikely to be clinically significant.

Studies have demonstrated the absence of flexor digitorum superficialis muscle or tendon components as variations that may be clinically relevant. In particular, the congenital absence of the flexor digitorum superficialis component that corresponds to the little finger may cause difficulty with determining normal function during the examination of a finger laceration.

# Surgical Considerations

**Flexor Digitorum Superficialis Tenodesis**, also known as the superficialis sling, is an operation that is used to treat swan neck deformity, a condition characterized by hypertension of the PIP joint of the finger and flexion posture of the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint.

One complication this can arise with this procedure is the creation of a flexion contracture that is greater than the degree desired. However, there is no uniform agreement in the literature regarding an optimal angle of PIP joint flexion during tenodesis.

The **Carpal Tunnel Release**(CTR) procedure is an option when patients who are suffering from carpal tunnel syndrome do not respond to all non-operative therapies.

# Clinical Significance

**Testing the Function of the Flexor Digitorum Superficialis Muscle**

Ask the patient to flex one out of the four medial fingers at the proximal interphalangeal joint against resistance, and the other three fingers are held in an extended position to inactivate the flexor digitorum profundus.

There are two methods which are more frequently used and accurate in practice for the clinical assessment to check for the variation of flexor digitorum superficialis muscle to the fifth finger. These include:

**1. Modified Baker's test:**Ask the patient to flex the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint of the little finger alone while the other fingers are held extended by the examiner. The little and ring fingers are then released to flex together to observe the proximal interphalangeal joint flexion improvement. Suppose the patient cannot flex the proximal interphalangeal joint of the little finger while other fingers are restrained in extension. In that case, however, the patient can flex the proximal interphalangeal joint of the 5th digit while the 4th digit is released, then it shows the absence of the 5th tendon of flexor digitorum superficial.

**2. Bilateral palms test:**Ask the patient to put bilateral palms and corresponding fingers face to face closely and rely on the forces of their own hands. While the little finger is ordered to flex, the adjacent fingers' influence can be observed apparently if there is a connection between the little finger and the adjacent fingers.

Other clinical relevances of the flexor digitorum superficialis muscle include the following:

**Swan Neck Deformity**is the hyperextension of the PIP joint with flexion posture of the DIP joint that most commonly occurs secondary to rheumatoid arthritis, cerebral palsy, connective tissue disorders such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, or trauma.

**Carpal Tunnel Syndrome**(CTS) is the most common peripheral nerve entrapment syndrome. This condition can occur secondary to a retracted flexor digitorum superficialis tendon that invades the tunnel. Patients with CTS will often present with intermittent numbness in their thumb, index, and middle fingers. Patients may also complain of discomfort in their wrist and palm of the affected hand that worsens throughout the night, weakness, and loss of grip strength. A common feature on physical exam is a positive Phalen's test, a sensitive and specific test for CTS, and usually present in moderate to severe cases.

Other injuries to the flexor digitorum superficialis, namely FDS belly or tendon rupture, are relatively rare but have been described occasionally by a case report.