An M-plasty may be designed before excision or later in the repair process. The design is best visualized by first drawing out a fusiform excision. To add an M-plasty to one end of the excision, the peak of the planned excision is inverted or folded inward on itself to create an "M" (see figure) with 30 degrees angles at and between the tips of the M. Tips with angles substantially >30 degrees may result in additional standing cutaneous dog ear deformities. Take care not to make the M so deep that it intrudes on the lesion itself and compromises the oncological integrity of the resection, if applicable. It is preferable to draw the excision margins around the lesion first and then overlay the planned M-plasty. The skin is incised in the standard fashion. Undermining is performed in the appropriate plane depending on the body location, generally subdermal. The final configuration of an M-plasty is a "Y," with the base representing the linear closure and the arms of the "Y" representing the M-plasty. Sutures may be placed in either a running or an interrupted fashion and will often be placed in layers, depending on the depth and location of the excision. The tip of the M-plasty may benefit from the placement of a tip stitch to align the tissue properly.

If an M-plasty is used to remove a dog ear, the dog ear is elevated with forceps, then two incisions are made at 45 degrees angles from the main incision on either side of the dog ear, and Burow's triangles are removed. This creates a "Y" shaped closure. The excess tissue is removed from the sides of the incision, sparing the "V" created between the two new incisions. The wound is then closed in the same fashion as above.

**Nested M-Plasty**

A nested M-plasty is a variant of a traditional M-plasty and can be described as an M-plasty within an M-plasty. If a standard M-plasty shortens the length of the scar and preserves healthy tissue, performing the process twice produces even shorter scars and preserves even more tissue, albeit at the expense of a more complicated procedure and a complex, branched scar. A standard M-plasty can be visualized as an ellipse with the peak of the ellipse folded inward. This produces two side-by-side triangles that are half the width of the original peak. A nested M-plasty repeats this process within one or both of those triangles. The triangles are folded on themselves again, creating four side-by-side triangles that are one-quarter the original width, resulting in a branching appearance (see figure). As with a regular M-plasty, tip stitches can be quite useful for this type of closure. This technique is best used on flat or concave surfaces as it can induce bunching of the skin, which typically flattens out with time. Bunching of skin over convex surfaces can be quite noticeable and tends to persist; it should therefore be avoided via meticulous incision design and closure

**M-Plasty Modifications**

The modified M-plasty, described by Asken in 1986, uses a shortened ellipse with obtuse angles and places additional tangential incisions on opposite sides of the ellipse at either end of the wound. The closure is accomplished with local undermining and adjustment of tension vectors; the final scar is Y-shaped, like a traditional M-plasty but shorter still.