Long head of the biceps (LHB) tendon pathologies spans a clinical spectrum, from acute tendinitis to chronic degenerative tendinopathy and spontaneous tendon rupture. In athletic populations, the physician must coordinate and work in tandem with his or her physical therapists to ensure the athlete's potential; co-existing shoulder girdle risk factors are addressed appropriately. In throwers, it is critical to recognize that poor trunk control, scapular dyskinesia, shoulder girdle atrophy, and muscular imbalances all can contribute to the proximal biceps tendinitis. Thus, the comprehensive management of these injuries often involves a team of head coaches and athletic trainers in the athletic populations, all the way to general practitioners, geriatricians, sports medicine primary care physicians, physiatrists, orthopedic surgery sports medicine specialists, and physical therapists.

Failed non-operative management is an indication for proceeding with surgical treatment. Other indications for surgery include:

- Partial-thickness tears of the LHB tendon (> 25% to 50%)

- Medial LHB tendon subluxation/dislocation

- LHB tendon subluxation/dislocation with associated bicipital groove soft tissue stabilizer injury; also may or may not include injuries to the subscapularis muscle/tendon

The two most common surgical techniques employed include biceps tenodesis and biceps tenotomy procedures. The literature demonstrates equivalent outcomes between each type of procedure, and both techniques yield a high rate of patient satisfaction and clinical outcomes at long-term follow-up with each type of procedure. (Level 1)

Orthopedic and rehabilitation nurses educate patients, monitor progress, and report changes to the interprofessional team. Physical therapists must work closely with postoperative patients at the direction of the orthopedist. [Level 5]