Hemiplegic migraine episodes can mimic several other neurologic conditions that can cause a headache and neurological deficits. Some of the differentials include:

- TIA (symptoms reversible in both TIA and hemiplegic migraine, but TIA symptoms are more sudden and less likely to have other aura symptoms like nausea, vomiting, and photophobia, among others.)

- Infections like meningitis, encephalitis, and brain abscess can cause a headache and motor symptoms; other symptoms like rash, fever, CSF analysis, and neuroimaging can help to distinguish

- Brain tumors typically cause more progressive neurologic symptoms and have neuroimaging findings.

- Seizures with postictal paralysis can be distinguished by paroxysmal symptoms like limb jerking at the onset and postictal confusion.

- Inherited disorders like mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS), hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), can cause a headache, and neurologic deficits can be distinguished by clinical features, neuroimaging, and genetics.

- Metabolic disturbances like homocystinuria and ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency can rarely present with a headache and stroke-like symptoms.

- The syndrome of stroke-like migraine attacks after radiation therapy (SMART) is differentiated by a history of cerebral radiation and characteristic imaging findings.

- Alternating hemiplegia of childhood caused by variants in the ATP1A3 gene.

- Another possible differential that could occasionally present with headache and stroke-like events with paroxysmal hemiparesis is Sturge-Weber syndrome.