Myopathies are typically involving motor impairment without no sensory symptoms. It presents as proximal muscle weakness, mainly in the pelvic girdle or the shoulder girdle muscle groups. However, pelvic muscle group is more common and more severe. Comprehensive history alongside physical examination is mandatory to identify and diagnose myopathies. Patients may complain of difficulty raising up from sitting position, climbing stairs or difficulty brushing their hair, or practicing any above head activities. Some other myopathies will present in different muscle groups like thighs, back muscles, or fingers, and could be possibly associated with other symptoms like myalgia, rashes, fatigue, or cramps. Muscle disease could also present with dark urine as a sign of renal damage in the case of rhabdomyolysis, particularly after vigorous exercises like running marathons.

**Polymyositis and dermatomyositis**: Both of them affect women more than men, present with proximal weakness affects pelvic girdle more than shoulder girdle. Polymyositis is associated with arthralgia while dermatomyositis is associated with other symptoms mainly skin manifestations including a purple rash on the eyelids called heliotrope rash, an erythematous scaly rash appears on the dorsum of the fingers called Gottron's papules, a reddish rash appears on the shoulder and the back known as Shawl sign, besides interstitial lung disease, Gastrointestinal vasculitis, and paraneoplastic syndrome underlying malignancy.

**Hypothyroid and hyperthyroid myopathies**: Both of them are associated with the thyroid disease whether it is hypo- or hyperthyroid disease, and both present with proximal muscle weakness and peripheral neuropathy. Hypothyroid myopathy is associated with pseudohypertrophy, myoedema, and delayed deep tendon reflexes. Hyperthyroid myopathy is associated with Grave's ophthalmopathy, goiter, and extraocular muscle weakness as well.

Other types of acquired myopathies will represent within a group of symptoms associated with that particular disease like for example sarcoidosis myopathy, amyloid myopathy, and critical illness myopathy. Duchenne muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy 1,2, mitochondrial myopathies, Glycogen storage diseases like (McArdle, Pompe's disease, etc) are inherited myopathies affect children and it is rare, and accompanied with severe systemic complications. These patients' life expectancy is relatively limited depending on the severity of the disease and the complications.