**Environmental Toxins Associated with Infertility**

**Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals**

Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals (EDCs) are exogenous chemicals that, when exposed, specifically in utero or puberty, can contribute to both female and male infertility and predispose to the development of other diseases that affect fertility as obesity, diabetes, and endocrine cancers (Birnbaum).

EDCs derive from various sources, including plant-derived phytoestrogens (such as soy products), industrial chemicals (such as flame retardants, pesticides, and lubricants), household consumables (such as bisphenol A [BPA] products, phthalates, tea, and lavender oils), and pharmaceutical products (such as diethylstilbestrol [DES] and estradiol).

DES may be the most infamous of these compounds. DES was used primarily in the 1950s and 1960s in pregnant mothers for miscarriage prevention until DES exposure in utero was associated with developing vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma (CCA) in female children. Exposure in offspring resulted in congenital anomalies in the reproductive tract and adverse pregnancy outcomes rendering affected women infertile or sub-fertile (Figure 1). Though most of these women are past reproductive age at this point, its historical use is still relevant for the increased risk for CCA and cervical cancer.

EDCs disrupt the human endocrine system by either increasing or decreasing the production of endogenous hormones or altering the peripheral distribution of endogenous hormones.

In terms of fertility concerns specifically, EDCs have been linked with reproductive development disorders, ovarian dysfunction, subfertility, and polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) in women. As far as reproductive development, the most striking example is DES as above. However, animal models have suggested an association of BPA with ovarian cysts, uterine polyps, vaginal adenosis, and impaired implantation in in-vitro fertilization (IVF) patients.

Higher serum BPA concentrations were seen in women with PCOS, with increasing evidence of insulin resistance and hyperandrogenism associated with increasing BPA concentrations.

EDCs have also been associated with male infertility. Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), for example, is a metabolite of a pesticide no longer used in the United States but still in use globally, has been shown to reduce sperm concentration, normal morphology, and motility in semen analyses.

Beyond reproductive organs, EDCs also affect other aspects of the endocrine system that also impact fertility, such as the thyroid, including abnormalities in metabolism and transport, resulting in an association with hypothyroidism.

**Heavy Metals**

Heavy metal exposure has also been implicated in infertility. Exposure can come from the natural environment and housing/work environments, as in the case of lead exposure through paint or mercury and arsenic exposure through food and water supply. Heavy metals that have been found to affect reproductive activity include lead, mercury, cadmium, and arsenic.

Individuals can be exposed to lead from a variety of sources, including, but not limited to, lead paints, water from lead pipes, cosmetics, construction sites, and herbal supplements. In patients identified as high risk based on exposure, a venous blood level can be collected. A lead level >15.47 ppb is associated with a twofold infertility risk compared to individuals below that threshold.

Mercury exposure usually comes from diet, primarily from predatory fish consumption. Mercury enters the seascape via industrial waste sources and accumulates in predatory fish. Other less common sources are women exposed to gold mining and some skin-lightening creams.

Cadmium exposure can stem from rechargeable batteries and certain paints and plastics. It can enter the food supply through resorption in the soil, resulting in cadmium exposure in various foods, including rice, wheat, leafy vegetables, and shellfish.

Arsenic exposure usually comes from certain groundwater sources, though it can also stem from certain pesticides and industrial exposures. Arsenic is primarily associated with otherwise unexplained male factor infertility.

**Smoking**

Smoking is a known environmental exposure that is modifiable, that influences fertility. Cigarette smoking is an important environmental toxin to consider, as 17.8% of adults in the United States smoke.

In smoking men, there is evidence of reduced sperm concentration and motility, as well as evidence in animal studies that smoking may reduce sperm’s ability to bind to the zona pellucida for fertilization.

In a meta-analysis of seven studies, it was noteworthy that in patients undergoing assisted reproduction, such as IVF, smokers require twice as many IVF cycles before conception compared to nonsmokers.