Trochanteric bursitis (TB), also known as greater trochanteric bursitis (GTB) or greater trochanteric pain syndrome (GTPS), is a common disorder and frequent cause of lateral hip pain. The bursa, a small fluid-filled sac, acts as a lubricating medium for nearby gluteus tendons to gracefully slide over during the physiologic range of motion. The trochanteric bursa is located on the lateral aspect of the hip, lying superficial to the hip abductor musculature and deep to the iliotibial band (ITB). Due to its superficial position and proximity to large tendons, the trochanteric bursa can become inflamed and is a common pain generator and a common reason for presentation to the orthopedic surgeon or family physician.

Inflammation to the bursa can be due to repetitive microtraumas such as running or exercise, tendinopathy of surrounding musculature, gross trauma including a fall from a height with direct compression to the bursa, or inflammation can be idiopathic without a discernable cause. Diagnosis is clinical and based primarily on history and physical examination, although imaging, including plain film radiographs, is important to rule out other causes of hip pain. Treatment modalities are nearly exclusively nonoperative in nature and include non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), physical therapy, stretching, and cortical steroid injections are often provided for pain relief. Surgical excision of the trochanteric bursa is reserved for refractory cases that do not respond to nonoperative treatment.