Three goals should be kept in mind when approaching a patient with suspected cardiac arrhythmia. These include understanding symptoms typically associated with cardiac arrhythmias, deciding whether the patient has potential risks of dying from an arrhythmia, and choosing the correct means of documenting the suspected rhythm disorder. Establishing a probable cause of an arrhythmia refers to the likelihood that an arrhythmia exists and is based on certain symptoms obtained in the history. An in-depth risk assessment is undertaken if there is a reasonable concern that death may be an outcome. This is largely based on a family history of sudden death, evidence of structural heart disease, or, in the case of the primary arrhythmia syndromes, unique ECG abnormalities. Making the diagnosis means documenting the arrhythmia and, in particular, linking it to the patient's symptoms. The best way to do this is to provide some form of ambulatory monitoring that brings the two together. This article outlines the various symptoms of cardiac arrhythmias, and their pathophysiologic basis, provides guidance in making a risk assessment and discusses the various means of reaching the correct diagnosis. It highlights the role of the interprofessional team in caring for patients experiencing arrhythmias.

**Objectives:**
- Outline the three main goals when approaching the patient with suspected arrhythmia.
- Explain how sustained low heart rates affect cardiac output and blood pressure, whether due to sinus bradycardia or AV block with rates in the 30 to 50 bpm ranges.
- Describe how tachyarrhythmias affect blood pressure, particularly those with an abrupt onset and rates exceeding 160 to 180 beats per minute.
- Summarize the three types of ambulatory monitoring devices and comment on when one might choose one over the other.