The FDA approval process requires comprehensive pre-clinical testing followed by multi-phase clinical trials to ensure safety and efficacy. Discovery is the beginning phase of medication development involving disease study, molecular models, and high-throughput screening to determine potential new drug molecules. Pre-clinical testing involves in-vitro and in-vivo experiments using cellular and animal models.

The submission of an Investigational New Drug (IND) application is required before being administered to human participants.

Initial testing of fewer than one hundred healthy patients to determine pharmacokinetics, toxicology, and drug safety in humans. Roughly two-thirds of drugs complete phase I testing and move on to phase II clinical trials.

Phase IV is considered post-market surveillance of the approved drug on thousands of diseased patients. Annual reports are submitted to the FDA to determine if the drug should still be available on the market.

If drug sponsors can demonstrate adequate safety and efficacy during clinical trials phases I-III, they may subsequently submit a New Drug Application (NDA) or Biologics License Application (BLA).

Priority review can be used for an NDA or BLA to decrease the FDA review period and may be combined with other expedited review programs.

The FDA continues to monitor newly approved drugs and biologics for long-term safety. Phase IV clinical trials are used for post-market surveillance, which involves thousands of participants.

US governing authorities heavily regulate intellectual property. Drug patents are granted by the US Patent and Trademark Office, whereas data exclusivity for new medicines is set by the FDA. Exclusivity involves inhibiting the approval of competing drugs for a set period to balance novel drug creation and consumer medication accessibility. The FDA allows 5 years of exclusivity for novel small-molecule drugs and 12 years for biologics.

Following the expiration of patents for name-brand drugs, the FDA regulates the production of generic drugs by requiring the submission of an Abbreviated New Drug Application(ANDA). The FDA approval of an ANDA requires evidence from a manufacturer that their production of a generic small-molecule drug is bioequivalent to the existing name-brand drug.

However, biologics are regulated under a different set of rules and require submission of an abbreviated Biologics License Application(aBLA). Generic biologics, or biosimilars, may differ considerably in molecular structure from the original biologic, unlike generic small-molecule drugs.