The American Academy of Pediatrics 2014 guidelines recommend immediate management of all preterm infants with nasal continuous positive airway pressure. Subsequently, surfactant administration may be considered an alternative to intubation with prophylactic or early surfactant administration in selected patients. The first dose is given within two hours of birth, preferably within the first hour. In an intubated infant that requires 30-40% oxygen, a repeat dose is indicated within the next 4 to 12 hours. Surfactant replacement therapy is administered by trained personnel in a clinical setting where equipment for intubation and resuscitation are readily available.

The endotracheal instillation of surfactant is the most widely accepted technique. Surfactant is administered in liquid form via an endotracheal tube in a single bolus dose as quickly as the neonate tolerates. Some studies recommend administering all the surfactant at once, while others advocate dividing the bolus into smaller aliquots.

Another technique of administration known as the INSURE (INtubation–SURfactant administration–Extubation) technique is approached with the neonate not already intubated. The INSURE technique uses an in-out intubation procedure to administer the surfactant. This process includes intubation, followed by administration of the drug, and then extubation. Newer methods to limit the invasiveness of older approaches are in practice and targets of research today.

The MIST method connects the patient to non-invasive respiratory support, and through that, the surfactant administration is with the work of spontaneous breathing. This method is increasingly used to reduce intubation rates and their associated pathologies. Another method is the less invasive surfactant administration or LISA technique.